

ONE
It was to be the culmination of months of planning.
The assassination of General Konstantin Benin.
Dawn on Monday morning shone only a bleak grey light over Moscow and it looked as though the weathermen would be right in their prediction of rain by midday.
The national six o'clock news had just begun when the blue transit van pulled into one of the numerous lay-bys on the hard shoulder of the southbound ringroad.
Lena Rodenko killed the engine and turned off the monotonous drone of propaganda.
She pushed a cigarette between her dry lips then fumbled in her coat pocket for a lighter and, cupping her trembling fingers around the flame, lit it and inhaled deeply.
She was naturally attractive but took no interest in her personal appearance.
Her short red hair was crudely shaped in a wedge and her pallid cheeks and small chin were peppered with unsightly acne.
She glanced at her brother sitting beside her and managed a weak, nervous smile.
Vasili was twenty-two, three years her senior.
His hair, by contrast, fell untidily to his shoulders and his patchy beard looked as though it had been stuck on at random.
She took a cassette from her pocket and slid it into the machine.
The  tape was of an English band, given to her by Vasili for her last birthday, which had become her most cherished possession.
Neither of them understood the words but the music represented all that was fair and just.
Democracy.
As she sucked thoughtfully on the cigarette her mind wandered back to the contents of the dossier they had prepared on Benin.
A graduate of the Red Army Academy in 1950 he was recruited by the KGB four years later but first came to prominence in 1961 as one of the architects of Fidel Castro's Direccion General de Inteligencia.
The two men were to remain lifelong friends.
He then spent several frustrating years as a military attache in Brazil, a move rumoured to have been spearheaded by his superiors fearful of their own positions, before returning to Moscow as head of the Surveillance Unit.
He then spent a brief spell on the staff at the Gaczyna spy school before being sent to Angola in 1974 as a senior military adviser; three years later he took over as commandant of the notorious Balashikha, a centre on the outskirts of Moscow used for the training of international terrorists.
He was subsequently appointed deputy director of Directorate S, the most sinister division within the KGB.
Its functions were abduction, assassination, sabotage and terrorism, both at home and abroad.
He was promoted to director in 1984.
It was said, even within the confines of the Politburo itself, that he was responsible for sending more people to their deaths in the Siberian concentration camps than any other KGB officer in living memory.
They had encountered one setback while compiling the dossier.
Apart from his graduation picture there was no other known photograph of Benin.
In retrospect Lena could see the ingenuity of his ploy.
He had become just another faceless bureaucrat.
This had initially seemed to be an insuperable problem until someone said that his face might not be familiar but they certainly knew his car.
More like a bulletproof tank, someone else said; it would take an anti-tank missile to get at him.
She hadn't heard the rest of the conversation.
In her mind she was already formulating a plan of action…
She looked at the cracked face of her cheap wristwatch and swallowed nervously.
It was almost time.
As though in response to her thoughts the two-way radio in Vasili's lap crackled into life.
They had the all-clear sign.
She struggled to start the van and just when she thought she had flooded the engine it spluttered into life and she eased out into the road.
She stopped the van seventy yards further on beside a steel drum and slipped the gear into neutral, leaving the engine idling.
Vasili checked the time.
They had a little over four minutes.
They climbed out and hurried round to the back of the van to open the doors.
Gennadi Potrovsky still found his good fortune hard to believe.
Two days earlier he had been driving troop carriers at Kuchino, one of the KGB's training centres outside Moscow, and now he'd been asked to drive for General Benin no less.
He had been  ordered not to tell anyone, not even his pregnant wife, until the letter of appointment made it all official.
She would be the first to know, then he would throw a party to tell his friends who had graduated from the Red Army Academy with him the previous year.
They would celebrate with him but he knew they would be envious.
After all, Benin was the legend of the academy.
It was Potrovsky's first day of official duty.
The previous day he had had to drive the route over and over until he knew it perfectly.
There was to be no inconvenience to the General, he had been repeatedly told.
Not that he had even seen Benin, hidden behind the opaque dark windows in the back of the Mercedes.
Even the partition between the front and back seats had been blacked out.
Benin was there, though, always preferring to be in the car first.
An aide had told him it was just one of Benin's little idiosyncrasies.
Potrovsky had waxed and polished the car the night before and had even gone as far as to iron the two pennants which flew on either side of the bonnet.
He was determined to impress Benin.
He touched the brake gently as the Mercedes reached the bend and although he saw what lay ahead of him he had only a split second in which to react — a blue transit van parked in the slow lane of the dual carriageway and, kneeling beside it, a youth partially hidden behind a tripod-mounted anti-tank launcher.
Potrovsky stamped on the brake pedal  violently and the Mercedes was still slewing across the icy road when the missile struck it broadside.
The car disintegrated in a sheet of searing flame and chunks of contorted metal were flung hundreds of feet into the air, landing in the snow-laced pine forest on either side of the carriageway.
All that remained was a deep, jagged depression where the Mercedes had once been, encircled by burning fragments of mangled debris.
Lena was transfixed by the gaping trough in the road.
Vasili shook her shoulders violently then slapped her across the face.
A single tear escaped from the corner of her eye but she made no move to look away.
He pushed her aside and unclipped the 331b launcher from the tripod then carried it to the back of the van where he dumped it on to the grey blanket which they had used to cover it.
He tossed the tripod in after it and banged the doors shut.
Grabbing Lena's hand he pulled her to the front of the van and bundled her into the passenger seat.
In his haste to get away he grated the gears and the wheels shrieked in protest when he failed to balance the-changeover between clutch and accelerator.
The van jerked forward but he managed to keep the engine from stalling and within seconds they had turned into a sharp bend and the grotesque crater was no longer visible in the rear view mirror.
He glanced at Lena.
She was still in a state of shock, her eyes locked on to an imaginary spot in the centre of the windscreen.
He had always said she was too young to be involved but had taken her with him at her own insistence.
The bitter irony  was that the whole plan had been her idea right from the start.
His main priority now was to get them to safety.
Safety being a dacha in Teplyystan, a village ten miles south of Moscow.
The dacha was owned by a doctor who, Vasili reasoned, would be able to snap Lena out of her trance; then the two of them could set off for Tula on the banks of the River Don where they would lie low until, with time, the investigation wound down.
He suddenly became aware of a white Mercedes behind them.
Where had it come from so quickly?
Road signs were supposed to have been erected at the mouth of the carriageway as soon as Benin's car had passed through, warning motorists of an impending dynamite blast and rerouting them on to another section of the motorway.
His eyes continually flickered towards the rear view mirror as he monitored the Mercedes' progress with mounting apprehension.
He willed himself not to panic: surely there was a logical explanation?
The moment he emerged on to a flat stretch of road after negotiating a particularly tight corner the explanation was obvious.
A roadblock.
A Mercedes and a Zim, bumper to bumper, blocking both lanes of the carriageway and behind them the menacing silhouette of a T-77 tank, its barrel aimed directly at the oncoming van.
Vasili glanced over his shoulder, his foot already on the brake and his hand dipping towards the gear lever.
The Mercedes had straddled the road, hemming him in, its two occupants now standing beside it, AK47 rifles in their gloved hands.
Four of the five men manning the roadblock were  similarly armed.
Vasili reluctantly switched off the engine and the unarmed man stepped forward and pulled open the driver's door.
No sooner had Vasili's feet touched the ground than a pair of tight-fitting handcuffs was snapped around his wrists.
He watched helplessly as Lena was hauled from the passenger seat and she too was handcuffed before being led away to the waiting Zim.
The unarmed man then produced a buff-coloured plastic ID card and held it up in front of Vasili.
Directorate S.
The back door of the Mercedes opened and a tall, craggy-faced man climbed out.
He tugged a fur-lined hat over his cropped white hair as he approached the transit van, his eyes riveted on Vasili's face.
‘Let me introduce myself.
General Konstantin Benin.’
Vasili wasn't surprised.
The whole plan had gone horribly wrong, but when?
He voiced the question.
Benin reached into the van, turned the music off and ejected the cassette before answering.
‘Women and drink should always be treated as chalk and cheese in this business.
Fortunately one of your colleagues didn't know that.’
‘Who?’
Vasili instantly regretted having risen to the bait.
‘You'll find out soon enough.
Most of your fellow conspirators are already in detention.’
‘How long have you known?’
‘Right from the beginning.
Your flat's been bugged for the past two months.’
‘General, take a look at this.’
The unarmed man  was gesturing to the back of the van.
‘It's not one of ours, sir.’
‘No, indeed.’
Benin peered inside the van and ran his hand over the British-made Carl Gustav missile launcher.
Benin turned back to Vasili then gripped the cassette in both hands and snapped it in half, allowing the tape to spill out on to the road.
He stuffed the two pieces into Vasili's anorak pocket.
‘Anatoli?’ he called out after Vasili had been led away to the Zim.
Benin's deputy hurried round from the back of the van.
‘Yes, sir?’
‘I want you to deal personally with the Potrovsky widow.
Make sure she's entitled to a state pension.’
‘I sent the details off last night.’
‘Good.
Oh, and send her some flowers on my behalf, usual wording.’
‘Yes sir.
What about a press release?’
‘Make it brief.
Give them some story about how an unexpected delay saved my life.
Mention the missile but not the make.
You can also add that the two youths involved.
were shot while resisting arrest.
Get it to Tass some time this morning.’
‘Aren't you going to make a show trial out of it, sir?’
‘It did cross my mind, but how can I when there are no defendants?’
He patted Anatoli's arm then returned to the Mercedes.
The driver closed the door behind him and moments later the car drew away from the road-block, heading south.
It only slowed down on nearing the outskirts of Teplyystan where it turned off on to a narrow road leading into the Bittsevsky forest park, a panoramic landscape of ravines and gorges layered with fir, oak and pine plantations.
The hoarding at the entrance was ominous enough: HALT!
NO TRESPASSING.
WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
The driver eased the Mercedes to a halt in front of a boomgate a couple of hundred yards further down the road and extended his ID card to the KGB duty officer, who immediately waved them through.
The road ended in a cul-de-sac after another quarter of a mile and the driver turned the car into the adjoining parking bay, almost deserted at that time of the morning.
Benin climbed out and crossed to the guardhouse where he showed his ID card to the nearest of three armed sentries.
The sentry checked its authenticity then activated the electronic turnstile.
All three saluted as Benin passed but, as always, he ignored them.
He made his way along a footpath flanked by spacious lawns and spectacularly colourful flowerbeds…rumoured to contain plastic flowers to ensure a year-round display…, up a flight of steps and through the double doors of the tri-star-shaped glass and aluminium building.
The news-stand was not due to open for an hour but after showing his ID card to a guard Benin asked that a copy of Pravda be delivered to his office the moment it arrived.
He rode the lift to the seventh floor and walked the length of the deserted corridor to the last of the  suites of offices.
Being on the top floor with its breathtaking view of the surrounding forest was one of the job's many perks.
He activated the lock with his magnetic strip ID card, then repeated the action on the inner door leading into his private office, closing it securely behind him.
After switching on the light he sat down behind his solid oak desk…made, on his orders, from Bittsevsky oak…, opened his leather-bound diary and scanned the day's agenda.
One name was missing.
The name of his most trusted and valued European operative, whose identity appeared nowhere in his office documentation.
The operative he had come in especially early that morning to contact.
He closed the diary and swivelled round in his chair to unlock the wall safe.
From it he removed a set of keys and selected one, using it to unlock the bottom left-hand drawer of his desk.
It was divided into two sections, the back section secured behind yet another lock.
He opened that one too and withdrew a telephone.
In a world of bugs and surveillance he considered an occasional trump card imperative to keep a winning hand.
He dialled out, and as he waited for it to be answered he knew he was using a line more private than anything set up between the Kremlin and the White House.
Monitoring the telephone conversations of the Kremlin hierarchy had become one of his pet projects over the last few years.
What he knew about their private lives…
The receiver was lifted at the other end.
‘Brazil,’ Benin said.
‘1967,’ came the reply.
The codewords matched.
Benin continued.
‘Were there any problems loading the cargo on to the train?’
‘None at all, the cover worked perfectly.’
‘And the train?’
‘It left on schedule.
The men are all in position, it's running according to plan.’
Benin replaced the receiver and locked the telephone away, then, after securing the drawer, put the keys back in the wall safe, closed it and spun the dial.
He sat back in his chair, his hands clasped behind his head.
The assassination attempt on his life had been thwarted and his master plan on the Continent was going exactly to plan.
It was going to be a good week.
TWO
Karl-Heinz Tesselmann liked to think of himself as a wanderer.
Words such as tramp, hobo and vagrant offended him, terms bandied about by an unsympathetic society.
His parents had been killed during the Berlin blitz and after being shunted from one set of foster parents to another he had run away at the end of the war.
At seventeen he joined a travelling band of gypsies who taught him the finer skills of pickpocketing until an accident to his hand six years later put paid to what would have been a very lucrative career.
The gypsies, having no more use for him, threw him out.
He tried to go solo but was quickly apprehended and subsequently jailed.
On his release all the doors seemed to close in his face.
He was a jailbird.
So, at the age of twenty-six, he took to the road.
That was thirty-two years ago.
Winter was closing in fast over Europe and, as always at that time of year, he was travelling south to avoid the worst of the weather.
It was the first time in fourteen years that he was travelling alone, his best friend having died of pneumonia only weeks before.
Although not unexpected, his death had still come as a shock.
Hans had never really recovered  from a near fatal case of tuberculosis as a child which had subsequently left him susceptible to infection.
Now all Tesselmann had left to remind him of Hans was a faded wool-lined overcoat.
A last gift from a true friend.
He looked from the overcoat to the grimy, torn green flannels and the scuffed brown shoes laced with uneven lengths of string, then felt in his pocket for the cigarettes he had bummed off a group of Swedish students in Bonn a few days earlier.
He had been hoping they might be filled with something a little stronger than tobacco…having heard stories about Scandinavian teenagers…but was disappointed when they turned out to be regular cigarettes.
Beggars can't be choosers.
His smile faltered when he withdrew his hand.
It was the last of the cigarettes.
He contemplated a few drags until he realized he was down to his last three matches, and reluctantly put the cigarette back in his pocket.
He had left his hometown of Kiel in northern Germany and covered the distance to Wissembourg on the Franco-German border in the space of ten days but he was still uncertain where he was ultimately headed.
It all depended on the availability of goods trains in any particular station at any particular time.
Hans and he had spent the last winter in Nice and it was the only place he wanted to avoid; the memories were still too painful.
Perhaps the following year.
His only concern right now was to board the Berne-bound goods train within the next few minutes.
It was a matter of dodging the security guards then hiding in one of  the freight cars.
Although he had done it countless times before there was always a risk involved, especially since the introduction of guard dogs trained to sniff out illegal stowaways like himself.
He had only ever been discovered once and still bore the scars on his wrist from the Alsatian's razor-sharp-teeth.
He made his way across the first set of tracks and reached the tail-end of a dozen coal-laden wagons.
Pressing himself against the last wagon he peered around the side for any sign of the guards.
No one.
The Berne-bound goods train was standing on the next track down; all he had to do was cover the twenty yards between the two tracks and find himself an empty freight car.
He had covered half the distance when a loud, commanding voice rooted him to the spot.
He immediately thought of the dogs.
His feet felt like lead and slowly, fearfully, he turned to look in the general direction of the voice.
Again, nobody.
Then he saw the signalman leaning out of the signal box window, a pipe clenched between his teeth.
The signalman removed the pipe and his loud voice boomed out again as he shared a joke with one of the engine drivers, both men totally oblivious to Tesselmann's nervous stare.
The signalman guffawed at his own punchline then disappeared from view, closing the window after him.
Tesselmann sighed deeply.
The train shuddered and edged forward.
It was leaving ahead of schedule!
As he hurried towards the nearest freight car, he heard the dreaded sound of a dog barking furiously behind him.
He glanced over his shoulder in time to see a guard, down on  one knee, fumbling with the leash to release the straining animal.
Tesselmann grabbed at the handle of the freight car and hauled himself off the ground, his legs swinging precariously in the air as he tried to clasp his other hand around the handle.
He could see the dog bounding towards him, its fangs bared, its tail flashing from side to side.
With the strength that can come only from fear he managed to draw his legs up until his heels were touching his buttocks.
The dog leapt up at him, twisting in mid-air, its jaws snapping shut inches from his calves.
The dog landed awkwardly on its hindlegs, losing its balance, and he looked away sharply as it tumbled under the wheels.
Allowing his legs to relax, he worked at unlatching the twin bolts and eased the door open, clambering inside where he dropped to his knees, exhausted, his chest heaving as he sucked in mouthfuls of air.
Not until he had regained his composure did he crawl over to the side of the car and slump down against it, wiping the sweat from his forehead with the back of his hand.
They would be waiting for him at the train's next scheduled stop, the guard would see to that.
Except he had no idea where or when the train would next be stopping.
He tried to scan his surroundings but the interior was too gloomy so he kicked the door open a bit further, flooding the freight car with light.
It was stacked with the usual assortment of crates and containers, impregnable behind an ingenious array of clamps and locks.
Security had changed drastically over the years.
He could remember the days when a simple penknife would open the majority of crates  and boxes being transported across Europe.
Their contents had usually turned out to be machine parts but there had been a couple of times when he had found something a little more palatable — once a case of French Burgundy, on another occasion a case of German hock.
He hugged himself against the sudden freezing wind then scrambled to his feet as it whipped the first drops of rain through the open door.
A storm was imminent.
Over the years he had become as used to the rocking and swaying of a train as an experienced sailor is to the pitching and rolling of a ship.
He made his way easily to the door and was about to close it when he caught sight of something tucked into the corner of the car between two wooden containers, out of sight from where he had been sitting earlier.
A sage-coloured tarpaulin.
It would come in useful.
He braced himself against the now torrential downpour and grabbed the door handle with both hands, hauling the sliding door back across the opening but stopping short of banging it closed.
Instead he pressed his foot against it while reaching over to pull a crate towards him.
He took his foot away and pushed the crate into place where it acted as a stop to prevent the door from sliding back open again.
The wind still managed to find a way through the hairline crack, whistling eerily around the interior of the freight car.
He shivered.
When he removed the crates to get at the tarpaulin he realized it was covering something, further stimulating his interest.
He gathered in the tarpaulin as a yachtsman might a  spinnaker and dumped it behind him before peering into the semi-darkness.
Beer kegs.
No wonder they had been covered up.
He counted them by tapping each with his forefinger.
Six in all.
They were made of metal and this presented him with a major problem.
How to open them?
He looked around for an implement to use and although his eyes were by now accustomed to the gloom he could see nothing suitable.
Not that this deterred him; he was determined to break one open and quench his thirst.
He only wished Hans were with him, not just as a drinking partner but also because he had always been the brains of the duo.
Hans would have had an answer to the current predicament.
A thought suddenly came to mind.
The fire extinguisher!
He turned to the wall where it should have been hanging but there was only an empty bracket.
He cursed and was about to turn away when another idea sprang to mind.
He inspected the bracket more closely.
It had rusted and one of the three screws was missing.
All it needed was a good tug.
He gripped it in both hands and pulled.
It held firm.
He twisted it, trying to prise loose the remaining screws, but although brittle from corrosion they refused to snap.
He gripped it again with both hands and yanked hard.
It came away from the wall and he had to grab on to a crate to stop himself overbalancing.
He held it up triumphantly as though it were a trophy then knelt beside the nearest keg and traced his finger around the seal of the small bung.
It would have to be knocked out.
When he had seen it being done by publicans a  mallet and a stake had been used, but all he had was a rusty bracket.
Nevertheless he steadied his aim and brought the bracket down on to the bung.
All it did was leave a dent.
The seal had been reinforced.
He decided to change his tactics.
Instead of striking the middle of the bung he would concentrate on the seal itself.
If he could first weaken the seal, a solid blow to the middle might be enough to break it open.
For the next five minutes he pounded frustratingly at the seal lining, the task not made any easier by the rhythmic rocking of the train as it sped through the rain.
Of the blows delivered, barely half found their mark.
He finally slumped against the nearest crate and stared at the dimpled area around the bung.
Had he made any sort of impression?
He gripped the bracket in both hands and repeatedly pounded the bung.
It suddenly buckled inwards, the bracket disappearing into the newly formed aperture.
There was no splash.
Instead, a cloud of luminous white powder blew up through the hole.
Instinctively he waved it from his face before getting to his feet and brushing it from the lapels of his overcoat.
He waited until the cloud had settled before returning to the keg to peer inside.
It was full of powder.
Baffled, he scratched his greasy white hair and wondered what it could be and why it should have been stored in a beer keg.
Suddenly the train began to slow.
He hurried to the door to see where he was and immediately recognized the goods yard.
Strasbourg.
Then he remembered the guard back at Wissembourg and knew he had only a limited time  to cover his tracks.
After pushing the open keg back into place he covered all six kegs with the tarpaulin and replaced the other crates around it.
He then went back to the door to check for any sign of the security guards he was certain would be waiting for him.
The area was deserted.
His luck was in, at least for the moment, but he had already decided not to tempt fate again.
The odds were stacked too heavily against him.
He waited for the train to shudder to a halt before jumping from the freight car and closing the door as quietly as possible behind him.
The storm was over and he regarded that as a good omen.
Josef Mauer had been with the Austrian police for eighteen years, the last eleven as a sergeant stationed in Linz, but despite numerous attempts by his superior to change his mind he had never been interested in promotion, preferring the everyday excitement that came with riding the streets in a police car to struggling with a mound of paperwork in some closeted office.
His original partner had been killed in a shoot-out four years earlier but instead of taking on a new partner Mauer now worked with the rookies, showing them the ropes and generally helping them to settle into the daily routine at the Mozartstrasse precinct as quickly as possible after their graduation from the Police Academy in Vienna.
Ernst Richter was the latest recruit from the  academy, having arrived the previous day, and he had been assigned to work with Mauer for the first month so that his temperament and personality could be assessed to ensure that later on he would be paired with the right partner.
‘What's the drill for today, sir?’
Richter asked when the two men reached the police car.
‘Sergeant, not sir,’ Mauer said tugging the peak cap over his thinning blond hair.
‘Your main priority is to get to know the city as quickly as possible, so we'll be acting mainly as back-up for the first few days.
It'll also help you to get to grips with police procedures.’
He held up his finger as Richter opened his mouth to speak.
‘I know, you've already learnt all about police procedures at the academy.
You all say that but the truth is, the theory and the practice are worlds apart.
It's one thing to sit in a classroom writing down notes but it's quite another to come face to face with an armed murderer or a cornered rapist, you mark my words.’
Mauer had barely swung the police car out into Mozartstrasse when the radio crackled into life.
‘Can I answer it, Sergeant?’
Mauer smiled to himself.
Rookies were all the same in the beginning, eager to please and desperate to be judged favourably by their superiors, but within the space of a few months they had become as bitter and cynical as the seasoned policemen they had been trying to impress.
Richter would learn soon enough: there were no heroes, only survivors.
As soon as Mauer knew their destination he switched on the siren and within minutes they had  reached Landstrasse, drawing to a halt opposite the Landerbank.
They scrambled from the police car and headed down a narrow alleyway, their hands resting lightly on their sheathed batons.
A bald man in a tuxedo was standing in a doorway half-way down the alley.
Seeing the approaching policemen, he hurried forward.
‘He's over there, amongst the dustbins,’ he said with a vague flick of his hand.
‘I can't have him lying there, I've got a restaurant kitchen through that door.
It's not hygienic, is it?’
Mauer looked distastefully at the half-dozen overflowing bins and wondered where the man got the nerve to talk about hygienic conditions.
Another two bins had been knocked over and a crumpled figure lay motionless between them, his right arm extended as though trying to reach out for something.
‘I thought he was dead but he moaned when I touched him.
Probably drunk.
I can't have him lying there.’
‘So you said.
Thank you for your assistance, we'll take it from here.’
The man saw the determination in Mauer's eyes and returned to the kitchen, closing the door behind him.
‘Looks like a vagrant,’ Richter said.
‘The overcoat doesn't look very old.
Probably stolen.’
‘More than likely,’ Mauer replied, then squatted down beside the body.
He screwed up his face at the appalling stench but made no move to draw back.
The vagrant's hands were covered by woollen gloves and his face was hidden underneath a navy blue balaclava.
‘Can you hear me?’
Mauer asked, prodding the vagrant with the tip of his baton.
Tesselmann's fingers twitched but when he tried to speak it escaped from his lips as a gurgle.
Mauer unmasked him.
Richter stumbled back and retched against the wall.
Mauer jerked his hand away.
His legs were trembling as he ran back to the police car to radio for immediate medical help.
THREE
Whatever did happen to chivalry?
The question crossed Sabrina Carver's mind as she stood with her left hand looped through the handle hanging from the rail above her in the aisle of the packed subway train as it hurtled through the cavernous tunnels beneath New York.
Her attitude towards feminism was ambivalent.
She certainly believed in equality between the sexes, especially in the work place, but felt there was always room for courtesy and manners in what was becoming an increasingly uncaring society.
As she looked around she felt a twinge of sadness that in a carriage where 70 per cent of the commuters were men there were five women forced to stand in the aisle.
She had a sneaking suspicion that she knew why the men had not given up their seats.
From where they sat they were able to study the women in detail.
Especially her.
She was twenty-eight years of age with the kind of breathtaking allure normally associated with the cover of a glossy fashion magazine.
Her features were classically beautiful: the perfectly structured high cheekbones, a small nose, sensual mouth and mesmerizing oval-shaped green eyes.
Her shoulder-length blonde hair, tinted with  auburn highlights, was pulled back tightly from her face and secured at the back of her head with a white ribbon.
Her designer clothes were from the pages of a glossy fashion magazine.
A Purificacion Garcia (her favourite designer) white cotton Jacquard tabard, a knee-length black cotton skirt and a pair of Kurt Geiger black suede high-heeled shoes.
She hated excessive make-up and had applied just enough to emphasize her striking looks.
Her one fixation was fitness and she kept herself in peak physical condition by attending aerobic classes three times a week at the Rivereast Health Club on Second Avenue, where she also helped put housewives through their paces in the basic skills of karate.
She had successfully gained her own black belt four years previously.
Although ever watchful of her enviously slim figure she was not obsessive, and loved to dine out.
Once a fortnight she and a gaggle of friends would go Dutch at one of their three favourite restaurants: either steaks at Christ Cella's, cordon bleu cuisine at Lutece's or her own personal favourite, a tandoori mixed grill at Gaylord's.
This was invariably followed by a session of late-night jazz at Ali's Alley downtown in Greenwich Village.
As far as her friends were concerned she worked as a translator at the United Nations.
It was the perfect cover story.
She had a degree in Romance languages from Wellesley and after doing her postgraduate work at the Sorbonne she had travelled extensively across Europe before returning to the States where she was recruited by the FBI, specializing in the use of firearms.
She had joined UNACO two years ago.
She alighted from the train at East 74th Street and whistled softly to herself as she walked the two hundred yards down 72nd Street from the subway to her ground-floor bachelor flat.
The concierge doffed his hat to her as she crossed the black and white tiled foyer and after smiling at him she unlocked the door of her small flat and entered directly into the sparsely furnished lounge.
She kicked off her shoes then crouched down in front of the stereo and traced her fingernail along the impressive collection of compact discs, selected one, and fed it into the machine.
A David Sanborn album.
It immediately reminded her of the unforgettable night at Ali's Alley when she had met Sanborn, her jazz idol, who had then discreetly found out from her friends which of his songs was her favourite and made an impromptu appearance on stage to play it especially for her.
The telephone started to ring.
She turned the music down and picked up the receiver.
Her only contribution to the phone conversation was an occasional monosyllable.
After replacing the receiver she sat down on the edge of the coffee table and smiled to herself.
An assignment.
The team was now officially on standby with a briefing session scheduled for later that afternoon.
Of the other two operatives making up the team, she had always enjoyed a special rapport with the phlegmatic C. W. Whitlock.
His equanimity was legendary amongst his colleagues and he had gone  out of his way to make her feel a part of the team when she first arrived at UNACO.
Furthermore, he had always related to her on an intellectual level, unlike the majority of men she knew who saw her as just another pretty face (to try a line on), and although she and Whitlock never mixed socially, only ever meeting up at work, she had come to regard him as one of her few real friends.
After turning the volume up again she disappeared into the kitchen to make herself a pastrami on rye.
New York was swathed in sunlight and the heat would have been stifling had it not been for a gentle easterly breeze blowing in from the Atlantic.
The perfect weather for a barbecue.
C. W. Whitlock emerged from the living-room on to the balcony of his sixth-floor Manhattan apartment, picked up the pair of tongs hanging beside the portable barbecue and prodded the simmering charcoal briquettes through the bars of the grill.
It was hot enough.
He placed the marinated chops and sausages on the grill then stood back and wiped the sweat from his forehead with the towel draped around his neck.
A loud guffaw boomed out from the lounge and he glanced through the doorway, thankful to be out-of the way.
Dr Charles Porter was, as usual, centre stage.
He didn't dislike the man; he just found him a bore.
Porter, one of the country's most respected authorities on paediatrics, had taken a shy Puerto Rican intern called Carmen Rodriguez under his wing twenty  years ago and given her the confidence to start up her own practice soon after graduating from medical school, and she was now one of New York's most popular and in demand paediatricians.
She had become Carmen Whitlock six years ago.
Whitlock looked at his wife sitting at an angle to the doorway, her face in profile.
Someone had once described her as ‘willowy’, a description he thought suited her to perfection.
Her eyes flickered towards him and she playfully stuck out her tongue.
Whitlock smiled at her then looked beyond her at the couple on the sofa.
Carmen's sister Rachel and her German husband, Eddie Kruger.
The sisters had similar features but Rachel was shorter and stockier.
Kruger was typically Teutonic.
Blond hair and blue eyes.
They had remained firm friends ever since their first meeting.
Whitlock turned his attention back to the barbecue and prodded each chop with a steak knife to find out if they were properly cooked.
After turning the sausages and prodding the briquettes again he rested his arms on the railing and looked out over Central Park, his eyes screwed up against the sun even though he was wearing a pair of prescription sunglasses.
It was that kind of day.
He was a forty-four-year-old with a light complexion for an African-born black, his grandfather having been a British Army major stationed in Kenya at the turn of the century.
The sharp nose and thin lips gave his angular face a harshness which was softened by the neatly trimmed black moustache he had worn since his early twenties.
He  had been educated in England and after graduating from Oxford with a BA (Hons) he returned to his native Kenya where, after a short spell in the national army, he joined the Intelligence Corps.
In his ten years with Intelligence he rose to the rank of colonel, but his superiors' prejudice against his British ancestry and education became unbearable and he resigned to take up the post offered to him with UNACO.
To all intents and purposes he was an attache with the Kenyan delegation at the United Nations and the only person outside UNACO who knew the truth was his wife, and even she had only been briefed in the vaguest possible terms.
He never discussed the nature of his work with her.
‘I thought the chef might like a beer.’
Whitlock smiled and took the Budweiser from Kruger.
‘Don't lie, you've just had enough of Dr Kildare.’
He had never lost his distinctive public school accent.
‘I don't know how Carmen can put up with him.’
‘Carmen?’
Whitlock snorted.
‘Spare a thought for me.
At least I've got an excuse to miss today's lecture.’
He picked up the tongs to check the meat.
‘Carmen regards him as a kind of guru and I'm the first to admit he's been an invaluable catalyst in her career, but I wish he could talk about something other than medicine.’
Kruger grinned then moved to the railing where he watched two female joggers passing beneath him, their bronzed legs moving in rhythmic unison.
When they disappeared he turned his attention to a couple  of girls who were laughing and giggling as they flung an orange frisbee at each other.
‘You should get yourself a telescope C.W. You could spend the whole day stargazing.’
‘I'd see a lot more stars when Carmen hit me over the head with it.
Anyway, those two aren't much older than Rosie.’
‘None of us are getting any younger,’ Kruger replied wistfully.
‘How is Rosie?
We haven't seen her around here for a while.’
Kruger put a hand on Whitlock's shoulder.
‘I know.
We were counting on her coming with us today but she'd already made plans to meet some friends in Times Square.’
‘Come on Eddie, it's hardly fair to expect a fifteen-year-old to give up her Saturday, especially one like today, to sit around with a bunch of old fogeys.
It's only natural she should want to be with kids her own age.’
Carmen appeared in the doorway, her hands pushed into the pockets of her flared skirt.
‘How's the food coming on?’
‘A few more minutes yet.
Is school out already?’
She rolled her eyes then returned inside.
Kruger stared after her.
‘It's weird, a paediatrician without kids of her own.’
‘I don't see why,’ Whitlock replied without looking up from the grill.
‘You can have too much of a good thing.’
The telephone rang in the lounge and Carmen answered it on the extension in the kitchen.
‘C.W., it's for you,’ she called out, her hand cupped over the mouthpiece.
He went through to the kitchen and knew immediately who the caller was by the apprehension in her eyes.
She handed the receiver to him and left the room without a word, closing the door quietly behind her.
When he emerged Carmen was absently rearranging the chrysanthemums in the crystal vase on the table in the hallway.
As he approached her he thought of Mike Graham, the third member of the team, who had lost his family so tragically the year prior to his recruitment by UNACO.
What if Carmen's life were put at stake as a direct result of a UNACO assignment?
Would he react as Graham had done?
He dismissed the question as so much supposition, but when he tried to give her a reassuring hug she wriggled free and went out on to the balcony to join the others.
The question stayed in the back of his mind.
‘Get rid of the bum!’
Mike Graham snapped when the radio commentator announced the second strike against the batter.
He leaned forward, his forearms resting on his knees, his eyes riveted to the portable radio at his feet as he waited for the pitcher's next delivery.
‘Strike three, side out,’ the commentator shouted above the disparaging cries of the partisan crowd.
‘Why the hell didn't they sell you to the Angels when they had the chance?’
Graham hissed angrily.
It had been an indifferent season for the New York Yankees, the team he had followed faithfully for thirty years, and, at 4-I down to the Detroit Tigers with two innings left, defeat seemed to be on the cards for a third successive game.
As the commentator began to analyse the Yankees' seasonal batting averages Graham looked around slowly at the tranquillity of his surroundings.
In front of him, as far as the eye could see, was the serenity of Lake Champlain, and all about him were the lush verdant forests of southern Vermont.
The panoramic grandeur of the place seemed a world away from New York, which had been his home until two years before.
New York was –30 miles away and, apart from business trips, he only ever returned there to compete in some of the city's more gruelling and arduous marathons.
He lived alone in a log cabin beside the lake, his only company a portable radio and television.
The nearest town was Burlington and he travelled the five miles there each Monday morning in his battered white ‘78 Ford pick-up to collect enough supplies to last him through the week.
He had always been friendly but reserved with the townsfolk who, in the main, accepted his reclusive lifestyle without question.
He never spoke of the tragedy which had driven him into seclusion.
He was thirty-seven years old with tousled collar length auburn hair and a youthfully handsome face marred by the cynicism in his penetrating pale-blue eyes.
He kept his firm, muscular body in shape with an hour's run every morning followed by a  demanding work-out in the small shed adjacent to the cabin which he had converted into a mini-gym soon after arriving from New York.
Sport had played a significant part in his life.
He was granted a football scholarship to attend UCLA and after graduating with a degree in Political Science his dream was realized when he signed for the New York Giants, the team he had supported since childhood, as a rookie quarterback.
A month later he was drafted into Vietnam where a shoulder wound abruptly put an end to his promising football career.
He subsequently became involved in the training of Meo tribesmen in Thailand and joined the elite Delta anti-terrorist unit on his return to the States.
His dedication and expertise with Delta were finally rewarded after eleven years when he was promoted to leader of Squadron B, with sixteen men under his command, but while he was on assignment in Libya his wife and five-year-old son were abducted by Arab terrorists in New York.
Despite a nationwide search by the FBI he never saw either of them again.
He was immediately given extended leave to undergo psychiatric therapy but refused to cooperate with the medical staff and was retired from Delta at his own request a month after he returned to work.
At the suggestion of the Delta Commander he applied for a post at UNACO and was finally accepted six weeks later after a succession of exhaustive interviews.
The spinner dipped under the water.
He had a bite.
As he reeled the fish in he listened with a growing sense of dismay and despair to the baseball commentary on  the radio.
The score was unchanged and the Yankees were batting in the ninth, and last, inning.
He landed the fish without any difficulty.
A five pound pike, hardly worth the effort.
The bleeper attached to his belt suddenly shrilled into life and after silencing it he eased the hook from the mouth of the pike thrashing about at his feet and brushed it back into the water with the side of his boot.
The game ended in jeers and abusive chants.
He resisted the temptation to kick the radio in after the fish then sprinted the forty yards to the cabin where he made a telephone call to acknowledge the bleeper.
It was answered at the other end after the first ring by a friendly, but formal, female voice.
‘Llewelyn and Lee, good afternoon.’
‘Mike Graham, ID 1913204.’
‘I'm putting you through, Mr Graham,’ came the immediate reply.
‘Mike?’ a deep voice boomed down the line a moment later.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Code Red.
I've chartered a Cessna from Nash, saves us sending a plane from our end.
He's waiting for you at the Burlington airstrip.
Sergei will be waiting for you at JFK.’
‘I'm on my way, sir.’
‘And Mike, pack some warm clothes.
You'll need them.’
He replaced the receiver then hurried back to the water's edge where he gathered together his tackle before returning to the cabin to pack.
Sergei Kolchinsky was the stereotyped image of a chain smoker.
Early fifties, thinning black hair, the unmistakeable signs of middle-age spread and the sort of doleful features that gave the impression he was carrying the troubles of the world on his shoulders.
The strange thing was that he derived no real enjoyment from smoking.
It had just become a costly, and addictive, habit.
Yet behind those melancholy eyes lay a brilliant tactical mind.
Following a distinguished career with the KGB, including sixteen years as a military attache in a succession of western countries, he was appointed as Deputy Director of UNACO after his predecessor had been sent back to Russia in disgrace for spying.
He had been with UNACO now for three years and although he still suffered from bouts of homesickness he never allowed those feelings to interfere with his work.
His clinical approach to his job had always been one of complete professionalism.
‘This cab free,tavarishch?’
Kolchinsky looked round sharply at the face peering through the open passenger-door window.
He smiled, then scrambled from the white BMW 728, crushing the half-smoked cigarette underfoot.
‘Hello Michael, I wasn't expecting you for another twenty minutes.’
Kolchinsky was the only person Graham knew who called him Michael.
Not that it bothered him.
After all, it was his name.
‘I told Nash to step on it.
The boss sounded agitated when I spoke to him over the phone.’
‘He's got reason to be,’ Kolchinsky replied, opening the boot so Graham could deposit his two black holdalls.
‘When's the briefing?’
‘As soon as we get to the UN,’ Kolchinsky answered, then snapped his seatbelt into place.
‘Sabrina and C.W. should be there already.’
‘Have you been briefed yet?’
Kolchinsky started the engine, glanced in the side mirror, and pulled away from the kerb.
‘Naturally.
And no, I'm not telling you anything.’
‘I never said a word.’
‘You didn't have to.
Put some music on; the cassettes are in the glove compartment.’
Graham found three tapes, holding up each one in turn.
‘They're all Mozart.
Haven't you got anything else?’
‘Mozart's the perfect driving music,’ Kolchinsky replied, lighting another cigarette.
Graham reluctantly pushed one of the cassettes into the system, waved the cigarette smoke irritably from his face, then turned his attention to the New York skyline and started to name the numerous skyscrapers to himself in an attempt to pass the time.
Officially, UNACO didn't exist.
Its name was absent from all the directional boards in the United Nations foyer and none of its thirty telephone lines was listed in any of the New York directories.
When someone did ring one of the numbers it was answered by a receptionist on behalf of‘Llewelyn and Lee’.
If the caller could identify himself either  by an ID number or a codeword his call would be transferred to the relevant extension.
If it was a wrong number, no harm had been done.
Not surprisingly ‘Llewelyn and Lee’ were also unlisted in the city directories.
The receptionist presided over a small office on the twenty-second floor of the United Nations Building, its unmarked door locked at all times and only accessible to authorized personnel.
Apart from her desk and swivel chair, the only other furniture was a burgundy-coloured couch and two matching armchairs.
Three of the walls were papered in a light cream colour and decorated with a selection of framed sketches of the Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, commissioned by the Secretary-General himself.
The fourth wall was constructed of rows of teak slats, incorporated into which were two seamless sliding doors, impossible to detect with the naked eye and only capable of being activated by miniature sonic transmitters.
The door to the right led into the UNACO command centre, manned round the clock by teams of analysts monitoring the fluctuating developments in world affairs.
Massive multi-coloured electronic charts and maps plotted the vacillating movements in known trouble-spots, computer print-outs updated existing material and VDUs displayed detailed information on known criminals at the touch of a button, feeding off the thousands of names stored in the system's central memory bank.
It was the nerve centre of UNACO's highly sophisticated world operation.
The door to the left could only be opened by one person.
It was the Director's private office.
Malcolm Philpott had been the UNACO Director ever since its inception, having spent the previous seven years as head of Scotland Yard's Special Branch.
He was in his mid-fifties with a gaunt face and thinning wavy red hair.
There were 209 employees working for UNACO, thirty of those being crack field agents siphoned off from police and intelligence agencies around the world.
Ten teams, each with three operatives, able to cross international boundaries without fear of breaking the law or breaching protocol.
There was no pecking order; each team had its own individuality and style.
That was certainly the case with Strike Force Three.
Of all his field agents Philpott had known Whitlock the longest, having personally recruited him for MIS at Oxford University.
He had liaised closely with him as a handler until his transfer to the Operations Planning Department, but Whitlock never really got on with his new handler and jumped at the chance to work with Philpott again.
Whitlock was the master of patience; nothing ever seemed to rile him, which was just as well considering the simmering tension between Sabrina and Graham.
When Sabrina's dossier had arrived on his desk from the FBI Director he was initially sceptical about her abilities but quickly changed his mind after meeting her.
She was both friendly and intelligent with none of the vanity so often associated with beautiful women.
Then he had been treated to a display of her marksmanship, involving both moving and stationary targets.
She was, without  question, the finest shot he had ever seen.
He had never regretted the day he welcomed her to UNACO.
Graham, on the other hand, had nearly slipped through the net.
The Delta Commander had contacted the Secretary-General instead of Philpott to put Graham's case forward.
The Secretary-General rejected Graham on the basis of his psychiatric report.
Philpott had then been contacted by Graham personally on the advice of the Delta Commander.
Philpott had been furious that the Secretary-General had failed to consult him and after several meetings with Graham overruled the decision, accepting Graham on to the team on a probationary basis, on the understanding that he would be subjected to periodic re-evaluation.
Graham still bore the mental scars of his tragedy but he had proved to be an excellent operative and Philpott had no intention of letting him go.
Philpott pressed a button on his desk intercom.
‘Sarah, send them through.’
Although he had left his native Scotland as a boy his voice still contained traces of his Celtic background.
He pointed the miniature transmitter at the door and pressed the button.
The door slid open.
When they had all come in he closed it again.
He indicated the two black leather couches against the wall and Kolchinsky was the first to sit down, immediately lighting up a cigarette.
‘If you want tea or coffee, help yourself,’ Philpott said, waving in the general direction of the dispenser to the right of his desk.
‘Milk, no sugar,’ Graham said to Sabrina then eased himself on to the couch beside Kolchinsky.
Sabrina glared at him, arms akimbo.
‘I'm not your personal maid.’
Whitlock saw the anger in Philpott's eyes and stepped forward with a placating smile.
‘Let Uncle Tom get it.
My ancestors had plenty of practice, it's second nature to me by now.’
‘It's okay, C.W., I'll get it,’ she muttered.
‘Sabrina!’
She turned to Philpott, who was pointing at the couch behind her.
She sat down without a word and shook her head when Whitlock asked if she wanted coffee.
Whitlock poured two cups of coffee then returned to his seat with one after handing the other to Graham.
Philpott opened the file in front of him.
‘As I said to you all over the phone, it's a Code Red operation.
Time isn't on our side.
There isn't much to go on but these are the facts as we know them.
A vagrant was discovered yesterday in Linz, the skin on his face and hands severely burnt almost as though he had been in a fire.
On further examination at the hospital it was discovered that he had lost most of his teeth and hair and there was irreparable damage to the stomach and intestines as well as to the central nervous system.
The doctors were unanimous in their diagnoses.
Somatic radiation poisoning.
An instantaneously absorbed dose of five grays would prove fatal within the space of two weeks.
The autopsy revealed he had absorbed three times that amount.’
‘What are grays?’
Graham asked.
‘It's the S1 unit to measure absorbed doses of radiation,’ Whitlock answered without looking at him.
Philpott nodded, then continued.
‘He managed to give the authorities a few sketchy details before he died.
He jumped a freight train at Wissembourg on the Franco-German border and found six beer kegs in the car, but when he broke one of them open he was showered in fine powder.
He then covered the kegs with a tarpaulin and left the train at Strasbourg.
Three days later he was found in Linz.’
‘Have the doctors identified the radioactive substance?’
Whitlock asked.
‘Plutonium-IV.’
‘Used in the manufacture of nuclear weapons,’ Whitlock added grimly.
‘So the kegs could be anywhere in Europe by now,’ Sabrina said.
Philpott tamped a wad of tobacco into his briar pipe and lit it carefully before looking up at Sabrina.
‘Correction.
Those kegs could be anywhere in the world by now.
They must be found, and quickly.’
Kolchinsky got to his feet and paced the length of the room before turning to face the others.
‘That damaged keg's a time bomb.
You've heard what happened when a few particles came into contact with the vagrant.
Imagine the consequences if its entire contents were to escape into the atmosphere.
Chernobyl's still fresh in everyone's mind.
It's absolutely imperative that we avoid another nuclear disaster.’
Philpott paused before speaking to give added impact to Kolchinsky's words.
‘Mike, Sabrina, you'll work together to trace those kegs.
And for God's sake bury the hatchet.’
They both nodded sombrely.
‘What about finding out who's behind the shipment?’
Graham asked, breaking the brief silence.
‘Your only concern is to find the plutonium.’
Philpott jabbed the stem of his pipe towards Whit-lock.
‘Anyway, with luck C.W. will come up with something there.
We've run a series of programs through the computer in the Command Centre and it's almost certain that the plutonium originated from the nuclear recovery plant outside Mainz in West Germany.
It's the only reprocessing plant in Western Europe which specializes in the production of grade-IV plutonium.
I've organised your usual undercover role as a freelance reporter; see what you can dig up.
Initial enquiries at the plant have so far uncovered nothing.
There's no record of any shipments or thefts so we're obviously dealing with a professional outfit.’
Kolchinsky picked up three manilla envelopes from Philpott's desk and handed them out.
They contained the standard kit for any UNACO operation.
A resume of the assignment…to be destroyed after reading…, airline tickets, maps of their ultimate destinations, written confirmation of hotel reservations, contacts…if any…and a sum of money in the appropriate currency.
There was no limit to the amount of money which could be used during any given assignment but at the end of it each operative  had to account to Kolchinsky for his or her expenses in tabular form, supplying the relevant chits to back up the figurework.
Kolchinsky's pedantic approach towards the expense accounts had given rise to a joke amongst the field operatives that it would be better to lose a life than a chit.
Graham held up his envelope.
‘C.W.'s bound for Mainz.
Where are we going?’
Philpott exhaled, blowing the smoke upwards.
‘Strasbourg’.
FOUR
Strasbourg, the capital of the French province of Alsace, is situated close to the border with Germany on an island formed by the two arms of the River 111.
It is a picturesque city of cobbled pedestrian streets and timber-framed houses, dominated by the Cathedral Tower, a Gothic building constructed of red Vosges sandstone and standing over 320 feet tall.
The Cathedral, which can be seen even from the furthest peaks of Alsace, is regarded by the Alsatians as a proud symbol of their heritage.
As Sabrina stood outside the hotel on the Place de la Gare staring up at the Cathedral's spire silhouetted against the dark, sombre skyline, she let her thoughts drift back over the hours since their departure from New York's John F. Kennedy Airport.
The flight to Paris had been punctuated by periodic bouts of turbulence and consequently neither of them had managed to get much sleep.
Before disembarking, the passengers had been reminded to put their watches forward by six hours to be in line with Continental time, which had served to add disorientation to fatigue.
A Piper Chieftain, belonging to UNACO, had been waiting at Orly Airport to fly them on to Strasbourg.
Although desperately tired both had pushed any thoughts of sleep from their minds, though after checking in at the hotel, the Vendome…chosen for its proximity to the station…, they had each taken a long, refreshing shower before meeting up again for a late breakfast in the dining room.
Graham's appearance brought her out of her reverie and they walked the short distance to the station, where she approached the information desk to ask for directions to the stationmaster's office.
She had never learnt to speak Alsatian, a dialect closely related to Old High German, so she spoke in faultless German instead.
The clerk even asked where in Germany she came from.
She answered Berlin; it was a city she had come to know well over the years.
The stationmaster's office turned out to be ideally situated overlooking the busy concourse.
She knocked on the door.
‘Herein!’a voice commanded from inside the office.
She opened the door.
It was a spacious room with wall-to-wall carpeting, a teak desk and three imitation leather armchairs against the wall to the right of the door.
The shelves on either side of the window behind the desk were stacked with files, directories and timetables.
‘Entschuldigen Sie,Herr Brummer?’ she said, addressing the silver-haired man standing by the window.
He turned to face them.
‘Ja.
Kann ich Ihnen helfen?’
Graham held up his hand before she could reply.
‘Sprechen sie Englisch –'; Brummer nodded.
‘Of course.
Can I help you?’
‘I'm Mike Graham.
This is Sabrina Carver.’
‘Ah yes, I was told to expect you.
I have the invoices you'll want over here.’
He indicated the five bulky-files on his desk.
‘All the transactions of goods loaded and off-loaded at Strasbourg in the last ten days.’
Graham eyed the mountains of files with dismay.
‘You must be running a pretty busy operation here.’
‘It is, Mr Graham.
Because of its strategic position Strasbourg has become the rail centre of Europe.
We also have an ever-growing harbour complex, with the result that over half the city's workforce are dependent on the transportation industry for their livelihood.
So as you can see, it is imperative for us to attain a constant turnover to maximize profitability.’
Sabrina opened the top file and leafed through the first few invoices.
‘Are they all in French?’
‘Yes.
It is for the benefit of the inspectors who come up from Paris for the biannual audits.
None of them speaks Alsatian.’
‘Thank goodness for the Parisian inspectors.
How are the invoices for the loaded and off-loaded goods filed?
Separately or together?’
‘Separately, but on a daily basis for easy reference.
All invoices also state the consignment's ultimate destination.
For insurance purposes, you understand.’
‘Thank you for your help,’ Sabrina said with a quick smile.
‘If there's anything you need don't hesitate to ask.’
‘Coffee,’ Graham said abruptly.
‘I'll have some sent up straight away.’
‘And some privacy to work,’ Graham added.
‘If you need me I can be contacted on the phone.
Extension seven.’
Sabrina waited until Brummer had left then selected a ballpoint pen from the holder on the desk and wrote on a scrap piece of paper.
She handed it to Graham.
‘What's this?’ he asked suspiciously.
‘Tonnelets a biere et tonneaux a biere —the French for beer kegs and beer barrels.
You don't exactly speak the lingo, do you?’
The meticulous scrutiny of each invoice proved to be both tedious and time-consuming, especially for Graham, who had the disadvantage of not understanding anything he was reading.
He finally resigned himself to memorizing the translated words, hoping to come across a matching entry on one of the invoices.
It was wishful thinking.
They managed to keep their lassitude at bay with regular coffee breaks every hour and when lunch arrived unexpectedly just after midday, courtesy of Brummer, they were grateful for the nourishment and the respite.
Lunch consisted of garbure,a thick vegetable soup, followed by veal a la forestiere and pot-au-chocolat for dessert.
Although momentarily tempted by the seductively rich chocolate dessert  Sabrina's willpower held firm and she gave it to Graham.
With lunch over they reluctantly returned their attention to the files.
It was 3.20 when Sabrina finally closed the last of her three files.
She stood up, stretched, then moved to the window and looked out over the busy concourse.
‘Are you nearly finished?’
He gripped the remaining invoices between his thumb and forefinger in an attempt to judge their numbers.
‘About fifty to go.’
‘Give them to me, it'll be quicker.
You get the gear from the locker downstairs.’
Their weapons would have been deposited in the locker the previous night by a UNACO operative.
The key had been left at the hotel pending their arrival.
It was a standard UNACO procedure.
‘Why the hurry?’
His eyes narrowed.
‘You've found something, haven't you?’
She shrugged.
‘Perhaps.
Give me the file.’
‘We are supposed to be working together.’
She rubbed her eyes wearily.
‘I had my reasons.
We had to go through all those invoices, regardless of what we found.
If I'd told you about the entry earlier on it might have lulled you into a false sense of complacency.
It was you, after all, who was going on at breakfast about the perils of lapses in concentration.’
‘Your faith in me's touching,’ he said tersely.
‘It works both ways, Mike,’ she replied, holding his stare.
He bit back his anger and left the office.
The concourse was packed and he struggled to control his  temper as he was jostled and shoved by passengers rushing for the boarding gates the moment their trains were announced over the Tannoy.
On reaching the lockers he found the area around them occupied by a crowd of students, their rucksacks and kitbags strewn across the unswept floor.
He removed an envelope from his anorak pocket, slit it open with his finger, and dropped the key into his hand.
He unlocked the relevant locker and removed the pale-blue Adidas holdall; but when he turned away he found his path blocked by an attractive teenager in scruffy jeans and a baggy floral T-shirt.
The glazed expression in her eyes told him she was on drugs.
She offered him the half-smoked burnie but he batted it angrily from her fingers before heading back towards the concourse.
It was then he saw the approaching gendarme.
For a moment he thought the gendarme had seen the incident and he instinctively gripped the holdall tighter.
He would have a lot of explaining to do if he were asked to open it.
The gendarme stopped in front of the scattered luggage and prodded the nearest haversack with his foot, ordering the students to stack their belongings in a tidy pile against the wall.
As the students came forward to claim their luggage the gendarme watched them closely, randomly checking passports and train tickets.
Graham noticed the fear on the girl's face as she crouched against the wall, her eyes flickering nervously around her.
He crossed to where she was squatting and hauled her to her feet.
‘You speak English?’ he asked sharply.
She nodded.
‘Put these on,’ he said pressing his sunglasses into her hand.
She glanced at the gendarme.
‘You're not going to…’
‘Put them on!’ he interposed irritably.
‘Now, where's your luggage?’
‘The orange haversack.’
Graham hoisted the haversack over his shoulder and noticed the gendarme watching him.
‘My daughter's.
Is there some problem?’
He never knew whether the gendarme understood him or not but felt relief flood over him when he was dismissed with a curt wave of the hand.
‘Who are you?’ the teenager asked after he had led her into the main concourse.
‘That's not important.
How old are you?’
She bowed her head.
‘Eighteen.’
‘Student?’
‘Princeton.’
‘You're young, pretty and obviously intelligent so why the hell are you trying to screw up your life?
All it takes is one conviction to make you a criminal.
You'll have to carry that stigma around with you for the rest of your life.
It's not worth it.’
‘You've done drugs,’ she said softly.
He held out his hand.
‘You're safe now.
My sunglasses.’
She took them off and gave them back to him.
‘Thanks.
I owe you.’
‘You owe yourself.’
He pushed the sunglasses into his shirt pocket then disappeared into the seething mass of afternoon commuters.
Sabrina looked up when he returned.
‘You took your time.’
He grimaced.
‘It's a jungle out there.’
He pointed to the file in her lap.
‘Find anything?’
‘Just that one entry.’
He put the holdall on the table then moved behind her chair to look over her shoulder at the entry she was underlining with a fingernail.
‘It's got a nine written in the margin,’ he said.
‘Don't forget the vagrant was heavily sedated when he spoke to the authorities.
Even if he did count six kegs, who's to say there weren't more stacked away in another part of the freight car?’
‘Where were they shipped from?’ he asked.
‘Munich.
They were unloaded here five days ago.
Local address.’
‘Ties in roughly with the time the vagrant jumped the train.
It could also be a wild-goose chase.’
‘Could be, but it's the only lead we've got.’
He unzipped the holdall, took out a couple of Boyt shoulder holsters and dropped them on to the table before delving into the holdall again for two handguns carefully wrapped in strips of green cloth.
Both were Beretta 92s, the official handgun of the United States Army.
The Beretta 92 had always been Sabrina's favourite handgun but Graham still secretly hankered for the Colt .45 he had first started to use in Vietnam.
He had only changed to the Beretta after joining UNACO.
All UNACO operatives were allowed to choose their own handguns and, although he had initially used a Colt .45, there had been one main reason for his  converting to the Beretta: its magazine capacity fifteen rounds as opposed to the Colt's seven.
Eight extra bullets in a tight spot could mean the difference between life and death.
And not only for him.
After strapping on her shoulder holster and snapping a magazine into the Beretta, Sabrina checked the holdall to make sure the radiation detection counter had also been included.
It was a portable Geiger-Muller detector, one of the most popular and reliable devices on the market.
It was also one of the most economical, which was why Kolchinsky would have purchased it in the first place.
She smiled to herself.
Kolchinsky was used to the gentle ribbing he got from the operatives about his cost-cutting exercises but when it came to the crunch he would never put any of their lives at risk for the sake of the budget.
He demanded, and got, only the best, invariably at a knockdown price after cleverly playing the manufacturers off against each other.
‘Ready?’
She nodded.
‘Have you got a plan in mind?’
‘Not yet.
Let's see the place first.’
The address on the invoice turned out to be a three-storey house on the Quai des Pecheurs, its reflection perfectly mirrored in the tranquil waters of the River 111.
Its white walls contrasted vividly with the black shutters latched into place over the numerous windows, and the heavy curtains drawn across the three dormer windows jutting out from  the unpainted corrugated-iron roof only added to its forbidding atmosphere.
‘They're certainly hiding something,’ Graham said as he climbed out of the rented Renault GTX.
‘I think, under the circumstances, we should call in our contact,’ Sabrina said at length.
He looked over the car roof at her, his eyebrows furrowed questioningly.
‘What circumstances?’
‘We can hardly go in demanding a guided tour without any kind of official search warrant.’
‘You know the rules, Sabrina: we only use contacts if it's absolutely necessary.
We can handle this ourselves.’
‘How?
You're not going to go storming in there like a bull in a china shop again?
You know how pissed off Kolchinsky was when he got the bill the last time you did that.’
‘No, I've got a more subtle approach in mind.
The damsel in distress.’
‘I might have guessed.
Okay, let's hear it.’
A minute later Sabrina swung the Renault into a narrow alleyway beside the house and emerged into a cobbled courtyard closed in on all sides by faded white walls, the paint peeling off in unsightly flakes to reveal greyish plaster underneath.
She climbed out and rapped the knocker on the black wooden door.
A judas hole slid back and a youthful face peered out at her.
She explained her predicament to him in French, occasionally gesturing at the Renault behind her.
As she spoke he leaned closer to the grille to get a better view of her.
Skintight jeans tucked into a pair of brown leather boots and  a terrific figure.
He could hardly believe his luck and unlocked the door to admit her.
Once inside in the long, dimly-lit corridor she withdrew a photostat copy of the invoice from her pocket and handed it to him.
His salacious grin faltered then disappeared and he glared at her, furious with himself for being tricked so easily.
His eyes flickered past her and he smiled faintly before turning back to her and loudly questioning the validity of the original invoice.
His clumsy attempt to distract her attention was all the warning she needed.
She waited until the last possible moment before pivoting round to challenge the approaching figure.
As the figure closed his fingers around her lapels she clenched her fists together and forced her arms up between his arms until her hands met in front of her face, forcing him to loosen his grip.
She then brought her clenched fists down viciously on to the bridge of his nose.
He screamed in agony and fell to his knees, cradling his broken nose between his bloodied hands.
The youth snaked his hand behind the door but as his fingers curled around the hilt of the sheathed poniard Graham appeared behind him and pressed the Beretta into his back.
He stiffened in terror then let his hand drop to his side.
Graham pushed him away from the entrance and reached behind the door to unsheath the poniard.
He extended it towards the youth, hilt first, daring him to take it.
Sabrina intervened by taking the poniard from Graham's hand and slipping it down the side of her boot.
‘Did you pick up any readings on the outer building?’ she asked, removing the Geiger-Muller counter from the holdall he had brought with him.
He shook his head.
‘It's clean.’
She switched it on and traced its sensitive receiver over the door and surrounding floor area.
The needle never moved.
When she approached the youth he took a hesitant step back but froze to the spot on seeing Graham's threatening look.
She tried to get a reading first off the youth then off his whimpering colleague.
Both readings were negative.
‘You speak English, boy?’
Graham demanded.
The youth pressed his back against the wall, his eyes wide with fear.
‘Parlez-vous anglais –'; Sabrina translated.
The youth shook his head.
She asked him about the beer kegs and he pointed to a flight of wooden stairs at the end of the hall.
‘What about him?’
Graham asked, indicating the injured man.
‘He won't be going anywhere in a hurry.’
The wooden stairs led down into a narrow corridor illuminated by a single naked bulb dangling at the end of a piece of frayed flex.
The only door was situated at the end of the corridor, secured by a bulky padlock.
She made her way to the door but again the counter failed to give a reading.
She told the youth to unlock the door but he shook his head.
Graham, having understood the conversation by Sabrina's gesticulation towards the padlock, shoved the youth roughly in the back towards the door.
When the youth swung round he found  himself staring down the barrel of Graham's Beretta.
He fumbled to unclip the keys from his belt and his fingers were trembling as he tried to unlock the door.
It took him three attempts to insert the key into the padlock.
He dropped the padlock on to the floor then pushed the heavy door open and reached inside to switch on the light.
Sabrina followed-him into the room, still unable to get any sort of reading on the Geiger-Muller counter.
Hundreds of crates of beer were stacked against three of the whitewashed walls but the fourth, and longest, wall was hidden behind rows of wooden racks lined with bottles of both local and imported wines.
The youth led them through a brick archway into a second room overflowing with cardboard boxes, many of them open to reveal their contents.
Whisky.
He pointed to the nine beer kegs standing in the centre of the room.
Sabrina traced the counter over the kegs.
The needle never moved.
She switched it off and squatted beside the kegs to read the labels.
‘Four kegs of Heller,five of Dunkler.
Both are beers native to Munich.
It's bootleg.’
‘A goddam shebeen,’ Graham snapped angrily.
‘So it was a wild-goose chase after all.’
‘Yeah.
I only hope C.W. comes up with something more constructive.’
Whitlock had come up with something a lot more constructive and was on his way to verify its authenticity.
His flight had left New York three hours after the Paris flight and by then the worst of the turbulence over the Atlantic had dissipated so he had been able to sleep for most of the journey.
Once at Frankfurt's Rhine-Main airport he had collected the keys of a Golf Corbio from the Hertz desk and driven the twenty-four miles on the A66 to Mainz where he checked in at the Europa Hotel on Kaiserstrasse.
Like Graham and Sabrina he too had been left a holdall, containing a Geiger-Muller counter and his favourite handgun, a Browning Mk2, in a locker at the main railway station where he had spent three hours studiously checking the invoices for all the freight loaded at the goods yard over the past ten days.
One invoice had fitted all the requirements perfectly.
Six metal beer kegs loaded on to a Swiss bound goods train which had stopped at Strasbourg on the same day the vagrant had claimed to be there.
Although it was hardly conclusive proof they were the same kegs as those discovered by the vagrant, all the signs pointed to it being more than just a coincidence.
There was only one sure way of finding out and that was to visit the local address given on the invoice to test for radiation levels.
It was already nightfall when Whitlock crossed the Heuss Bridge over the Rhine and turned the Golf Corbio into Rampenstrasse, his eyes screwed up behind his tinted glasses as he tried to distinguish the numbers, many of them faded and indistinct, on the rows of warehouses lining the river bank.
He found the warehouse which corresponded to the  number on the invoice lying beside him on the passenger seat and slowed the Golf to a halt in front of it.
He grabbed the holdall from the back seat and climbed out.
The only other cars were the five parked outside a brightly lit Italian restaurant on the other side of the street.
Not only was it gaudy in appearance but the smell wafting from the kitchen was distinctly malodorous.
He walked over to the warehouse.
The unpainted doors were padlocked and above them he could vaguely make out the name Strauss, the paintwork having been abraded over the years by the weather.
He glanced around, then took a nail file from his pocket and set to work on the padlock.
Moments later it opened and he unfastened the chain securing the two doors together and eased one of them open wide enough for him to slip inside.
After trying several switches he succeeded in lighting a bulb in the far corner of the warehouse.
Rusted hooks hung from antiquated iron girders above him, the windows had long since been vandalized and the faded walls were daubed with obscene graffiti.
Even the concrete floor had cracked with age and clusters of weeds had grown up through the uneven apertures.
The whole place reeked of desolation and neglect.
He unzipped the holdall, removed the Geiger-Muller counter, and switched it on.
The needle immediately showed a reading, which then strengthened and weakened as he moved about the warehouse.
He switched it off, satisfied that the kegs had, at some stage, been stored there.
‘Was wunschen Sie?’ 65 
Whitlock swung round.
The man standing at the entrance was in his late twenties with greasy blond hair and a stained apron tied loosely' around his fat stomach.
Whitlock thought of the Italian restaurant and moved closer to get a better look.
The impression was overwhelmingly one of weakness.
He believed strongly in physiognomy and his instincts were rarely wrong.
‘Do you speak English?’
Whitlock asked.
‘I speak a little.
We must, we have plenty of English people come here.’
Whitlock assumed ‘here’ meant Germany and not the restaurant.
Surely no tourist would venture there.
Then again…
‘I take it you work in the restaurant across the road?’
The man nodded.
‘How long?’
‘Nearly two years.’
Whitlock reached into his pocket and withdrew a roll of banknotes which he turned slowly in his hands.
The weak were always the easiest to bribe.
He hated bribery because it was the hardest of all expenses to try and explain to Kolchinsky.
‘I'm after information and I'm willing to pay well for it.’
‘Who are you?
British Police?’
‘Pay me and I'll tell you.
Otherwise let me ask the questions.’
‘What do you want to know?’ the man asked, wiping his palms on his apron, his eyes never wavering from the banknotes in Whitlock's hand.
‘Have you seen anyone around this warehouse in the last six months?’
The man ran his tongue over his dry lips and nodded.
‘Sometimes they come and eat in my restaurant.
Three of them.
One only come in the restaurant once but I'm sure he's the boss.
The other two were —’ he looked up at the roof as he struggled for the word ‘— how you say, scared of him?
My wife say he's handsome.’
He shrugged as though her opinion was irrelevant.
‘What did he look like?’
‘A big man with black hair.
And he have different coloured eyes.
One brown, one green.
I see when he come to pay the bill.
He speak good German but he not born here.’
‘Did you recognize his accent?’
‘No.’
‘And the other two?’
‘One is small with short red hair.
The other an Ami — an American.
Blond, like me.
He have a moustache.’
‘Did you ever hear their names mentioned?’
The man shook his head.
‘They always sit in the corner.
They like to be alone.’
‘Any activity around the warehouse?’
‘I see a van come here sometimes.
That's all.’
‘Was there anything written on it?’
‘I didn't see.’
Whitlock peeled off several notes from the roll and the man snatched them from his fingers and stuffed them into his pocket.
‘What is that?’ the man asked, watching Whitlock 67 replace the Geiger-Muller counter in the holdall.
Whitlock zipped the holdall and stood up.
‘Pay me and I'll tell you.’
‘You smart.’
‘Yeah?’
Whitlock waited for the man to leave the warehouse before following him out and padlocking the chain.
‘You come eat in my restaurant.
I make you a good lasagne.’
‘We have a saying in English.
‘When in Rome, do as the Romans do.’
We're in Germany.’
‘You not like lasagne?’
Whitlock glanced at the restaurant.
‘As you said, I'm smart.’
He returned to the Golf and picked up the invoice from the passenger seat.
The cargo's ultimate destination had been printed neatly in black pen in the bottom left-hand corner of the page.
Lausanne.
Whitlock telephoned them the moment he returned to the hotel but when Sabrina contacted Lausanne station she was told the only afternoon train had already departed.
Both she and Graham agreed there was little else they could do that night and when he telephoned through to report to UNACO headquarters he was told a company Cessna would be waiting at six o'clock the following morning to fly them on to Geneva, the nearest airport to Lausanne.
They both settled for an early night.
FIVE
The Cessna arrived at Cointrin Airport, Geneva, at 7.30.
Graham rented the fastest car Hertz could offer, a BMW 73si, to take them the seventy miles to Lausanne.
Sabrina, with a string of saloon car races under her belt, felt she would be best qualified to drive until Graham tactlessly reminded her of her near fatal crash at Le Mans.
She bit back her anger, for it was neither the time nor the place to start an argument.
She let him drive.
An hour later they arrived at Lausanne station where the stationmaster had been told to expect them.
He made several internal calls then announced, somewhat relieved, that he had tracked down the porter who had overseen the off-loading of the freight train the previous day.
Graham asked him not to summon the porter to his office.
He believed strongly in the psychology of home territory, which invariably put witnesses at their ease and made them more likely to remember little details they might otherwise forget or overlook in strange or foreign surroundings.
He had seen it work while at Delta.
The porter was standing on the platform, his hands dug into his overall pockets.
‘You speak English?’
Graham asked.
The porter nodded hesitantly.
‘We'd like to ask you some questions,’ Sabrina said.
‘What's in it for me?’
‘Your job,’ Graham replied tersely.
‘Well, if you put it that way…’ the porter said with a nervous chuckle.
‘Recognize this invoice?’
Sabrina asked, holding up the one given to her by the stationmaster.
The porter pointed to the name printed in the top left-hand corner.
‘That's me.
Deiter Teufel.
Teufel means ‘devil’.
Deiter the Devil, especially with the women.’
‘I don't give a damn about your social life,’ Graham snapped.
‘So you dealt with this particular cargo when it arrived here yesterday?’
‘It's my name, isn't it?’
‘I don't need your sarcasm, boy.’
‘I was here but…’
‘But?’
Sabrina prompted.
‘I could lose my job,’ Teufel said, staring at his unpolished shoes.
‘I should have known it wouldn't work.’
‘You're on the verge of losing it anyway unless you start coming up with some answers.’
‘Hang on, Mike.’
Sabrina stared at Teufel's bowed head.
‘Look, we're not interested if you've broken some internal disciplinary code.
All we want to know is what happened to the cargo.’
‘I don't actually know,’ Teufel replied, stubbing his toecap absently on the concrete platform.
‘I promise you it won't go any further than the three of us,’ Sabrina said.
‘You promise?’
‘I promise,’ she answered with a reassuring smile.
‘About forty minutes before the train was due to arrive this man came up to me and asked if I'd be interested in making five hundred francs.
Naturally I jumped at the chance.’
‘What man?
Had you seen him before?’
Graham asked.
‘I'd never seen him before.
Well-built, black hair, spoke good German.
He knew somehow that I was dealing with this section and gave me the serial number of a wagon and told me not to go anywhere near it.
He said it contained his own private cargo and that he wanted to unload it himself.
I know it's against the rules but I wasn't going to argue, not for that kind of money.’
‘Then what happened?’
Sabrina pressed.
‘A white van was reversed up to the wagon
‘Did he have any accomplices?’
Graham asked.
‘I only saw the driver but there could have been others inside the wagon.’
‘Describe the driver,’ Graham said.
Teufel shrugged.
‘I didn't really take much notice of him.
I just remember he had a moustache.
There was something strange though.
After the van had been loaded it drove to another loading bay and backed up against a second wagon.
It must have been there for at least an hour.
Then it returned to the original wagon and backed up against it again.
Both trains left about the same time.’
‘Did you check either of the freight cars before they left?’
‘No, sir, but I did check my invoices afterwards.
Both wagons were down as empty.’
‘Where were the trains going?’
Graham asked.
‘The one from Mainz goes on to Rome.
I'm not sure about the other one.
I'll check if you want.’
‘Check,’ Graham said.
Teufel disappeared into a booth and returned a minute later.
‘The other train's bound for Zurich via Fribourg and Berne.
It's stuck in Fribourg at the moment.
Mechanical problems.
I've also written down the serial numbers of the two wagons if that will be any help to you.’
‘Has the cargo been transferred to another train in Fribourg?’
Sabrina asked, taking the slip of paper from him.
‘No, the train's scheduled to leave Fribourg later this afternoon.
The cargo will still be on board.’
‘So you never went near either of the freight cars?’
Sabrina asked.
‘I stayed well clear.
I wanted the money.’
‘Thanks for your help.
And don't worry, we won't say anything to the stationmaster about yesterday.’
‘Thanks,’ Teufel muttered, then smiled knowingly at Graham.
‘You're lucky to have such a beautiful assistant.’
‘Partner,’ Sabrina said sharply.
Teufel touched his cap apologetically.
‘Excuse me, I've got work to do.’
Sabrina watched him disappear back into the booth.
‘So crime does pay sometimes.’
‘Meaning?’
Graham asked as they walked back towards the main Concourse.
‘He'd be irradiated if he'd turned the bribe down and gone to the freight car.’
‘True enough,’ Graham answered, then chuckled to himself.
‘What?’
‘Assistant.
I like it.’
‘I bet,’ she replied, then pointed to the station cafe.
‘Come on, I'll buy you breakfast.’
He had bacon, eggs and sausages.
She settled for a continental breakfast, substituting two slices of freshly baked tresse,a plaited white loaf, for the conventional croissant.
‘What do you make of these latest developments?’
Graham asked as they sat down at one of the few vacant tables.
She stirred her coffee thoughtfully before answering.
‘They found out about the damaged keg and had to repair it secretly; that must be why the van was backed up to the freight car.’
‘Not to mention the fact that someone in a protective white suit might just attract the wrong kind of attention,’ Graham added between mouthfuls.
‘They must know they're in the frame otherwise why the decoy?’
‘Not necessarily.
We're dealing with professionals.
It's only natural they should cover their tracks after a setback like that.’
He forked the remaining bit of  sausage and dipped it into the runny egg yolk.
‘Which train do you think is the decoy?’
‘The original one bound for Rome,’ she replied without hesitation.
‘They've fooled you,’ he said, his mouth full.
‘Really?
And what makes you so certain?’
‘Intuition.’
‘Intuition?
Of course, why didn't I think of that?’ she said sarcastically.
Graham banged his fist angrily on the table.
A couple at the next table scowled at him but looked away when he glared back at them.
He leaned forward and tapped his finger on the table.
‘I already had six years’ experience of the criminal mind by the time you graduated from the Sorbonne as a spoilt little brat.’
‘The spoilt little brat.
I was wondering when we would get round to that.
What about the rest of it?
The poor little rich girl who got into the FBI through her father's influence and who would now be married to some rich Miami socialite had it not been for the timely intervention of Colonel Philpott, who was pressed into giving her a job with UNACO.
You should try playing another track, Mike, that one's already beginning to stick.’
‘The truth hurts.’
‘And you should know.’
She immediately regretted her words.
‘I'm sorry, Mike, I didn't mean that.’
‘You wouldn't have said it if you didn't mean it.’
He rubbed his hands over his face.
‘Can we get back to the case?’
‘It could actually be a blessing in disguise.’
‘What could?’
He pushed his plate aside.
‘Our difference of opinion.
We'll have to check out both trains.’
‘True, but we need a second Geiger counter and there isn't time to wait for them to send us another one.’
‘You take it; I shouldn't find it too difficult to buy another.’
‘Well, we're wasting time sitting here,’ he said and stood up.
‘And as the boss keeps reminding us, it's a Code Red.
The proverbial race against time.’
The hoarding at the entrance to the sliproad leading off the A643 five miles out of Mainz warned of the penalties which could be imposed on any unauthorized personnel attempting to gain illegal entry into the Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing Plant a mile further down the road.
Whitlock swung the Golf Corbio on to the sliproad, past the hoarding, and as he reached the crest of the first rise he saw the plant laid out before him, hemmed in behind ten-feet-high fencing crowned with layers of barbed wire, all of which he later discovered could be electrified at the flick of a switch.
Towering above the numerous box-shaped buildings were three unsightly cooling towers, each belching out plumes of thick, grey smoke which drifted up into the low, threatening rain clouds overhead.
As he drew to a halt in front of the  boomgate he thought about the unacceptable quantities of low-level toxic waste being expelled daily into the atmosphere by avaricious chemical companies with scant regard for the safety and welfare of future generations.
They treated little embarrassments such as their role in the gradual destruction of the ozone layer in the same way that the Vatican dealt with internal corruption: by brushing it under the carpet and pretending it never existed.
It had always distressed him that the West and the Eastern bloc could both budget so generously for what he considered to be the evils of the nuclear industry while millions in the Third World were left wanting for food.
Whatever the questions he really wanted to ask at the reprocessing plant, though, he would never allow his personal feelings to interfere with an assignment.
A guard emerged from the hut behind the boomgate and approached the Golf.
Whitlock noticed the holster affixed to the guard's belt, then glanced down at the leashed Doberman sitting obediently beside him.
He wound his window down and thought momentarily of his brother-in-law, Eddie Kruger, who had taught him all the conversational German he knew.
It wasn't much, but enough to get by on.
‘Morning.
The name's Whitlock.
New York Times.
I've got an appointment with—’ he paused to look at the name at the foot of the letter which had been included in his holdall at the station ‘-K.
Schendel.
Nine o'clock.’
The guard traced his finger down the typed list  of names attached to his clipboard, found the name, then asked Whitlock for some kind of identification.
Satisfied with Whitlock's passport, the guard returned to the hut to telephone through to reception.
He opened the boomgate and Whitlock gave him a friendly wave as he drove past on his way to the visitors' car park.
The reception area had obviously been designed to impress, with its mushroom-coloured Anton Plus carpet imported from America, its three-tiered Czechoslovakian glass crystal lights, its brown leather armchairs and its crushed velour curtains draped ornately on either side of the plate glass window facing directly out on to the car park.
He approached the oak-panelled reception desk and returned the receptionist's smile.
‘I've an appointment with Mr Schendel at nine.’
‘Miss, actually.
Karen,’ a female voice said in English behind him.
When he turned his first thought was that she too had been designed to impress.
Contradicting and yet somehow enhancing the pinstriped jacket and skirt she was wearing, her sable-coloured hair was coiled up on her head, accentuating her fine features and her perfect neck.
Her movements were graceful and elegant and her handshake firm without losing any of its femininity.
‘My apologies,’ Whitlock said, deciding to stick to English.
Her English seemed infinitely better than his beleaguered German.
‘What for?’ she asked with a frown.
‘For assuming you'd be a man.’
‘It's a natural assumption for a man to make.
Come through to my office.
I was about to order myself some coffee.’
Her office, situated off the corridor leading directly out of the reception area, was spacious and subtly feminine.
Pastel walls formed a tasteful background to a selection of mounted Sara Moon prints, fresh flowers were arranged in a crystal vase, and there was a pink shade on the small desk lamp.
She indicated the white leather armchair in front of her desk, then sat down in her swivel chair and reached for the telephone.
‘Tea or coffee?’
‘Whatever you're having.’
‘Why are men always so evasive?
It's not a difficult choice.
Tea or coffee?’
‘Coffee,’ he replied, then, as she gave the order, leaned forward to look more closely at a framed photograph of a freckle-faced boy on her desk.
‘He's pretty cute.’
‘My son, Rudi,’ she said, replacing the receiver.
‘He and his father were drowned off the Costa Brava four years ago.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Whitlock said.
‘Thank you.’
‘How long had you been married?’
‘Oh, we weren't married.
Childhood sweethearts.
I met Erich when I was fifteen.
We would have been together nineteen years this year.’
‘I can honestly say you don't look a day over twenty-five.’
She laughed.
‘I've got a feeling we're going to get along just fine, Mr Whitlock.’
‘C.W., please.’
‘What do the initials stand for?’
‘Nothing, they're just initials.’
He had never forgiven his parents for naming him Clarence Wilkins.
Karen poured the coffee when it arrived and let Whitlock help himself to milk and sugar.
‘What sort of article do you want to write?’ she asked.
‘I was hoping to get an insight into the people who work here.
So much has already been written about the operational side of the industry that the public tend to take for granted the workforce whose expertise makes it all possible.’
‘The human angle, in other words?’
Whitlock nodded.
‘Also, with Chernobyl still fresh in everyone's mind I thought it might be a good idea to show that workers in the nuclear industry are just like the rest of us.
They have families and mortgages and are just as worried about the possibility of a radiation leak as the next person.’
‘More worried.
Not only would our livelihood be at stake if there was a shutdown but we'd also be the first to be irradiated.’
She paused to take a sip of coffee.
‘So why come to Mainz?’
‘We've been deluged with stories about the American nuclear industry over the past few years.
People want to read about something different and with Mainz central to the rest of Europe this is both an  important and controversial plant site.
Fallout from here could contaminate the whole continent.’
‘The melodrama of journalism,’ she said with a smile.
‘How long are you planning on being here?’
‘Two, three days,’ he replied.
‘Good, then I'll be able to show you personally just how stringent our safety regulations are.
Unfortunately I'm going to be busy for most of today lecturing to a group of Japanese businessmen, so I'll have to leave you in the hands of my assistant.
He'll give you a general tour and you can decide who you'd like to interview after that.
I'll set up the interviews for you.’
‘Sounds fine,’ Whitlock replied.
‘I'll organize a dosemeter badge for you,’ she said, reaching for the telephone.
‘A what?’
Whitlock asked, affecting ignorance.
‘It's a badge containing a strip of masked photographic film worn by all personnel working within the plant itself.
When the film's subsequently developed the degree of darkening reveals the radiation dose received.’
She replaced the receiver and gave him an apologetic smile.
‘Sorry about having to rush off like this but I promise I'll be free tomorrow.’
‘Duty calls,’ he said with a wry grin.
She scribbled something on her memo pad and slid the paper across the desk to him.
Ask me out tonight.
He looked up in bewilderment and noticed the self-assurance had gone from her eyes.
She looked frightened.
‘I was wondering, would you be free tonight?’
‘Yes,’ she replied, injecting a little hesitancy into her voice.
‘I thought we could go out for a meal,’ he said folding the paper and slipping it into his jacket pocket.
‘That would be nice.
Did you have anywhere in mind?’
‘I'll leave the decision to you.’
‘The Rheingrill at the Hilton's about the best in town.’
‘Eight o'clock?’ he said.
‘I shall look forward to it.
You'll have to excuse me now, I've still got a few things to see to before my audience arrives.
My assistant will be with you shortly.’
He slumped back in the armchair after she had left.
What the hell was going on?
It had taken Sabrina forty minutes to drive from Lausanne to Fribourg and another fifteen minutes to find the isolated goods yard where Teufel, the porter at Lausanne, had said she would find the freight cars.
She parked the hired Audi Coupe in front of the wire fence then reached into the back for the holdall containing the Geiger-Muller counter which she had managed to buy after numerous telephone calls to a succession of Lausanne retailers.
The icy wind cut across her face as she opened the door and she zipped her anorak up to her throat and tugged the protective hood over her head.
The gate was padlocked from the inside.
She slipped the holdall straps over her shoulder and effortlessly scaled the fence, jumping nimbly to the ground when she was halfway down the other side.
She crouched down behind a row of freight cars and took in her surroundings: to her right a goods shed, to her left two sets of parallel track and a rusted freight car, its wheels barely visible through the tangled mass of overgrown weeds.
The whole area was completely deserted.
She transferred the Beretta from her shoulder holster to her anorak pocket then moved down the row of freight cars, checking for the serial number which corresponded with the one Teufel had written down for her.
It was stencilled in white paint on the freight car fourth from the front.
She took the Geiger-Muller counter from the holdall but couldn't get a reading from around the seal of the door.
She then ran her finger along the narrow groove between the door and the frame to check for wires in the unlikely event of it having been booby-trapped.
Her fears were groundless and she slid the door back.
She saw the shadowy movement out of the corner of her eye and she was still reaching for her Beretta when she was struck heavily on the shoulder, knocking the Geiger-Muller counter from her hand.
It smashed against the rusted freight car behind her, shattering the glass exterior and buckling the sensitive anode.
The ginger tomcat glared up at her, its tail lashing furiously from side to side.
She waited until it had stalked away before picking up the remains of the  Geiger-Muller counter and dropping them into the holdall.
Her grim smile was triumphant when she turned back to the open freight car.
Its sole contents were six metal beer kegs.
She clambered up into the car to take a closer look at them, careful though to remain at what she considered to be a safe distance.
All six bungs were sealed and there was no evidence that any of them had ever been damaged.
Even a master welder would have left some traces of his craftsmanship.
It had to be a trap.
The bullet smashed into the nearest keg.
She flung herself to the floor and rolled to safety behind the half-opened door, the Beretta clenched tightly in her gloved hand.
Although the gunman had her pinned down he wasn't her immediate threat.
Her heart was pounding fearfully as she slowly looked over her shoulder.
The bullet had torn a jagged hole in the side of the keg but there was no sign of the deadly plutonium she had imagined would be seeping out into the atmosphere.
She let out a deep sigh of relief.
These were the decoy kegs after all — Mike had been right.
From the angle at which the bullet had penetrated the keg it had to have come from the direction of the shed.
The door of the freight car was useless as an escape route: the sniper would have it covered.
She noticed one of the wooden struts on the opposite wall had snapped off leaving an aperture the size of a football in the corner of the car.
It solved the mystery of how the cat had managed to get inside.
She pressed her back against the wall and shuffled on the seat of her jeans to the aperture, her eyes continually flickering towards  the open door to ensure she was still out of sight of the shed.
Rot had already set into the damp wood and she was able to break chunks off the strut as though they were bits of soggy cardboard.
The strut above was more durable but the nails came loose when she struck it firmly with the heel of her boot.
She kicked out again, this time cracking it a couple of feet from the juncture with the adjacent wall.
The third kick splintered it enough for her to break it off.
She peered out through the hole but all she could see was the perimeter fence thirty yards away.
Sweating with fear she wriggled through the hole, then ducked under the freight car and crawled slowly forward on her belly between the two sets of rails.
Although she couldn't be seen herself, neither could she see the shed or, more importantly, the exact location of the sniper.
She was only a few feet away from the buffer when a rat darted in front of her, and although she jerked her head back sharply its wet tail brushed against her cheek as it disappeared into a gap between the two lengths of corroded track.
She bit her lower lip to stifle the cry in her throat and felt the goosepimples bristling across her skin.
Where was the damn cat when she needed it most?
She had always prided herself on her resoluteness and fortitude but there was one fear she had never managed to conquer — a fear of rats which dated back to an incident when she was three years old.
She had been inadvertently locked in a disused cellar and the only sound she had heard while cringing in a darkened corner was the incessant scratching  as the rats scurried across the concrete floor around her.
When she had finally been rescued some two hours later it was discovered that the hem of her frock had been chewed away.
She winced painfully as a burning sensation spread across her cheek, and jerked her hand away from her face.
Without realizing it she had been rubbing the area of skin which had touched the rat's tail.
She began to crawl forward again, her eyes continually flickering between the tracks on either side of her.
Rats, like rabbits, were notorious breeders.
She reached the buffer and rolled out from underneath the freight car, safe in the knowledge she was on the sniper's blindspot.
Only it worked both ways.
The shed was at least twenty yards away and there was no cover.
She took several deep breaths, then broke cover and sprinted in a zigzag weave across the open ground.
The first bullet struck the earth behind her, spitting up a mound of soil.
The second bullet followed almost immediately, this time in front of her, and she had to fling herself the last few feet, landing heavily against the side of the corrugated iron door.
She massaged her collarbone gingerly and tried to calm her ragged breathing.
The bullets had followed each other too quickly from different angles for them to have been fired by the same person.
She had an idea where the first sniper had been but in any case he could have moved.
The second sniper could be anywhere.
She knew it would be tantamount to suicide to try to go in through the open doorway so she made her way cautiously  around the side of the building, careful to duck low enough under the shattered windows to avoid detection.
There were two doors at the back of the shed, one partially open, its frame warped from years of neglect.
It was the only way in.
She pressed herself against the wall inches away from the door and used a piece of corroded piping at her feet to ease it open.
A volley of bullets immediately peppered the ground directly in front of the doorway, confirming her worst fears.
They were armed with semi-automatics, not sniper rifles.
Her view of the interior of the shed was limited but what she did see raised her hopes.
It was the first bit of luck she had had all afternoon.
A faded yellow skip stood a couple of feet from the door, well within diving distance.
She launched herself through the doorway and was safely behind the skip by the time the first bullets rattled against it.
There was a vehement curse in German, then silence.
The German was somewhere on the H-shaped catwalk on the opposite side of the shed.
The other sniper was crouched behind a rusted workbench close to the main doorway.
Two black Honda scramblers were parked close to the workbench and her first thought was to put them out of action, but she doubted whether she could get in a clear shot without exposing her head.
She heard footsteps on the catwalk and peered up into the semi-darkness trying to get a fix on the German's movements.
It was too dark for her to see anything, but from where he was, twenty feet up, she would be perfectly silhouetted against the open door.
He was closing in for the kill.
She bit  her lower lip anxiously, her eyes scanning the darkness above her in a desperate attempt to catch a glimpse of movement.
It was all she needed to give her a chance to retaliate.
A sudden burst of gunfire from behind the workbench riddled the wall harmlessly behind her.
She saw the German at the last possible moment.
He was down on one knee, the FN FAL semi-automatic rifle resting lightly on the railing.
Its barrel was pointing straight at her.
She had no time to aim and fired off four shots in rapid succession.
One of the bullets struck his forearm and he cried out, dropping the rifle which clattered noisily on to the concrete floor below.
She was expecting to be pinned down by a concentrated bout of gunfire to give the German a chance to retreat but instead the second sniper swung his FN FAL on the unsuspecting German and gunned him down.
He then sprayed a fusillade of bullets across the front of the skip as he pushed one of the scramblers out through the doorway.
He kick-started the motorbike and continued to fire wildly behind him as he sped away.
By the time she reached the doorway he was out of firing range.
She moved cautiously up the corroded metal steps on to the catwalk and knelt beside the German, the Beretta pressed into the nape of his neck.
There was no pulse.
She pushed the Beretta into her anorak pocket then rolled him on to his back and pulled off his black balaclava.
He was in his late thirties with thinning brown hair and a rugged, weather beaten face.
She went through his pockets but all she found was a spare clip for the FN FAL.
She wiped the clip on her anorak, then removed his leather gloves and pressed his fingers on either side of its shiny surface.
If he had a criminal record UNACO would have a set of fingerprints.
After slipping the clip carefully into her anorak pocket and zipping it closed she descended the steps and scooped up the fallen FN FAL.
She ejected the clip and threw it amongst a pile of discarded wooden crates in the corner of the shed, then buried the rifle under a mound of rubble in the pockmarked skip.
Sensing she was being watched, she spun round to face the doorway, the Beretta gripped tightly at arm's length.
Immediately she lowered the gun.
The two boys were no older than six, their eyes wide and fearful as they stared at the gun hanging limply at her side.
‘Are you making a film?’ one of them asked innocently in French.
She pocketed the Beretta, her hands still trembling as she thought of how close she had come to firing on the turn.
She crossed to the doorway and led them away from the shed.
‘Yes, we're making a film,’ she replied in French, then squatted down in front of them, her hands resting lightly on their shoulders.
‘What are your names?’
‘Marcel.’
‘Jean-Paul.
What's your name?’
‘Sabrina.’
‘Are you really a film star?’
Marcel asked.
She nodded, then put a finger to her lips.
‘Don't tell anyone though, we're filming in secret.’
‘Where are the cameras?’
Jean-Paul asked, looking around him.
‘They'll be here later this afternoon.
We're just rehearsing at the moment.’
‘Will you be on television?’
Marcel asked.
‘Next year,’ she replied with a smile.
‘See, I told you it was a movie,’ Jean-Paul said and pushed Marcel playfully.
‘Didn't,’ Marcel replied and pushed Jean-Paul back.
‘I saw a man here the other day.
He said he was also in the film.’
Jean-Paul gave Marcel another push.
‘You weren't here.
You were sick.’
Sabrina stared at Jean-Paul.
‘What man?’
‘He said I wasn't to tell anyone but I guess it's okay seeing you're also in the film.
He wasn't as friendly as you.’
‘Did he say who he was?’
Jean-Paul shook his head.
‘But I bet he's the baddie.’
Sabrina decided to play her hand.
‘I think I know who you mean.
A big man with black hair?’
‘Yes.
Is he the baddie?’
Sabrina nodded.
‘What was he doing?’
‘He and another man were putting some barrels into that wagon over there.
He said it's part of the film.’
‘How long have those wagons been standing there?’
Sabrina asked, trying to bring Marcel back into the conversation.
He shrugged and glanced at Jean-Paul.
‘Since we started playing here.’
‘How long's that?’
He shrugged again.
‘A long time.’
‘Will you be here tomorrow?’
Jean-Paul asked.
‘I don't know yet,’ she lied.
‘How about you?’
‘We play here every day,’ Jean-Paul replied, then gave Marcel a playful shove before running away towards the fence.
Marcel scowled then ran after him.
She waited until they were out of sight before returning to the shed.
The German was too heavy for her to drag down the steps, so she reluctantly decided to push him off the catwalk.
She cupped her hands underneath him and eased him over the edge.
She felt momentarily nauseated as the body struck the concrete floor but quickly regained her composure and, after hurrying down the steps, she scanned the shed for a suitable place to hide the body.
A row of corroded steel drums caught her eye but she quickly discounted them.
Even if she could have got him into one, which she very much doubted, there was no guarantee it could hold his weight without breaking.
A tattered brown tarpaulin bundled in the corner of the shed?
Not only would it be an obvious place to look but she was uneasy about what might be living underneath it.
A picture of the rat crossed her mind and she instinctively rubbed the back of her hand across her cheek.
The workbench?
She crouched down and jerked open the two doors, fully expecting the cupboard to have been converted into a homely little rat lair.
Plenty of cobwebs but no rats.
The space was divided in two by a metal shelf, which she managed to dislodge  and pull out.
Then she dragged the body to the workbench and pushed it into the cupboard, head first.
There was enough room for the body, except for the left arm.
No matter how she tried she couldn't prevent the arm from flopping out on to the floor.
With a lot of effort she finally managed to close the left-hand door and bolt it into place, then pushed the arm against the dead man's chest and forced the other door over, sliding the remains of a file through two loops where the handles had once been to keep it shut.
She piled a mound of rubble in front of it, then took the FN FAL from the skip and hid it in a length of hollow piping above the catwalk.
The scrambler was next.
It was too big to conceal in the shed so she wheeled it outside and hid it in the freight car containing the metal beer kegs.
It would only be a matter of time before it was discovered but it was the best she could do in such a short time.
She knelt beside the damaged keg and peered through the serrated bullet hole.
The keg was empty.
She then tested its weight against the individual weights of the other five kegs.
They too were empty.
After jumping nimbly from the freight car she closed the door, picked up her holdall, and hurried towards the fence.
She would phone her report to Philpott as soon as she got back to the hotel.
The Rome-bound train had been unavoidably delayed in Montreux after a small avalanche had  blocked the track five miles further up the line.
It was due fifty minutes late in Martigny, its next scheduled stop, twenty-five miles south of Montreux.
Graham had already budgeted on being in Martigny ten minutes prior to the train's scheduled arrival so when he reached the station he found he actually had an hour to kill.
He decided to while it away in the station cafeteria and was already on his third cup of coffee when the train's approach was announced over the Tannoy.
He picked up his two black holdalls and went out on to the platform to watch the train pull into the station.
The locked wheels shrieked as they slid along the rails and the train finally shuddered to a halt in a cloud of hissing steam.
He made a mental note of the number of coaches and freight cars.
Six coaches and eight freight cars.
He crossed to the guard and tapped him on the arm.
‘How long is the train due to stay here?’
‘Twenty minutes,’ the guard replied, then hurried away to help someone with his luggage.
A movement caught his eye and he looked back at the man standing on the steps of the rear coach.
The man was in his early forties with jet-black hair combed back from a cruel menacing face and the kind of muscular physique usually associated with a bodybuilder.
He alighted from the coach, seemingly oblivious to his surroundings, and walked the length of the freight cars, stopping beside the last one.
He unlocked the bulky padlock and eased the door open.
The man who climbed out of the freight car was at least six feet five inches high, a  couple of inches taller than the other man, with a horrendously scarred face and a dyed blond pigtail dangling grotesquely from the back of an otherwise shaven head.
The black-haired man slid the door shut but refrained from padlocking it.
Graham waited until the two men were seated in the cafeteria before moving down the platform to the freight car.
He glanced around, satisfied that nobody was taking any notice of his suspicious behaviour, then opened the door fractionally and peered inside.
A nylon Firebird sleeping bag was laid out on the floor directly in front of the door, obviously being used as a makeshift pillow.
There was an overwhelming stench of stale urine and sweat from inside the freight car but Graham swallowed back the rising bile in his throat and eased the door open further to see what else it might contain.
A sealed wooden crate, twelve feet by six, with WERNER FRACHT, ERHARDSTRASSE, MUNCHEN stencilled in black paint across its facing side.
He placed the holdall inside the freight car and activated the Geiger-Muller counter inside it.
The counter emitted a monotonous crackle.
The freight car was contaminated.
He heard the approaching footsteps on the gravel behind him.
‘Cosa desidera' ?
The flush-faced man was in his mid-fifties with a thick grey moustache and a pair of pebble glasses perched precariously on his bulbous nose.
He was dressed in a pale-blue tunic and trousers with a red trim around the sleeves and lapels.
‘What did you say?’
Graham asked casually as he zipped up the holdall.
‘I asked what do you want?
This is private property.’
‘Really, and here I thought trains were for the public.’
The man struggled to marshal his thoughts and translate them into English.
‘They are, but this wagon is private property.’
‘You're making sense now.’
Graham pointed to the crate.
‘Whose is this?’
‘I ask the questions!
What are you doing here?’
‘Looking.’
‘Looking?
Are you a passenger?’
Graham nodded.
‘And what are you?’
‘I'm the conductor.
Show me your ticket.’
‘Sure, when I'm on the train.’
Graham picked up his holdalls and walked away to the cafeteria, where he changed a couple of Swiss francs into loose change then made a call on one of the public telephones, positioning himself in such a way so he could study the two men as he described them to Philpott.
He replaced the receiver, having been given his new instructions.
Stay with the train at all costs.
The two men left the cafeteria when the train's departure was announced over the Tannoy.
The black-haired man closed his accomplice in the freight car again, padlocked the door, then glanced round as the conductor hurried towards him.
‘Excuse me, sir, you said I was to tell you if anyone came snooping around the wagon while you  were in the cafeteria,’ the conductor said excitedly in Italian.
‘So?’ came the nonchalant reply.
‘There was somebody, sir.
An American.’
‘Excellent.
What was he doing?’
The conductor removed his peak cap and scratched his wiry hair thoughtfully.
‘He had something hidden in his holdall.
I couldn't see what it was but it made a funny crackling noise.’
‘So where is he now?’
‘On the train, sir.
Do you want me to watch him for you?’
‘If I did I'd tell you.’
‘Yes, sir,’ the conductor replied obsequiously.
‘Point this American out to my friend on the train.
Tell him you've already spoken to me.’
‘Yes, sir.’
The man peeled off two bank notes from the roll in his pocket and stuffed them into the conductor's tunic pocket.
‘Thank you, sir,’ the conductor said, then scurried away.
The man stood thoughtfully on the platform as the train slowly pulled out of the station.
The bait, in the form of the unlocked freight car, had been taken.
The plans would have to be altered accordingly and that meant first attending to some unfinished business at Lausanne station.
The prospect of a candlelit dinner with a visiting British nurse had had Dieter Teufel glancing at his wristwatch all day.
With less than twenty minutes  of his shift remaining he had already decided on the clothes he would be wearing for the special occasion.
A Roser Marce blue linen suit and a cream Christian Dior shirt.
Not that he could ever have afforded to buy those kind of designer clothes on his meagre wage but with the money he had received to throw the American and his beautiful assistant, or rather partner, off the scent he had been able to splash out for once in his life.
All he had done was follow instructions.
He had no idea what any of it was about but who was he to complain when he was being paid so well?
And, according to the black-haired man, there would be more to come…
He watched the approaching passenger train from Interlaken.
It contained his least favourite type of commuters, the Yuppies with their expensive skiing gear and false tales of bravado which were shouted, rather than spoken, to relatives on the platform.
He pushed past a group of waiting relatives…why people insisted on waving when the train was still so far away had always been a mystery to him…and glanced round sharply at a teenage girl who elbowed him accidentally, but painfully, in the back.
She smiled ruefully, then continued to wave frantically at the approaching train.
The engine was less than five yards away when he felt a hand shove him hard in the small of the back.
He stumbled then fell on to the track, his scream silenced abruptly as he disappeared beneath the screeching wheels.
Karen Schendel walked into the Hilton foyer punctually at eight o'clock.
Whitlock, who had been watching the entrance from the comfort of an armchair for the past ten minutes, got to his feet and shook her extended hand.
‘Thanks for coming,’ she said with a smile.
‘I thought you might have written me off as a crackpot after my performance this morning.’
‘Hardly, but I do admit to being both baffled and intrigued.
I must say you're looking lovely tonight.’
— She was wearing a turquoise silk dress, her newly washed black hair spilling on to her narrow shoulders.
‘Thank you,’ she said softly, fidgeting with her pearls.
‘Well, shall we go through or would you prefer a drink first?’
‘Let's go through to the restaurant, we'll have more privacy to talk there.’
The maitre d'hotel beamed at her.
‘Ah, guten Abend, Fraulein Schendel.’
‘Guten Abend, Franz.
I believe Mr Whitlock booked a table for us,’ she said, subtly switching to English.
‘Please don't change to English just because I'm here.
I do speak German, only it needs a major overhaul to set it right.’
‘Your German was word perfect when we spoke earlier, Mr Whitlock,’ Franz said.
‘I should hope so.
I practised it enough times in the car coming here,’ Whitlock replied with a grin.
Karen chuckled.
‘Hidden talents?’
‘Some talents are better left that way,’ Whitlock replied as they followed Franz to a table for two in the corner of the restaurant.
‘Is this one of your regular haunts?’
Whitlock asked after their order had been taken.
‘When the company's paying.
I'm not really one for dining out.
You might find this hard to believe but I'm the kind of person who likes nothing more than to potter about the house in a pair of jeans and a sweater and eat spaghetti Bolognese.
I guess I never really grew out of the tomboy stage.’
‘Where did you pick up your English?’
‘In Britain.
After graduating from Mainz University I went over there for three years as a lab assistant, first at Dounreay then at Calder Hall.
I only became interested in public relations once I had come back to Germany.’
‘How long have you been involved in PR work?’
‘Five years now, the last two as head of PR here in Mainz.
I'm also in charge of the hiring of the plant's non-technical staff.
Guards, drivers, cleaners, personnel like that.’
The wine steward presented the wine bottle for Whitlock's inspection.
He nodded.
Karen watched the steward opening the bottle at the sideboard.
‘How long have you been with the New York Times?’
‘About four years.’
‘Then you'll probably know a friend of mine.
John Marsh?’
He shook his head.
‘Can't say I do, but you must 98 remember I'm only there in a freelance capacity.
I've never been on the permanent staff.’
‘Of course, it said you were a freelance writer in your introductory letter.
So, as you'd say in journalism, you're a stringer.’
‘Right,’ Whitlock replied, returning her smile.
The wine steward returned with the open bottle and poured a measure for Whitlock to taste.
On receiving the customary nod he filled both glasses and left the bottle in the ice bucket by the side of the table.
‘You're not really a journalist, are you?’ she said quietly.
Whitlock felt cornered.
His stomach was churning but he knew he could elude her if only he could remain calm and call her bluff.
‘You're an intriguing person.
This morning you mysteriously slide me a note telling me to ask you out and now you claim I'm not really a journalist even though my credentials were thoroughly checked out by your plant manager before he let me near the place.
I feel as though I'm disintegrating before my very eyes.
By the end of the night I won't know who I am or what I do any more.
You don't work for the KGB by any chance?’
She ignored his gentle sarcasm.
‘If you worked for the Times you'd have known John.
He writes a daily showbiz column for them.
He's the epitome of the extrovert, he knows everyone and everyone knows him.’
She noticed the lingering doubt in his eyes.
‘When I heard you were coming I made some discreet enquiries about you at the newspaper.
John's never heard of you.’
She stopped talking when the waiter arrived with the food, then picked up the conversation again after he had left.
‘You probably think I'm making this up.
We can phone John if you like: he'll be putting the finishing touches to his column for the morning edition.
You can speak to him yourself.’
Whitlock stared at his plate, his appetite suddenly gone.
‘Also, if you'd really been a journalist you'd have known what a ‘stringer’ is.
You didn't.
A ‘stringer’ isn't just a freelance — it's a correspondent based away from head office whose local contacts give him an on-the-spot usefulness which far surpasses that of a reporter sent out from head office.’
‘So how come you know so much about journalism?’
‘I used to date John when he was stationed in Berlin.
He was supposed to be the paper's foreign correspondent but instead of filing everyday reports like the other journalists he became obsessed with chasing after so-called spies and spent most of the time commuting between East and West Germany hoping to land the big scoop.’
‘And did he?’
She put her hand to her lips, trying not to laugh with her mouth full.
‘Sorry,’ she said after swallowing.
‘He wrote a story, with pictures to back it up, about an American general supposedly handing over documents to a beautiful KGB agent on Hamburg's Kennedy Bridge.
The KGB agent turned out to be a Reeperbahn hooker and the documents a  couple of hundred marks for services rendered.
He was hauled back to New York and given that column to keep him out of any more mischief.’
Whitlock smiled politely, his mind still reeling from the way she had dissected his cover story, piece by piece, until there was nothing left for him to hide behind.
Nothing like it had ever happened at UNACO.
He felt humiliated.
Outclassed and outmanoeuvred by a pretty face — or rather by what lay behind it.
As he watched her eating he knew what would have to be done if she tried to expose him publicly.
His hand brushed against the holstered Browning Mk7…
‘What intrigues me most of all is how you managed to get someone like the editor of the New York Times to agree to back up your cover story.’
He could have answered her in one word.
Philpott.
He had a sneaking suspicion Philpott had members of staff whose sole function was to dig up the personal indiscretions of those people who could be beneficial to UNACO, then use them as a form of blackmail to get what he wanted.
It was only a theory but it had always amazed him, and the other field operatives, how Philpott could come up with solid cover stories at such short notice.
Solid, that is, until now…
‘Is there something wrong with the Sauerbraten,sir?’
Franz asked anxiously at Whitlock's shoulder.
‘You've hardly touched it.’
‘On the contrary, my compliments to the chef.
I think I've got a touch of indigestion.’
He looked at Karen.
‘Acidity, I believe?’
‘Can I get you something for it, sir?’
‘No, thank you, just take the plate away.’
‘Would you like anything else, sir?’
Franz asked as he reluctantly removed the plate from the table.
‘Coffee and cognac,’ Karen said quickly.
‘For two?’
Franz asked.
Whitlock nodded.
She waited until they were alone then rested her elbows on the table, her clenched hands under her chin.
‘I know how you must feel but I had to be sure you weren't another journalist out for a story.’
‘I hope you're satisfied.’
‘I'm satisfied you're not a journalist.
I don't know who you're really working for but it must be a pretty influential organization to have the editor of the New York Times over a barrel.’
After the coffee and cognac were served she delved into her handbag and withdrew a folded sheet of paper which she held out to him.
‘What's this?’ he asked, taking it from her.
‘Look.’
He unfolded the paper.
It was a scale drawing of a miniature microphone, perfectly reproduced, which was in reality no larger than a sugar cube.
‘A bug.
What's it got to do with me?’
‘That bug's stuck under my desk.
I came across it by chance a couple of months ago.
That's why I slipped you the note this morning.
I had to speak to you in private.’
She rubbed her face and when she dropped her hands her eyes had welled up with tears.
‘You're my last hope, C.W.’
He handed her his breast pocket handkerchief and studied her carefully as she dabbed her eyes.
Gone was the confident, self-assured woman and in its place an uncertain, frightened child.
She was either on the level or a damn good actress.
He decided to leave his options open.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said, gripping the handkerchief in both hands.
‘I just feel so helpless.’
‘You want to talk about it?’
She held her coffee cup between her palms and met his eyes.
‘Have you ever heard of the term, ‘diversion’?’
He sat forward attentively.
‘MUF?’
‘There's a difference.
Diversion's a general euphemism for theft.
‘Materials unaccounted for’ is the specific term used for any kind of discrepancy between the book inventory and the actual inventory.’
‘What exactly are you trying to say?’
‘That there's nuclear material being siphoned off without it affecting the inventory system.’
‘Have you reported it?’
She sat back in her chair.
‘I can't report suspicions and that's all I have at the moment.’
‘Why are you telling me this?
What makes you think you can trust me?’
‘I need outside help.
You're my only chance.
I can't confide in anyone at the plant.
I couldn't be certain they weren't involved somehow in the diversion.
Anyway, an attempt's already been made on my life.’
‘They know you suspect?’
The waiter returned with a fresh pot of percolated coffee and refilled their cups.
Karen added some milk to her coffee and stirred it.
‘I kept a diary in my desk recording all my thoughts and suspicions.
One night it was stolen.
Two days later someone tampered with the brakes of my car.’
‘Did you report it?’
‘Naturally, but the plant manager was convinced it was only something to do with the Friends of the Earth.
I've never gone along with that theory.
Our views may be poles apart but they're not saboteurs.
No, it was an inside job.’
She took a sip of coffee.
‘They've also managed to get into my house while I was at work.
Nothing's ever been taken; all they did was rearrange the lounge furniture.
I suppose it's their way of saying they can get at me whenever they want.
I'm frightened C.W., I'm really frightened.’
He was perturbed by her capricious behaviour.
He felt like a boxer who had been pummelled mercilessly against the ropes, on the verge of defeat, only to see his opponent's corner throw in the towel.
It never happened in boxing.
He thought back to his options.
Was she acting?
Was she, in fact, part of the team responsible for the plutonium thefts?
Was she the bait to lure him into a trap?
Or, on the other hand, was she on the level?
Was she genuinely reaching out to him as a last source of help?
Was she really in fear of her life?
They were all questions which both puzzled and disturbed him, yet at the same time he knew she was the key  to helping him expose the diversion at the plant.
He had to stick with her, irrespective of where her true loyalties lay.
‘You don't believe me, do you?’
‘You're putting words into my mouth,’ he replied defensively.
‘And you're evading the question.’
He dabbed his mouth with the napkin.
‘I don't disbelieve you.’
‘The classic reply.
You come to the reprocessing plant posing as a journalist but really you're on some undercover assignment for a powerful organization, maybe for a government.
I hardly think you went to all this trouble just to check the plumbing.
We both know why you're here.
I thought I'd be helping you by telling you what I did.
I want to help you, C.W.; can't you see that?’
She leaned forward and gripped his wrists.
‘If the plutonium were to fall into the wrong hands the results could be catastrophic.
It would also give the anti-nuclear group some propaganda to use against us.’
She smiled apologetically and released his hands.
‘I believe passionately in the future of this industry but what chance have we got when an avaricious few are using it for their own crazy purposes?’
‘Can you give me a list of the employees you think are involved in the diversion?’
‘I'll have it for you first thing in the morning.’
‘I intend writing the story I came here to find.’
‘Of course, you need to keep your cover intact.’
‘As I said to you earlier, I'm a freelance writer.
The article should appear in the Times a couple of  days after I get back to New York.
Perhaps your friend could send you a copy.’
He called for the bill.
When Franz arrived with it Karen deftly plucked it from the sideplate and held up a hand to silence Whitlock's protest.
‘It's the least I can do.
Anyway, the company's paying.’
She slipped her hand through the crook of his arm once they emerged into the foyer and they walked in silence to the lift to go down to the basement car park.
The change in temperature was immediately noticeable when the lift doors parted and she tugged her shawl closer around her shoulders as the cold night air swirled around them.
‘Where are you parked?’
‘In the corner, it's all I could find,’ she replied.
‘It's pretty busy tonight.
Probably a conference.’
They took no notice of the black Mercedes as it slipped noiselessly out of the parking space behind them, the driver's foot hovering over the accelerator.
It crept forward, slowly building up speed, and when it was twenty yards behind them the driver pressed the accelerator to the floor.
Whitlock shoved Karen out of the way and had to fling himself on to the bonnet of a BMW as the Mercedes flashed past, missing him by inches.
The driver spun the wheel as the Mercedes reached the end of the row of parked cars and it skidded sideways, the left corner of the rear bumper crumpling in a flash of sparks as it glanced off the wall.
The driver changed down gears and sped up the ramp, smashing  through the boomgate, and disappeared out into the street.
Whitlock hurried over to where Karen was huddled against a pillar, her head buried in her arms.
He crouched down beside her and put his hand lightly on her shoulder.
She put her arms around his neck and pressed her face against his chest.
He became aware of someone behind him and was reaching for his Browning when he saw the uniform.
He let his hand drop.
‘Are you all right?’ the boomgate operator asked anxiously.
‘We're okay, thanks.’
The man moved off to summon his superiors who, in turn, would summon the police.
‘Are you all right?’
Whitlock asked as he helped her to her feet.
‘I'm okay,’ she replied in a shaky voice.
‘How about you?’
‘I'll survive,’ he replied with a grim smile.
‘Have you ever seen that car before?’
‘Never.
Did you get a look at the driver?’
‘No, it was all too quick,’ he lied.
Not that he had seen much.
A Caucasian face partially shaded by a trilby.
It wasn't much to go on but he was determined to keep the information to himself.
‘And the number plate?’
‘Blacked out with masking tape,’ he replied.
‘There's no point in us hanging around here any longer.
The last thing we need is to have the police involved.’
‘I'll make you some coffee at my place,’ she said, taking her car keys from her handbag.
‘Thanks anyway but I want to get back to the hotel and soak my shoulder in a hot bath.
It's already getting a bit stiff.
Anyway, you've got that list to prepare.
The car won't be back tonight.’
She kissed him lightly on the cheek.
‘I owe you one.’
‘You don't owe me anything.
Now, go on.
I'll see you in the morning.’
As he walked to his car he was already planning his report for Philpott.
Top priority would be a thorough screening of Karen Schendel.
As he left the underground car park, the driver of the black Mercedes parked in the shadows of a driveway opposite pulled out into the road, and followed the Golf Corbio at a safe distance.
SIX
Largo Antiks was a small, nondescript antiques shop on the corner of Beethoven and Dreikonigstrasse in Zurich.
It was run by two balding, bespectacled men in their late thirties, neither of whom was called Largo, whose extensive knowledge of antiques had made it one of the most popular and profitable shops of its kind in the whole canton.
Both men worked for UNACO.
The shop was a front for UNACO's European headquarters.
It had been bought with a United Nations grant of 1980 on the understanding that all the profits would be channelled discreetly into a numbered Swiss bank account to be used exclusively by UNICEF.
A bell jangled above the door when Philpott entered the shop, followed by Sabrina and Kolchinsky.
The assistant behind the counter acknowledged them with a curt nod and his eyes flickered towards an area of the shop hidden from the entrance.
Philpott understood the gesture and browsed through the antiques until the lone customer had left the shop.
The assistant then ushered them through the doorway behind the counter, removed a sonic transmitter from his pocket and pointed it at the empty bookcase against the opposite wall.
He activated the transmitter and the bookcase swivelled outwards to reveal a concrete passage behind.
Sabrina always got a kick out of the swivelling bookcase; it was like something out of a Boris Karloff film.
So much more interesting than Philpott's drab wall panels at the United Nations headquarters.
They set off down the passage and the assistant sealed them in before returning to the shop.
Half a dozen unmarked doors lined the passage, behind each of which was a soundproofed room where highly skilled UNACO personnel operated some of the world's most advanced and sophisticated computer systems in the struggle to put a stop to the alarming rise in international crime.
Philpott led them to a pale-blue door at the end of the passage.
He pressed a buzzer.
An overhead camera panned each face in turn before the door was opened.
It led into the plush office of Jacques Rust, head of UNACO's European operation.
Rust closed the door by remote control then activated his mechanized wheelchair and approached them.
He was a forty-two-year-old Frenchman with a distinctly handsome face and sparkling blue eyes.
He had spent fourteen years with the French Service de Documentation Exterieure et de Contre Espionage before becoming one of Philpott's first field operatives when UNACO was founded in I980.
He had been paired off with Whitlock.
When Philpott received official permission to increase his field operatives from twenty to thirty he put Sabrina with them to form the original Strike Force Three.
Less than a year later Rust and Sabrina were on a routine stakeout at the Marseilles docks when they had come under heavy fire from a gang of drug smugglers and Rust was hit in the spine, leaving him paralysed from the waist down.
He was initially given a senior position at the Command Centre in the United Nations but when the head of the European operation died in a car crash…which was subsequently proved to have been an accident and not sabotage as originally thought…
Philpott surprised many of his team by appointing him, and not Kolchinsky, as the dead man's successor.
It had been a shrewd, but wise, choice and the ties between Zurich and New York had never been stronger.
‘Colonel, I wasn't expecting you until tomorrow,’ Rust said as he shook hands with both men.
‘You should have let me know you were coming earlier, I'd have had a car waiting at the airport for you.’
Philpott eased himself into an armchair, leaning his cane against the wall.
After graduating from Sandhurst Military College with the coveted Sword of Honour he had first seen active duty in Korea where he suffered a serious leg injury while attempting to rescue a wounded colleague.
It had left him with a pronounced limp in his left leg.
‘We took the morning flight on Swiss Air.
Sabrina was there to meet us.’
Sabrina kissed him on both cheeks then ran her hand lightly over his hair.
‘How many times must I tell you, don't cut your hair so short.
It shows up your receding hairline.’
‘Still as complimentary as ever,’ Rust added drily.
‘Oh, I've got something for you,’ she said, handing him the FN FAL magazine clip now sealed in a plastic bag.
‘There's a set of prints on it.
Your boffins shouldn't have too much trouble in coming up with a name.’
Rust phoned out on his internal line for someone to fetch the clip.
He replaced the receiver and looked up.
‘Anyone for coffee before we start?’
All three declined.
‘There's been a new development since I received your telex yesterday.
An avalanche's blocked the track outside Sion and first reports say it won't be cleared before daybreak.
That means the train's going to be delayed there overnight.’
‘Why do I get the feeling this is more than just coincidence?’
Philpott asked as he tapped the dottle from his pipe into the ashtray beside him.
Rust smiled.
‘The snow's very loose on the Wildhorn at this time of year and all it took was a small charge to start the ball rolling, if you'll excuse the pun.
I thought we might need the extra time to help consolidate our position.
Although judging by the telex you've already tracked down the plutonium.’
‘Perhaps,’ Kolchinsky said, entering the conversation for the first time.
‘The Geiger counter picked up levels of radiation but we already knew those kegs had been stored in that particular freight car.
Now it contains a sealed crate belonging to Werner Freight.
What we don't know is whether that crate contains the kegs.
If we jump the gun and point a finger at Stefan Werner without sufficient evidence  and it turns out we were in the wrong he's got enough sway to splash UNACO across the front page of every newspaper in Europe.’
A light flashed on the desk and after checking the video camera Rust activated the door.
He handed the plastic bag to the white-coated technician and asked to be told the moment the fingerprints were identified.
‘I don't think he would,’ Sabrina said after the technician had left.
‘What?’
Philpott asked, the lighter poised over the mouth of his pipe.
‘Stefan.
He's not a vindictive person.
If he knew it was a matter of international security I'm certain he wouldn't object to having the crate opened.’
‘Stefan?’
Rust said raising his eyebrows.
‘I didn't know we were on first-name terms.’
‘I went out with him a couple of times when I was at the Sorbonne.’
‘You never said you knew him,’ Philpott said sharply.
‘I went to a couple of parties with him, that's all.’
‘How well did you know him?’
‘I never slept with him if that's what you mean, sir,’ she shot back angrily.
‘We were friends, that's all.
I haven't seen him since I left Switzerland five years ago.’
‘What kind of person was he?’
Kolchinsky asked.
‘Ambitious,’ she replied.
‘Very ambitious.
His work was his life.’
The telephone rang and Rust snatched up the  receiver.
He gave a thumbs-up sign then replaced it and manoeuvred his wheelchair round behind his desk where he tapped his security code into the IBM computer linked up to the central data bank elsewhere in the building.
‘We're in business,’ he said when the relevant entry appeared on the screen.
‘The fingerprints check out to one Kurt Rauff.’
‘What have you got on him?’
Philpott asked.
‘You British have a term for him.
An international milk thief.’
‘A petty villain in other words,’ Philpott replied with a hint of irritation in his voice.
‘What was he mixed up in?’
‘This and that.
He had a number of convictions, all small sentences.
Pickpocketing, cheque fraud, embezzlement.’
‘Hardly your gun-toting sniper,’ Sabrina said.
‘Not so quick,cherie,’Rust replied, holding up a finger.
‘It seems he's elevated himself into the big league these past four years.
He was involved in gunrunning for the likes of Dauphin, Giselle and Umbretti.’
‘It's audacious enough for any of them,’ Philpott said, biting the stem of his pipe thoughtfully.
‘Any luck yet with the two men Mike saw on the train?’
‘We've come up with a few names.
Most of them correspond with the list your boys drew up at the UN.
I've got men asking around.’
‘May I see that telex?’
Sabrina asked.
Rust pointed to it lying on his desk.
She read it through then looked up at Philpott.
‘You haven't mentioned that the black-haired man has different coloured eyes.’
‘What?’
Philpott replied in bewilderment.
‘Didn't C.W. tell you, sir?’
‘I didn't speak to him.
He called at night and spoke to the duty officer.
That's the description he passed on to me.’
‘Jacques, you might…’ she trailed off seeing Rust's grim expression.
‘One brown, one green,n'est-ce pas?’
She nodded slowly.
Rust stared at the screen.
‘His name's Joachim Hendrique.’
‘Balashikha,’ Kolchinsky whispered, ashen-faced.
‘Balashikha?
The KGB's training school for Third World terrorists?’
Philpott asked, staring at Kolchinsky.
Kolchinsky nodded.
‘Run by Directorate S, the most feared division within the KGB itself.’
‘There's no mention of Balashikha here,’ Rust announced after scanning the screen.
‘I'm not surprised.
The true identity of Balashikha graduates is known only to the most senior members of Directorate S. The whole place is shrouded in secrecy.’
‘So how do you know about him?’
Philpott asked.
‘Hendrique was reputed to have been the best student ever to graduate from Balashikha.
That kind of information tends to leak out to other members of the KGB hierarchy.
Accidentally-on-purpose, if you get my meaning.’
‘Was he one of the names on the list?’
Philpott asked Rust.
Rust shook his head.
‘The only known photographs of him are a series of blurred snapshots taken by the CIA official in Nicaragua.
The features must have been too indistinct to program into the computer.
The identikit can only match faces already stored in the memory bank.’
‘Yet you knew who he was the moment I mentioned his eyes,’ Sabrina said, sitting forward, her interest stimulated.
‘He once tried to kill me.
It happened while I was still with the SDECE.
We'd received a tip-off about a shipment of cocaine due in at Nice aboard a South American freighter, so when it was unloaded we were able to apprehend the gang without much of a struggle.
A couple of them made a break for it.
I chased one into a warehouse where he managed to double back and attack me from behind.
He knocked my gun from my hand then pushed me up against the wall, pressing his own gun into my stomach.
He was wearing a balaclava so all I could see was his eyes.
One brown, one green.
He pulled the trigger but the chamber was empty.
Most criminals would have panicked at that moment.
He just laughed.
Then he hit me with the butt of his gun and the next thing I remember is coming round to find my colleagues crouched anxiously beside me.
He'd escaped.
I'll never forget those eyes as long as I live.’
‘If you never saw his face…’
‘Having differently coloured eyes is rare enough  but he also had the distinctive physique of a bodybuilder,’ Rust said, cutting in across Kolchinsky's words.
‘It's the same man, Sergei, I'd stake my career on it.’
‘What does it say about him?’
Philpott asked, pointing to the VDU.
Rust read through the text, translating the salient points from French into English.
‘He was born in Chad in 1947 and raised by missionaries.
He ran away to sea at fifteen and made a name for himself as a good, but sadistic, fist fighter.
He next surfaced in Amsterdam in 1969 as an insurrectionist amongst the more seditious members of the hippy community and was instrumental in provoking clashes between them and the police.
He was never caught.
He went to ground and wasn't heard of again until 1975 when word reached the CIA that he was training the Marxist MPLA soldiers in Angola.
After Angola he went to Nicaragua where he fought with the Sandanistas until the downfall of Somoza in I980.
Since then he's become involved in illegal gunrunning operations across Europe.
He's also known to deal in drugs in and around Amsterdam where it's rumoured he lives on a houseboat somewhere in the Jordan area.
His favourite weapons are a .357 Desert Eagle, which he always carries on his person, and a Franchi Spas shotgun.
There's one point that isn't in his dossier.
He never works for himself.
He merely employs the muscle and makes sure the whole operation runs according to plan.’
‘You have to give him credit for his choice of  weapons, especially the Desert Eagle,’ Sabrina said.
‘Can you put a name to his accomplice?’
Kolchinsky asked.
Rust opened the file on his desk and ran his finger down the list of suspects.
One name caught his eye and he programmed it into the computer.
‘Akkid Milchan.
Thirty-seven years old.
Six feet five.
Egyptian.
Mute.
His face was scarred in an explosion aboard a Liberian tanker in 1979.
He also lives in Amsterdam and has been working, off and on, for Hendrique since I982.’
‘At least now we've got an idea who we're up against.
Jacques, you said this Rauff has been mixed up with the likes of Dauphin, Giselle and Umbretti.
Find out if any of them has been linked to Hendrique over the past few months.
I also want Werner checked out, but for God's sake be discreet.’
Philpott crossed to a map of Europe on the wall as Rust reached for the telephone to relay the orders.
‘Sabrina?’
She sprang nimbly to her feet and approached him, her hands thrust into the pockets of her baggy camouflage pants.
‘The train's stuck at Sion,’ he said, prodding the name on the map with the end of his pipe.
‘And will be until morning,’ she added.
‘Precisely,’ he said, giving her the kind of look a great thespian might give an impish soubrette who had just delivered his punchline.
‘I know it's been a long day but I want you to drive to Sion tonight.
You've got a berth reserved on the train so you'll be able to get some sleep once you get there.
Mike  needs to be filled in on the latest developments.’
‘You think Stefan's involved, don't you?’
‘Not necessarily, but I do think the crate contains the kegs.’
‘What makes you so sure, sir?’
‘Instinct.’
She smiled.
‘You sound like Mike.’
Rust manoeuvred his wheelchair out from behind the desk and stopped it in the centre of the room.
‘Anyone hungry?
I know this little restaurant round the corner that serves a delicious choucroute garnie .
‘I'm famished,’ Philpott said, then turned to Sabrina.
‘Have something to eat with us before you go.’
‘Thank you, sir, but I'll grab a bit on the way there.’
‘Friture de perchettes served in butter sauce?
Your favourite,cherie,’Rust said, then kissed the tips of his bunched fingers.
‘Another time, Jacques.
I want to get to Sion as soon as possible.’
Rust pulled on his jacket, then led the way out into the passage and through a side door into the street, the antiques shop now being closed.
Sabrina zipped up her anorak as she stepped out into the cold night air and rummaged in her pockets for the keys to the Audi Coupe.
‘Come on, I'll escort you to your car.’
Philpott gave her a reassuring smile, then he and Kolchinsky disappeared around the corner in search of the restaurant.
‘Want a push?’
‘It'll be like old times again with you watching my back,’ Rust replied with a grin.
‘And look what happened,’ she said bitterly.
He looked round at her.
‘Why can't you accept that it wasn't your fault?
If you'd stuck your head out to give me covering fire you wouldn't be pushing this wheelchair.
You know damn well I've never blamed you for what happened that night; it was one of those risks we had to take.
Anyway, why must this discussion always crop up whenever we see each other?’
She remained silent.
‘How's Mike these days?’ he asked, broaching the silence.
‘Fine,’ she answered absently.
‘Send him my regards,’ he said as they reached the Audi Coupe.
‘I will.’
She unlocked the driver's door, hugged him and quickly climbed inside.
He waited until the Audi Coupe had merged with the evening traffic before making his way to the restaurant.
Philpott and Kolchinsky were seated at the table nearest the trellised entrance of the small cocktail bar.
‘You didn't have to sit here just because of me,’ he said, giving the barman the customary wave.
It meant he would have his usual.
‘It saves you weaving through all those tables and chairs,’ Kolchinsky replied.
‘This is my very own Monza,’ Rust said, extending his arms.
‘How long before you get some feedback on Werner and the others?’
Philpott asked.
‘It'll be brought to me as soon as it comes through.
You suspect Werner, don't you?’
‘I certainly think his company's involved somewhere along the line.
If it does turn out he's personally involved I've got a feeling it's going to be difficult as hell trying to prove it.’
‘Herr Stefan Werner.’
Heads automatically turned to look when the toastmaster made the announcement.
Werner was in his late forties with a short, stocky physique, thinning brown hair and a neatly trimmed russet moustache that tapered down over the corners of his mouth.
He had a charismatic quality about him that had long made him one of Europe's most eligible bachelors.
He entered the palatial ballroom and took in his surroundings, mentally assessing the wealth of his hosts.
He ignored the mottled marble floor, the neo-Doric pillars and the intricately carved oak ceiling.
His only interest was in the collection of paintings lining the oak-panelled walls.
Houses could be paid off gradually; paintings had to be bought outright.
He regarded it as a fairly accurate way of weeding out the pretenders from the cream of Europe's opulent elite.
The hostess broke away from a clique of friends and bustled towards him, arms outstretched.
They embraced fleetingly.
She was the granddaughter of some forgotten Prussian nobleman and she and her  husband had once owned a beautiful sixteenth century castle overlooking the town of Assmannshausen in the Rhine Valley before selling it in favour of their present mansion on the outskirts of Berlin.
They insisted it had been a step up the social ladder; he secretly disagreed.
‘I'm so glad you could make it tonight, Stefan.
You know how popular you are with the single ladies.’
‘You flatter me, Marisa,’ Werner replied with an affected smile.
‘You know how much I enjoy your parties.
I'm only sorry I had a prior engagement, otherwise I'd have been here much earlier.’
He had long since mastered the art of tactful lying.
‘You're here, that's the main thing.
I believe you were at the theatre?’
‘At the Philharmonic actually.
A recital of Handel's Messiah by the Berlin Philharmonic and the Schonberg Boys’ Choir.
I missed it the last time round.’
‘It sounds as if you enjoyed it,’ she said, leading him across the room.
‘It's not enjoyment, it's ecstasy,’ he replied, and helped himself to a glass of champagne from the tray of a passing waiter.
He caught the tail end of a whispered discussion behind him regarding his worth and was horrified to hear the group settle on a figure of 150 million pounds.
Had they trebled it they would have been nearer the truth.
Not only did he own Werner Lines, a worldwide shipping empire with more than  vessels in commission, but he had also branched out into the freight industry over the past four years and succeeded in cornering an important section of its competitive market by buying out a succession of small, struggling companies and amalgamating them under an experienced board of directors answerable only to him.
With his freight company working hand-in-hand with his shipping line he was able to undercut his competitors by offering their clientele the kind of package deals no company director could resist.
His success rate was obvious by the number of struggling competitors, many of whom he subsequently bought out to add to his ever growing empire…
‘Stefan, I nearly forgot to tell you.
There's someone here ta see you.’
Another of her unattached friends who always seemed to find their way on to the invitation list whenever she was certain he would be at one of her soirees.
He knew she only had his best interests at heart but he had yet to meet one of these women whose interest in him stemmed beyond his bank balance.
Anyway, his standing in society was far too high to have it blackened by the indiscreet infidelities of a wife bored with her husband's success.
He had seen too many prominent European industrialists toppled from their pedestals by tabloid revelations of the pathetic vanity of their wives, frivolously whittling away the family money on a succession of oversexed gigolos.
Bachelorhood suited him perfectly.
‘He arrived half an hour ago and said he wanted  to see you urgently.
He said I should say ‘Brazil, 1967’ and you'd understand.’
‘Where is he, Marisa?’ he asked, gripping her arms.
‘I put him in the study.
Is he Russian?’ she asked, stressing the last word.
‘Yes, an old friend of mine.’
‘I suppose he's with the KGB,’ she said, chuckling.
His eyes narrowed menacingly but he quickly checked himself and smiled.
‘You've been watching too many late-night movies.
No, we're in the same line of business.’
‘Is he married?’ she asked with a mischievous glint in her eye.
‘No, but I doubt you'd find too many takers here willing to give up the delights of the West for a Russian dacha.’
‘Perhaps we could get him to…defect, is that the word they use?’
‘I doubt you'd get him to do that.’
‘I'll get one of the staff to show you the way.’
The butler led him down the hall to a veneered door which he opened.
‘Can I get you anything, sir?’
‘No, thank you.’
The butler bowed curtly and closed the door behind him.
Benin embraced Werner then held him at arm's length.
‘You're looking well, my friend.’
‘I can afford to,’ Werner answered with a smile.
He crossed to the sideboard.
‘Scotch?’
‘Please.’
Benin eased the velvet curtains apart and  looked out over the brightly lit garden.
‘Is it safe to talk here?’
Werner poured two measures of scotch and handed one of the tumblers to Benin.
‘Quite safe.
Any news of the man Hendrique saw?
Or the one at the Mainz plant?’
‘Nothing yet, but I've got a team working around the clock so it should only be a matter of time before they come up with the answers.’
Benin moved to the writing desk and stared absently at the framed family photograph then turned back to Werner.
‘I've come here to ask you to direct operations from on board the train.’
‘And Hendrique?’
Werner asked.
‘He'll take orders from you.’
‘You know how independent…’
‘He'll do as he's told!’
Benin cut in sharply, then lowered his voice.
‘I've tolerated his insubordination in the past but he knows exactly what will happen to him if he doesn't toe the line this time.
I think you'll find him very cooperative.’
‘That will be a first,’ Werner said with surprise.
‘How did you manage it?’
‘I've built up a dossier on his drug and arms deals over the past few years.
If he steps out of line this time I'll see to it that the dossier falls into the appropriate hands.’
‘The authorities?’
‘Since when has he ever been frightened of the law?
You no doubt heard about the raid on a Venezuelan freighter outside Amsterdam a couple of years ago when a gang impersonating the harbour  police impounded over a million pounds worth of acapulco gold?’
‘Hendrique?’
‘Correct.
He thought the cannabis was being shipped in by a small-time Dutch gangster trying to muscle in on the Amsterdam syndicate.
He couldn't have been more wrong.
It was a Mafia shipment.’
Werner whistled softly.
‘The Mafia immediately put out a contract on the gang.
It's still valid.’
Benin watched Werner light a cigarette before continuing.
‘I spoke to Hendrique on the phone before I left East Berlin.
The train's due out of Sion at nine tomorrow morning.
It's next stop's Brig, the last station before the Simplon Tunnel.
Board the train there, he's expecting you.’
‘I'll have a company helicopter refuelled and ready for take-off within the hour.’
‘There is one more thing,’ Benin said, and picked up an attache case from beside his chair.
He handed it to Werner.
Werner knew what it contained even though he had never seen it before.
He swallowed nervously and unlocked it.
Then, almost reluctantly, he opened it.
It contained a silver box no bigger than a pocket calculator, cushioned in the centre of a layer of spongy foam.
‘There's a miniature computer built into the roof of the lid.’
Werner squinted at it.
A narrow blank screen above a row of the numbers one to nine.
‘What are the coordinates?’
‘One-nine-six-seven,’ Benin replied.
‘I should have guessed,’ Werner replied, and reached for the numerical keys.
‘Don't touch it!’
Werner jerked his hand away as though the keyboard had given him an electric shock.
Benin smiled apologetically.
‘It can only be opened once.
Werner felt a drop of perspiration trickle out from under his hairline and he wiped it away before it could run down the side of his face.
‘It must only be used as a last resort.’
‘I'll buy that,’ Werner said, then closed the case and locked it, after memorizing the combination.
Benin held out his hand.
‘Good luck, my friend.’
Werner shook it firmly.
Benin left the room.
Werner placed the attache case beside the chair then poured himself a stiff Scotch from the crystal decanter on the sideboard.
Graham tossed the paperback on to the opposite couchette and made his way to the dining car.
It was deserted except for a sleepy-eyed steward who glared at him as though he were trespassing.
‘Coffee,’ Graham said as he sat down.
The steward gave him a look of indifference then disappeared through one of the swing doors.
The train had already left Sion when the avalanche struck and with the possibility of further minor falls it had retreated to the sanctuary of the station where the passengers were told it would remain for the rest of the night.
The station restaurant had promised to  remain open until midnight and the dining car would be open all night for light snacks and beverages, all courtesy of the company.
Graham glanced at his wristwatch.
Almost one o'clock in the morning.
The steward deposited the steaming hot cup of coffee on to the table in front of him, slopping some into the saucer in the process.
‘Are acts of God designed to show us just how mortal we really are?’
Graham glanced round, startled by the voice behind him.
Hendrique, having rejoined the train at the previous station, Vetroz, was staring out of the window behind Graham.
‘Sorry if I startled you.
I take it you are English-speaking?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Do you mind if I join you?’
Hendrique asked, indicating the two chairs opposite Graham.
‘Sit down.’
Hendrique snapped his fingers to wake the dozing steward.
‘Cameriere!
Un cappuccino, per favore.’
The steward scrambled off the bar stool and disappeared through the swing door.
‘You Italian?’
Hendrique pulled one of the chairs away from the table and sat down.
‘No, but it's one of the languages I've learnt to speak over the years.’
‘I'm impressed,’ Graham said with a thinly veiled sarcasm.
‘How many in all?’
‘A handful,’ Hendrique replied with a shrug.
‘I find I can blend in better with the locals if I  understand their language.
How about you?
Are you interested in languages?’
‘Just one.
American.’
Hendrique waited until the steward had deposited the coffee and left the dining car before speaking.
‘You look like the sort of man who enjoys a challenge.’
Graham was intrigued.
‘Perhaps.’
‘I've devised a board game to alleviate these kind of boring situations.
The object is to bluff your opponent into submission.
There is a catch, however.
We play for pain, not money.
The squeamish would doubtless see it as sadistic; I see it as a test of character and inner strength.
Interested?’
‘As you said, I look like the sort of man who enjoys a challenge.’
‘Excellent.’
Hendrique got to his feet.
‘I'll fetch it from my compartment.
I won't be a moment.’
Graham had barely finished his coffee when Hendrique returned with a brown leather attache case.
He put the case on the table and opened it.
After removing the contents he closed the lid again and placed the case on the floor beside his chair.
It consisted of a two-inch-thick wooden board, its fifteen-by-eight-inch surface divided into two equal sections by an indicator running the length of the board with the figures one to ten printed on it.
On either side of the indicator was a set of three lights positioned equidistantly beneath each other and a metallic pressure pad raised fractionally above the level of the board.
A metallic bracelet was  attached to a circuit underneath each of the pads by a length of flex on opposite sides of the board.
Hendrique, using two paper napkins to protect his hands, removed the strip light from its socket on the ceiling of the carriage directly above the table then unravelled a length of flex and secured the two crocodile clips at the end of it to the respective overhead power points.
He fitted the plug at the other end of the flex into the socket at the side of the board.
‘The rules are quite simple.
We each attach a bracelet to our wrist then press the palm of our other hand on to the metal pad.
Once the pad's level with the board it activates the electrical circuit and the game begins.’
Hendrique ran his finger the length of the indicator.
‘This monitors the level of current passing through the circuit at any given time.
The number one will automatically light up as soon as we activate the circuit and the current increases gradually as the numbers get progressively higher.
One to five light up in green, six to eight in amber, nine and ten in red.
I think the colours are self-explanatory.
The winner is the one who can out-bluff his opponent and keep his hand on the pad the longest.
We play the best of three, hence the lights.
As soon as the loser pulls his hand off the pad the light on his side comes on.
That's it.’
‘How much time is there between the numbers lighting up?’
‘Five, six seconds.
That's the one drawback of the game, it's over so quickly.’
‘It's still ingenious,’ Graham said.
‘It beats Monopoly.’
Hendrique removed the cloth and affixed the board to the table by means of its four powerful suction pads.
They each snapped a bracelet around their wrist and locked it, placing the miniature keys in the centre of the board.
Hendrique nodded and they pressed their hands down simultaneously on to the metal pads.
Graham immediately felt a tingling sensation in his hand which quickly spread up his arm and into his chest.
Although Hendrique was staring at him Graham was more interested in monitoring the progress of the indicator.
As it changed from green to amber the current intensified sharply and before he could stop himself Graham instinctively jerked his hand off the pad.
He wasn't expecting the jarring shock that shot through his other arm but the shortness of the flex prevented him from pulling it more than a few inches off the table.
‘I'm sorry,’ Hendrique said without sounding very convincing.
‘I forgot to tell you: if you forfeit a game you incur an extra penalty of a shock transmitted through an electrode on the inside of the bracelet.’
‘It doesn't help to be wise after the event,’ Graham said tersely.
‘There's something else.
The aftershocks intensify threefold each time.
If you've got a heart condition we should stop now.
A shock nine times stronger than the one you experienced could kill.
Actually, it has in the past.’
‘Let's play.’
‘I didn't explain the rules properly at the outset so it's only fair we should start again…’
‘I don't need to be nannied,’ Graham interposed.
‘You're one game up.’
‘As you wish,’ Hendrique replied, and placed his hand back on the pad.
This time Graham held Hendrique's stare.
The colour on the indicator changed from green to amber and Graham's eyes narrowed fractionally, his stare unremitting in its intensity.
Hendrique found himself unable to hold Graham's gaze and in his disorientation he turned away, unconsciously easing the pressure on the pad.
The shock seared through his arm and he grabbed at the bracelet as though trying to tear it from his wrist.
He closed his eyes until the pounding in his head had subsided and wiped the sweat from his forehead with the back of his hand.
‘I make that one game all,’ Graham said with evident satisfaction.
Hendrique sucked in several deep breaths but said nothing.
It was the first time he had conceded a game since building the device three years earlier.
He sat forward and placed his hand on the pad, his palm still tingling from the effects of the shock.
The last game had reached eight.
Graham already knew he could reach ten without pulling off.
Hendrique had been right: it was a test of inner strength.
They both pressed down on the pads.
Hendrique, having learnt from his mistake, concentrated on the indicator instead of on Graham's face.
Graham also watched the indicator and winced more out of irritation than anything else when green five increased to amber six.
Had Hendrique warned him at the beginning about the current intensifying when crossing the colour boundary the game might already have been over.
Seven.
Eight.
He clenched his jaw as the pain barrier seemed to break with every passing second.
Red nine.
His hand began to shudder and his eyes watered.
He felt a strange moment of camaraderie with Hendrique.
Then the moment was gone.
Red ten.
Graham's back arched agonizingly and he used every last ounce of inner strength to keep himself from wrenching his hand off the pad.
He caught a glimpse of Hendrique through the distorting haze of pain.
Hendrique's head was tilted back, his mouth open in a silent scream.
In that split second Graham knew he had won.
Hendrique was on the brink of defeat.
Safe in that knowledge Graham braced himself then pulled away from the pad.
He remembered nothing else.
Graham sat in the deserted dining car for some time after regaining consciousness, his trembling fingers gently massaging his temples as he tried to overcome the throbbing in his head.
When he did finally get to his feet his legs were unsteady and he had to stick close to the tables for support on his way to the door.
He entered the next carriage, his hand gripped tightly around the railing, and moved slowly down the corridor until he reached his own compartment.
He yanked the door open and stumbled inside.
The communicating door opened immediately and Sabrina came in, the Beretta gripped in her hand.
She moved to the compartment door, peered out into the deserted corridor, then closed and locked it.
‘Have you been drinking?’ was her first reaction on seeing him with his head buried in his hands.
He jerked his head up, startled by her voice, then winced at the pain resulting from the sudden movement.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘I'm your partner, remember?’
‘You know what I mean,’ he snapped, and again the pain reverberated through his head.
‘The boss sent me back,’ she replied dismissively and crouched down in front of him.
‘What happened?’
‘My head,’ he muttered.
She disappeared back into her own compartment then returned with a glass of water and two paracetamol.
‘I thought you never touched painkillers,’ he said, staring at her open hand.
‘You do, and I bet you didn't bring any.’
He took the tablets from her and swallowed them with a mouthful of water.
Then he sat back and closed his eyes.
She sat on the opposite couchette and picked up the paperback he had been reading.
Another James Hadley Chase.
Not her kind of author.
She read very few thrillers; they reminded her of work.
‘You wouldn't like it.’
‘I know,’ she replied and dropped it on to the couchette.
‘What happened to your head?’
He told her about his confrontation with Hendrique.
She shook her head in disbelief when he had finished.
‘It's not the first time you've put your life at risk for the sake of a challenge and I'm sure it won't be the last time either.’
‘You don't understand, do you?
It's not the actual challenge that counts; it's the psychology behind it.
In that kind of one-to-one confrontation with two people of roughly the same strength, the one with the stronger willpower always wins.
Take two boxers for example.
Both men are the same strength and weight but it's the one who's psyched himself up properly beforehand who's going to win.
Expertise and experience count for nothing if a fighter isn't mentally prepared before he enters the ring.
Intimidation invariably leads to defeat.’
‘You lost, so where does that leave your theory?’
‘I didn't lose, I let him win.
There's a big difference.
I merely inverted the theory.’
‘In other words when the two of you confront each other again you know you can beat him.
He only thinks he can beat you.’
‘At last,’ he said.
‘But what happens if I'm the one who ends up confronting him?’
He stared at her.
‘Only you can answer that question.’
She pondered his words then got to her feet.
‘Let's see your arm.’
‘My arm?’
‘Where the electrode came into contact with your skin.’
‘It's nothing,’ he muttered, but still pulled up the sleeve of his sweatshirt to reveal the inflamed area on his inner wrist.
She told him about the latest developments from Zurich while dressing the wound, filling him in on the backgrounds of Hendrique and Milchan as well as relaying Philpott's instructions.
‘And Jacques sends his regards,’ she concluded as she secured the bandage with a strip of sticking plaster.
He sat back and massaged his temples, his eyes closed.
‘You're very fond of him, aren't you?’
‘I always have been, ever since we first started working together.’
‘Was there…’ he trailed off and opened his eyes.
‘Forget it.’
It was a side of Graham she had never seen before.
He seemed more open than usual.
She assumed it was only a temporary lapse in character while he nursed his head but she still determined to keep the conversation going for as long as possible.
‘Was there ever anything between Jacques and me, is that what you were going to ask?’
‘It's none of my business.’
‘Why not?
You're my partner, for God's sake,’ she shot back.
He winced.
‘Don't shout.’
‘Sorry,’ she said with an apologetic smile.
‘And  no, there was never anything between us.
He was the brother I never had, a confidant I could turn to for advice if I ever needed it.’
‘Has there ever been a special guy in your life?’
‘Well, there was Rutger Hauer…’ she said, then giggled.
‘Never anyone special, no.
I had a few casual relationships after I left the Sorbonne.
These days work takes up most of my time.’
‘Do you ever see yourself getting married?’
‘It isn't very high on my list of priorities but I guess I'd change my mind soon enough if I were to meet the right person.’
‘That's what it's all about.
The right person.’
She knew what was going through his mind.
He had never spoken to her before about his wife and son.
‘Carrie was the right person,’ he said at length.
‘Where did you meet her?’
‘At Elaine's .’
‘The bar on Second Avenue?’
‘Yeah.
I was there with a few of the guys from Delta.
We'd just been given leave after the fiasco of Operation Eagle Claw, the so-called attempt to rescue the American hostages from our embassy in Teheran back in 1980.
She was there with some of her girlfriends from Van Cleef and Arpels; that's where she used to work.
We managed to persuade them to come and sit with us and she ended up next to me.
Well, we just got talking and she agreed to have dinner with me the following night.
We were married five months later.’
His smile was sad.
‘She was really shy.
It went back to her childhood  when she had been teased by her schoolmates about her stammer.
She'd overcome it by the time she was eighteen but it still surfaced when she got excited about something.’
‘And when was your son born?’
‘A year, almost to the day, after the marriage.
She always wanted Mikey to go on to university and become a doctor or a lawyer.
I only ever wanted him to grow up to become a pro-ball player.
I took him to the first Giants game when he was three.
He took to it like a duck to water and from then on he'd grill me for hours on end about the various types of plays, especially when we were watching it on TV.
I'd always imagined that one day I'd be able to turn to the guy beside me at the Giants Stadium and say ‘That's my kid playing down there’.
I'd have been the proudest father in the history of the game.’
‘Did he look like you at that age?’
‘The spitting image according to my mother.’
He pulled out his wallet, opened it, and handed a picture to her.
‘That's the last photograph of them I ever took.
It was still in the camera when…they were abducted.
I nearly didn't have it developed but now I'm real glad I did.
I've got an enlarged print of it on my bedside table.’
She stared at the photograph and immediately saw why he had been attracted to Carrie.
She was squatting down in the photograph and Sabrina estimated her to have been a little over five feet with a slender petite figure and a pale, milky complexion.
She had the kind of wide, alluring  brown eyes the Fifties' authors would have described as ‘big enough to drown a man’.
Mike Junior was standing beside her in a Giants sweatshirt, a football tucked under his arm.
He had a cheeky mischievous face and his fine blond hair came down almost to his shoulders.
‘He looks like he must have been pretty naughty,’ she said, and handed the picture back to him.
— 
‘As naughty as most five-year-olds I guess,’ he replied, pocketing the wallet.
‘I still lie awake at night trying to justify the decision I made in Libya.
I sacrificed my family for the sake of seven terrorists who were planning bombing raids in some of America's major cities.
My order to attack undoubtedly saved a lot of other innocent lives but it still doesn't give me peace of mind.
Morally it was right, personally it was wrong.
There's no in-between.’
‘As you said earlier, the only person who knows their true inner strength is themselves.
It's something you'll have to come to terms with yourself.’
‘Thanks.’
‘Thanks?’
‘For not patronizing me like everyone else.
You talk more sense than all those psychiatrists put together.’
He glanced at his wristwatch.
‘Come on, time to get some sleep.’
She stood up and stifled a yawn.
‘How's the head?’
‘Buzzing,’ he replied, turning the couchette over to get at the narrow bed.
‘I'll see you in the morning,’ she said, moving to the communicating door.
‘Sabrina?’
She paused as she was about to close the door and looked back at him.
‘The man who had Carrie and Mikey kidnapped was trained at Balashikha.’
‘It wasn't…’
‘No, it wasn't Hendrique.’
The cynicism seemed to flood back into his eyes.
‘You asked me earlier what would happen if you were the one who ended up confronting him.
Don't worry, you won't.
He's mine.
She felt a shiver run up her spine as she closed the door behind her.
SEVEN
The man who joined Hendrique for breakfast the following morning was Eddie Kyle.
He was a stocky, forty-year-old Londoner with a pale skin and crew-cut red hair.
He had a long criminal record at Scotland Yard and was currently on their wanted list for a variety of crimes, the most serious being the murder of an East End gangster.
The murder had been ordered by Hendrique, for whom Kyle had been working during the last five years.
He was also an experienced pilot of both helicopters and light planes and flew exclusively for Hendrique, ferrying both arms and drugs in and out of Amsterdam on a regular basis.
‘Everything's been arranged,’ Kyle said.
‘Excellent.’
Hendrique looked up as Sabrina entered the dining car.
‘Is that the woman who shot Rauff?’
Kyle pretended to gaze around the carriage, his eyes lingering on her for a moment.
‘That's her all right.’
‘Are you sure?
You said her face was partially hidden under an anorak hood.’
Kyle grinned.
‘I never saw her face properly but 
I'm not likely to forget a figure like that.
It's her all right.
What a pity.’
‘Getting sentimental in your old age?’
Hendrique asked disdainfully.
Kyle stared at her image reflected in the window beside him.
‘What I had in mind has nothing to do with sentimentality.’
‘She killed Rauff and she'd have killed you if your luck hadn't been running.
We're dealing with a professional, not one of your dumb Amsterdam whores.
Remember that next time, it might just save your life.’
The anger in Hendrique's voice was enough to wipe all expression from Kyle's face.
He was subdued for the remainder of breakfast.
Karen Schendel looked up and smiled at Whitlock when he knocked on the open door.
‘Morning,’ she said in a friendly voice, then pointed to the desk to remind him about the microphone.
‘Morning.’
He gestured for her to move aside so he could take a closer look at the microphone.
She eased her chair back but made no move to stand up, filling the silence with small talk as he crouched down, his head twisted at an angle to peer underneath her desk.
It was as she had drawn it.
The kind that cost about a hundred dollars on the black market.
Sophisticated but very compact.
His eyes flickered over her legs sheathed in fine black stockings.
They  were exquisitely shaped, even better than Carmen's legs.
The thought of his wife jarred him guiltily out of his fantasy and when he glanced up Karen was smiling at him.
He was about to apologize, remembered the microphone, then moved round to the other side of the desk and sat down.
‘Coffee?’ she asked.
‘I had some before I left the hotel.
I'd like to get started if you don't mind.’
‘Not at all,’ she replied as she shuffled her papers into a neat pile.
She waited until they were clear of the office before speaking again.
‘How's your shoulder this morning?’
He wriggled his arm.
‘No after-effects, yet.
I soaked it in a hot bath last night; it should be okay now.’
‘I was worried about you.’
The sincerity in her voice surprised him.
Once inside the lift she pressed the button for the floor she wanted and handed him a folded sheet of paper.
On it were four names written neatly underneath each other.
‘They're my four suspects.
Especially Dr Leitzig.
I've arranged for you to meet him first.’
‘What's his position?’
‘He's the senior plant technician.
That entails overseeing the entire reprocessing operation.’
‘Does he do the monthly stocktaking?’
‘Along with the plant manager and other members of the scientific staff.
It's very strictly controlled.’
‘Is he involved in writing up the stocksheets?’
The doors parted and they emerged into another carpeted corridor.
‘No, that's all done by computer.
As I said last night, it's diversion as opposed to MUF.
The plutonium's being siphoned off before the figures reach the computers.’
He grabbed her arm as she was about to knock on a frosted-glass door halfway down the corridor.
‘You've made a lot of accusations but you haven't come up with a single shred of evidence to back them up.’
‘I told you, I don't have any evidence…’
‘Then what are your grounds for these suspicions?’
‘You don't believe me, do you?’ she snapped.
‘You don't believe me.’
‘Right now I don't know what to believe.
You've got to give me something constructive to work on, can't you see that?’
Her eyes were blazing.
‘All I have to do is make one phone call to the plant manager and I can blow your cover.’
‘And what good would that do either of us?’ he asked calmly.
She sighed deeply and nodded.
‘I'm sorry, C.W., I'm just not used to confiding in the people around here.
I'll tell you everything I know after you've seen Leitzig.
Agreed?’
‘Agreed,’ he answered reluctantly, wishing he had more to go on before meeting Leitzig.
Karen knocked on the door, then opened it without waiting.
A middle-aged woman looked up from her typewriter and smiled at them.
The two  women spoke rapidly to each other in German, their conversation punctuated with laughter.
Karen finally turned to Whitlock.
‘It's back to German I'm afraid.
She doesn't speak any English.’
‘And Leitzig?’
‘He does but it's a case of getting him to speak it.
He can be very stubborn at times.
I'll see you later.’
He exchanged a polite smile with the secretary after Karen had left, then picked up the only magazine on the coffee table and leafed through it, his interest not overly stimulated by a computer programming manual written in German.
The inner door opened.
The man who emerged was in his late fifties with short grey hair and round, wire-framed glasses.
Whitlock stood up and shook the extended hand, unwilling to speak until he knew which language Leitzig intended to use.
‘I am Dr Hans Leitzig.’
Whitlock was relieved that it was English.
‘I am on my way down to the reprocessing area.
Perhaps you would like to come along so you can see the plant in operation?’
‘Thank you, I would,’ Whitlock replied.
‘Which hotel are you staying at?’
‘Europa.’
‘Good choice,’ Leitzig said, then spoke briefly to his secretary.
Whitlock studied him.
He could have been the driver of the Mercedes at the Hilton Hotel, but then  so could the majority of Mainz's male population.
It had all happened so quickly.
‘Karen was telling me you are writing about the workforce rather than about the plant's operational side.
I think that is a good idea, especially in the light of the bad publicity the industry has had since Chernobyl.’
‘My sentiments exactly,’ Whitlock said, hoping the sycophancy came through in his voice.
Leitzig led him to the changerooms where they pulled on white overcoats.
Whitlock had to be reminded to clip on his compulsory dosemeter badge.
‘How much of the reprocessing area did Karen show you yesterday?’
‘She was unavailable.
I was shown around by her assistant.
He didn't bring me down here at all.’
‘How much do you know about the reprocessing operation?’
Leitzig asked as they left the changerooms.
‘Not much, I'm afraid,’ he lied.
‘It is not too difficult to understand.
Come on, I'll show you where it all starts.’
Leitzig led him through a succession of corridors until they reached an area marked STORAGE PONDS with a no-entry sign beside it and the words AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY in black paint underneath.
Leitzig fed his ID card into one of the steel doors.
It swung open to reveal a lime-green cavern over three hundred feet long and another eighty feet high above the waterline.
The water, Leitzig told him, was thirty feet deep.
Two sets of catwalks  spanned the length of the cavern and four smaller catwalks led out into the water, all of them enclosed by safety railings.
Leitzig pointed to the rows of steel containers submerged in the water, and described how they had been transported to the plant in 100 tonne flasks with walls fourteen inches thick.
‘How long are they stored here for?’
‘Ninety days here, and another ninety days at the nuclear power station prior to transportation.’
‘So presumably the water acts as a coolant?’
Whitlock asked as he looked over the railing at the water fifty feet below him.
‘Correct.
It acts as a shield for the operators.
We'd already be irradiated if the water wasn't there to absorb the radiation emitted by the fuel.’
‘Sobering thought,’ Whitlock muttered, then followed Leitzig out of the cavern.
Next they went into the main building where part of the reprocessing cycle took place.
They watched from behind a protective glass partition, seemingly erected to shield the visiting public from any of the harmful gamma rays.
Leitzig explained that it was actually there to blot out any outside noises which might distract the skilled operators from their delicate and sensitive work.
All work was carried out using remote-controlled equipment and monitored on closed-circuit television screens.
‘After the quarantine period's over,’ he went on, with an air of simplifying an impossibly complex process, ‘the containers are transferred into the decanning cave through a series of sub-ponds leading  off from the main storage pond.
Once inside the cave, which is constructed of concrete walls seven feet thick, the fuel element can be observed both on closed-circuit television and through specially designed windows built into the walls.
Each window is filled with a solution of zinc bromide which, although transparent, is able to absorb the short wavelengths of gamma radiation.
The element is first placed on the stripping machine where the contaminated cladding is cut away, then dropped on to a conveyor belt to be stored under water in concrete storage silos.
The bare fuel rods are then loaded into a transfer magazine, which can hold up to thirty-eight rods at any given time, and dissolved in nitric acid.
The nitric acid solution is then mixed with an organic solvent and the uranium and plutonium are separated from the waste products.
The waste products, which contain radioactive fission products, iron from the plant machinery and chemical impurities from the fuel, are then reduced by evaporation and stored near the plant in tanks at temperatures of 50°C.
The acid solution enters another section of the plant where it passes through a second organic solvent to remove any lingering waste products, then, on coming into contact with a water-based solution, the uranium and plutonium separate, the plutonium returning to the water solution and the uranium remaining in the solvent.
They emerge as uranyl nitrate and plutonium nitrate, ready to be used in the fuel cycle again.’
It was two hours later when they returned to Leitzig's office.
He had his secretary order some  coffee, then closed the door and sat down behind his desk.
‘What's the percentage of uranium to plutonium after the elements have been reprocessed?’
Whitlock asked.
‘The normal breakdown of recovered uranium's ninety-nine per cent to point five per cent of plutonium.
The other half per cent is made up of radioactive waste.
It may vary by point one or point two but never more than that.’
‘And those statistics are transferred on to the computer?’
‘Of course, but I fail to see where this question is leading.’
Whitlock smiled.
‘Sorry, it's just my journalistic training getting the better of me.
Can we talk about you now?’
‘Ask away’ Leitzig replied, folding his hands on the desk.
‘A little background on yourself?’
‘It's all very commonplace I'm afraid.
I was born in a small town called Tettnang which is fairly close to the Austrian border.
It's only got a population of about fifteen thousand and it's situated in the heart of asparagus country.
I remember how happy I was when I was accepted at Hamburg University, because I could at last get away from my mother's asparagus dishes.’
He chuckled to himself then reached for his cigarettes and lit one.
‘I went to England to work after my graduation.
First at Calder Hall, then at Sellafield.
I left the industry in the early Seventies and came back here to work at  the Max Planck Institute of Chemistry.
I spent several years at the Institute before returning to the industry.
I've never regretted the decision.’
‘So how long have you been the plant's senior technician?’
‘Two and a half years now.’
‘And what do you do in your spare time?’
‘Fishing mainly.
There's nothing more relaxing than to drive the Land Rover into the country for a day's fishing.’
‘Married?’
‘No,’ Leitzig retorted defensively then held up his hands apologetically.
‘I'm a widower.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘My wife's death was the main reason for my returning to the industry.
I was able to throw myself into my work, which helped to take my mind off the fact that she was gone.
I used to dread going home at night; the silence and solitude were almost too much to bear.’
‘Why didn't you move?’
Leitzig looked surprised by the question.
‘I could never turn my back on our home.
It contains so many memories.’
‘Sure,’ Whitlock replied sympathetically.
‘Any children?’
‘Neither of us wanted any.
I regret that now.’
Whitlock thought about his own situation.
What if something were to happen to Carmen?
Would he end up as desolate and lonely as Leitzig?
The secretary entered with the coffee tray and made room for it on the desk.