

1
‘This is Only the Beginning’
The voice on the other end of the telephone line was abrupt and filled with contained excitement.
‘Go to scrambler’ it said.
This was not the operations room of a naval warship or a secret room in the White House but my modest office above a restaurant in north London.
The scrambler device was duly attached to the standard telephone and the first details emerged of Prince Charles's dismissal of his private secretary, Major-General Sir Christopher Airey.
That call, made from a windy public phone box on one of the most north-westerly islands in Europe, was the first step along the twisting path which lead directly to the heart of the British monarchy.
It set in motion an inquiry into the truth concerning the Princess of Wales, her marriage and her life within the royal family.
It was to prove a salutary and startling education.
After a decade spent watching the workings of the modern monarchy, writing numerous books, and pontificating on TV and radio around the world about the royal family, I thought I had a solid knowledge of the subject.
The last year has taught me how little I really knew about what goes on behind the wrought-iron gates of Buckingham Palace and the red brick walls of Kensington Palace.
I published the story about the dismissal in the Sunday Times .
It was followed a week later by a longer piece which discussed the rivalry which exists between the offices of the Prince and the Princess of Wales.
A few weeks later, at the time of Diana's 30th birthday, I wrote a further story about how Jimmy Savile, the television personality, had been instrumental in arranging a reconciliation between the royal couple following disclosures that Diana had refused her husband's offer of a birthday party at Highgrove.
The publication of these stories in the Sunday Times had several effects.
First, they generated a witch hunt inside the palace to discover  my sources.
Long experience had told me that this was to be expected.
Prince Charles's new private secretary, Commander Richard Aylard pored over the articles looking for clues while the Queen's private secretary, Sir Robert Fellowes pointed the finger at the staff inside Kensington Palace.
A terse phone call from Arthur Edwards, a long-serving photographer from The Sun newspaper, whose avuncular manner belies the fact that he has excellent sources inside the royal world, reinforced the message.
‘I didn't believe that Jimmy Savile stuff you wrote on Sunday,’ he said.
‘Then I spoke to one of my contacts and he said it was on the money.
I'm just ringing to warn you: be careful, they are looking for your sources.’
[This message was dramatically reinforced in March this year when I broke the story about the impending separation of the Duke and Duchess of York.
A call from a trusted contact informed me that senior police officers from the Royalty and Diplomatic Protection squad had been summoned to Buckingham Palace and ordered to find who leaked the story.
‘Watch your phones,’ I was brusquely cautioned.
Ten days later my office was broken into.]
At the same time these original articles, which were generally sympathetic to the Princess of Wales, proved to those around her, many of whom I would meet later, that at last her side of the story could be told fairly.
They were dismayed by the crop of books and articles which celebrated the 10th anniversary of the Wales's marriage and Diana's 30th birthday.
For the most part she was portrayed as a frivolous ingenue whose emotional and intellectual development was gently guided by her serious-minded husband.
The general consensus was that, while their marriage may have had its ups and downs, they were now amicable companions pursuing separate interests but united by a common duty.
I was soon to learn that those closest to the Princess considered those sentiments to be a grotesque parody of the truth.
A mid-week meeting with a member of Diana's circle in the incongruous circumstances of a working men's cafe in North Ruislip outside London was the turning point.
As the tables around us tucked into bacon and eggs, an alarming story unfolded of the true nature of Diana's life inside Kensington Palace.
The facts, which spilled out in no particular order, revealed the flip side of the fairytale.
Amid the clatter of cutlery and crockery, my contact revealed how Diana had seriously considered calling off the  wedding two days before she walked down the aisle at St Paul's Cathedral.
The source of her concern was Prince Charles's continuing friendship with Camilla Parker-Bowles, the wife of a member of the Queen's Household.
Camilla had been Charles's girlfriend during his bachelor days and in Diana's mind his continued friendship with Camilla presented a grave threat to her own chance of happiness with the Prince of Wales.
She was particularly concerned when, shortly before her wedding day, she discovered that Prince Charles planned to give his friend a bracelet inscribed with their nicknames ‘Fred’ and ‘Gladys’.
She discovered the truth about their petnames a few weeks previously when Camilla was taken ill.
On that occasion he sent her a bouquet of flowers, from ‘Fred’ to ‘Gladys’.
As a result Diana considered her wedding day to be one of the most emotionally confusing times of her life.
On her honeymoon Diana saw photographs of Camilla fall out of his diary; later Charles appeared at dinner wearing cufflinks with two ‘C's intertwined.
He admitted they were a gift from the woman he once loved and lost.
From this false start, their marriage had many more vicissitudes until it has now reached a point where there now exists between them a thinly disguised mutual antipathy.
The strain of her royal life and the reality of Diana's marriage has triggered a potentially fatal eating disorder, bulimia nervosa which has dogged her throughout her royal career.
At times the loneliness of her position has brought her to the edge of despair, so much so that she has made a number of suicide attempts, some more half-hearted than others.
The dark ages, as she called them, have covered most of her royal life.
Yet the heartening aspect of her story was the way Diana had come to terms with her life and how, with the help of friends and counsellors, she was finding her true nature.
The story of her transformation from victim to victor, a process that continues to this day, is the subject of this book.
A number of incidents, some more significant than others, brought about that change; a late night confrontation with Camilla Parker-Bowles; Diana's behaviour following the avalanche in Klosters, Switzerland which nearly claimed her husband's life; comforting a grieving stranger in a Nottingham hospital, and deciding at last to seek treatment for her chronic eating disorder.
During 1991 she became aware of just how much she had changed by her commitment to her  friend Adrian Ward-Jackson when he was dying of AIDS.
It was an experience which enriched her life, giving her a greater understanding of herself and a surer sense of purpose.
The most obvious outward sign of the inner development was her new shorter hairstyle which signified the liberation she feels from her past life.
Clearly there was material here for a book which would radically revise the way the Princess of Wales was seen by the public.
My publisher Michael O'Mara, a hard-nosed American from Pennsylvania, needed convincing.
‘If she was so miserable, why was she always smiling?’ asked the man who had printed more pictures of Diana than any man alive.
It did not help that the ‘Hitler Diaries’, the story of how a forger fooled British and German newspapers as well as reputable historians with amateurish fakes purporting to be the German leader's handwritten diaries, was currently on television.
O'Mara was deeply sceptical.
A meeting was arranged with my contacts and other interested parties.
O'Mara listened to extracts from several tape recorded interviews, read certain documents and looked through a number of previously unpublished pictures.
There was a long silence when the tape recorder was switched off.
Drawing deeply on a Havana cigar, O'Mara said: ‘How in hell are we going to prove all this?’
That was the central problem.
Much of the material which was then available could not, for reasons of confidentiality, be attributed.
A strategy was finally agreed.
Every aspect of this story had to be substantiated and amplified by further interviews with family, friends and counsellors of the Princess of Wales.
It was a task which occupied the next ten months.
The one certain prediction made by her astrologer, Felix Lyle as we discussed her life and character one balmy summer's evening in August 1991 was that it would be a tortuous path.
How right he was.
Meetings took place in various locations: near Diana's Gloucestershire home, in Hampshire and Dorset, in Scotland and even America.
People who had kindly given assistance for earlier books, particularly Inside Buckingham Palace and Duchess were asked to help.
Secrecy was essential.
The mandarins at Buckingham Palace like to control the flow of information concerning their royal principals.
In this regard they are no different from any other large organisation.
Those authors who operate independently of Palace purview soon discover that doors are quickly locked, bolted and barred to inquiry.
However, once a number of additional begging letters — requests for interviews — were sent, it became apparent that there were a substantial number of Diana's ‘inner circle’ who felt it was time to set her record straight.
They believed that for once the truth should be told about the difficult life Diana has led and, for the most part, still leads.
These taped interviews, most on the record, others unattributable, amply endorsed the original premise.
One dose friend explained why so many of her circle had decided to co-operate.
He said: ‘For ten years we have sat and watched Diana being destroyed.
We've often spoken about her and said that something has got to happen.
But nothing has.
It was painful for us all to see a delightful candle being progressively snuffed out by the royal system and an empty marriage.’
This was an undercover operation which had to be conducted with great speed as it quickly emerged that there was every chance that the Princess might well have left the royal circle by the proposed September publication date of the book.
As James Gilbey, a member of the distilling dynasty who has known Diana since she was 17, noted: ‘She said to me recently that she hadn't made any date in her diary past July because she doesn't think she is going to be there.’
Her dramatic assertion may have been wish  fulfilment , a hyperbolic statement expressing her real desires, but with such an unstable outlook we couldn't take any chances: publication was brought forward to June.
In view of the Duchess of York's abrupt departure from the royal family in March this year it was a prudent decision.
As the interviews progressed, a very distinct new picture of Diana surfaced from beneath the highly varnished image.
Behind the public smiles Diana is a lonely and unhappy young woman who endures a loveless marriage, is seen as an outsider by the Queen and the rest of the royal family and is frequently at odds with the aims and objectives of the pervasive royal system.
As Oonagh Toffolo, who once nursed the Duke of Windsor and regularly visits Diana for sessions of acupuncture and meditation, observes: ‘She is a prisoner of the system just as surely as any woman incarcerated in Holloway jail.’
Amid the cloud of silver photo frames, the clutter of Herend porcelain and other knick-knacks which Diana collects and displays in her private rooms at Kensington Palace is a shredder to destroy her mail and a telephone scrambler to disguise her private calls.
Last summer she had her rooms secretly ‘swept’ with an electronic gadget to seek out any possible bugging device.
It was clean but the doubts remain.
She even  exercises extreme caution about what she throws into her waste-paper bin.
No one and nothing can be trusted.
There is no doubt she feels that she has paid a high price for her royal life and looks forward to the day when she can spend a weekend in Paris or, as she says, ‘I can run along a beach without a policeman following me’.
As she dreams and hopes, she endures a marriage and a position which has yielded meagre satisfaction and much pain.
While she is now more in control of herself and her life, her fate hangs in the balance.
She endlessly debates the central dilemma in her life.
If she divorces Prince Charles she loses her children and the chance to use her special gifts to help those in need, whether it be the homeless, AIDS patients or victims of leprosy.
If she stays she is trapped in a marriage and lifestyle which offers scant prospect of achieving personal happiness.
As her best friend, Carolyn Bartholomew observes of the woman she has known since they were schoolgirls: ‘She is not a happy person but she once was and it is my dearest hope that one day she will find the happiness she truly deserves.’
While she occupies an isolated public position she has drawn great comfort from her two children, Princes William and Harry, who are undoubtedly the two most important people in her life.
They are her stalwart supporters in a dosed, oppressive world.
As she says: ‘I want to bring them up with security, not to anticipate things because they will be disappointed.
That's made my own life so much easier.
I hug my children to death and get into bed with them at night.
I always feed them love and affection.
It's so important.’
While she knows that Prince William will one day become king she is firm in her belief that she will never become queen.
This profound sense of destiny which has influenced her life gives her an intuitive awareness that she has been singled out for a special role.
Her fate has taken her on a different journey, a route where the monarchy is secondary to her true vocation.
That road leads inexorably to her work for the sick, the dying and the distressed.
The inner spiritual resources which sustained and nourished her in her darkest hours are now manifested in her uncanny empathy with those in need.
It is a calling.
As her brother Earl Spencer, told me: ‘She strikes me as an immensely Christian figure and she has the strength which I think true Christians have and the direction in her life which others can envy; that sureness of her purpose and the strength of  her character and position to do an enormous amount of good.
I am sure she will continue to do so.’
The irony of her life is that if she had enjoyed a happy marriage these qualities may have remained dormant.
The private work she has undertaken in bereavement counselling and nursing the terminally ill has given her intense  fulfilment .
‘I love it, I can't wait to get into it.
It's like a hunger,’ she says.
She has suffered much in the last decade but that experience has given her the inner fortitude to shoulder the emotional burden she must carry on the next stage of her life's journey.
As Mother Teresa told her during her visit to Rome this year: ‘To heal other people you have to suffer yourself.’
Diana nodded vigorously in agreement.
While she struggles to find an acceptable equilibrium in her life, she acknowledges the progress she has made.
She says: ‘I've opened up.
My life is changing.
This is only the beginning.’
2
‘I was Supposed to be a Boy’
It is a memory indelibly engraved upon her soul.
Diana Spencer sat quietly at the bottom of the cold stone stairs at her Norfolk home, clutching the wrought-iron banisters while all around her there was a determined bustle.
She could hear her father loading suitcases into the boot of a car, then Frances, her mother, crunching across the gravel forecourt, the clunk of the car door being shut and the sound of a car engine revving and then slowly fading as her mother drove through the gates of Park House and out of her life.
Diana was six years old.
A quarter of a century later, it is a moment she can still picture in her mind's eye and she can still summon up the painful feelings of rejection, breach of trust and isolation that the break-up of her parents’ marriage signified to her.
It may have happened differently but that is the picture Diana carries with her.
There are many other snapshots of her childhood which crowd her memory.
Her mother's tears, her father's lonely silences, the numerous nannies she resented, the endless shuttling between parents, the sound of her brother Charles sobbing himself to sleep, the feelings of guilt that she wasn't born a boy and the firmly fixed idea that somehow she was a ‘nuisance’ to have around.
She craved cuddles and kisses; she was given a catalogue from Hamley's toy shop.
It was a childhood where she wanted for nothing materially but everything emotionally.
‘She comes from a privileged background but she had a childhood that was very hard,’ says her astrologer Felix Lyle.
The Honourable Diana Spencer was born late on the afternoon of July 1,1961, the third daughter of Viscount Althorp, then aged 37, and Viscountess Althorp, 12 years his junior.
She weighed 71b 12oz and while her father expressed his delight at a ‘perfect physical specimen’ there was no hiding the sense of anticlimax, if not downright disappointment, in the family that the new arrival was not the longed-for male heir who would carry on the Spencer name.
Such was the anticipation of a boy that the couple hadn't considered any girls' names.
A week later they settled on ‘Diana Frances’, after the infant's mother and a Spencer ancestress.
While Viscount Althorp, the late Earl Spencer, may have been proud of his new daughter — Diana was very much the apple of his eye — his remarks about her health could have been chosen more diplomatically.
Just eighteen months previously Diana's mother had given birth to John, a baby so badly deformed and sickly that he survived for only ten hours.
It was a harrowing time for the couple and there was much pressure from older members of the family to see ‘what was wrong with the mother’.
They wanted to know why she kept producing girls.
Lady Althorp, still only 23, was sent to various Harley Street clinics in London for intimate tests.
For Diana's mother, fiercely proud, combative and tough-minded, it was a humiliating and unjust experience, all the more so in retrospect as nowadays it is known that the sex of the baby is determined by the man.
As her son Charles, the new Earl Spencer, observes: ‘It was a dreadful time for my parents and probably the root of their divorce because I don't think they ever got over it.’
While she was too young to understand, Diana certainly caught the pitch of the family's frustration, and, believing that she was ‘a nuisance,’ she accepted a corresponding load of guilt and failure for disappointing her parents and family, feelings she has now learned to accept and recognize.
Three years after Diana's birth the longed-for son arrived.
Unlike Diana who was christened in Sandringham church and had well-to-do commoners for godparents, baby brother Charles was christened in style at Westminster Abbey with the Queen as principal godparent.
The infant was heir to a rapidly diminishing but still substantial fortune accumulated in the fifteenth century when the Spencers were among the wealthiest sheep traders in Europe.
With their fortune they collected an earldom from Charles I, built Althorp House in Northamptonshire, acquired a family crest and motto —‘God defend the right’— and amassed a fine collection of art, antiques, books and objets d'art .
For the next three centuries Spencers were at home in the palaces of Kensington, Buckingham and Westminster as they occupied various offices of State and Court.
If a Spencer never quite reached the commanding heights, they certainly walked confidently along the corridors  of power.
Spencers became Knights of the Garter, Privy Councillors, ambassadors and a First Lord of the Admiralty while the third Earl Spencer was considered as a possible Prime Minister.
They were linked by blood to Charles II, the Dukes of Marlborough, Devonshire and Abercorn and through a quirk of history to seven American presidents, including Franklin D. Roosevelt, and to the actor Humphrey Bogart and, it is said, the gangster Al Capone.
The Spencer qualities of quiet public service, the values of noblesse oblige were well expressed in their service to the Sovereign.
Generations of Spencer men and women have fulfilled the functions of Lord Chamberlain, equerry, lady-in-waiting and other positions at Court.
Diana's paternal grandmother, Countess Spencer was a Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, while her maternal grandmother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy is currently one of her Women of the Bedchamber, a position she has held for nearly thirty years.
The late Earl Spencer served as equerry to both King George Vl and the present Queen.
However, it was the family of Diana's mother, the Fermoys, with their roots in Ireland and connections in the United States, who were responsible for the acquisition of Park House, her childhood home in Norfolk.
As a mark of friendship with his second son, the Duke of York (later George Vl), King George V granted Diana's grandfather, Maurice Fermoy, the 4th Baron, the lease of Park House, a spacious property originally built to accommodate the overflow of guests and staff from nearby Sandringham House.
The Fermoys certainly made a mark on the area.
Maurice Fermoy became the Conservative Member of Parliament for King's Lynn while his Scottish wife, who gave up a promising career as a concert pianist to marry, founded the King's Lynn Festival for Arts and Music which, since its inception in 1951, has attracted world renowned musicians such as Sir John Barbirolli and Yehudi Menuhin.
For the young Diana Spencer, this long noble heritage was not so much impressive as terrifying.
She never relished visits to the ancestral home of Althorp.
There were too many creepy corners and badly lit corridors peopled with portraits of long-dead ancestors whose eyes followed her unnervingly.
As her brother recalls: ‘It was like an old man's club with masses of clocks ticking away.
For an impressionable child it was a nightmarish place.
We never looked forward to going there.’
This sense of foreboding was hardly helped by the bad-tempered relationship which existed between her gruff grandfather Jack, the 7th Earl, and his son Johnnie Althorp.
For many years they were barely on grunting, let alone speaking terms.
Abrupt to the point of rudeness yet fiercely protective of Althorp, Diana's grandfather earned the nickname of ‘the curator earl’ because he knew the history of every picture and piece of furniture in his stately home.
He was so proud of his domain that he often followed visitors around with a duster and once, in the library, snatched a cigar from out of Winston Churchill's mouth.
Beneath this irascible veneer was a man of cultivation and taste, whose priorities contrasted sharply with his son's laissez-faire approach to life and amiable enjoyment of the traditional outdoor pursuits of an English country gentleman.
While Diana was in awe of her grandfather, she adored her grandmother, Countess Spencer.
‘She was sweet, wonderful and very special.
Divine really,’ says the Princess.
The Countess was known locally for her frequent visits to the sick and the infirm and never at a loss for a generous word or gesture.
While Diana has inherited her mother's sparky, strong-willed nature she has also been blessed with her paternal grandmother's qualities of thoughtfulness and compassion.
In contrast to the eerie splendours of Althorp, Diana's rambling ten-bedroomed home, Park House, was positively cosy notwithstanding the staff cottages, extensive garages, outdoor swimming pool, tennis court and cricket pitch in the grounds as well as the six full-time staff who included a cook, a butler and a private governess.
Screened from the road by trees and shrubs, the house is substantial but its dirty, sand-brick exterior makes it appear rather bleak and lonely.
In spite of its forbidding appearance, the Spencer children loved the rambling pile.
When they moved to Althorp in 1975 on the death of their grandfather, the 7th Earl, Charles said goodbye to every room and Diana today still revisits her former home, even though it has been turned into a Cheshire Home holiday hotel for the disabled.
Park House was a home of atmosphere and great character.
On the ground floor was the stone-flagged kitchen, the dark green laundry room, domain of Diana's foul-tempered ginger cat called Marmalade, and the schoolroom where their governess, Miss Gertrude Allen known as ‘Ally’— taught the girls the rudiments of reading and writing.
Next door was what the children called ‘The Beatle Room’, a room devoted entirely to psychedelic posters, pictures and other memorabilia  of the Sixties' pop stars.
It was a rare concession to the postwar era.
Elsewhere the house was a snapshot of upper-class English life, decorated with formal family portraits, regimental pictures, as well as the plaques, photographs and certificates which were testimony of a lifetime spent in good works.
From her pretty cream bedroom in the first floor nursery, Diana enjoyed a pleasant prospect of grazing cattle, a patchwork of open fields and parkland interspersed with copses of pine, silver birch and yew.
Rabbits, foxes and other woodland creatures were regularly seen on the lawns while the frequent sea frets which softly curled around her sash windows were evidence that the Norfolk coast was only six miles away.
It was a heavenly place for growing children.
They fed trout in the lake at Sandringham House, slid down the banisters, took Jill, their springer spaniel for long rambles, played hide and seek in the garden, listened to the wind whistling through the trees and hunted for pigeons' eggs.
In summer they swam in the heated outdoor swimming pool, looked for frogs and newts, picnicked on the beach near their private hut at Brancaster and played in their very own tree house.
And, as in Enid Blyton's Famous Five children's books, there was always ‘lashings of ginger beer’ and the smell of something appetizing baking in the kitchen.
Like her elder sisters, Diana was on horseback at three and soon developed a passion for animals, the smaller the better.
She had pet hamsters, rabbits, guinea pigs, her cat Marmalade, which Charles and Jane loathed, and, as her mother recalls, ‘anything in a small cage’.
When one of her menagerie died, Diana dutifully performed a burial ceremony.
While goldfish were flushed down the lavatory, she normally placed her other dead pets in a cardboard shoe box, dug a hole beneath the spreading cedar tree on the lawn and laid them to rest.
Finally, she placed a makeshift cross above their grave.
Graveyards held a sombre fascination.
Charles and Diana frequently visited their brother John's lichen-covered grave in the Sandringham churchyard and mused about what he would have been like and whether they would have been born if he had lived.
Charles feels that his parents would have completed their family with Diana while the Princess herself feels that she would not have been born.
It was a matter for endless unresolved conjecture.
In Diana's young mind her brother's gravestone with its simple ‘In Loving Memory’ epitaph, was a permanent  reminder that, as she now recalls: ‘I was the girl who was supposed to be a boy.’
Just as her childhood amusements could have originated from the pages of a 1930s' children's book, so Diana's upbringing reflected the values of a bygone age.
She had a nanny, Kent-born Judith Pamell who took the infant Diana for walks around the grounds in a well-used, highly-sprung perambulator.
Indeed, Diana's first memory is ‘the smell of the warm plastic’ of her pram hood.
The growing girl did not see as much of her mother as she would have wished and less of her father.
Her sisters Sarah and Jane, her senior by six and four years respectively, were already spending mornings in the downstairs classroom when she was born and by the time Diana was ready to join them they were packing their bags for boarding-school.
Mealtimes were spent with nanny.
Simple fare was the order of the day.
Cereals at breakfast, mince and vegetables for lunch and fish every Friday.
Her parents were a benign though distant presence and it wasn't until Charles was seven that he actually sat down to a meal with his father in the downstairs dining-room.
There was a formality and restraint to their childhood, a reflection of the way Diana's parents were raised.
As Charles recalls: ‘It was a privileged upbringing out of a different age, a distant way of living from your parents.
I don't know anyone who brings up children like that any more.
It certainly lacked a mother figure.’
Privileged yes, snobbish no.
At a very early age the Spencer children had impressed upon them the value of good manners, honesty and accepting people for what they are, not for their position in life.
Charles says: ‘We never understood the whole title business.
I didn't even know I had any kind of title until I went to prep school when I started to get these letters saying: ‘The Honourable Charles’.
Then I started to wonder what it was all about.
We had no idea that we were privileged.
As children we accepted our circumstances as normal.’
Their royal nextdoor neighbours simply fitted in to a social landscape of friends and acquaintances who included the children of the Queen's land agent, Charles and Alexandra Loyd, the local vicar's daughter Penelope Ashton, and William and Annabel Fox, whose mother Carol was Diana's godmother.
Social relations with the royal family were sporadic, especially as they only spend a small part of the year on their 20,000-acre estate.
A royal visit to Park House was such a rare event that when Princess Anne said she would call round after church service  one Sunday there was consternation in the Althorp household.
Diana's father didn't drink and staff frantically searched through the cupboards looking for a bottle of something suitable to offer their royal guest.
Finally they found a cheap bottle of sherry, which had been won in a church bazaar, lying forgotten in a drawer.
Occasionally Princess Margaret's son, Viscount Linley, and the Princes Andrew and Edward might come to play for the afternoon but there certainly weren't the comings and goings many have assumed.
In fact the Spencer children viewed their invitations to the Queen's winter home with trepidation.
After watching a screening of the Walt Disney film,Chitty, Chitty, Bang, Bang in the private cinema, Charles had nightmares about a character called the Children Catcher.
For Diana it was the ‘strange’ atmosphere of Sandringham itself which she hated.
On one occasion she refused to go.
She kicked and screamed her defiance until her father told her that it would be considered very bad manners if she didn't join the other children.
If anyone had told her then that one day she would join the royal family she would have run a mile.
If the atmosphere at Sandringham was uncomfortable, at Park House it became unbearable as Diana's little world fell apart at the seams.
In September 1967 Sarah and Jane went to boarding-school at West Heath in Kent, a move which coincided with the collapse of the Althorps' 14-year marriage.
That summer they decided on a trial separation, a decision which came as a ‘thunderbolt, a terrible shock’ to Charles, horrified both families and shocked the county set.
Even for a family with a penchant for turning a drama into a crisis, this was an exceptional event.
They remembered how their marriage in 1954 was trumpeted as ‘the society wedding of the year’, their union endorsed by the presence of the Queen and Queen Mother.
Certainly in his bachelor days Johnnie Spencer was the catch of the county.
Not only was he heir to the Spencer estates, he also served with distinction as a captain in the Royal Scots Greys during World War Two and, as Equerry to the Queen, he had accompanied the Queen and Prince Philip on their historic tour of Australia shortly before his marriage.
The sophistication exuded by a man twelve years her senior was no doubt part of the attraction for the Honourable Frances Roche, the daughter of the 4th Baron Fermoy, who was an 1 8-year-old debutante when they first met.
With her trim figure, vivacious personality and love of sports Frances caught the eye of many young men that season, among them Major Ronald Ferguson, the Duchess of York's father.
However, it was Johnnie Spencer who won her heart and, after a short courtship, they married at Westminster Abbey in June 1954.
They obviously took the words of the Bishop of Norwich to heart.
Just nine months after he declared: ‘You are making an addition to the home life of your country on which above all others, our national life depends,’ their first daughter Sarah was born.
They settled for a country life; Johnnie studied at the Royal Agricultural College in Cirencester and, following an uneasy spell on the Althorp estate, they moved to Park House.
Over the next few years they built up a 650-acre farm, a sizeable chunk of which was bought with 20,000 of Frances' inheritance.
Tensions soon simmered beneath the impression of domestic harmony and marital bliss.
The pressure to produce a male heir was ever-present and there was Frances' growing realization that a lifestyle which had seemed urbane to her in her youth was, on mature reflection, dull and uninspiring.
The late Earl Spencer said: ‘How many of those fourteen years were happy?
I thought all of them, until the moment we parted.
I was wrong.
We hadn't fallen apart, we'd drifted apart.’
As cracks appeared in the facade of unity, the atmosphere at Park House soured.
In public the couple were all smiles, in private it was a different story.
While the freezing silences, heated exchanges and bitter words can only be imagined, the traumatic effect on the children is only too evident.
Diana clearly remembers witnessing a particularly violent argument between her mother and father as she peeked from her hiding-place behind the drawing-room door.
The catalyst which provoked that indignation was the appearance in their lives of a wealthy businessman, Peter Shand Kydd who had recently returned to Britain after selling a sheep farm in Australia.
The Althorps first met the extrovert university-educated entrepreneur and his artist wife, Janet Munro Kerr at a dinner party in London.
A subsequent arrangement to go on a skiing holiday in Switzerland together proved a fatal turning point in their lives.
Peter, an amusing bon viveur with an attractive bohemian streak, seemed to possess all the qualities Johnnie lacked.
In the exhilaration of their affair Lady Althorp, eleven years his junior, did not notice his bouts of depression and black moods.
That would come later.
On their return from holiday Peter, then aged 42, moved out of his London home leaving behind his wife and three children.
At the same  time he began to see Frances secretly at an address in South Kensington in central London.
When the Althorps agreed to-a trial separation, Diana's mother moved out of Park House into a rented apartment in Cadogan Place, Belgravia.
It was then that the myth of ‘the bolter’ was born, that Frances had left her husband and deserted her four children for the love of another man.
She was cast as the selfish villainess of the drama, her husband the innocent injured party.
In fact when she left home Lady Althorp had already made arrangements for Charles and Diana to live with her in London.
Diana was enrolled at a girls' day-school, Charles at a nearby kindergarten.
When Frances arrived at her new home, to be followed weeks later by her children and their nanny, she had every hope that the children would be relatively unaffected by her marital breakdown, especially as Sarah and Jane were away at boarding-school.
During term-time the younger children returned to Park House at weekends while their father, Viscount Althorp stayed with them in Belgravia when he visited London.
They were bleak meetings.
Charles's earliest memory is playing quietly on the floor with a train set while his mother sat sobbing on the edge of the bed, his father smiling weakly at him in a forlorn attempt to reassure his son that everything was all right.
The family was reunited at Park House for half term and again during the Christmas holidays.
But, as Mrs Shand Kydd has stated: ‘It was my last Christmas there for by now it had become apparent that the marriage had completely broken down.’
That fateful visit was marked by a distinct absence of seasonal goodwill or tidings of joy for the future.
Viscount Althorp insisted, against his wife's fierce objections, that the children return permanently to Park House and continue their education at Silfield school in King's Lynn.
‘He refused to let them return in the New Year to London,’ she said.
As the legal machinery for divorce ground into action, the children became pawns in  a bitter and acrimonious battle which turned mother against daughter and husband against wife.
Lady Althorp sued for custody of the children, an action started with every hope of success as the mother usually wins — unless the father is a nobleman.
His rank and title give him prior claims.
The case, which was heard in June 1968, wasn't helped by the fact that two months earlier Lady Althorp had been named as the ‘other  woman’ in the Shand Kydds' divorce while most galling of all, her own mother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy sided against her.
It was the greatest betrayal of her life and one she will never forgive.
The Althorps' divorce went through in April 1969 and a month later on May 2, Peter Shand Kydd and Lady Althorp married in a quiet register office ceremony and bought a house on the West Sussex coast where Peter could indulge his love of sailing.
It was not just the adults who were scarred by this vicious legal battle.
However much their parents and the family tried to muffle the blow, the impact on the children was still profound.
Subsequently, family friends and biographers have tried to minimize the effect.
They have claimed that Sarah and Jane were barely troubled by the divorce as they were away at school, that Charles, aged four, was too young to understand while Diana, then seven, reacted to the break up with ‘the unthinking resilience of her age’ or even regarded it as ‘fresh excitement’in her young life.
The reality was more traumatic than many have realized.
It is significant that at one time in their lives both Sarah and Diana have suffered from debilitating eating disorders, anorexia nervosa and bulimia respectively.
These illnesses are rooted in a complex web of relations between mother and daughter, food and anxiety and, to use the jargon, ‘malfunctioning’ family life.
As Diana says: ‘My parents were busy sorting themselves out.
I remember my mother crying, daddy never spoke to us about it.
We could never ask questions.
Too many nannies.
The whole thing was very unstable.’
To the casual visitor Diana seemed happy enough.
She was always a busy, tidy little girl, going around the house at night making sure all the curtains were drawn and tucking up the zoo of small furry animals which crowded her bed — she has kept them to this day.
She raced around the driveway on her blue tricycle, took her dolls for walks in her pram — she always asked for a new one as a birthday present — and helped to dress her smaller brother.
The warm, maternal, caring streak which has characterized her adult life, was becoming evident in her daily life.
There were more frequent visits to grandparents and other relations.
Countess Spencer often stayed at Park House while Ruth, Lady Fermoy taught the children card games.
In her elegant home, described as ‘a little corner of Belgravia in Norfolk,’ she explained the intricacies of mah-jong and bridge.
However, there was no disguising the bewilderment Diana felt.
Night-times were worst.
As children, Diana and Charles were afraid of the dark and they insisted that the landing light was left on or a candle lit in their rooms.
With the wind whistling in the trees outside their window and the night-time cries of owls and other creatures, Park House could be a creepy place for a child.
One evening when their father casually mentioned that a murderer was on the loose in the vicinity, the children were too terrified to sleep, listening anxiously to every rattle, creak and squeak in the silent house.
Diana daubed luminous paint on the eyes of her cuddly green hippo so that at night it seemed as though he was keeping watch and looking after her.
Every night as she lay in her bed, surrounded by her cuddly toys, she could hear her brother sobbing, crying for his mother.
Sometimes she went to him, sometimes her fear of the dark overcame her maternal instincts and she stayed in her room listening as Charles wailed: ‘I want my mummy, I want my mummy.’
Then she too would bury her head in the pillow and weep.
‘I just couldn't bear it,’ she recalls.
‘I could never pluck up enough courage to get out of bed.
I remember it to this day.’
Nor did she have much confidence in many of the nannies who now worked at Park House.
They changed with alarming frequency and ranged from the sweet to the sadistic.
One nanny was sacked on the spot when Diana's mother discovered that her employee was lacing her elder daughters' food with laxatives as a punishment.
She wondered why they constantly complained of stomach pains until she caught the woman redhanded.
Another nanny beat Diana on the head with a wooden spoon if she was naughty or alternatively banged Charles and Diana's heads together.
Charles recalls kicking a hole in his bedroom door when he was sent to his room for no good reason.
‘Children have a natural sense of justice and if we felt they were unjust we would rebel,’ he explains.
Other nannies, such as Sally Percival, now married and living in Northampton, were kind and sympathetic and still receive Christmas cards from the children today.
However, the task of a new nanny was made all the more difficult because the children, bewildered and unhappy, felt that they had come to take the place of their mother.
The prettier they were, the more suspicious Diana was of them.
They put pins in their chairs, threw their clothes out of the window and locked them in the bathroom.
In fact Charles's childhood experiences confirmed him in his decision not to employ a nanny for his own children.
Their father sometimes joined the children for tea in the nursery but, as their former nanny Mary Clarke recalls, ‘it was very hard going.
In those early days he wasn't very relaxed with them.’
Johnnie buried himself in his work for Northamptonshire County Council, the National Association of Boys' Clubs and his cattle farm.
His son recalls: ‘He was really miserable after the divorce, basically shell shocked.
He used to sit in his study the whole time.
I remember occasionally, very occasionally, he used to play cricket with me on the lawn.
That was a great treat.’
School simply cast the problem in another mould.
Charles and Diana were ‘different’ and knew it.
They were the only pupils at Silfield school whose parents were divorced.
It set them apart from the start.
A point emphasized by her former form captain, Delissa Needham: ‘She was the only girl I knew whose parents were divorced.
Those things just didn't happen then.’
The school itself was welcoming and friendly enough.
Run by headmistress Jean Lowe, who gave evidence on Lord Althorp's behalf during the divorce case, it had a real family atmosphere.
Classes were small and teachers were generous with house points and gold stars for achievements in reading, writing or drawing.
Outside was a tennis court, a sandpit, a lawn for playing netball and rounders as well as a garden for weekly ‘scavenger hunts’.
Diana, unused to the hurly burly of school life, was quiet and shy although she did have her friend, Alexandra Loyd to keep her company.
While her handwriting was clear and she read fluently, Diana found the scholarly side rather confusing.
Miss Lowe remembers her kindness to the smaller children, her love of animals and general helpfulness but not her academic potential.
She was good at art as well but her friends couldn't explain why she burst into tears for no apparent reason during a painting class one sunny afternoon.
They do remember that she dedicated all her pictures to ‘Mummy and Daddy’.
As she muddled through her ‘tables’ and Janet and John books, Diana became increasingly envious of her younger brother, who was remembered as a ‘solemn’but well-behaved little boy.
‘I longed to be as good as him in the schoolroom,’ she says.
As with all siblings there were fights which Diana, being bigger and stronger, invariably won.
And she pinched, Charles complained.
Soon he realized that he could wound with words, teasing his sister mercilessly.
Both parents ordered him to stop calling his sister ‘Brian’, a nickname derived from a slow and  rather dull-witted snail who featured in a popular children's TV show, ‘The Magic Roundabout’.
He had sweet revenge with the unexpected help of the local vicar's wife.
Charles says, with relish: ‘I don't know whether a  psychologist would say it was the trauma of the divorce but she had real difficulty telling the truth purely because she liked to embellish things.
On the school run one day the vicar's wife stopped the car and said: ‘Diana Spencer, if you tell one more lie like that I am going to make you walk home.’
Of course I was triumphant because she had been rumbled.’
While the sibling competition was an inevitable part of growing-up, far less bearable was the growing parental rivalry, conscious or not, as Frances and Johnnie vied with each other to win the love of their children.
Yet while they showered their offspring with expensive presents this wasn't accompanied by the affectionate cuddles and kisses that the children craved.
Diana's father, who already had a reputation locally for organizing splendid fireworks' displays on Guy Fawkes Night, laid on a wonderful party for her seventh birthday.
He borrowed a dromedary camel called Bert from Dudley zoo for the afternoon and watched with evident delight as the surprised children were taken for rides around the lawn.
Christmas was simply an exercise in extravagance.
Before the big day Charles and Diana were given the catalogue for Hamley's, a large toy store in London's West End, and told to tick what presents they wanted Father Christmas to bring.
Lo and behold, on Christmas Day their wishes came true, the stockings on the end of their beds bulging with goodies.
‘It makes you very materialistic,’ says Charles.
There was one present which gave Diana the most agonizing decision of her young life.
In 1969 she was a guest at the wedding of her cousin, Elizabeth Wake-Walker and Anthony Duckworth-Chad held at St James's Piccadilly.
Her father gave her a smart blue dress, her mother an equally smart green dress.
‘I can't remember to this day which one I wore but I remember being totally traumatized by it because it would show favouritism.’
That tightrope was walked every weekend when Charles and Diana took the train with their nanny from Norfolk to Liverpool Street station in London where their mother met them.
Shortly after they reached her apartment in Belgravia the standard procedure was for their mother to burst into tears.
‘What's the matter, mummy?’ they would chorus to which she invariably answered: ‘I don't want you to go tomorrow.’
It  was a ritual which resulted in the children feeling guilty and confused.
Holidays, split between parents, were just as grim.
In 1969 life became more relaxed and carefree when Peter Shand Kydd was officially introduced into their lives.
They first met him on the platform at Liverpool Street station during one of their regular Friday shuttles between Norfolk and London.
Handsome, smiling and smartly suited, he was an immediate hit, all the more so when their mother told them that they had been married that morning.
Peter, who made his fortune in the family wallpaper business, was a generous, demonstrative and easy-going stepfather.
After a brief time in Buckinghamshire, the newly weds moved into an unassuming suburban house called Appleshore in Itchenor on the West Sussex coast where Peter, a Royal Navy veteran, took the children sailing.
He allowed Charles to wear his admiral's hat and so his nickname ‘The Admiral’ was born.
Diana he dubbed ‘The Duchess’, a nickname her friends still use.
As Charles observes: ‘If you want an insight into why Diana is not just some sort of spoilt toff it is because we had very contrasting lifestyles.
It wasn't all stately homes and butlers.
My mother's home was an ordinary set up and every holiday we spent half our holiday with our mother so we were in an environment of relative normality for much of our time.’
Three years later in 1972 the Shand Kydds bought a 1,000-acre farm on the isle of Seil, south of Oban in Argyllshire where Mrs Shand Kydd lives today.
When the children came for summer holidays they enjoyed a ‘Swallows and Amazon’ idyll, spending their days mackerel fishing, lobster potting and sailing and, on fine days, enjoying  barbecues on the beach.
Diana even had her own Shetland pony called Souffle.
It was on horseback that she suffered a broken arm which has made her anxious about riding ever since.
She was galloping on her pony, Romilly, in the grounds of Sandringham Park when the horse stumbled and she fell off.
Although she was in pain, there was no evidence that the arm was broken and so two days later she went skiing to Switzerland.
During the holiday her arm felt so lifeless that she went to a local Swiss hospital for an X-ray.
She was diagnosed as suffering from ‘greenstick’, a childhood condition where children's bones are so flexible that they bend, not break.
A doctor strapped the arm but when she later tried to go riding again she lost her nerve and dismounted.
She still rides but prefers to exercise by swimming or tennis because, living in central London, it is more convenient.
Swimming and dancing are also activities at which she excels.
They stood her in good stead when her father enrolled her at her next school, Riddlesworth Hall, two hours' drive from Park House.
She learned to love the school which tried to be a home away from home to the 120 girls.
However, her first feelings when she was sent there were of betrayal and resentment.
Diana was nine and felt the wrench from her father keenly.
In her motherly concerned way, she was cosseting him as he tried to pick up the pieces of his life.
His decision to send her away from her home and brother into an alien world was interpreted as rejection.
She made threats like: ‘If you love me, you won't leave me here’ as her father gently explained the benefits of attending a school which offered ballet, swimming, riding and a place to keep her beloved Peanuts, her guinea pig.
She had won the Fur and Feather Section with him at the Sandringham Show —‘Maybe that was because he was the only entry,’ she observes drily — and later won the Palmer Cup for Pets' Corner at her new school.
Her father also told her that she would be among friends.
Alexandra Loyd, her cousin Diana Wake-Walker and Claire Pratt, the daughter of her godmother Sarah Pratt, were also at the all-girls' boarding-school near Diss in Norfolk.
Nonetheless as he left her behind with her trunk labelled ‘D. Spencer,’ clutching her favourite green hippo — girls were only allowed one cuddly toy in bed — and Peanuts, he felt a deep sense of loss.
‘That was a dreadful day,’ he says, ‘dreadful losing her.’
An excellent amateur cameraman, he took a photograph of her before she left home.
It shows a sweet-faced girl, shy, yet with a sunny, open disposition, dressed in the school uniform which consisted of a dark red jacket and grey, pleated skirt.
He saved too the note she sent requesting ‘Big choc. cake, ginger biscuits, Twiglets’ just as he has kept the clipping she sent him from the Daily Telegraph about academic failures who become gifted and successful later in life.
Although quiet and demure in her first term she was no goody goody.
She preferred laughter and skylarks to solid endeavour and while she could be noisy she shied away from being the centre of attention.
Diana would never shout out answers in class or volunteer to read the lessons at assembly.
Far from it.
In one of her first school plays where she played a Dutch doll, Diana only agreed to take the part if she could remain silent.
Noisy with her friends in the dormitory, she was quiet in class.
She was a popular pupil but somehow she always felt that she was set apart.
Diana no longer felt so different because of her parents' divorce but because a voice inside her told her that she would be separate from the herd.
That intuition told her that her life was, as she says, ‘going to be a winding road.
I always felt very detached from everyone else.
I knew I was going somewhere different, that I was in the wrong shell.’
However, she joined in with gusto in the school's activities.
She represented her house, Nightingale, at swimming and netball and developed her lifelong passion for dance.
When the annual nativity play came around she enjoyed the thrill of putting on makeup and dressing up.
‘I was one of those people who came and paid homage to Jesus,’ she recalls with amusement.
At home she loved donning her sisters' clothes.
An early picture shows her in a wide-brimmed black hat and white dress owned by Sarah.
While she respected Jane, the sensible member of the foursome, she hero-worshipped her eldest sister.
When Sarah returned home from West Heath school, Diana was a willing servant, unpacking her suitcases, running her bath and tidying her room.
Her loving domesticity was noticed not only by Viscount Althorp's butler, Albert Betts, who recalls how she ironed her own jeans and performed other household duties but also by her headmistress at Riddlesworth, Elizabeth Ridsdale — Riddy to pupils — who awarded her the Legatt Cup for helpfulness.
That achievement was greeted with satisfaction by her grandmother, Countess Spencer who had kept an affectionate eye on Diana since the divorce.
The feeling was mutual and when, in the autumn of 1972, she died of a brain tumour, Diana was heartbroken.
She attended her memorial service along with the Queen Mother and Princess Margaret at the Chapel Royal in St James's Palace.
Countess Spencer holds a very special place in Diana's heart.
She sincerely believes that her grandmother looks after her in the spirit world.
These otherworldly concerns gave way to more earthly considerations when Diana took the Common Entrance exam to enable her to follow in the footsteps of her sisters, Sarah and Jane, at West Heath boarding school set in 32 acres of parkland and woods outside Sevenoaks in Kent.
The school, founded in 1865 on religious lines, emphasized the value of ‘character and confidence’ as much as academic ability.
Her sister Sarah had, however, shown a touch too much character for the liking of the headmistress, Ruth Rudge.
A competitor par excellence , Sarah passed six ‘O’ levels, rode for the school team at Hickstead, starred in amateur dramatic productions and  swam for the school team.
Her strong competitive streak also meant that she had to be the most outrageous, the most rebellious and the most  indisciplined girl in school.
‘She had to be the best at everything,’ recalls a contemporary.
While her grandmother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy, forgave her when the exuberant redhead rode her horse into Park House when she was visiting, Miss Rudge could not excuse other instances of her colourful behaviour.
Sarah complained that she was ‘bored’ and so Miss Rudge told her to pack her bags and leave for a term.
Jane, who captained the school lacrosse team, was a complete contrast to Sarah.
Highly intelligent — she gained a hatful of ‘O’ and ‘A’levels; eminently sensible and dependable, she was a prefect in the sixth form when Diana arrived.
Doubtless there was discussion in the teachers' common room about which sister the latest Spencer recruit to Poplar class would emulate, Sarah or Jane.
It was a close run thing.
Diana was in awe of her eldest sister but it wasn't until later in life that she forged a close relationship with Jane.
During their youth Jane was more likely to put her weight and invective behind brother Charles than her kid sister.
Diana's inevitable inclination was to imitate Sarah.
During her first weeks she was noisy and disruptive in class.
In an attempt to copy her sister Sarah's exploits she accepted a challenge which nearly got her expelled.
One evening her friends, reviewing the dwindling stocks of sweets in their tuck boxes, asked Diana to rendezvous with another girl at the end of the school drive and collect more supplies from her.
It was a dare she accepted.
As she walked down the tree-lined road in the pitch black she managed to suppress her fear of the dark.
When she reached the school gate she discovered that there was no-one there.
She waited.
And she waited.
When two police cars raced in through the school gates she hid behind a wall.
Then she noticed the lights going on all over the school but thought no more about it.
Finally she returned to her dorm, terrified not so much at the prospect of getting caught but because she had come back empty handed.
As luck would have it a fellow pupil in Diana's dormitory complained that she had appendicitis.
As she was being examined, Diana's teacher noticed the empty bed.
The game was up.
It was not just Diana who had to face the music but her parents as well.
They were summoned to see Miss Rudge who took a dim view of the episode.
Secretly Diana's parents were amused that their dutiful but docile  daughter had displayed such spirit.
‘I didn't know you had it in you,’ said her mother afterwards.
While the incident curbed her wilder high jinks, Diana was always game for a dare.
Food was a favourite challenge.
‘It was always a great joke: let's get Diana to eat three kippers and six slices of bread for breakfast,’ says one schoolfriend.
‘And she did.’
Her reputation as a glutton meant that while she often visited the matron with digestive problems these escapades did little harm to her popularity.
On one birthday her friends dubbed together to buy her a necklace decorated with a ‘D’ for Diana.
Carolyn Pride, now Carolyn Bartholomew, who had the next bed in Diana's dormitory and later shared her London flat, remembers her as a ‘strong character, buoyant and noisy.’
She added: ‘Jane was very popular, nice, unassuming but uncontroversial.
Diana, by contrast was much more full of life, a bubbly character.’
Carolyn and Diana were drawn to each other from the start because they were among the only pupils whose parents were divorced.
‘It wasn't a great trial to us and we didn't sit sobbing in a comer about it,’ she says although other pupils remember Diana as a ‘private and controlled’teenager who did not wear her emotions on her sleeve.
It was noticeable that the two pictures which took pride of place on Diana's bedside dressing-table were not of her family but of her favourite hamsters, Little Black Muff and Little Black Puff.
However, she did fret constantly about her average academic abilities.
Her sisters proved to be a hard act to follow while her brother, then at Maidwell Hall in Northamptonshire, was displaying the scholastic skills which later won him a place at Oxford University.
The gawky teenager, who tended to stoop to disguise her height, longed to be as good as her brother in the classroom.
She was jealous and saw herself as a failure.
‘I wasn't any good at anything.
I felt hopeless, a dropout,’ she says.
While she muddled through at maths and science she was more at home with subjects involving people.
History, particularly the Tudors and Stuarts, fascinated her while in English she loved books like Pride and Prejudice and Far from the Madding Crowd That didn't stop her from reading slushy romantic fiction by Barbara Cartland, soon to be her step-grandmother.
In essays she wrote endlessly, her distinctive, well-rounded hand covering the pages.
‘It just came out of the pen, on and on and on,’ she says.
Yet when it came to the silence of the examination hall, Diana froze.
The five ‘O’ levels she took in English  literature and language, history, geography and art resulted in ‘D’grades which are fails.
The success which eluded her in the classroom did arrive but from an unexpected quarter.
West Heath encouraged ‘good citizenship’ by the girls, these ideas expressed in visits to the old, the sick and the mentally handicapped.
Every week Diana and another girl saw an old lady in Sevenoaks.
They chatted to her over tea and biscuits, tidied her house and did the odd spot of shopping.
At the same time the local Voluntary Service Unit organized trips to Darenth Park, a large mental hospital near Dartford.
Dozens of teenage volunteers were bussed in on Tuesday evening for a dance with mentally and physically handicapped patients.
Other youngsters helped with hyperactive teenagers who were so severely disturbed that to encourage a patient to smile was a major success story.
‘That's where she learned to go down on her hands and knees to meet people because most of the interaction was crawling with the patients,’ says Muriel Stevens who helped organize the visits.
Many new school volunteers were apprehensive about visiting the hospital, anxieties fed by their fear of the unknown.
However, Diana discovered that she had a natural aptitude for this work.
She formed a instinctive rapport with many patients, her efforts giving her a real sense of achievement.
It worked wonders for her sense of self-esteem.
At the same time she was a good all-round athlete.
She won swimming and diving cups four years running.
Her ‘Spencer Special,’ where she dived into the pool leaving barely a ripple, always attracted an audience.
She was netball captain and played a creditable game of tennis.
But she lived in the shadow of her sporty sisters and her mother who was ‘captain of everything’ when she was at school and would have played at Junior Wimbledon but for an attack of appendicitis.
When Diana started to learn piano, any progress she made was always dwarfed by the achievements of her grandmother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy, who had performed at the Royal Albert Hall in front of the Queen Mother, and her sister Sarah who studied piano at a conservatoire in Vienna following her abrupt departure from West Heath.
By contrast her community work was something she had achieved on her own without looking over her shoulder at the rest of her family.
It was a satisfying first.
Dance gave her a further chance to shine.
She loved her ballet and tap dancing sessions and longed to be a ballet dancer but, at 5ft 10 ½ inches, was too tall.
A favourite ballet was Swan Lake which she saw  at least four times when school parties travelled to the Coliseum or Sadler's Wells theatres in London.
As she danced she could lose herself in the movement.
Often she crept out of her bed in the dead of night and sneaked into the new school hall to practise.
With music from a record player providing the background, Diana practised ballet for hours on end.
‘It always released tremendous tension in my head,’ she says.
This extra effort paid dividends when she won the school dancing competition at the end of the spring term in 1976.
Little wonder then that during the build-up to her wedding she invited her former teacher Wendy Mitchell and pianist Lily Snipp to Buckingham Palace so that she could have dancing lessons.
For Diana it was an hour away from the stresses and strains of her new-found position.
When the family moved to Althorp in 1975 she had the perfect auditorium.
On summer days she would practise her arabesques on the sandstone balustrades of the house and when the visitors had gone she danced in the black-and-white marble entrance hall, known officially as Wootton Hall, beneath portraits of her distinguished ancestors.
They were not her only audience.
While she refused to dance in public, her brother and staff took turns to look through the keyhole and watch her as she worked-out in her black leotard.
‘We were all very impressed,’ he says.
The family moved to Althorp following the death of her grandfather, the 7th Earl Spencer, on June 9, 1975.
Although 83 he was still sprightly and his death from pneumonia following a short hospital stay came as a shock.
It meant considerable upheaval.
The girls all became Ladies, Charles, then aged eleven, was made a Viscount while their father became the 8th Earl and inherited Althorp.
With 13,000 acres of rolling Northamptonshire farmland, more than 100 tied cottages, a valuable collection of paintings, several by Sir Joshua Reynolds, rare books, and seventeenth-century porcelain, furniture and silver, including the Marlborough collection, Althorp was not so much a stately home, more a way of life.
The new Earl also inherited a 2.25 million bill for death duties as well as 80,000 a year running costs.
This did not prevent him paying for the installation of a swimming pool to amuse his children who roamed around their new domain during the holidays.
Diana spent her days swimming, walking around the grounds, driving in Charles's blue beach buggy and, of course, dancing.
The staff adored her, they found her friendly and unassuming with something of  a passion for chocolates, sweets and the sugary romances of Barbara Cartland.
She eagerly awaited the days when Sarah arrived from London bringing with her a crowd of her sophisticated friends.
Witty, and sharp, Sarah was seen by her contemporaries as the queen of the season especially after her father had organized a splendid coming-of-age party in 1973 at Castle Rising, a Norman castle in Norfolk.
Guests arrived by horse-drawn carriages and the path to the Castle was lit by blazing torches.
The lavish party is still talked about today.
Her escorts matched her status.
Everyone expected her relationship with Gerald Grosvenor, the Duke of Westminster and Britain's wealthiest aristocrat, to end in marriage.
She was as surprised as anyone when he looked elsewhere.
Diana was happy to bask in her sister's glory.
Lucinda Craig Harvey, who shared a house in London with Sarah and later employed Diana as a cleaner for 1 an hour, first met her prospective charlady during a cricket match at Althorp.
First impressions were not flattering.
Diana struck her as ‘a rather large girl who wore terrifying Laura Ashley maternity dresses’.
She says: ‘She was very shy, blushed easily and was very much the younger sister.
Terribly unsophisticated, she certainly wasn't anything to look at.’
Nonetheless, Diana joined in the parties, the barbecues and the regular cricket matches with enthusiasm.
These sporting contests between the house and the village ended with the arrival of a character who could have been dreamt up by central casting.
As a cryptic entry in the visitors' book noted: ‘Raine stopped play’.
Raine Spencer is not so much a person but a phenomenon.
With her bouffant hairdo, elaborate plumage, gushing charm and bright smile she is a caricature of a countess.
The daughter of the outspoken romantic novelist Barbara Cartland, she already had a half page entry in Who's Who before she met Johnnie Spencer.
As Lady Lewisham and later after 1962 as the Countess of Dartmouth, she was a controversial figure in London politics where she served as a London County Councillor.
Her colourful opinions soon gave her a wider platform and she became a familiar face in the gossip columns.
During the 1960s she became notorious as a parody of the ‘pearls and twinset’ Tory councillor with views as rigid as her hairdos.
‘I always know when I visit Conservative houses because they wash their milk bottles before they put them out,’ was one howler which  contributed to her being booed off the stage when she addressed students at the London School of Economics.
However her outspoken opinions mask an iron determination matched by a formidable charm and sharp turn of phrase.
She and Earl Spencer worked on a book for the Greater London Council called What is Our Heritage ? and soon found they had much in common.
Raine was then 46 and had been married to the Earl of Dartmouth for 28 years.
They had four children, William, Rupert, Charlotte, and Henry.
During their schooldays at Eton, Johnnie Spencer and the Earl of Dartmouth had been good friends.
Raine wielded her overwhelming charm on both father and son, effecting something of a reconciliation between Earl Spencer and her lover during the Earl's final years.
The old Earl adored her, especially as for every birthday and Christmas she bought him a walking stick to add to his collection.
The children were less impressed.
Like a galleon in full sail, she first hove into view during the early 1970s.
Indeed her presence at Sarah's 18th birthday party at Castle Rising was the source of much muttering among the Norfolk gentry.
A ‘sticky’ dinner at the Duke's Head hotel in King's Lynn was the first real opportunity Charles and Diana had of assessing the new woman in their father's life.
Ostensibly the dinner was organized to celebrate a tax plan which would save the family fortune.
In reality it was a chance for Charles and Diana to get to know their prospective stepmother.
‘We didn't like her one bit,’ says Charles.
They told their father that if he did marry her they would wash their hands of them.
In 1976 Charles, then 12, spelled out his feelings by sending Raine a ‘vile’ letter while Diana encouraged a schoolfriend to write her prospective stepmother a poison pen letter.
The incident which prompted their behaviour was the discovery, shortly before the death of Diana's grandfather, of a letter which Raine had sent to their father discussing her plans for Althorp.
Her private opinions of the incumbent Earl did not match the way Diana and Charles saw her behave in public toward their grandfather.
With the family adamantly opposed to the match, Raine and Johnnie married quietly at Caxton Hall register office on July 14, 1977, shortly after he had been named in divorce proceedings by the Earl of Dartmouth.
None of the children were told about the wedding in advance and the first Charles knew of his new stepmother was when the headmaster of his prep school informed him 
Immediately a whirlwind of change ripped through Althorp as the new mistress endeavoured to turn the family home into a paying proposition so that the awesome debts the new Earl had taken on could be paid off.
The staff were pared to the bone and in order to open the house to paying visitors the stable block was turned into a tea room and gift shop.
Over the years numerous paintings, antiques and other objets d'art have been sold often, claim the children, at rock bottom prices while they describe in disdainful terms the way the house has been ‘restored’.
Earl Spencer always stoutly defended his wife's robust management of the estate saying: ‘The cost of restoration has been immense.’
However there is no disguising the sour relations that exist between Raine and his children.
She publicly commented on the rift when she spoke to newspaper columnist Jean Rook: ‘I'm absolutely sick of the ‘Wicked Stepmother’ lark.
You're never going to make me sound like a human being, because people like to think I'm Dracula's mother but I did have a rotten time at the start and it's only just getting better.
Sarah resented me, even my place at the head of the table, and gave orders to the servants over my head.
Jane didn't speak to me for two years, even if we bumped in a passageway.
Diana was sweet, always did her own thing.’
In fact, Diana's indignation at Raine simmered for years until finally it boiled over in 1989 at the church rehearsal for her brother's wedding to Victoria Lockwood, a successful model.
Raine refused to speak to Diana's mother in church even though they were seated together in the same pew.
Diana vented all the grievances which had been welling up inside her for more than ten years.
As Diana challenged her Raine replied: ‘You have no idea how much pain your mother put your father through.’
Diana, who has since admitted that she had never felt such fury, rounded on her stepmother.
‘Pain Raine.
That's one word you don't even know how to relate to.
In my role I see people suffer like you'll never see and you call that pain.
You've got a lot to learn.’
There was much more in the same vein.
Afterwards her mother said that was the first time anyone in the family had defended her.
However in the early days of her tenure at Althorp, the children simply treated Raine as a joke.
They played upon her penchant for pigeonholing house guests into their appropriate social categories.
When Charles arrived from Eton, where he was then at school, he had primed his friends beforehand to give false names.
So one boy said that  he was ‘James Rothschild’, implying that he was a member of the famous banking family.
Raine brightened.
‘Oh, are you Hannah's son?’, she asked.
Charles's schoolfriend said that he didn't know before compounding his folly by spelling the surname incorrectly in the visitors' book.
At a weekend barbecue one of Sarah's friends wagered 100 that Charles couldn't throw his stepmother into the swimming pool.
Raine, who appeared at this shorts and T-shirts party in a ballgown, agreed to Charles's request for a dance by the pool.
As he tensed for a judo throw, she realized what was going on and slipped away.
Christmas at Althorp with Raine Spencer in charge was a bizarre comedy, a sharp contrast to the extravagances of Park House.
She presided over the present-opening like an officious timekeeper.
The children were only allowed to open the present she indicated and only after she had looked at her watch to give the go-ahead to tear the paper off ‘It was completely mad,’ says Charles.
The only bright spot was when Diana decided to give one of her presents away to a rather irascible nightwatchman.
While he had a fearsome reputation, Diana instinctively felt that he was just lonely.
She and her brother went to see him and he was so touched by her gesture that he burst into tears.
It was an early example of her sensitivity to the needs of others, a quality noticed by her headmistress, Miss Rudge who awarded her the Miss Clark Lawrence Award for service to the school in her last term in 1977.
Diana was now growing in self-confidence, a quality recognized by her elevation to school prefect.
When she left West Heath, Diana followed in sister Sarah's footsteps by enrolling at the Institut Alpin Videmanette, an expensive finishing school near Gstaad in Switzerland, where Diana took classes in domestic science, dressmaking and cookery.
She was supposed to speak nothing but French all day.
In fact she and her friend Sophie Kimball spoke English all the time and the only thing she cultivated was her skiing.
Unhappy and stifled by school routine, Diana was desperate to escape.
She wrote scores of letters pleading with her parents to bring her home.
Finally they relented when she argued that they were simply wasting their money.
With her schooldays behind her, Diana felt as if some great weight had been lifted from her shoulders.
She visibly blossomed, becoming jollier, livelier and prettier.
Diana was now more mature and relaxed and her sisters' friends looked at her with new eyes.
Still shy and  overweight, she was nevertheless developing into a popular character.
‘She was great fun, charming and kind,’ says a friend.
However, the blooming of Diana was viewed with jealous misgivings by Sarah.
London was her kingdom and she didn't want her sister taking the spotlight away from her.
The crunch came on one of the last of the old-style weekends at Althorp.
Diana asked her sister for a lift to London.
Sarah refused saying that it would cost too much in petrol to have an extra person in the car.
Her friends ridiculed her, seeing for the first time how the balance in their relationship had shifted in favour of adorable Diana.
Diana had been the Cinderella of her family for long enough.
She had felt her spirit suppressed by school routine and her character cramped by her minor position in the family.
Diana was eager to spread her wings and start her own life in London.
The thrill of independence beckoned.
As her brother Charles says: ‘Suddenly the insignificant ugly duckling was obviously going to be a swan.’
3
‘Just Call Me ‘Sir’’
By any standards it was an unusual romance.
It was not until Lady Diana Spencer was formally engaged to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales that she was given permission to call him ‘Charles’.
Until then she had demurely addressed him as ‘Sir’.
He called her Diana.
In Prince Charles's circle this was considered the norm.
When Diana's sister Sarah enjoyed a nine-month long relationship with the Prince of Wales she had been as formal.
‘It just seemed natural,’ she recalls.
‘It was obviously right to do so because I was never corrected.’
It was during her sister's romance that Diana first came into the path of the man considered then to be the world's most eligible bachelor.
That historic meeting in November 1977 was hardly auspicious.
Diana, on weekend leave from West Heath school, was introduced to the Prince in the middle of a ploughed field near Nobottle Wood on the Althorp estate during a day's shooting.
The Prince, who brought along his faithful labrador, Sandringham Harvey, is considered to be one of the finest shots in the country so he was more intent on sport than small talk on that bleak afternoon.
Diana cut a nondescript figure in her checked shirt, her sister's anorak, cords and wellington boots.
She kept in the background, realizing that she had only been brought along to make up numbers.
It was very much her sister's show and Sarah was perhaps being rather mischievous when she said later that she ‘played Cupid’ between her kid sister and the Prince.
If Charles's first memories of Diana on that fateful weekend are of ‘a very jolly and amusing and attractive 16-year-old — full of fun’, then it was certainly no thanks to her elder sister.
As far as Sarah was concerned Charles was her domain at that time and trespassers were not welcome by the sparky redhead who applied her competitive instincts to the men in her life.
In any case Diana was not overly impressed by Sarah's royal boyfriend.
‘What a sad man,’ she remembers  thinking.
The Spencers held a dance that weekend in his honour and it was noticeable that Sarah was enthusiastic in her attentions.
Diana has since told friends: ‘I kept out of the way.
I remember being podgy, no make-up, an unsmart lady but I made a lot of noise and he seemed to like that.’
When dinner was over he liked Diana enough to ask her to show him the 115-foot-long picture gallery which then housed one of the finest private collections of art in Europe.
Sarah wanted to be the guide to the family's ‘etchings’.
Diana took the hint and left them to it.
While Sarah's behaviour was hardly that of a would-be Cupid, Charles's interest in her younger sister left Diana with much food for thought.
He was, after all, her sister's boyfriend.
Charles and Sarah had met at Ascot in June 1977 when Sarah was licking her wounds after her romance with the Duke of Westminster had ended.
At that time she was suffering from anorexia nervosa, a slimming disease, which friends believe was triggered by the collapse of her love affair.
As one friend notes: ‘Sarah always had to be the best at everything.
The best car, the wittiest put-down, and the best dress.
Dieting was part of her competitive nature, to be thinner than everybody else’.
While that incident may have precipitated the disease, eating disorder experts observe that the illness is seated in family life.
The majority of sufferers are teenage girls with strong characters who come from disturbed family backgrounds.
They see food as a way of controlling both their bodies and the chaos they feel about their lives.
Anorexics, who will use all manner of subterfuge to avoid eating, often become so thin that they lose their monthly periods and consequently have difficulty becoming pregnant.
Four out of ten die.
Sarah has kept a picture of herself in her underwear when she was literally skin and bone.
At that time, during the mid-1970s, she thought she was fat.
Now she realizes how sick she was.
Her family, worried about her health, used every method possible to encourage her to eat.
For example she would be allowed to speak to Prince Charles on the telephone if she put on two pounds.
In 1977 she elected to go to a nursing home in Regent's Park where she was treated by Dr Maurice Lipsedge, a psychiatrist who, by pure coincidence, cared for Diana a decade later when she resolved to fight her bulimia.
As she tried to overcome her illness, Sarah frequently saw Prince Charles.
During the summer of 1977 she watched him play polo at Smith's Lawn, Windsor and when, in February 1978, he invited her to  join him on a skiing party in Klosters, Switzerland there was much speculation that she might be the future queen of England.
However Sarah's enjoyment of publicity overcame the circumspection a royal girlfriend is expected to display.
She gave a magazine interview which considerably dented Prince Charles's image as a charming Casanova.
‘Our relationship is totally platonic,’ she stated.
‘I think of him as the big brother I never had.’
For good measure she added: ‘I wouldn't marry a man I didn't love, whether it was a dustman or the King of England.
If he asked me I would turn him down.’
While their romance cooled-off, Charles still asked Sarah to attend his 30th birthday party at Buckingham Palace in November 1978.
Much to Sarah's surprise, Diana was also invited.
Cinderella was going to the ball.
Diana enjoyed herself enormously at the birthday party not least because it brought her sister down a peg or two.
Yet it never entered her head for a moment to think that Prince Charles was remotely interested in romance.
Certainly she never considered herself a match for the actress Susan George, who was his escort that evening.
In any case, life was much too enjoyable to think about steady boyfriends.
She had returned from her ill-starred excursion to the Swiss finishing school desperate to begin an independent life in London.
Her parents were not as enthusiastic.
She had no paper qualifications, no special skills and only a vague notion that she wanted to work with children.
While Diana seemed destined for a life of unskilled, low-paying jobs, she was not that much out of the ordinary for girls of her class and background.
Aristocratic families traditionally invest more thought and effort in educating boys than girls.
There is a tacit assumption that, after rounding off their formal education with a cookery or arts course, daughters will join their well-bred friends on the marriage market.
At the start of the Queen's reign this feature of the London season was still formalized in the presentation of debutantes at Buckingham Palace which was followed by a series of coming-out balls.
Indeed Diana's parents had met at her mother's coming-out ball in April 1953, while in her day Raine, Countess Spencer was voted ‘Deb of the Year’.
Marriage was very much in Diana's mind when she returned from Switzerland.
Her sister Jane had asked her to be chief bridesmaid at her wedding to Robert Fellowes, the son-of the Queen's land agent at Sandringham and now her private secretary, which was held in the  Guards Chapel in April 1978.
While there was no pressure from her family to embark on a structured career, there was considerable reluctance about allowing her to live on her own in London.
As her Swiss headmistress Madame Yersin commented: ‘She was rather young for a sixteen-year-old.’
If she was an innocent abroad, her parents considered that a life cocooned in an all-girls school was hardly adequate preparation for the bright lights of the big city.
They told her that she couldn't have her own flat until she was eighteen.
Instead she was farmed out to family friends, Major Jeremy Whitaker, a photographer, and his wife Philippa who lived in Headley Bawden in Hampshire.
She stayed with them for three months and as well as looking after their daughter Alexandra she cleaned and cooked.
Yet she was itching to move to the metropolis and bombarded her parents with subtle and not so subtle requests.
Finally a compromise was reached.
Her mother allowed her to stay at her flat in Cadogan Square.
As Mrs Shand Kydd spent most of the year in Scotland it was as good as her own place.
It was to be her home for a year, sharing it initially with Laura Greig, an old schoolchum and now one of her ladies-in-waiting, and Sophie Kimball, the daughter of the then Conservative Member of Parliament, Marcus Kimball.
In order to earn her keep Diana joined the ranks of what she now dismissively refers to as the ‘velvet hairband’ brigade, the upper-class ladies who fit a loose template of values, fashions, breeding and attitudes and are commonly known as ‘Sloane Rangers’.
She signed up for two employment agencies: Solve Your Problems and Knightsbridge Nannies, and worked as a waitress at private parties and as a charlady.
In between driving lessons — she passed her test at the second attempt she was much in demand as a babysitter by her sisters' married friends while Sarah used her to make up numbers at her frequent dinner parties.
Her London life was sedate, almost mundane.
She didn't smoke and never drank, preferring to spend her free time reading, watching television, visiting friends or going out for supper in modest bistros.
Noisy nightclubs, wild parties or smoky pubs were never her scene.
‘Disco Di’ has only ever existed in the minds of headline writers with an appreciation for alliteration.
In reality Diana is a loner by inclination and habit.
Weekends were spent in the country, at Althorp with her father, at her sister Jane's cottage on the estate or at a house party organized by one of her growing circle of friends.
Her friends from Norfolk and West  Heath, Alexandra Loyd, Caroline Harbord-Hammond, the daughter of Lord Suffield, Theresa Mowbray, the goddaughter of Frances Shand Kydd, and Mary-Ann Stewart-Richardson, were all now living in London and formed the nucleus of her set.
It was while she was staying with Caroline one weekend in September 1978 at her parents' Norfolk home that she had a disturbing premonition.
When she was politely asked about her father's health her reply startled the assembled company.
She found herself saying that she felt her father was going to ‘drop down’ in some way.
‘If he dies, he will die immediately otherwise he will survive,’ she said.
The following day the telephone rang.
Diana knew it was about her father.
It was.
Earl Spencer had collapsed in the courtyard at Althorp suffering from a massive cerebral haemorrhage and had been rushed to Northampton General Hospital.
Diana packed her bags and joined her sisters and brother Charles who had been driven from Eton by his brother-in-law, Robert Fellowes.
The medical prognosis was bleak.
Earl Spencer was not expected to survive the night.
According to his son, Charles, Raine Spencer was matter of fact.
He remembers her telling his brother-in-law: ‘I'll be out of Althorp first thing in the morning.’
The reign of Raine seemed to be over.
For two days the children camped out in the hospital waiting-room as their father clung on to life.
When doctors announced that there was a glimmer of hope, Raine organized a private ambulance to take him to the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases in Queen Square, central London where for several months he lay in a coma.
As the family kept vigil, the children saw at close quarters the stubborn determination of their stepmother.
She tried to stop the children visiting their critically ill father.
Nurses were instructed to prevent them from seeing Earl Spencer as he lay helpless in his private room.
As Raine has said since: ‘I'm a survivor and people forget that at their peril.
There's pure steel up my backbone.
Nobody destroys me, and nobody was going to destroy Johnnie so long as I could sit by his bed — some of his family tried to stop me — and will my life force into him.’
During this critical time the ill feeling between Raine and the children boiled over into a series of vicious exchanges.
There was iron too in the Spencer soul and numerous hospital corridors rang to the sound of the redoubtable Countess and the fiery Lady Sarah Spencer hissing at each other like a pair of angry geese.
In November Earl Spencer suffered a relapse and was moved to the  Brompton Hospital in South Kensington.
Once again his life hung in the balance.
When his doctors were at their most pessimistic, Raine's will-power won through.
She had heard of a German drug called Aslocillin which she thought could help and so she pulled every string to find a supply.
It was unlicensed in Britain but that didn't stop her.
The wonder drug was duly acquired and miraculously did the trick.
One afternoon she was maintaining her usual bedside vigil when, with the strains of Madam Butterfly playing in the background, he opened his eyes ‘and was back’.
In January 1979 when he was finally released from hospital he and Raine booked into the Dorchester Hotel in Park Lane for an expensive month-long convalescence.
Throughout this episode the strain on the family was intense.
Sarah, who lived near to the Brompton Hospital, visited her father regularly although Raine's hostility complicated an already fraught situation.
When she was absent sympathetic nurses allowed Diana and Jane to see him but with Earl Spencer drifting in and out of consciousness he was never aware of the presence of his children.
Even when he was awake a feeding tube in his throat meant that he was unable to speak.
As Diana has recalled: ‘He wasn't able to ask where his children were.
Goodness knows what he was thinking because no-one was telling him.’
Understandably Diana found it hard to concentrate on the cookery course she had enrolled in a few days before her father suffered his stroke.
For three months she went by Underground to the Wimbledon home of Elizabeth Russell where for almost as long as anyone can remember she has schooled the daughters of knights, dukes and earls in the delights of sauces, sponges and souffles.
As far as Diana was concerned it was another set of ‘velvet hairbands’.
She had joined the course at her parents' insistence and while it wasn't her idea of fun at the time it seemed a better alternative than being behind a typewriter.
Often the glutton in Diana got the better of her and she was frequently told off for dipping her fingers into pans filled with gooey sauces.
She completed the course a few pounds heavier and clutching a diploma for her efforts.
As her father began his fight back to health, Diana's mother took a hand in guiding her career.
She wrote to Miss Betty Vacani, the legendary dance teacher who has taught three generations of royal children, and asked if there was a vacancy for a student ballet teacher at grade two level.
There was.
Diana passed her interview and, in the spring term, began at the Vacani dance studio on the Brompton Road.
It neatly combined her love of children with her enjoyment of dance.
Again she only lasted three months but for once it wasn't her fault.
In March, her friend Mary-Ann Stewart-Richardson invited her to join her family on their skiing holiday in the French Alps.
Diana fell badly on the ski slopes, tearing all the tendons in her left ankle.
For three months she was in and out of plaster as the tendons slowly heeled.
It marked the end of her aspirations as a dance teacher.
In spite of her misadventure, Diana looks back on that trip to Val Claret as one of the most enjoyable and carefree holidays of her life.
It is also where she first met many of the people who have since become loyal and supportive friends.
When Diana joined the Stewart-Richardsons they were just coming to terms with a family tragedy.
She naturally felt out of place in their chalet and accepted the invitation of Simon Berry, the son of a wealthy wine merchant, to join his chalet party.
Berry and three other old Etonians, James Bolton, Alex Lyle and Christian De Lotbiniere, were the brains behind ‘Ski Bob’ travel.
This was a company, named after their Eton housemaster Bob Baird, which had been formed when they discovered that they were too young legally to book holidays themselves.
So these young entrepreneurs started their own company and within the twenty-strong group, which mainly comprised old Etonians, the greatest accolade was to be called ‘Bob’.
Diana was soon Bob, Bob, Bobbing along.
‘You're skating on thin ice,’ she yelled in her Miss Piggy voice as she  skied dangerously close behind members of the group.
She joined in the pillow fights, charades and satirical singsongs.
Diana was teased mercilessly about a framed photograph of Prince Charles, taken at his Investiture in 1969, which hung in her school dormitory.
Not guilty, she said.
It was a gift to the school.
When she stayed in the Berry chalet she slept on the living-room sofa.
Not that she got much sleep.
Medical student, James Colthurst, liked to regale the slumbering throng with unwelcome early morning renditions of Martin Luther King's famous ‘I had a dream’ speech or his equally unamusing Mussolini impersonation.
Adam Russell, the great-grandson of former Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin and now a deer farmer in Dorset, was not overly impressed by Diana when she first walked in.
He recalls: ‘When she arrived she made a rude comment followed by a giggle.
I thought: ‘Oh God, a giggler, help’.
Once you got behind that she was very much more composed.
But she was lacking in self-confidence when she should have had lots.
Very bubbly and giggly but not in a vacuous way.’
When he too was injured, they kept each other company and during their conversations he saw the reflective, rather sad side to her character.
He says: ‘She seemed a happy person on the surface but underneath she had been deeply affected by her parents’ divorce.’
Her sister Sarah, then working for Savills, a leading estate agent, found what was to become, for a time, the most famous address in Britain.
A three-bedroomed apartment in a mansion block at 60, Coleherne Court was Diana's coming-of-age present from her parents.
In July 1979 she moved into the 50,000 apartment and immediately set to work furnishing the rooms in a warm but simple Habitat style.
The white walls were repainted in pastel shades, the sitting room became pale primrose yellow while the bathroom was bright with red cherries.
Diana had always promised her schoolfriend, Carolyn Bartholomew, a room when she got her own apartment.
She was as good as her word.
Sophie Kimball and Philippa Coaker stayed for a while but in August Diana and Carolyn were joined by Anne Bolton, who also worked for Savills, and Virginia Pitman, the oldest member of the quartet.
It was these three who stayed with her throughout her romance with Prince Charles.
Diana now looks back on those days at Coleherne Court as the happiest time of her life.
It was juvenile, innocent, uncomplicated and above all fun.
‘I laughed my head off there,’ she says and the only black cloud was when the apartment was burgled and she had most of her jewellery stolen.
As landlady, she charged the others 18 a week and organized the cleaning rotas.
Naturally she had the largest room, complete with double bed.
So that no-one would forget her status, the words ‘Chief Chick’ were emblazoned on her bedroom door.
‘She always had the rubber gloves on as she clucked about the place,’ recalls Carolyn.
‘But it was her house and when it is your own you are incredibly proud of it.’
At least she never had to worry about washing piles of dirty dishes and cups.
The girls rarely cooked in spite of the fact that Virginia and Diana had completed expensive cordon bleu courses.
Diana's two specialities were chocolate roulades and Russian borscht soup which friends asked her to make and then deliver to their apartments.
Usually the girls devoured the roulade before it left Coleherne Court.
Otherwise they lived on Harvest Crunch bran cereal and chocolate.
‘We stayed remarkably plump,’ observes Carolyn.
The houseproud teenager was also tidying up her career.
Shortly after moving into her apartment she found a job where she was truly in her element.
For several afternoons a week she went to work at the Young England kindergarten run by Victoria Wilson and Kay Seth-Smith in St Saviour's church hall in Pimlico.
She taught the children painting, drawing and dancing and joined in the games they devised.
Victoria and Kay were so impressed with her rapport with the children that they asked her to work in the morning as well.
On Tuesdays and Thursdays she looked after Patrick Robinson, the son of an American oil executive, work which she ‘adored’.
There were still loose ends in her working week so her sister Sarah took it upon herself to tie them up.
She employed her as a cleaner at her house in Elm Park Lane, Chelsea.
Sarah's flatmate Lucinda Craig Harvey recalls: ‘Diana hero-worshipped her but Sarah treated her like a doormat.
She told me not to be embarrassed about asking Diana to do the washing up and so on.’
Diana, who did the vacuuming, dusting, ironing and washing, was paid 1 an hour and took a quiet satisfaction in her labours.
When she became engaged to Prince Charles Diana referred to her cleaning job in her reply to Lucinda's letter of congratulation.
‘Gone are the days of Jif and dusters.
Oh dear will I ever see them again?’
She escaped her sister's gimlet gaze when she returned to the privacy of her own apartment.
Perhaps this was just as well since the jolly but rather juvenile japes her sister embarked upon might not have pleased her.
Diana and Carolyn would regularly while away a quiet evening ringing people with silly names who appeared in the telephone directory.
Another favourite pastime was planning raids on the various apartments and cars owned by their friends.
Carolyn recalls: ‘We used to do midnight runs, we were always skimming around London on undercover operations in Diana's Metro.’
Those who offended the girls in some way were paid back with interest.
Doorbells were rung in the dead of night, early morning alarm calls were made, friends' cars had their locks covered in sticky tape.
On one occasion James Gilbey, then working for a car rental company in Victoria, woke to find his prize Alfa Romeo car covered in eggs and flour which had set like concrete.
For some reason he had let down Diana on a date so she and Carolyn had taken their revenge.
It wasn't all one way traffic.
One evening James Colthurst and Adam Russell secretly tied two huge ‘L’ plates to the front and rear of Diana's  Honda Civic car.
She managed to pull them off but as she drove down the street she was followed by a cacophony of tin cans tied to the bumper.
Once again eggs and flour were used by Diana and Carolyn in high-spirited retaliation.
Indeed this innocent, totally unsophisticated fun continued throughout her romance with Prince Charles.
‘We were the giggling lavatorial girls we've always been portrayed but somewhere there was a spark of maturity,’ says Carolyn.
Certainly the constant parade of young men calling round for a chat and tea, if there was any, or to take the girls out for the evening were friends who happened to be boys.
For the most part Diana's escorts were old Etonians whom she had met while skiing or elsewhere.
Harry Herbert, the son of the Queen's racing manager, the Earl of Carnarvon, James Boughey, a lieutenant in the Coldstream Guards, farmer's son George Plumptre, who asked her to the ballet the day she got engaged, the artist Marcus May and Rory Scott, then a dashing lieutenant in the Royal Scots Guards, often came to call, along with Simon Berry, Adam Russell, and James Colthurst.
‘We were all just friends together,’ Simon Berry remembers.
The men in her life were clean-cut, well-bred, reliable, unpretentious and good company.
‘Diana is an Uptown girl who has never gone in for downtown men,’ observes Rory Scott.
If they wore a uniform or had been cast aside by Sarah so much the better.
She felt rather sorry for Sarah's rejects and often tried, unsuccessfully, to be asked out by them.
So she did washing for William van Straubenzee, one of Sarah's old boyfriends, and ironed the shirts of Rory Scott, who had then starred in a television documentary about Trooping the Colour, and Diana regularly stayed for weekends at his parents' farm near Petworth, West Sussex.
She continued caring for his wardrobe during her royal romance, on one occasion delivering a pile of freshly laundered shirts to the back entrance of St James's Palace, where Rory was on duty, in order to avoid the press.
James Boughey was another military man who took her out to restaurants and the theatre and Diana visited Simon Berry and Adam Russell at their rented house on the Blenheim estate when they were undergraduates at Oxford.
There were lots of boyfriends but none became lovers.
The sense of destiny which Diana had felt from an early age shaped, albeit unconsciously, her relationships with the opposite sex.
She says: ‘I knew I had to keep myself tidy for what lay ahead.’
As Carolyn observes: ‘I'm not a terribly spiritual person but I do  believe that she was meant to do what she is doing and she certainly believes that.
She was surrounded by this golden aura which stopped men going any further, whether they would have liked to or not, it never happened.
She was protected somehow by a perfect light.’
It is a quality noted by her old boyfriends.
Rory Scott says roguishly: ‘She was very sexually attractive and the relationship was not a platonic one as far as I was concerned but it remained that way.
She was always a little aloof, you always felt that there was a lot you would never know about her.’
In the summer of 1979 another boyfriend, Adam Russell, completed his language degree at Oxford and decided to spend a year travelling.
He left unspoken the fact that he hoped the friendship between himself and Diana could be renewed and developed upon his return.
When he arrived home a year later it was too late.
A friend told him: ‘You've only got one rival, the Prince of Wales.’
That winter Diana's star began to move into the royal family's orbit.
She received an unexpected Christmas bonus in the form of an invitation to join a royal house party at Sandringham for a shooting weekend in February.
Lucinda Craig Harvey, known to all her friends as Beryl, remembers Diana's excitement and the irony of the subsequent conversation.
They were chatting about the weekend while Diana, ever the Cinderella, was on her knees cleaning the kitchen floor.
Diana said: ‘Guess what, I'm going on a shooting weekend to Sandringham.’
Lucinda replied: ‘Gosh, perhaps you are going to be the next queen of England.’
As she wrung out a cloth which she was using to mop the floor Diana joked: ‘Beryl, I doubt it.
Can you see me swanning around in kid gloves and a ballgown?’
As Diana's life was taking a new direction, her sister Sarah was in crisis.
She and Neil McCorquodale, a former Coldstream Guards officer, had abruptly called off their wedding which was planned for later in February.
In true Spencer style — it is certainly not a family for the faint-hearted — there were angry words and exchanges of letters between the interested parties.
While Sarah was trying to sort out the mess — they eventually married in May 1980 at St Mary's church near Althorp — Diana was having fun.
For once Diana was in what she calls ‘a grown up’ social setting.
This for Diana was the satisfaction of that Sandringham weekend, not her proximity to Prince Charles.
She was still in awe of the man, her sense of respect mellowed by a feeling of deep sympathy for the Prince whose ‘honorary grandfather’, Earl  Mountbatten had been assassinated by the IRA just six months previously.
In any case the following Monday as she scrubbed her sister's floors this aristocratic Cinderella had to pinch herself to make sure that her weekend was not some idle pipe-dream.
For whatever that small voice of intuition was telling her about her destiny, common-sense decreed that the Prince already had a full hand of potential suitors.
She travelled to King's Lynn and then on to Sandringham with Lady Amanda Knatchbull, the granddaughter of the murdered Earl.
Lord Mountbatten had strenuously pressed her suit not only on the Prince of Wales but the royal family.
After all it was he, in the face of George Vl's reservations, who was instrumental in clearing the decks for the union of Princess Elizabeth and his nephew Prince Philip.
While commentators have dismissed her as a serious contender, those who worked intimately with the Prince and watched Mountbatten's machinations at first-hand were convinced that marriage between Prince Charles and Amanda Knatchbull was a virtual certainty.
A glance through his working diary for 1979 shows how frequently Prince Charles stayed at Broadlands, the Mountbatten family seat, ostensibly for fishing and shooting weekends.
Amanda was a frequent companion and, according to those working for the Prince, it was only the discovery of her friendship with a diplomat which prevented the match going any further.
In the aftermath of Mountbatten's murder in August 1979, Charles's friendship with Lady Amanda developed and he spent several weekends in her company as they tried to come to terms with their loss.
If the unofficial ‘queenmaker’ had lived and Lady Amanda's friendship remained undiscovered, royal history might have been very different.
While Amanda may be considered as the ‘official candidate’ whose breeding and background made her eminently acceptable at Court, the Prince was also conducting a stormy relationship with Anna Wallace, the daughter of a Scottish landowner whom he had met while fox hunting in November 1979.
She was the latest of a long line of girlfriends, drawn for the most part from the upper reaches of the aristocracy, who had appeared on his romantic horizon.
However Anna, fiery, wilful and impulsive, was temperamentally unsuitable for the regulated routine of royalty.
Not for nothing was she known as ‘Whiplash Wallace’.
Prince Charles, a man who by his own admission fell in love easily, pressed his suit even though his advisers told him that  she had other boyfriends.
Their relationship became so serious that, according to at least one account, he asked her to marry him.
She is said to have turned him down but that rebuff did little to dampen his ardour.
In May they were discovered by journalists lying on a blanket by the river Dee on the Queen's estate at Balmoral.
The Prince was furious at this intrusion into his private life and authorized his friend, Lord Tryon, who was present at the picnic to shout a four letter word at the journalists concerned.
The end of their romance in the middle of June was just as tempestuous.
She complained bitterly when he virtually ignored her during a ball to celebrate the Queen Mother's 80th birthday at Windsor Castle.
Anna was overheard to rage: ‘Don't ignore me like that again.
I've never been treated so badly in my life.
No-one treats me like that, not even you.’
On their next public appearance he treated her in precisely the same way.
She watched with mounting fury as he danced the night away with Camilla Parker-Bowles at a polo ball held at Stowell Park, the Gloucestershire estate owned by Lord Vestey.
He was so eager for Camilla's company that he did not even ask his hostess, Lady Vestey to take the floor.
In the end, Anna borrowed Lady Vestey's BMW car and drove off into the night, angry and humiliated at her very public snub.
Within a month she married Johnny Hesketh, the younger brother of Lord Hesketh.
With hindsight it is tempting to ask if her outrage was directed at the Prince or the woman who held him in such thrall, Camilla Parker-Bowles.
If Prince Charles was serious about marrying Anna then she, a worldly wise 25-year-old, would have been aware of his friendship with Camilla.
She would have known, as Diana discovered too late, that Camilla's famous vetting of Charles's girlfriends was not so much to assess their potential as a royal bride but to see how much of a threat they posed to her friendship with Prince Charles.
She might also have simply got tired of playing second fiddle to the Prince's pastimes.
Throughout his bachelor years — and during his marriage — his partners have simply fitted in to his lifestyle.
They were interested spectators while he played polo, went fishing or fox hunting.
When he entertained them to dinner, they travelled to his apartment at Buckingham Palace, not the other way around.
His staff organized boxes for concerts or the opera and even  remembered to send flowers to his escorts.
‘A charming male chauvinist’ is how one friend describes him.
His behaviour, as the Victorian constitutionalist Walter  Bagehot had noted a hundred years earlier, was the prerogative of princes.
He wrote: ‘All the world and the glory of it, whatever is most attractive, whatever is most seductive, has always been offered to the Prince of Wales of the day, and always will be.
It is not rational to expect the best virtue where temptation is applied in the most trying form at the frailest time of human life.’
That summer of 1980 Prince Charles was a man of settled habits and inflexible routine.
A former member of his Household, reviewing the collapse of the Wales's marriage, sincerely believes that he would have remained single if he had been given the choice.
He recalls: ‘It's very sad really.
He would never have got married, of course because he was happy with his bachelor life.
If he had his fishing tackle ready, his polo ponies saddled and a 5 note for the church collection he was perfectly content.
It was great fun.
You would wake him up at six in the morning and say: ‘Right Sir we are going here’ and off we would go.’
His friendship with Camilla Parker-Bowles, who eagerly adapted her life to his diary, dovetailed perfectly with his lifestyle.
Unfortunately for Charles, his title brought obligations as well as privileges.
His duty was to marry and produce an heir to the throne.
It was a subject Earl Mountbatten discussed endlessly with the Queen during afternoon tea at Buckingham Palace while Prince Philip let it be known that he was growing impatient with his son's irresponsible approach to marriage.
The ghost of the Duke of Windsor haunted the minds of the family, patently aware that the older he became the more difficult it would be to find a virginal, Protestant aristocrat to be his bride.
His quest for a wife had developed into a national pastime.
The Prince, then nearly 33, had already made himself a hostage to fortune by declaring that 30 was a suitable age to settle down.
He publicly acknowledged the problems of finding a suitable bride.
‘Marriage is a much more important business than falling in love.
I think one must concentrate on marriage being essentially a question of mutual love and respect for each other…
Essentially you must be good friends, and love, I'm sure, will grow out of that friendship.
I have a particular responsibility to ensure that I make the right decision.
The last thing I could possibly entertain is getting divorced.’
On another occasion he declared that marriage was a partnership where his wife was not simply marrying the man but a way of life.
As he said: ‘If I'm deciding on whom I want to live with for fifty years — well, that's the last decision I want my head to be ruled by my heart.’
Thus marriage in his eyes was primarily the discharge of an obligation to his family and the nation, a task made all the more difficult by the immutable nature of the contract.
In his pragmatic search for a partner to  fulfil a role, love and happiness were secondary considerations.
The meeting which was to set Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer irrevocably on the road to St Paul's Cathedral took place in July 1980 on a hay bale at the home of Commander Robert de Pass, a friend of Prince Philip, and his wife Philippa, a lady-in-waiting to the Queen.
Diana was invited to stay at their house in Petworth, West Sussex by their son Philip.
‘You're a young blood,’ he told her, ‘you might like him.’
During the weekend she drove to nearby Cowdray Park to watch the Prince play polo for his team, Les Diables Bleus.
At the end of the game the small house party trooped back to Petworth for a barbecue in the grounds of the de Pass' country home.
Diana was seated next to Charles on a bale of hay and, after the usual pleasantries, the conversation moved on to Earl Mountbatten's death and his funeral in Westminster Abbey.
In a conversation which she later recalled to friends Diana told him: ‘You looked so sad when you walked up the aisle at the funeral.
It was the most tragic thing I've ever seen.
My heart bled for you when I watched it.
I thought: ‘It's wrong, you are lonely, you should be with somebody to look after you’.’
Her words touched a deep chord.
Charles saw Diana with new eyes.
Suddenly, as she later told her friends, she found herself overwhelmed by his enthusiastic attentions.
Diana was flattered, flustered and bewildered by the passion she had aroused in a man twelve years her senior.
They resumed their conversation, chatting away late into the evening.
The Prince, who had important paperwork to attend to at Buckingham Palace, asked her to drive back with him the following day.
She refused on the grounds that it would be rude to her hosts.
However, from that point their relationship began to develop.
Her flatmate, Carolyn Bartholomew, recalls: ‘Prince Charles was coming quietly on to the scene.
She certainly had a special place for him in her heart.’
He invited her to a performance of Verdi's Requiem — one of her favourite works — at the Royal Albert Hall.
Her grandmother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy went along as their chaperone and accompanied them when they returned to Buckingham Palace for a cold buffet supper in his apartments.
His memo to his valet, then the late Stephen Barry, relating to the meeting is typical of the elaborate planning undertaken for the simplest royal date.
It read: ‘Please ring Captain Anthony Asquith [a former equerry]before going out shooting and tell him that I have asked Lady Diana Spencer (Lady Fermoy's granddaughter) to come to the Albert Hall and dinner afterwards at BP on Sunday evening.
Please ask him if this can be arranged and she will arrive with her grandmother at the Albert Hall.
If it is allright please ask him to ring back at lunchtime when we will be in the House.
C.’[The House is Buckingham Palace.]
The problem is that the invitation must have come rather late as Carolyn recalls: ‘I walked in about six o'clock and Diana went: ‘Quick, quick I've got to meet Charles in twenty minutes.’
Well, we had the funniest time ever, getting the hair washed, getting it dried, getting the dress, where's the dress.
We did it in twenty minutes flat.
But I mean, how dare he ask her so late.’
She had scarcely recovered her composure from that frantic evening before he invited her to join him on the royal yacht Britannia during Cowes Week.
The royal yacht, the oldest ship in the Royal Navy, is a familiar sight in the waters of the Solent during the August regatta and Prince Philip plays host to a party which usually includes his German relatives along with Princess Alexandra, her husband, Sir Angus Ogilvy and numerous yachting friends.
On that weekend Diana had Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones, Princess Margaret's daughter, and Susan Deptford, who later became Major Ronald Ferguson's second wife, to keep her company.
She went water skiing while Prince Charles went windsurfing.
Stories that she lightheartedly tipped him off his surfboard do not ring true of Diana who was totally in awe of him.
Indeed she felt ‘fairly intimidated’ by the atmosphere on board the royal yacht.
Not only were his friends so much older than herself, but they seemed aware of Prince Charles's strategy towards her.
She found them too friendly and too knowing.
‘They were all over me like a bad rash’, she told her friends.
For a girl who likes to be in control it was profoundly disconcerting.
There was little time to reflect on the implications as Prince Charles had already asked her to Balmoral for the weekend of the Braemar Games early in September.
The Queen's Highland castle retreat, set in 40,000 acres of heather and grouse moor, is effectively the Windsors' family seat.
Ever since Queen Victoria bought the estate in 1848 it has had a special place in the affections of the royal family.
However the  very quirks and obscure family traditions which have accrued over the years can intimidate newcomers.
‘Don't sit there’ they chorus at an unfortunate guest foolish enough to try and sit in a chair in the drawing-room which was last used by Queen Victoria.
Those who successfully navigate this social minefield, popularly known as ‘the Balmoral test,’ are accepted by the royal family.
The ones who fail vanish from royal favour as quickly as the Highland mists come and go.
So the prospect of her stay at Balmoral loomed large in Diana's mind.
She was ‘terrified’ and desperately wanted to behave in the appropriate manner.
Fortunately rather than staying in the main house, she was able to stay with her sister Jane and husband Robert who, as he was a member of the royal Household, enjoyed a grace and favour cottage on the estate.
Prince Charles rang her every day, suggesting she join him for a walk or a barbecue.
It was a ‘wonderful’ few days until the glint of a pair of binoculars across the river Dee spoilt their idyll.
They were carried by royal journalist James Whitaker who had spotted Prince Charles fishing by the banks of the river Dee.
The hunters had become the hunted.
Diana immediately told Charles that she would make herself scarce so while he continued fishing she hid behind a tree for half an hour hoping vainly that the journalists would go away.
Cleverly she used the mirror from her powder compact to watch the unholy trinity of James Whitaker and rival photographers Ken Lennox and Arthur Edwards as they tried to capture her on film.
She foiled their efforts by calmly walking straight up through the pine trees, her head muffled with a headscarf and flat cap, leaving Fleet Street's finest clueless as to her identity.
They soon picked up her trail and from then on her private life was effectively over.
Reporters waited outside her apartment day and night, while photographers badgered her at the Young England kindergarten where she worked.
On one occasion she agreed to pose for photographs on the condition that she would then be left alone.
Unfortunately during the photo session the light was behind her and made her cotton skirt seem see-through, revealing her legs to the world.
‘I knew your legs were good but I didn't realize they were that spectacular,’ Prince Charles is reported to have commented.
‘And did you really have to show them to everybody?’
While Prince Charles could afford to be amused, Diana was quickly discovering the exacting price of royal romance.
She was telephoned in the early hours of the morning about stories in newspapers and yet dare  not take the communal telephone off the hook in case any of their families became ill during the night.
Each time she went out in her distinctive red Metro she was followed by a press posse.
However she never lost control, giving polite but non-committal answers to endless questions about her feelings for the Prince.
Her engaging smile, her winsome manner and her impeccable behaviour soon endeared her to the public.
Her flatmate Carolyn Bartholomew says: ‘She played it just right.
She didn't in any way splash it across the newspapers because that ruined her sister's chances.
Diana was very aware that if anything special had to be cultivated it should take place without any pressure from the press.’
Nonetheless, there was constant stress which tested her reserves to the limit.
In the privacy of her apartment she could afford to show her feelings.
‘I cried like a baby to the four walls, I just couldn't cope with it,’ she recalls.
Prince Charles never offered to help and when, in desperation, she contacted the press office at Buckingham Palace, they told her that she was on her own.
While they washed their hands of any involvement, Diana dipped deep into her inner resources, drawing upon her instinctive determination to survive.
What made it worse was that Prince Charles seemed less concerned about her predicament than that of his friend Camilla Parker-Bowles.
When he called Diana on the phone he often spoke in sympathetic tones about the rough time Camilla was getting because there were three or four journalists outside her home.
Diana bit her lip and said nothing, never mentioning the virtual siege she was living under.
She didn't think that it was her place to do so nor did she want to appear to be a burden to the man she loved.
As the romance gathered momentum, Diana began to harbour doubts about her new friend Camilla Parker-Bowles.
She seemed to know everything that Diana and Charles had discussed in their rare moments of privacy and was full of advice on how best to handle Prince Charles.
It was all very strange.
Even Diana, an absolute beginner in the rules of love, was starting to suspect that this was not the way most men conducted their romances.
For a start she and Charles were never on their own.
At her first Balmoral when she stayed with her sister Jane, the Parker-Bowles were prominent among the house guests.
When Charles invited her to dine at Buckingham Palace the Parker-Bowles or his skiing companions Charles and Patti Palmer-Tomkinson were always present.
On October 24,1980 when Diana drove from London to Ludlow to watch Prince Charles race his horse Allibar in the Clun Handicap for amateur riders they spent the weekend with the Parker-Bowles at Bolehyde Manor in Wiltshire.
The following day Charles and Andrew Parker-Bowles went out with the Beaufort Hunt while Camilla and Diana spent the morning together.
They made a return visit to Bolehyde Manor the following weekend.
During that first weekend Prince Charles showed Diana around Highgrove, the 353-acre Gloucestershire home he had bought in July the same month he had started to woo her.
As he took her on a guided tour of the eight-bedroomed mansion, the Prince asked her to organize the interior decoration.
He liked her taste while she felt that it was a ‘most improper’ suggestion as they were not even engaged.
So Diana was deeply distressed when the Sunday Mirror newspaper ran a front page story claiming that, on November 5, Diana drove from London for a secret meeting with Prince Charles aboard the royal train in a siding at Holt in Wiltshire.
For once Buckingham Palace came to her assistance.
The Queen authorized her press secretary to demand a retraction.
There was an exchange of letters which the editor, Bob Edwards, published coincidentally on the same day that Prince Charles flew to India and Nepal for an official tour.
Diana insisted that she had been in her apartment, exhausted after a late night at the Ritz hotel where she and Prince Charles had attended Princess Margaret's 50th birthday party.
‘The whole thing has got out of control, I'm not so much bored as miserable,’ confided Diana to a sympathetic neighbour who just happened to be a journalist.
Her mother, Frances Shand Kydd also took the opportunity to enter the fray on behalf of her youngest daughter.
In early December she wrote a letter to The Times complaining about the lies and harassment Diana had endured since the romance became public.
‘May I ask the editors of Fleet Street, whether, in the execution of their jobs, they consider it necessary or fair to harass my daughter daily, from dawn until well after dusk?
Is it fair to ask any human being, regardless of circumstances, to be treated in this way?’
While her letter galvanized sixty Members of Parliament to draft a motion ‘deploring the manner in which Lady Diana Spencer is being treated by the media’ and led to a meeting between editors and the Press Council, the  siege of Coleherne Court continued.
Sandringham, the royal family's winter fortress, was also surrounded  by the media.
The House of Windsor, protected by police, press secretaries, and endless private acres, showed less composure than the House of Spencer.
The Queen shouted: ‘Why don't you go away?’ at the crowd of hacks while Prince Charles heckled: ‘A very happy New Year, and to your editors a particularly nasty one!’
Prince Edward is even said to have fired a shotgun over the head of a Daily Mirror photographer.
Back at Coleherne Court, the beleaguered garrison managed to outwit the enemy when it mattered.
On one occasion, when Diana was due to stay with Prince Charles at Broadlands, she stripped the sheets from her bed and used them to lower her suitcase from the kitchen window to the street below, out of sight of the waiting newshounds.
On another occasion she climbed over dustbins and went through the fire exit of a Knightsbridge store, while once she and Carolyn abandoned her car and jumped on a red double decker bus to evade photographers.
When the bus got caught in traffic they dashed off it and ran through a nearby Russell and Bromley shoe store.
‘That was brilliant fun,’ says Carolyn, ‘like being on a drag hunt in the middle of London.’
They had organized a decoy system whereby Carolyn drove Diana's car to entice her press pursuers away and then Diana would emerge from Coleherne Court and walk off in the other direction.
Even her grandmother, Lady Fermoy, joined in the subterfuge.
Diana, having spent Christmas 1980 at Althorp, returned to London to spend New Year's Eve with her flatmates.
The next day she drove to Sandringham but first left her distinctive Metro at Kensington Palace where her grandmother's silver VW Golf was waiting.
Away she went in the VW, leaving the gentlemen of the press behind.
As the hysterical media juggernaut pushed Charles and Diana along to the altar, she had to try and come to terms with her own feelings and thoughts about the Prince of Wales.
It was not easy.
She had never had a real boyfriend before and so had no yardstick by which to compare Charles's behaviour.
During their bizarre courtship she was his willing puppy who came to heel when he whistled.
It was no more than he expected.
As the Prince of Wales, he was used to being the centre of attention and the focus of flattery and praise.
He called her Diana, she addressed him as ‘Sir’.
He aroused her mothering instincts.
When she came back from a date with the Prince she would be full of sympathy for him uttering phrases like ‘they work him too hard’ or ‘it's appalling the way they push him  around.’
In her eyes he was a sad, lonely man who needed looking after.
And she was hopelessly, utterly besotted with him.
He was the man she wanted to be with for the rest of her life and she was willing to jump through any hoop and over any hurdle to win him.
Diana regularly asked her flatmates for advice on how she should conduct her romance.
As Carolyn recalls: ‘It was pretty normal procedure that goes on between girls.
Some of it I can't disclose, some of it would have been on the lines of: ‘Make sure you do this or that’.
It was a bit of a game.’
As she bathed in the warm glow of first love, she was occasionally unsettled by shards of doubt.
Surprisingly, it was her grandmother, Ruth, Lady Fermoy, a lady-in-waiting to the Queen Mother, who sounded one of the first notes of caution.
Far from engineering the union, as has been widely suspected, her grandmother advised her about the difficulties of marrying into the royal family.
‘You must understand that their sense of humour and lifestyle are very different,’ she warned her.
‘I don't think it will suit you.’
Diana was also troubled by other worries.
There was his clique of sycophantic friends, many of them middle-aged, who were too fawning and deferential.
She instinctively felt that that kind of attention wasn't good for him.
Then there was the ever-present Mrs Parker-Bowles who seemed to know everything they were doing almost before they had done it.
During their courtship Diana had asked him about his previous girlfriends.
He had told her candidly that they were married women because, in his words, ‘they were safe’; they had their husbands to think about.
Yet Diana truly believed he was in love with her because of the devoted way he behaved in her presence.
At the same time she couldn't help but wonder about the fact that in the space of twelve months he had been involved in three relationships, Anna Wallace, Amanda Knatchbull and herself, any one of which could have ended in marriage.
Those doubts disappeared following a telephone call she received while Prince Charles was on a skiing holiday in Klosters, Switzerland.
During his call, made from the chalet of his friends Charles and Patti Palmer-Tomkinson, he said that he had something important to ask to her when he returned.
Instinct told her what that ‘something’ was and that night she talked until the small hours with her flatmates discussing what she should do.
She was in love, she thought he was in love with her and yet she was concerned that there might be another woman hovering in the background.
He returned to England on February 3,1981, looking fit and tanned.
That Thursday he joined HMS Invincible , the Royal Navy's latest aircraft carrier, for manoeuvres, and returned to London where he spent the night at Buckingham Palace.
He had arranged to see Diana the following day, Friday February 6,at Windsor Castle.
It was here that the Prince of Wales formally asked Lady Diana Spencer to be his bride.
The actual proposal took place late that evening in the Windsor nursery.
He told her how much he had missed her while he was away skiing and then asked her simply to marry him.
At first she treated his request in a light-hearted way and broke into a fit of giggles.
The Prince was deadly serious, emphasizing the earnestness of his proposal by reminding her that one day she would be queen.
While a small voice inside her head told her that she would never become queen but would have a tough life she found herself accepting his offer and telling him repeatedly how much she loved him.
‘Whatever love means’, he replied, a phrase he was to use again during their formal engagement interviews with the media.
He left her and went upstairs to telephone the Queen, who was at Sandringham, and inform her of the happy outcome of his proposal.
In the meantime Diana pondered her fate.
Despite her nervous laughter, Diana had given the prospect much thought.
Besides her undoubted love for Prince Charles, her sense of duty and her deep desire to carry out a useful role in life were factors in her fateful decision.
When she returned to her apartment later that night her friends were eager for news.
She flopped down on her bed and announced: ‘Guess what?’
They cried out in unison: ‘He asked you.’
Diana replied: ‘He did and I said: ‘Yes please’ '.
After the congratulatory hugs and tears and kisses, they opened a bottle of champagne before they went for a drive round London nursing their secret.
She told her parents the next day.
They were naturally thrilled but when she told her brother Charles of her marriage plans at their mother's London apartment he wisecracked: ‘Who to?’
He recalls: ‘When I got there she looked absolutely blissful and was beaming away.
I just remember her as really ecstatic.’
Did he feel then that she was in love with the role or the person?
‘From the baptism of fire she had got from the press she knew that she could handle the role too.
She looked as happy as I have ever seen her look.
It was genuine because nobody with insincere motives could look that happy.
It wasn't the look of  somebody who had won the jackpot but somebody who looked spiritually fulfilled as well.’
Her sister Sarah, for so long the Spencer girl in the spotlight, now had to make way for Diana.
While she was happy for her younger sister, she admitted to being rather envious of Diana's new found fame.
It took her some time to adjust to her new billing as sister to the future Princess of Wales.
Jane took a more practical approach.
While she shared in the bride-to-be's euphoria, as the wife of the Queen's assistant private secretary, she couldn't help but be concerned about how Diana would cope with royal life.
This was for the future.
Two days later Diana took a well-earned break, her last as a private citizen.
She joined her mother and stepfather on a flight for Australia where they travelled to his sheep station at Yass in New South Wales.
They stayed at a friend's beach house and enjoyed ten days of peace and seclusion.
While Diana and her mother started planning guest lists, wardrobe requirements and the other details for the wedding of the year, the media vainly attempted to discover her hiding-place.
The one man who did know was the Prince of Wales.
As the days passed, Diana pined for her Prince and yet he never telephoned.
She excused his silence as due to the pressure of his royal duties.
Finally she called him only to find that he was not in his apartment at Buckingham Palace.
It was only after she called him that he telephoned her.
Soothed by that solitary telephone call, Diana's ruffled pride was momentarily mollified when she returned to Coleherne Court.
There was a knock on the door and a member of the Prince's staff appeared with a large bouquet of flowers.
However there was no note from her future husband and she concluded sadly that it was simply a tactful gesture by his office.
These concerns were forgotten a few days later when Diana rose at dawn and travelled to the Lambourn home of Nick Gaselee, Charles's trainer, to watch him ride his horse, Allibar.
As she and his detective observed the Prince put the horse through its paces on the gallops Diana was seized by another premonition of disaster.
She said that Allibar was going to have a heart attack and die.
Within seconds of her uttering those words, 11-year-old Allibar reared its head back and collapsed to the ground with a massive coronary.
Diana leapt out of the Land Rover and raced to Charles's side.
There was nothing anyone could do.
The couple stayed with the horse until a vet officially certified its death and then, to avoid waiting photographers, Diana left the Gaselees in the  back of the Land Rover with a coat over her head.
It was a miserable moment but there was little time to reflect on the tragedy.
The inexorable demands of royal duty took Prince Charles on to Wales, leaving Diana to sympathize with his loss by telephone.
Soon they would be together forever, the subterfuge and deceit ended.
It was nearly time to let the world into their secret.
The night before the engagement announcement, which took place on February 24,1981, she packed a bag, hugged her loyal friends and left Coleherne Court forever.
She had an armed Scotland Yard bodyguard for company, Chief Inspector Paul Officer, a philosophical policeman who is fascinated by runes, mysticism and the after-world.
As she prepared to say goodbye to her private life, he told her: ‘I just want you to know that this is the last night of freedom in your life so make the most of it.’
Those words stopped her in her tracks.
‘They felt like a sword through my heart.’
4
‘Such Hope in My Heart’
The quest of the handsome prince was complete.
He had found his fair maiden and the world had its fairytale.
In her ivory tower, Cinderella was unhappy, locked away from her friends, her family and the outside world.
As the public celebrated the Prince's fortune, the shades of the prison-house closed inexorably around Diana.
For all her aristocratic breeding, this innocent young kindergarten teacher felt totally at sea in the deferential hierarchy of Buckingham Palace.
There were many tears in those three months and many more to come after that.
Weight simply dropped off, her waist shrinking from 29 inches when the engagement was announced down to 23 inches on her wedding day.
It was during this turbulent time that her bulimia nervosa, which would take nearly a decade to overcome, began.
The note Diana left her friends at Coleherne Court saying: ‘For God's sake ring me up — I'm going to need you.’
It proved painfully accurate.
As her friend Carolyn Bartholomew, who watched her waste away during her engagement, recalls: ‘She went to live at Buckingham Palace and then the tears started.
This little thing got so thin.
I was so worried about her.
She wasn't happy, she was suddenly plunged into all this pressure and it was a nightmare for her.
She was dizzy with it, bombarded from all sides.
It was a whirlwind and she was ashen, she was grey.’
Her first night at Clarence House, the Queen Mother's London residence, was the calm before the coming storm.
She was left to her own devices when she arrived, no-one from the royal family least of all her future husband, thinking it necessary to welcome her to her new world.
The popular myth paints a homely picture of the Queen Mother ducking around Diana as she schooled her in the subtle arts of royal protocol while the Queen's senior lady-in-waiting, Lady Susan Hussey  took the young woman aside for tuition in regal history.
In reality, Diana was given less training in her new job than the average supermarket checkout operator.
Diana was shown to her first-floor bedroom by a servant.
There was a letter lying on her bed.
It was from Camilla Parker-Bowles and had been written several days before the engagement was officially announced.
The friendly note invited her to lunch.
It was during that meeting, arranged to coincide with Prince Charles's trip to Australia and New Zealand, that Diana became suspicious.
Camilla kept asking if Diana was going to hunt when she moved to Highgrove.
Nonplussed by such an odd question, Diana replied in the negative.
The relief on Camilla's face was clear.
Diana later realized that Camilla saw Charles's love of hunting as a conduit to maintaining her own friendship.
It wasn't clear at the time.
Then again nothing was.
Diana soon moved in to rooms at Buckingham Palace where she, her mother and a small team had to organize her wedding and her wardrobe.
Diana quickly appreciated that the only thing the royal family like to change is their clothes.
With the year divided into three official seasons and often involving four formal changes of clothes a day, her wardrobe of one long dress, one silk shirt and a smart pair of shoes was wholly inadequate.
During her romance she had regularly raided her friends' wardrobes so that she would have a presentable outfit to go out in.
While her mother helped her choose the famous blue engagement suit which she bought from Harrods, she asked her sisters' friend Anna Harvey, the fashion editor of Vogue magazine, for advice on building up her formal wardrobe.
She began to understand that her working clothes had not just to be fashionable but also to cope with the vagaries of walkabouts, the intrusion of photographers and her ever-present enemy, the wind.
Slowly she discovered tricks of the trade such as weighting her hems so that they didn't blow up in a breeze and she gradually acquired a coterie of designers, including Catherine Walker, David Sassoon and Victor Edelstein, whom she now relies upon.
At first there was no grand plan, it was simply a case of choosing who was around or who had been recommended by her new friends from Vogue .
She picked two young designers, David and Elizabeth Emanuel to make the wedding-dress because she was impressed by their work when she attended a photographic shoot at Lord Snowdon's  Kensington studio.
They also made the evening gown for her first official engagement, a charity gala in the city of London, which created almost as big a sensation as the dress which graced St Paul's Cathedral a few months later.
The black taffeta silk ballgown was strapless and backless with a plunging, gravity-defying decolletage.
Prince Charles was not impressed with the outfit.
While she thought black was the smartest colour a girl her age could wear, he had different ideas.
When she appeared in her finery at the door of his study he commented unfavourably saying that only people in mourning wore black.
Diana replied that she was not yet a member of his family and, what's more, she had no other dress suitable for the occasion.
That spat did little for her confidence as she faced a battery of cameras waiting outside Goldsmiths Hall.
She was unschooled in the niceties of royal behaviour and felt absolutely terrified that she would embarrass her fiance in some way.
‘It was an horrendous occasion,’ she told her friends.
During the course of the evening she met Princess Grace of Monaco, a woman she had always admired from afar.
She noticed Diana's uncertainty and, ignoring the other guests who were still buzzing over Diana's choice of dress, whisked her off to the powder room.
Diana poured her heart out about the publicity, her sense of isolation and fears about what the future held in store.
‘Don't worry,’ Princess Grace joked.
‘It will get a lot worse’.
At the end of that momentous month of March, Prince Charles flew to Australia for a five-week visit.
Before he climbed the gangway of the RAF VC10 he grasped her arm and kissed her on each cheek.
As she watched his plane taxi away, she broke down and wept.
This vulnerability further endeared her to the public.
However, her tears were not what they seemed.
Before he had left for the airport, he had attended to a few last minute details in his study at Buckingham Palace.
Diana was chatting to him when the telephone rang.
It was Camilla.
Diana wondered whether to sit there or leave and let them make their farewells in private.
She left her fiance alone but told friends afterwards that the episode broke her heart.
She was now alone in the ivory tower.
For a girl used to the noise and chaos of an all girls' apartment, Buckingham Palace felt like anywhere but home.
Diana found it a place of ‘dead energy’ and grew to despise the smooth evasions and subtle equivocations employed by courtiers, particularly when she asked them directly about her fiancé's former  relationship with Camilla Parker-Bowles.
Lonely and feeling sorry for herself, she regularly wandered from her second floor apartment to the kitchens to chat to the staff.
On one famous occasion Diana, barefoot and casually dressed in jeans, buttered toast for an astonished footman.
She found some solace in her love of dancing inviting the West Heath school pianist, the late Lily Snipp and Wendy Mitchell, her dance teacher, to Buckingham Palace to give her private lessons.
For forty minutes Diana, dressed in a black leotard, went through a routine that combined ballet with tap dancing.
During those momentous days Miss Snipp kept a diary which gives a first-hand feeling of the misgivings felt by Lady Diana Spencer as the wedding-day approached.
The first entry in Miss Snipp's diary, on Friday June 5, 1981, recorded details of Diana's first lesson.
She wrote: ‘To Buckingham Palace to play for Lady Diana.
We all worked hard at the lesson, no time wasted.
When the lesson was over Lady Diana, with her tongue in her cheek, said: ‘I suppose Miss Snipp will now go direct to Fleet Street.
She has a good sense of humour — she will need it in the years to come.’
The most poignant lesson, which proved to be the last, was held a few days before the wedding.
Diana's thoughts were on the profound changes ahead.
Miss Snipp noted: ‘Lady Diana rather tired — too many late nights.
I delivered silver salt-cellars — present from West Heath school — very beautiful and much admired.
Lady Diana counting how many days of freedom are left to her.
Rather sad.
Masses of people outside of Palace.
We hope to resume lessons in October.
Lady Diana said: ‘In 12 days time I shall no longer be men.’
Even as she spoke those words Diana must have known that she had left behind her bachelor persona as soon as she had entered the Palace portals.
In the weeks following the engagement she had grown in confidence and self-assurance, her sense of humour frequently bubbling to the surface.
Lucinda Craig Harvey saw her former cleaning lady on several occasions during her engagement, once at the 30th birthday party of her brother-in-law, Neil McCorquodale.
‘She had a distance to her and everyone was in awe of her,’ she recalls.
It was a quality also noticed by James Gilbey.
‘She has always been seen as a typical Sloane Ranger.
That's not true.
She was always removed, always had a determination about her and was very matter-of-fact, almost dogmatic.
That quality has now developed into a tremendous presence.’
While she was in awe of Prince Charles, deferring to his every  decision, she didn't appear to be overcome by her surroundings.
Inwardly she may have been nervous, outwardly she appeared calm, relaxed and ready to have fun.
At Prince Andrew's 21st birthday party which was held at Windsor Castle she was at her ease among friends.
When her future brother-in-law asked where he could find the Duchess of Westminster, the wife of Britain's richest aristocrat, she joked: ‘Oh Andrew, do stop name dropping.’
Her ready repartee, cutting but not vicious, was reminiscent of her eldest sister Sarah when she was the queen bee of the Society circuit.
‘Don't look so serious it's not working,’ joked Diana as she introduced Adam Russell to the Queen, Prince Charles and other members of the royal family in the receiving line at the ball held-at Buckingham Palace two days before her wedding.
Once again she seemed good humoured and relaxed in her grand surroundings.
There wasn't the slightest sign that a few hours earlier she had collapsed in paroxysms of tears and seriously considered calling the whole thing off.
The cause of the tears was the arrival, a few days earlier, of a parcel at the busy Buckingham Palace office which she shared with Michael Colbourne, who was then in charge of the Prince's finances, and several others.
Diana insisted on opening it, despite firm remonstrations from the Prince's right hand man.
Inside was a gold chain bracelet with a blue enamel disc and the initials ‘F’ and ‘G’entwined.
The initials stand for ‘Fred’ and ‘Gladys’the nicknames used by Camilla and Charles which Diana had been made aware of by friends.
It had come home to her earlier when she discovered that the Prince had sent a bouquet of flowers to Camilla when she had been ill.
Once again he used that nickname.
Work in the Prince's office at Buckingham Palace came to a halt when Diana confronted her husband-to-be about his proposed gift.
In spite of her angry and tearful protests Charles insisted on giving the token to the woman who had haunted their courtship and has since cast a long shadow across their married life.
The full enormity of the charade hit her a week before the wedding when she attended a rehearsal at St Paul's Cathedral.
As soon as the camera lights were switched on, it triggered the churning emotions in her heart and she broke down and wept inconsolably.
The public glimpsed her frustration and desperation the weekend before the wedding when she left a polo field at Tidworth in floods of tears.
By then, though, the television cameras were in place for the  wedding, the cake had been baked, the crowds were already gathering on the pavement and the sense of happy anticipation was almost palpable.
On the Monday before her wedding-day, Diana gave serious consideration to calling a halt to the whole affair.
At lunchtime she knew that Prince Charles had gone to present Camilla with her gift, even leaving behind his senior bodyguard, Chief Inspector John McLean.
At the time he was seeing Camilla, Diana had lunch with her sisters at Buckingham Palace and discussed her predicament with them.
She was confused, upset and bewildered by the train of events.
At that moment, as she seriously considered calling-off the wedding, they made light of her fears and premonitions of the disaster which lay ahead.
‘Bad luck Duch,’ they said, using the family nickname for their younger sister, ‘your face is on the tea-towels so you're too late to chicken out now.’
Her head and heart were in turmoil but no-one would have guessed it when later that evening she and Charles entertained 800 of their friends and family at a ball inside Buckingham Palace.
It was a memorable night of riotous jollity.
Princess Margaret attached a balloon to her tiara, Prince Andrew tied another to the tails of his dinner jacket while royal bar staff dispensed a cocktail called ‘A Long Slow Comfortable Screw up against the Throne’.
Rory Scott recalls dancing with Diana in front of the then Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, and embarrassing himself by continually standing on Diana's toes.
The comedian Spike Milligan held forth about God, Diana gave a priceless diamond and pearl necklace to a friend to look after while she danced; while the Queen was observed looking through the programme and saying in bemused tones: ‘It says here they have live music’, as though it had just been invented.
Diana's brother, Charles, just down from Eton, vividly remembers bowing to one of the waiters.
‘He was absolutely weighed down with medals,’ he recalls, ‘and by that stage, with so many royal people there, I was in automatic bowing mode.
I bowed and he looked surprised.
Then he asked me if I wanted a drink.’
For most of the guests the evening passed in a haze of euphoria.
‘It was an intoxicatingly happy atmosphere,’ recalls Adam Russell.
‘Everyone horribly drunk and then catching taxis in the early hours, it was a blur, a glorious, happy blur.’
On the eve of the wedding, which Diana spent at Clarence House, her mood was much improved when Charles sent her a signet ring engraved with the Prince of Wales feathers and an affectionate card  which said: ‘I'm so proud of you and when you come up I'll be there at the altar for you tomorrow.
Just look 'em in the eye and knock 'em dead.’
While his loving note helped to sooth her misgivings, it was difficult to control the inner turmoil which had been building up over the months.
During dinner that evening with her sister Jane, she ate everything she could and then was promptly sick.
The stress and tension of the occasion were partly to blame but the incident was also an early symptom of bulimia nervosa, the illness which took pernicious hold later that year.
She has since told a dose friend: ‘The night before the wedding I was very calm, deathly calm.
I felt I was the lamb to the slaughter.
I knew it and I couldn't do anything about it.’
She woke early on the morning of July 29, 1981 which is not surprising as her room overlooked the Mall where the singing, chattering crowds had been gathering for days.
It was the start of what she later described as ‘the most emotionally confusing day of my life.’
Listening to the crowds outside, she felt a deathly composure combined with great anticipation at the event which lay ahead.
Her hairdresser Kevin Shanley, make-up artist Barbara Daly and David and Elizabeth Emanuel were on hand to ensure that the bride looked her best.
They succeeded.
Her brother Charles remembers his sister's transformation.
‘She was never one for make-up but she did look fantastic.
It was the first time in my life I ever thought of Diana as beautiful.
She really did look stunning that day and very composed, not showing any nerves although she was slightly pale.
She was happy and calm.’
Her father, who gave her away, was thrilled.
‘Darling I'm so proud of you,’ he said as she walked down the staircase at Clarence House.
As she climbed in to the Glass Coach with her father, Diana had several practical considerations to overcome.
Her dressmakers realized too late that they had not taken the size of the coach into consideration when they had designed the ivory silk wedding gown with its 25-foot-long train.
In spite of all Diana's effort it was badly crushed in the short journey to St Paul's.
She also knew that it was her priority to get her father, physically impaired since his stroke, down the aisle.
‘It was a deeply moving moment for us when he made it,’ observes Charles Spencer.
Earl Spencer loved the carriage ride, waving enthusiastically to the crowds.
As they reached St Martin-in-the-Fields church the cheering was so loud  he thought that they had arrived at St Paul's and prepared to get out of the carriage.
When they finally arrived at the cathedral, the world held its collective breath and Diana, with her father leaning heavily on her arm, walked with painful slowness down the aisle.
Diana had plenty of time to spot the guests, who included Camilla Parker-Bowles.
As she walked down the aisle her heart brimmed over with love and adoration for Charles.
When she looked at him through her veil her fears vanished and she thought that she was the luckiest girl in the world.
She had such hope for the future, such belief that he would love, nurture and protect her from the difficulties that lay ahead.
That moment was watched by 750 million people gathered around television sets in more than seventy countries.
It was, in the words of the Archbishop of Canterbury, ‘the stuff of which fairy-tales are made’.
But for the moment she had to concentrate on dipping a formal curtsey to the Queen, a consideration which had greatly exercised her mind in the previous few days.
When the newly created Princess of Wales emerged from St Paul's Cathedral to the cheers of the crowd, hope and happiness brimmed in her heart.
She convinced herself that the bulimia, which had scarred her engagement, was simply an attack of pre-wedding nerves and that Mrs Parker-Bowles was consigned to history.
She now speaks of those hours of heady emotion in a voice of wry amusement: ‘I had tremendous hopes in my heart.’
She was proved bitterly wrong.
The friendship between Prince Charles and Camilla continues to this day.
In Diana's mind this unworkable triangle has engendered a decade of angst, anguish and anger.
There are no winners.
A friend of both of them, who has watched this unhappy saga unfold over the last decade, now concedes: ‘I am sorry for the tragedy of it all.
My heart bleeds for the whole misunderstanding but it bleeds most for Diana.’
But on that July day, Diana basked in the warm affection of the crowds who lined the route back to Buckingham Palace where the royal family and their guests enjoyed the traditional royal wedding-breakfast.
By then she was simply too weary to think clearly, feeling totally overwhelmed by the spontaneous display of affection from the patriotic crowd.
She was longing for some peace and privacy, believing that now the wedding was over she would slip back into relative obscurity.
The royal couple found that seclusion at Broadlands, Earl Mountbatten's home in  Hampshire, where they spent the first three days of their honeymoon, followed by a leisurely Mediterranean cruise on board the royal yacht Britannia which they joined at Gibraltar.
Prince Charles had his own ideas about married life.
He brought along his fishing tackle which he used at their Hampshire retreat, together with half a dozen books by his friend and mentor, the South African philosopher and adventurer, Sir Laurens van der Post.
It was his idea that they should-read his books together and then discuss van der Post's mystical ideas at mealtimes.
Diana, on the other hand, wanted to spend time really getting to know her husband.
For much of their engagement his royal duties had taken him away from her side.
On board the royal yacht, with its 21officers and 256 men, they were never left alone.
Evening meals were black-tie affairs attended by selected officers.
While they discussed the day's events, a Royal Marine band played in an adjoining room.
The nervous tension of the build-up to the wedding had left the royal couple absolutely drained.
For much of the time they slept and when she wasn't sleeping Diana frequently visited the kitchens, the domain of ‘Swampie’ Marsh and fellow chefs.
They were amused by the way she consumed endless bowls of ice-cream or asked them to make her special snacks in between the normal meals.
Over the years royal staff and her friends have been puzzled by Diana's appetite, particularly as she always appeared to be so slim.
She was frequently found raiding the refrigerator at Highgrove late in the evening, and once startled a footman by eating an entire steak and kidney pie when she was staying at Windsor Castle.
Her friend Rory Scott remembers her eating a 11b bag of sweets in short order during a bridge evening while her admission that she ate a bowl of custard before she went to bed added to the perplexity concerning her diet.
In fact, virtually from the moment she became the Princess of Wales, Diana has suffered from bulimia nervosa which helps to explain her erratic dietary behaviour.
As Carolyn Bartholomew, who has been instrumental in convincing Diana to seek medical help, observes: ‘It's been there through her royal career, without a doubt.
I hate to say it but I feel that it may erupt when she feels under pressure.’
Bulimia, according to a recent Drug and Therapeutics bulletin from the Consumers' Association, is suffered by around two percent of young women in Britain.
These women indulge in episodes of massive overeating associated with a sense of loss of control.
Between episodes of eating most sufferers fast or induce vomiting.
Binges tend to be secret, sometimes  pre-planned and are often followed by strong mood swings expressed as guilt, depression, self-hate and even suicidal behaviour.
Sufferers usually have a normal body weight but see themselves as being fat, bloated and ugly.
This dislike of their bodies leads to fasting between the episodes of overeating and sufferers commonly have a sense of failure, low self-esteem and loss of control.
Muscle cramps, kidney and even heart failure are the physical results of prolonged bulimia.
Unlike anorexia nervosa, bulimia survives by disguise.
It is a sophisticated illness in as much as sufferers do not admit that they have a problem.
They always appear to be happy and spend their lives trying to help others.
Yet there is rage beneath the sunny smile, anger which sufferers are afraid to express.
Women in the caring professions such as nursing and nannying are particularly prone to the illness.
They see their own needs as greed and subsequently feel guilty about caring for themselves.
That disgust is translated into violent purging by vomiting or laxatives.
As the medical bulletin concludes: ‘Bulimia nervosa is a serious, under recognized, potentially chronic and occasionally fatal disorder affecting many young women but rarely men.’
While the roots of both bulimia and anorexia lie in childhood and a disordered family background, uncertainty and anxiety in adult life provide the trigger for the illness.
For Diana, the last few months had been an emotional rollercoaster as she had tried to come to terms with her new life as a public figure and the suffocating publicity as well as her husband's ambiguous behaviour towards her.
It was an explosive cocktail and it took just one spark to bring on her illness.
On one occasion, as the wedding day drew near, Charles put his arm around her waist and commented on what he considered to be her chubby figure.
It was an innocent enough remark but it triggered something inside her.
Shortly afterwards she made herself sick.
It was a profound release of tension and in some hazy way gave her a sense of control over herself and a means of releasing the anger she felt.
Their honeymoon gave no respite.
In fact it became much worse as Diana would make herself sick four, sometimes five times a day.
The ever-present shadow cast by Camilla merely served to throw fuel on the flames.
Reminders were everywhere.
On one occasion they were comparing engagements in their respective diaries when two photographs of Camilla fell out from the pages of Charles's diary.
Amid the tears and the angry words, she pleaded with him to be honest about how he felt about her and Camilla.
Those words fell on deaf ears.
Several days later  they entertained the Egyptian President, Anwar Sadat, and his wife Jihan on board the royal yacht.
When Charles appeared for dinner, Diana noticed that he was sporting a new pair of cufflinks in the shape of two ‘C's intertwined.
He admitted that they were from Camilla but passed them off as a simple gesture of friendship.
Diana didn't see it that way.
As she commented angrily to friends later, she could not see why Charles needed these constant reminders of Camilla.
In public however Diana appeared buoyant and happy.
She joined in a singsong in the sailors’ mess, playing ‘What shall we do with a drunken sailor?’after drinking from a can of beer.
‘We were all tickled pink,’ recalls one sailor.
One moonlit night they enjoyed a barbecue in a bay on the coast of Ithaca.
It was organized by the yacht's officers, who did all the cooking.
After they had eaten a Royal Marine accordionist came ashore, song sheets were handed out, and the night air rang to the sound of Boy Scout songs and sea shanties.
In its own way, the honeymoon finale was the highpoint of the trip.
For days the officers and men had rehearsed a farewell concert.
There were more than fourteen acts, from stand-up comics to bawdy singalongs.
The royal couple returned to Britain looking fit, tanned and very much in love and flew to join the Queen and the rest of the royal family on the Balmoral estate.
But the Highland mists did little to soothe Diana's troubled spirit.
Indeed when they arrived at Balmoral, where they stayed from August to late October, the full impact of life as Princess of Wales began to hit home.
She had believed, like many others in the royal family, that her fame would be transitory, her star soon fading following the wedding.
Everyone, even newspaper editors, were caught unawares by the Princess Diana phenomenon.
Their readers could not get enough of Diana; her face was on every magazine cover, every aspect of her life attracted comment and anyone who had ever known her was tracked down to be interviewed by the voracious media.
In a little under a year this insecure High School drop-out had undergone a process of deification by press and public.
Her very ordinariness was celebrated; everyday gestures such as opening a car door herself or buying a bag of sweets were acclaimed as evidence of a very human princess.
Everyone was infected, even the royal family's guests at Balmoral that autumn.
Diana was profoundly confused.
She had not altered overmuch in the twelve months since she was covering cars with eggs and flour and ringing doorbells with her giggling friends.
As she mingled with the guests at the Queen's Scottish home she realized that she was no longer treated as a person but as a position, no longer a flesh and blood human being with thoughts and feelings but a symbol where the very title ‘Her Royal Highness, the Princess of Wales’ distanced her not only from the wider public but from those within the intimate royal circle.
Protocol decreed that she should be addressed as ‘Your Royal Highness’ on first reference and ‘Ma'am’thereafter.
Of course everyone curtsied too.
Diana was disconcerted.
‘Don't call me ma'am, call me Duch,’ she told a friend shortly after her marriage.
But no matter how much she tried she could not prevent the shift in perceptions towards her.
She realized that everyone looked at her with new eyes, handling her like a precious piece of porcelain to be admired but not touched.
Diana was treated with kid gloves when all she needed was some sensible advice, a cuddle and a consoling word.
Yet the confused young woman that was the real Diana was in grave danger of drowning in the tidal wave of change which had turned her world upside-down.
For the watching world, she smiled and laughed, seeming perfectly delighted with her husband and newfound status.
At a famous photocall by the Bridge of Dee on the Balmoral estate, Diana told the assembled media that she could ‘highly recommend’ married life.
However, away from the cameras and microphones, the couple argued continually.
Diana was always on edge, suspecting Camilla's presence in Charles's every action.
At times she believed that he was seeking Camilla's advice about his marriage or making arrangements to see her.
As a close friend commented: ‘They had shocking rows about her, real stinkers and I don't blame Diana one bit.’
She lived on an emotional see-saw, her jealousy matched by a sublime devotion to Charles.
Diana was still totally besotted with him and Charles, in his own way, in love with her.
They went for long rambles around the hills which overlook Balmoral and as they lay in the heather he read out passages from books by the Swiss psychiatrist, Carl Jung, or Laurens van der Post.
Charles was happy and if he was content, so was Diana.
The touching love letters they exchanged are testimony to that growing bond of affection.
But these romantic interludes were mere pauses in Diana's worries about public life, anxieties which did little to subdue her bulimic condition.
She was continually sick, her weight falling drastically until she had literally gone to ‘skin and bone.’
At this critical juncture in her  life she felt that there was no-one in whom she could confide.
She assumed, correctly, that the Queen and other members of the royal family would take her husband's side.
In any event the royal family, both by training and inclination, shy away from emotional breast beating.
They live in a world of contained feelings and regimented activity.
It was assumed by them that Diana would somehow be able to assume their rigid code of behaviour overnight.
Nor did she feel she could approach her own family for assistance.
Her parents and sisters were sympathetic but expected her to conform to the existing status quo .
Her girlfriends, particularly her former flatmates, would have rallied round but she did not feel that she could inflict them with such a burden of responsibility.
She sensed that, like the rest of the world, they wanted the royal fairy-tale to work.
They believed in the myth and Diana could not bring herself to tell them the awful truth.
She was terribly alone and dreadfully exposed.
Inexorably her thoughts turned to suicide, not because she wanted to die but because she desperately wanted help.
Her husband took matters into his own hands by asking Laurens van der Post to come to Scotland to see what he could do.
His ministrations had little effect so in early October she flew to London for professional counselling.
She saw several doctors and psychologists at Buckingham Palace.
They diagnosed various  tranquillizers to calm her down and recover her equilibrium.
However Diana vigorously fought against their advice.
She knew in her heart that she did not need drugs, she needed rest, patience and understanding from those around her.
Just as she was bombarded by voices telling her to accept the doctors' recommendations she discovered that she was pregnant.
‘Thank Heavens for William,’ she has since said as it meant she could now quite properly forsake the pills she was  proffered by arguing that she did not want to risk physical or mental deformity in the baby she was carrying.
Her pregnancy was a reprieve.
It was reprieve that would not last long.
5
‘My Cries for Help’
The sound of voices raised in anger and hysterical sobbing could be plainly heard coming from the suite of rooms occupied by the Prince and Princess of Wales at Sandringham House.
It was shortly after Christmas but there was little festive feeling between the royal couple.
Diana was then three months’ pregnant with Prince William and felt absolutely wretched.
Her relationship with Prince Charles was rapidly unravelling.
The Prince seemed incapable of understanding or wishing to comprehend the turmoil in Diana's life.
She was suffering dreadfully from morning sickness, she was haunted by Camilla Parker-Bowles and she was desperately trying to accommodate herself to her new position and new family.
As she later told friends: ‘One minute I was a nobody, the next minute I was Princess of Wales, mother, media toy, member of this family and it was just too much for one person to handle.’
She had pleaded, cajoled and quarrelled violently as she tried to win the Prince's assistance.
In vain.
On that January day in 1982, her first New Year within the royal family, she now threatened to take her own life.
He accused her of crying wolf and prepared to go riding on the Sandringham estate.
She was as good as her word.
Standing on top of the wooden staircase she hurled herself to the ground, landing in a heap at the bottom.
The Queen Mother was one of the first to arrive on the scene.
She was horrified, physically shaking with the shock of what she had witnessed.
A local doctor was summoned while George Pinker, Diana's gynaecologist, travelled from London to visit his royal patient.
Her husband simply dismissed her plight and carried on with his plan to go riding.
Fortunately Diana was not seriously hurt by the fall although she did suffer severe bruising around her stomach.
A full check-up revealed that the foetus had not been injured.
The incident was one of many domestic crises which crowded in upon the royal couple in those tumultuous early days.
At every turning point they put a greater distance between each other.
As her friend James Gilbey observes of her suicide attempts: ‘They were messages of complete desperation.
Please, please help.’
In the first years of their married life, Diana made several suicide bids and numerous threats.
It should be emphasized that they were not serious attempts to take her life but cries for help.
On one occasion she threw herself against a glass display cabinet at Kensington Palace while on another she slashed at her wrists with a razor blade.
Another time she cut herself with the serrated edge of a lemon slicer; on yet another occasion, during a heated argument with Prince Charles, she picked up a penknife lying on his dressing table and cut her chest and her thighs.
Although she was bleeding her husband studiously scorned her.
As ever he thought that she was faking her problems.
Later on, her sister Jane, who saw her shortly afterwards, remarked on the score marks on her body.
Jane was horrified when she learned the truth.
As Diana has since told friends: ‘They were desperate cries for help.
I just needed time to adjust to my new position.’
One friend who watched their relationship  deteriorate points to Prince Charles's disinterest and total lack of respect for her at a time when Diana badly needed help.
‘His indifference pushed her to the edge whereas he could have romanced her to the end of the world.
They could have set the world alight.
Through no fault of his own, because of his own ignorance, upbringing and lack of a whole relationship with anyone in his life, he instilled this hatred of herself.’
This is a partisan appraisal.
In the early days of their marriage Prince Charles did, for a time, try to ease his wife into the royal routine.
Her first big test was a three-day visit to Wales in October 1981.
The crowds made it painfully obvious who was the new star of the show the Princess of Wales.
Charles was left apologizing for not having enough wives to go round.
If he took one side of the street during a walkabout the crowd collectively groaned, it was his wife they had come to see.
‘I seem to do nothing but collect flowers these days,’ he said.
‘I know my role.’
Behind the smiles there were other muttered concerns.
The first sight of the Princess on a rainswept quayside in Wales came as a shock to royal watchers.
It was the first chance to see  Diana close up since the long honeymoon and it was like looking at a different woman.
She wasn't just slim, she was painfully thin.
She had lost weight before the wedding; that was only to be expected — but the girl moving through the crowds, shaking hands and accepting flowers, looked positively transparent.
Diana was.
two months' pregnant — and feeling worse than she looked.
She chose the wrong clothes for the torrential rain which followed their every move, she was wracked by severe morning sickness and absolutely overwhelmed by the crowds who turned out to see her.
Diana admits that she wasn't easy to handle during that baptism of fire.
She was often in tears as they travelled to the various venues, telling her husband that she simply could not face the crowds.
She didn't have the energy or the resources to cope with the prospect of meeting so many people.
There were times, many times, when she longed to be back in her safe bachelor apartment with her jolly, uncomplicated friends.
While Prince Charles sympathized with his tearful wife he insisted that the royal roadshow had to go on.
He was understandably apprehensive when Diana made her first speech partly in Welsh at Cardiff City Hall when she was presented with the Freedom of the City.
While Diana passed that test with aplomb, she discovered another truism about royal life.
However well she did, however hard she tried she never earned a word of praise from her husband, the royal family or their courtiers.
In her vulnerable, lonely position a little applause would have worked wonders.
‘I remember her saying that she was trying so damn hard and all she needed was a pat on the back,’ recalls a friend.
‘But it wasn't forthcoming.’
Every day she fought back the waves of nausea in order to  fulfil her public engagements.
She had such a morbid fear of letting down her husband and the royal family ‘firm’ that she performed her official duties when she was quite clearly unwell.
On two occasions she had to cancel engagements, on others she looked pale and sickly, acutely aware that she was not helping her husband.
At least after her pregnancy was officially announced on November 5, 1981 Diana could publicly discuss her condition.
The weary Princess said: ‘Some days I feel terrible.
No-one told me I would feel like I did.’
She confessed to a passion for bacon and tomato sandwiches and took to telephoning her friend, Sarah Ferguson, the daughter of Charles's polo manager Major Ronald Ferguson.
The irrepressible redhead regularly  left her job at a London art dealer and drove round to Buckingham Palace to cheer up the royal mother-to-be.
In private it was no better.
She stalwartly refused to take any drugs, once again arguing that she could not hold herself responsible if the baby were born deformed.
At the same time she acknowledged that she was now seen by the rest of the royal family as ‘a problem’.
At formal dinners at Sandringham or Windsor Castle she frequently had to leave the table to be ill.
Instead of simply going to bed, she insisted on returning, believing that it was her duty to try and  fulfil her obligations.
If daily life was difficult, public duties were a nightmare.
The visit to Wales had been a triumph but Diana had felt overwhelmed by her popularity, the size of the crowds and the proximity of the media.
She was riding a tiger and there was no way of escape.
For the first few months she trembled at the thought of performing an official engagement on her own.
Where possible she would join Charles and remain by his side, silent, attentive but still terrified.
When she accepted her first solo public duty, to switch on the Christmas lights at Regent Street in London's West End, she was paralyzed with nerves.
She felt sick as she made a brief speech which was delivered in a rapid monotone.
At the end of that engagement she was glad to return home to Buckingham Palace.
It didn't get any easier.
The girl who would only appear in school plays if she had a non-speaking part was now centre stage.
It took, by her own admission, six years before she felt comfortable appearing in her starring role.
Fortunately for her the camera had already fallen in love with the new royal cover girl.
However nervous she may have felt inside, her warm smile and unaffected manner were a photographer's delight.
For once the camera did lie, not about the beauty she was becoming but in camouflaging the vulnerable personality behind her effortless capacity to dazzle.
She believes that she was able to smile through the pain thanks to qualities she inherited from her mother.
When friends ask how she was able to display such a sunny public countenance she says: ‘I've got what my mother has got.
However bloody you are feeling you can put on the most amazing show of happiness.
My mother is an expert at that and I've picked it up.
It kept the wolves from the door.’
The ability to become this smiling persona in public is helped by the nature of bulimia which is a disease where sufferers can maintain their normal body weight — unlike its sister illness, anorexia nervosa where  you slim to skin and bone.
At the same time Diana's healthy lifestyle of regular exercise, little alcohol and early nights gave her the energy to carry on with her royal duties.
As an eating-disorders expert explained: ‘Bulimics do not admit they have a problem.
There are always smiles, no problems in their lives and they spend their time trying to please others.
But there is unhappiness underneath because they are frightened to express their anger.’
At the same time her deep sense of duty and obligation impelled her to keep up appearances for the sake of the public.
A close friend says: ‘The public side of her was very different from the private side.
They wanted a fairy princess to come and touch them and turn everything into gold.
All their worries would be forgotten.
Little did they realize that the individual was crucifying herself inside’.
Diana, an unwilling international media celebrity, was having to learn on the hoof.
There was no training, backup or advice from within the royal system.
Everything was piecemeal and haphazard.
Charles's courtiers were used to dealing with a bachelor of fixed habits and a set routine.
Marriage changed all that.
During the preparations for the wedding there was consternation that Prince Charles would not be able to afford his portion of the expense.
‘Sums were worked out on the backs of envelopes, it was chaos,’ recalls one former member of his Household.
The momentum which continued long after the wedding took everyone by surprise.
Even though extra staff were drafted in, Diana herself sat down to answer many of the 47,000 letters of congratulation and 10,000 gifts which the wedding generated.
She frequently had to pinch herself with the absurdity of it all.
One moment she was cleaning floors for a living, the next receiving a pair of brass candlesticks from the King and Queen of Sweden or making small talk with the President of Somewhere or Other.
Fortunately her upbringing had given her the social training to cope with these situations.
This was just as well because the federal structure of the royal family means that everyone keeps to their own province.
As well as coming to terms with her public role, the fledgling princess had two houses to furnish and decorate.
Prince Charles admired her sense of style and colour and left the burden of decoration to her.
However, she did need professional help.
She welcomed her mother's suggestion of Dudley Poplak, a discreet South African-born interior designer who had furnished her own homes.
He set to work on apartments eight and nine at Kensington Palace and Highgrove.
His main task was tastefully to accommodate as many wedding presents into their new homes as was practicable.
An eighteenth century travelling commode from the Duke and Duchess of Wellington, a pair of Georgian chairs from the people of Bermuda and wrought-iron gates from the neighbouring village of Tetbury were just a sample of the cornucopia of presents which had descended on the royal couple.
For much of her pregnancy Diana stayed at Buckingham Palace while painters and carpenters worked at their new London home.
It wasn't until five weeks before Prince William was born that the royal couple moved into Kensington Palace, the home also of Princess Margaret, the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester and their immediate neighbours, Prince and Princess Michael of Kent.
By then Diana was truly at the end of her tether.
She was constantly watched by photographers and reporters while newspapers commented on her every action.
Unknown to the Princess, the Queen had already summoned Fleet Street newspaper editors to Buckingham Palace where her press secretary requested that Diana be given a little peace and privacy.
The request was ignored.
In February, when Charles and Diana flew to Windermere island in the Bahamas, they were followed by representatives from two tabloid newspapers.
The Princess, then five months' pregnant, was photographed running through the surf in a bikini.
She and Charles were furious at the publication of the pictures while the palace, reflecting their outrage, remarked that it was one of ‘the blackest days in British journalism.’
The honeymoon between the press, the Princess and the palace was effectively over.
This daily media obsession with Diana further burdened her already overstretched mental and physical resources.
The bulimia, the morning sickness, her collapsing marriage and her jealousy of Camilla conspired to make her life intolerable.
Media interest in the forthcoming birth was just too much to bear.
She decided to have the labour induced even though her gynaecologist, George Pinker has been quoted as saying: ‘Birth is a natural process and should be treated as such.’
While she was well aware of her mother's trauma following the birth of brother John, her instincts told her that the baby was well.
‘It's well cooked,’ she told a friend before she and Prince Charles travelled to the private Lindo wing of St Mary's Hospital in Paddington, west London.
Her labour was, like her pregnancy, seemingly interminable and difficult.
Diana was continually sick and at one point Mr Pinker and his fellow doctors considered performing an emergency caesarian  operation.
During her labour Diana's temperature soared dramatically which in turn gave rise to concern for the baby's health.
In the end Diana, who had an epidural injection in the base of her spine, was able to give birth thanks to her own efforts, without resorting to forceps or an operation.
Joy was unconfined.
At 9.03 pm on June 21,1982 Diana produced the son and heir which was cause for national rejoicing.
When the Queen came to visit her grandchild the following day her comment was typical.
As she looked at the tiny bundle she said drily: ‘Thank goodness he hasn't got ears like his father.’
The second in line to the throne was still known officially as ‘Baby Wales’ and it took the couple several days of discussion before they arrived at a name.
Prince Charles admitted as much: ‘We've thought of one or two.
There's a bit of an argument about it, but we'll find one eventually.’
Charles wanted to call his first son ‘Arthur’ and his second ‘Albert’, after Queen Victoria's consort.
William and Harry were Diana's choices while her husband's preferences were used in their children's middle names.
When the time came, she was similarly firm about the boys' schooling.
Prince Charles argued that they should be brought up initially by Mabel Anderson, his childhood nanny, and then a governess employed to educate the boys for the first few years in the privacy of Kensington Palace.
This was the way Prince Charles had been reared and he wanted his boys to follow suit.
Diana suggested that her children should go to school with other youngsters.
She believes that it is essential that her children grow up in the outside world and not be hidden away in the artificial environment of a royal palace.
Within the confines of the royal schedule Diana has attempted to bring up her children as normally as possible.
Her own childhood was evidence enough of the emotional harm which can be wrought when a child is passed from one parental figure to another.
She was determined that her children would never be deprived of the cuddles and kisses that she and her brother Charles craved when they were young.
While Barbara Barnes, the nanny to Lord and Lady Glenconner's children, was employed it was made clear that Diana would be intimately involved in her children's upbringing.
Initially she breast-fed the boys, a subject she discussed endlessly with her sister Sarah.
For a time the joy of motherhood overcame her eating-disorder.
Carolyn Bartholomew who visited her at Kensington Palace three days after William was born recalls: ‘She was thrilled with both herself and  the baby.
There was a contentment about her.’
The mood was infectious.
For a time Charles surprised his friends by his enthusiasm for the nursery routine.
‘I was hoping to do some digging,’ he told Harold Haywood, secretary of the Prince's Trust one Friday evening.
‘But the ground's so hard that I can't get the spade in.
So I expect I'll be nappy changing instead.’
As William grew, stories filtered out about the Prince joining his son in the bath, of William flushing his shoes down the lavatory or of Charles cutting short engagements to be with his family.
There were darker tales too: that Diana was suffering from anorexia nervosa; that Prince Charles was concerned about her health; that she was beginning to exert too much influence on his friends and their staff In reality, the Princess was suffering both from bulimia and a severe case of post-natal depression.
The events of the last year had left her mentally drained while she was physically exhausted because of her chronic illness.
The birth of William and the consequent psychological reaction triggered off the black feelings she harboured about her husband's friendship with Camilla Parker-Bowles.
There were tears and panic telephone calls when he didn't arrive home on time, nights without sleep when he was away.
A friend clearly recalls the Princess telephoning him in tears.
Diana had accidentally overheard her husband talking on a portable telephone while having a bath.
She was deeply upset when she heard him say: ‘Whatever happens I will always love you.’
She was weepy and nervy, anxious about her baby —‘Is he all right Barbara?’ she would ask her new nanny — while neglecting herself.
It was a desperately lonely time.
Her family and friends were now at the margins of her new life.
At the same time she knew that the royal family perceived her not only as a problem but also as a threat.
They were deeply concerned about Prince Charles's decision to give up shooting as well as his inclination towards vegetarianism.
As the royal family have large estates in Scotland and Norfolk where hunting, shooting and fishing are an integral part of land management, they were very worried about the future.
Diana was blamed for her husband's change of heart.
It was a woeful misreading of her position.
Diana felt that she was in no position to influence her husband's behaviour.
Changes in his wardrobe were one thing, radical alterations in the traditional country code were quite another.
In fact, Charles's highly publicized conversion to vegetarianism can more properly be laid at the door of his former bodyguard, Paul Officer who frequently  argued with him during long car journeys about the virtues of a non-meat diet.
She was also beginning to see the lie of the land with her in-laws.
During a ferocious argument with Diana, Charles made clear the royal family's position.
He told her in no uncertain terms that his father, the Duke of Edinburgh had agreed that if, after five years, his marriage was not working he could go back to his bachelor habits.
Whether those sentiments, uttered in the heat of the moment, are true or not was beside the point.
They had the effect of placing Diana on her guard in her every dealing with her in-laws.
At Balmoral her mood grew even more depressed.
The weather hardly lifted her spirits.
It rained continually and when the Princess was photographed leaving the castle en route to London the media jumped to the conclusion that she was bored with the Queen's Highland retreat and wanted to go shopping.
In fact, she returned to Kensington Palace for professional treatment for her chronic depression.
Over a period of time she was seen by a number of psychotherapists and psychologists who adopted differing approaches to her varied problems.
Some suggested drugs, as they had when she was pregnant with William, others tried to explore her psyche.
One of the first to treat her was the noted Jungian psychotherapist Dr Allan McGlashan, a friend of Laurens van der Post, who has consulting rooms conveniently near to Kensington Palace.
He was intrigued to analyse her dreams and encouraged her to write them down before he discussed the hidden messages they may have contained.
She later told friends that she was not convinced by this form of treatment.
As a result he discontinued his visits.
However his involvement with the royal family has not ended.
Over the last few years he has discussed many confidential matters with Prince Charles who has regularly visited his practice near Sloane Street.
Another doctor, David Mitchell, was more concerned to discuss and analyse Diana's conversations with her husband.
He came to see her every evening and asked her to recount the events of that day.
She admitted frankly that their dialogues consisted more of tears than words.
There were other professional counsellors who saw the Princess.
While they had their own ideas and theories, Diana did not feel that any of them came close to understanding the true nature of the turmoil in her heart and mind.
On November 11, Diana's doctor, Michael Linnett, mentioned his  concern about her health to her former West Heath pianist, Lily Snipp.
She recorded in her diaries: ‘Diana looked very beautiful and very thin (Her doctor wants her to increase her weight — she has no appetite.)
I enquired after Prince William — he slept 13 hours last night!
She said that she and Charles are besotted parents and their son is wonderful.’
With savage irony, when she was in the depths of despair, the tide of publicity turned against her.
She was no longer the fairy-tale Princess but the royal shopaholic who had lavished a fortune on an endless array of new outfits.
It was Diana who was held responsible for the steady stream of royal staff who had left their service during the last eighteen months and it was the Princess who was accused of forcing Charles to abandon his friends, change his eating habits and his wardrobe.
Even the Queen's press secretary had described their relationship as ‘rumbustious.’
At a time when dark thoughts of suicide continually crossed her mind, gossip columnist Nigel Dempster described her as ‘a fiend and a monster.’
While it was an appalling parody of the truth, Diana took the criticism very much to heart.
Later her brother unwittingly reinforced the impression that she hired and fired staff when he said: ‘In a quiet way she has weeded out a lot of the hangers-on who surrounded Charles.’
While he was referring to the Prince's fawning friends, it was interpreted as a comment on the high staff turnover at Kensington Palace and Highgrove.
In reality, Diana was struggling to keep her head above water, let alone undertake a radical management restructuring programme.
Yet she shouldered the blame for what the media gleefully called: ‘Malice at the Palace’ describing the Princess as ‘the mouse that roared’.
In a moment of exasperation she told James Whitaker: ‘I want you to understand that I am not responsible for any sackings.
I don't just sack people.’
Her outburst came following the resignation of Edward Adeane, the Prince's private secretary and a member of the family which had helped to guide the monarchy since the days of George V.
In truth, Diana got on rather well with Adeane, who introduced her to many of the women she accepted as her ladies-in-waiting while she was an enthusiastic matchmaker, continually trying to pair off the difficult bachelor with unattached ladies.
When the Prince's devoted valet, Stephen Barry, who later died of AIDS, resigned the blame was laid at Diana's door.
She had anticipated as much when he talked to her about leaving as they watched the sun go down over the Mediterranean during the honeymoon cruise.
He, like the Prince's detective John  McLean and several other staff who served the Prince during his bachelorhood, knew that it was time to leave once he was safely married.
So it proved.
As she endeavoured to come to terms with the realities of her marriage and royal life, there were moments in those early years when Diana sensed that she actually could cope and could make a positive contribution to the royal family and the wider nation.
Those first glimmerings occurred in tragic circumstances.
When Princess Grace of Monaco died in a motor car accident in September 1982, she was determined to attend her funeral.
Diana felt a debt of gratitude to the woman who had been so kind to her during that first traumatic public engagement eighteen months before as well as an empathy with someone who, like her, had come into the royal world from the outside.
Initially she discussed her desire to go to the funeral with her husband.
He was doubtful and told her that she would have to ask the Queen's private secretary for approval.
She sent him a memo — the usual form of royal communication — but he replied negatively, arguing that it wasn't possible as she had only been doing the job for a short time.
Diana felt so strongly about the issue that, for once, she would not take no for an answer.
This time she wrote directly to the Queen who raised no objections to the request.
It was her first solo foreign trip representing the royal family and she returned home to praise from the public for her dignified manner at the highly charged and at times mawkish funeral service.
Other challenges were on the horizon.
Prince William was still at the crawling stage when they were invited to visit Australia by the government.
There was much controversy in the media about how Diana had defied the Queen to take Prince William on her first major overseas visit.
In fact it was the Australian Prime Minister, Malcolm Fraser, who was instrumental in this decision.
He wrote to the royal couple saying that he appreciated the problems facing a young family and invited them to bring the Prince along as well.
Until that moment they were reconciled to leaving him behind for the proposed four-week tour.
Fraser's considerate gesture enabled them to lengthen the visit to include a two-week trip to New Zealand.
The Queen's permission was never requested.
During the visit William stayed at Woomargama, a 4,000-acre sheep station in New South Wales, with nanny Barbara Barnes and assorted security personnel.
While his parents could only be with him during the  occasional break in a hectic schedule, at least Diana knew that he was under the same skies.
His presence in the country was a useful talking point during their endless walkabouts and Diana in particular delighted in chatting about his progress.
That visit was a test of endurance for Diana.
There have been few occasions since then when she has experienced such remorseless enthusiasm.
In a country of 17 million people, around one million actually travelled to see them as they journeyed from city to city.
At times the welcome bordered on frenzy.
In Brisbane where 300,000 people packed together in the city centre, hysteria ran as high as the baking 95 degree temperature.
There were many moments when an unexpected surge in the crowd could have resulted in catastrophe.
No-one in the royal entourage, including the Prince of Wales, had ever experienced this kind of adulation.
Those first few days were traumatic.
She was jet-lagged, anxious and sick with bulimia.
After her first engagement at the Alice Springs School of the Air, she and her lady-in-waiting, Anne Beckwith-Smith consoled each other.
Behind dosed doors Diana cried her eyes out with nervous exhaustion.
She wanted William; she wanted to go home, she wanted to be anywhere but Alice Springs.
Even Anne, a mature, practical 29year-old, was devastated.
That first week was an ordeal.
She had been thrown in at the deep end and it was a question of sink or swim.
Diana drew deeply on her inner resolve and managed to keep going.
While Diana looked to her husband for a lead and guidance, the way the press and public reacted to the royal couple merely served to drive a wedge between them.
As in Wales, the crowds complained when Prince Charles went over to their side of the street during a walkabout.
Press coverage focused on the Princess; Charles was confined to a walk-on role.
It was the same later that year when they visited Canada for three weeks.
As a former member of his Household explained: ‘He never expected this kind of reaction.
After all, he was the Prince of Wales.
When he got out of the car people would groan.
It hurt his pride and inevitably he became jealous.
In the end it was rather like working for two pop stars.
It was all very sad and is one reason why now they do everything separately.’
In public Charles accepted the revised status quo with good grace; in private he blamed Diana.
Naturally she pointed out that she never sought this adulation, quite the opposite, and was frankly horrified by media attention.
Indeed, for a woman suffering from an illness directly  related to self-image, her smiling face on the front cover of every newspaper and magazine did little to help.
Ultimately, the success of that gruelling tour marked a turning point in her royal life.
She went out a girl, she returned home a woman.
It was nothing like the transformation she would undergo in a few years time but it signalled the slow resurrection of her inner spirit.
For a long time she had been out of control, unable to cope with the everyday demands of her new royal role.
Now she had developed a self-assurance and experience which allowed her to perform on the public stage.
There were still tears and traumas but the worst was over.
She gradually started to pick up the threads of her life.
For a long time she had not been able to face many of her friends.
Confined to a prison, she knew that she would find it unbearable to hear the news from her former circle.
In their terms, talk about their holidays, dinner parties and new jobs, seemed mundane compared to her new status as an international superstar.
But for Diana this chatter signified freedom, a freedom she could no longer enjoy.
At the same time Diana did not want her friends to see her in such a wretched, unhappy state.
She was rather like an injured animal, wanting to lick her wounds in peace and privacy.
Following her tours of Australia and Canada she felt enough confidence to renew her friendships and wrote a number of letters asking how everyone was and what they were doing.
One was to Adam Russell whom she arranged to meet at an Italian restaurant in Pimlico.
The woman he saw was very different from the happy, mischievous girl he knew from the ski slopes.
More confident certainly but beneath the banter Diana was a very lonely and unhappy young woman.
‘She was really feeling the bars of the cage chafing.
At that time she hadn't come to terms with them,’ he recalls.
Her greatest luxury in life was to sit down with baked beans on toast and watch television.
‘That's my idea of paradise,’ she told him.
The most obvious sign of the Diana's new life was the sight of her Scotland Yard bodyguard who was seated at a nearby table.
It took her a long time to come to terms with that presence; the proximity of an armed police officer was the most potent reminder of the gilded cage she had now entered.
It was the little things she missed such as those blissful moments of privacy when she could listen to her favourite composers on the car stereo at full blast.
Now she had to consider another person's wishes at all times.
In the early days she would go for an evening ‘burn up’ in her car around central London, leaving her armed Scotland Yard bodyguard behind.
On one occasion she was chased through the streets by a car full of excited young Arabs.
Nowadays she is more likely to drive to a favourite beach on the south coast so that she can enjoy the wind in her hair and the tang of the sea breeze on her face.
She loves being by water, be it the river Dee or the sea.
It is the place where she likes to think, to commune with herself.
The presence of a bodyguard was a constant reminder of the invisible veil which separated her from her family and friends.
It was the awareness that she was now a possible target for an anonymous terrorist or an unknown madman.
The bloody attempt to kidnap Princess Anne on the Mall just yards from Buckingham Palace and the successful break-in to the Queen's bedroom by an unemployed labourer, Michael Fagan were ample proof of the constant danger the royal family faced.
Diana was typically matter of fact in response to this ever-present threat.
She went to the headquarters of the Special Air Services in Hereford where she underwent a ‘terrifying’ driving course where she learnt the basic techniques in handling a possible terrorist attack or kidnap attempt.
Thunderflashes and smoke bombs were thrown at her car by her ‘enemies’ to make sure that the training was as realistic as possible.
On another occasion she went to Lippits Hill in Loughton, Essex, where officers from the Metropolitan Police receive weapons training.
There she learnt how to handle a .38 calibre Smith and Wesson revolver and a Hechler and Koch machine pistol which are now standard issue to members of the Royal Protection squad.
She had become reconciled to the idea of an eternal shadow; she discovered that, far from being a threat, her bodyguards were much wiser sounding boards than many of the gentleman courtiers who fluttered around her.
Police officers like Sergeant Allan Peters and Inspector Graham Smith became avuncular father figures, defusing tricky situations and deflating overweening subjects alike with a joke or a crisp command.
They also brought her mothering instincts to the fore.
She remembered their birthdays, sent notes of apology to their wives when they had to accompany her on an overseas tours and ensured that they were ‘fed and watered’ when she went out with them from Kensington Palace.
When Graham Smith contracted cancer, she invited him and his wife on holiday to Necker in the Caribbean and also on a Mediterranean cruise on board the yacht owned by Greek tycoon, John  Latsis.
Such is her affection for this popular police officer that she arranged a dinner in his honour after he had recovered which was attended by her family.
If she is dining with friends at San Lorenzo, her favourite restaurant, her current detective, Inspector Ken Wharfe will often join her table at the end of the meal and regale the assembled throng with his jokes.
Perhaps she reserves her fondest memories for Sergeant Barry Mannakee who became her bodyguard at a time when she felt lost and alone in the royal world.
He sensed her bewilderment and became a shoulder for her to lean on and sometimes to cry on during this painful period.
The affectionate bond that built up between them did not go unnoticed either by Prince Charles nor Mannakee's colleagues.
Shortly before the wedding of the Duke and Duchess of York in July 1986 he was transferred to other duties, much to Diana's dismay.
In the following spring he was tragically killed in a motorcycle accident.
For much of this unhappy early chapter in Diana's royal life, she had excluded those who had been near and dear to her, although Prince Charles still saw his former friends, particularly the Parker-Bowles and the Palmer-Tomkinsons.
The Prince and Princess attended the Parker-Bowles' house-warming party when they moved from Bolehyde Manor to Middlewich House, twelve miles from Highgrove and Charles regularly saw Camilla when he went fox hunting.
At Kensington Palace and Highgrove the couple entertained little, so rarely in fact that their butler Allan Fisher described working for the Wales's as ‘boring’.
It was a meagre diet: an annual dinner for Charles's polo playing friends, a ‘boys only’ evening or the occasional lunch with friends like Catherine Soames, Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones and the then Sarah Ferguson.
The tours, new homes, new baby, and Diana's illnesses took a heavy toll.
In her desperation she consulted Penny Thornton, an astrologer introduced to her by Sarah Ferguson.
Diana admitted to Penny that she couldn't bear the pressure of her position any longer and that she had to leave the system.
‘One day you will be allowed out but you will be allowed out as opposed to divorcing,’ Penny told her, confirming Diana's existing opinion that she would never become queen.
The mood in 1984 was not helped by the fact that she was pregnant with Prince Harry.
Once again she suffered badly from morning-sickness although it wasn't as bad as the first time.
When she returned from a solo engagement in Norway, Diana was still in the early stages of pregnancy.
She and the late Victor Chapman, the Queen's former  assistant press secretary, took turns to use the lavatory on the flight home.
Characteristically he was suffering from a hangover, she from morning-sickness.
It was during those months of waiting that she felt in her heart that her husband was once again seeing Camilla.
She felt the signs were there.
Late-night telephone calls, unexplained absences and other minor but significant changes in his usual routine.
Ironically, during that time, Charles and Diana enjoyed the happiest period of their married life.
The balmy summer months before Harry's birth was a time of contentment and mutual devotion.
But a storm cloud hovered on the horizon.
Diana knew that Charles was desperate for their second child to be a girl.
A scan had already shown that her baby was a boy.
It was a secret she nursed until the moment he was born at 4.20pm on Saturday, September 15 in the Lindo wing at St Mary's Hospital.
Charles's reaction finally closed the door on any love Diana may have felt for him.
‘Oh it's a boy,’ he said, ‘and he's even got rusty hair.’
[A common Spencer trait.]
With these dismissive remarks he left for Kensington Palace.
The following day he played polo.
From that moment, as Diana has told friends: ‘Something inside me died.’
It was a reaction which marked the beginning of the end of their marriage.
6
‘Darling I'm Going to Disappear’
It was a routine request from the Queen to her daughter-in-law, the Princess of Wales.
Royal Ascot race week loomed and she was in the process of drawing up a guest list for the traditional house party at Windsor Castle.
Would the Princess like to recommend two single girls of good breeding who would be acceptable guests?
She duly put forward the names of two friends, Susie Fenwick and Sarah Ferguson, the daughter of Prince Charles's polo manager Major Ronald Ferguson.
Sarah, a vivacious redhead known by one and all as ‘Fergie’, first met Diana during the early days of her romance with Prince Charles when she watched him play polo at Cowdray Park near the Sussex home of Sarah's mother, Susie Barrantes.
Fourth cousins by marriage, the girls had been aware of each other for much longer and had a number of friends in common.
They soon became good friends.
Sarah was invited to Diana's wedding and entertained her royal friend in her apartment near Clapham Junction in south London.
At one of Sarah's cocktail parties at her home in Lavender Gardens, Diana met Paddy McNally, a motor racing entrepreneur who enjoyed an uneven and ultimately unhappy romance with Fergie.
It was Paddy who, on a June day in 1985, dropped Sarah at Windsor Castle's private entrance where she was met by a footman and taken to her room by one of the Queen's ladies-in-waiting.
By the side of her bed there was a card, embossed with the Queen's cypher, giving the times of meals and table placements as well as a note saying how the various guests would be conveyed to the racecourse, either in open carriages or black Daimler saloons.
Even though her family had rubbed shoulders with the royal family for years, Sarah was understandably nervous.
She arrived promptly in the Green Drawing Room for pre-lunch drinks and then  found herself seated next to Prince Andrew, who was on leave from his Royal Navy flying duties.
They discovered an instant rapport.
He teased her by trying to feed her chocolate profiteroles.
She refused, playfully punching his shoulder and claiming one of her interminable diets as an excuse.
‘There are always humble beginnings; it's got to start somewhere’, said Andrew at their engagement interview eight months later.
While Diana has been billed as the matchmaker in this royal romance, the truth is that she never noticed the romantic spark between her brother-in-law and one of her best friends.
After all, Sarah was involved in a long-term relationship with Paddy McNally while Andrew still had a soft spot for Katherine ‘Koo’ Stark, an American actress who had excited considerable media interest because of her appearance in soft-porn films.
Diana was favourably impressed when she met Koo during her romance with Andrew.
The Princess had known Andrew since childhood and had always been aware that beneath the brash, noisy mask was a much shrewder and lonelier character than he or his family would admit.
Charles was only ever jealous of him when he served with some distinction as a helicopter pilot during the Falklands war.
While he returned from that campaign with greater maturity, even his best friends would never describe him as a man of great ambition.
In his free time he was happy to watch cartoons and videos on TV or wander around the various royal apartments, chatting to kitchen staff or watching Diana perform her ballet exercises at Kensington Palace.
Diana had seen how Koo Stark, gentle, quiet and utterly devoted, had given this rather lonely man the affection and friendship he was seeking.
So when Andrew started seeing Sarah, the Princess took a back seat.
She told her friend: ‘I'm there if you need me.’
As their romance developed, Diana was happy to agree to Andrew's requests that he and Sarah stay at Highgrove for the weekend.
As Sarah's stepmother, Susan Ferguson said: ‘Things got better and better between them as the weeks passed by.
There was never any ‘is it on or is it off?’
It wasn't as complicated because they got on so well.
That was the nice thing about it, a straightforward love story.
Of course if Sarah hadn't been a friend of the Princess of Wales the situation would have been far more difficult in the early stages.
She made it easier for Sarah to see him.
You have to remember that in his position it is very difficult to meet women.’
As with Diana's romance, events began to take on a momentum of their own.
The Queen invited Sarah to stay at Sandringham in January  1986; soon after, Charles and Diana took her skiing to Klosters in Switzerland.