

Backstage by Alex Finer, editor
SO HOW OLD IS MARTIN AMIS ANYWAY?
THE PRIVATE PASSIONS OF PUBLIC FIGURES are a constant source of fascination to readers of the tabloid press and to students of literary biography alike.
So whether your tastes are low of highbrow, I have no doubt you will enjoy ‘The Grudge Match: Amis v Barnes’, page 78, an account of the latest round in a long-standing snooker grudge match between two of Britain's best known novelists.
Especially as it is told by the protagonists themselves, each giving his own gloss on their titanic duel.
Their paths first crossed some twenty years ago when a mutual friend, the poet Craig Raine, introduced they to one another in the Blackfriar pub off Fleet Street.
Julian Barnes (pictured left) was then on the staff of the Oxford English Dictionary Supplement , and Martin Amis worked for the Times Literary Supplement .
When Amis became literary editor of the New Statesman , he appointed Barnes his deputy.
And the snooker duel got underway in earnest.
You could have no clue of their passion for snooker — bad snooker, at that — from the information they allow you on their book jackets.
Both writers belong to the minimalist school.
The fly-leaf biography in Barnes's latest novel,Talking It Over (Jonathan Cape) tells you that ‘Julian Barnes was born in Leicester in 1946.
His work has been translated into more than twenty languages.’
That's it, though he doesn't go as far as refusing to let you see his picture.
But no mention of snooker, certainly.
Nor, for that matter, of other building blocks in his character — his collection of Flaubertiana, his love of cooking, his marriage to leading literary agent Pat Kavanagh.
Compared to Martin Amis, though, Barnes is positively garrulous.
The new Amis,Times Arrow (Jonathan Cape), is a story — told backwards — about a German doctor who worked in Auschwitz.
There are no biographical notes about the author on the bookjacket at all.
There is a fashionable picture, but not a single word.
Not even the year in which he was born, the sort of information even gravestones give away.
I know authors say they prefer to let their work speak for them, but I hardly think it would harm the integrity of the book to know a little something about the man, such as that he is forty-two, married to American academic Antonia Phillips, with two children, Louis and Jacob, and that he has what he calls a ‘middle-aged obsession’ with competitive games, particularly tennis.
Now, at least, fans of both novelists can learn of their passionate clashes over the green baize.
I venture to suggest you are more likely to turn to the books of both authors after reading their contributions in Esquire.
The writing is revealing and engaging and, by disclosing something of their characters, their books become more attractive and approachable.
My favourite to date,Money by Amis and Flaubert's Parrot by Barnes.
After the snooker, of course.
THOMAS KENEALLY reveals an unexpected love of Rugby League in ‘The Other Code’, page 72.
Bought up Catholic Irish in New South Wales, he spent six years in a seminary before concluding he did not want to be a priest.
His moral dilemmas now appear in novels such as Schindler's Ark , his 1982 Booker prizewinner.
RICHARD NEVILLE — he of Oz fame — one spent a crazy summer with the actor and comedian Robin Williams.
His memoir of those days on page 138, sheds light on the star of Good Morning Vietnam and Dead Poets' Society before he was claimed by fame and fortune.
JANINE DI GIOVANNI — specializes in profiles of such difficult subjects as Imelda Marcos and Daniel Ortega.
So writing about photographer David Bailey in ‘the Life and Loves of David Bailey’, page 56, was relatively straightforward.
American-born and London-based, di Giovanni is currently writing a book on the Palestinian Intifada uprising, to be published in 1992.
NOAH RICHLER returned to his native Montreal to research the events he portrays so vividly in ‘The Sex War Killings’ on page 96 (a radio version of which will be broadcast on Radio 4 on December 1).
Once briefly a prospector on the Yukon, he is now a BBC radio producer, fitting in an extensive travelling when he can.
Letters
THE SOUND AND THE FURY
Letters to the editor should be sent with your address and daytime telephone number to: The Sound and the Fury, Esquire,.
Letters may be edited for length and clarity
Inspired mix
I BOUGHT the September issue primarily for the Maradona story (‘The Shame of Argentina’) which I much enjoyed.
I have been waiting a long time for a British magazine to offer intelligent coverage of mainstream sport in a way that Sports Illustrated , among others in America, seems to do effortlessly.
The British men's magazine market seems never to have outgrown its tedious fascination with fast boats and faster cars.
Colm Toibin's piece will be a hard act to follow but I suspect you are up to it.
I'd also like to congratulate you on the exceptional photographs in the Stephen Hawking article which were both honest and deeply moving.
A magazine with the vision to run these two very different pieces in the same issue, in the knowledge that they could both appeal to the same reader, deserves applause.
I WAS EXTREMELY moved by Charles Fox's superb article on Stephen Hawking (‘Stephen Hawking, Superstar’), but at the same time it left me feeling uneasy.
Was it so much better than anything else I've read on Hawking because it was written with the sensitivity and understanding of someone suffering from a disability in some ways similar to his?
I think the answer is yes, which leads to a depressing conclusion, and not just about disability.
I have spent many hours of my life arguing that it is not necessary to have been in prison to write convincingly about prison conditions, not to be poor to declaim on the evils of poverty, nor black to describe racial discrimination.
Fox's example has made me think again.
I hope this doesn't mean that too many newspaper and magazine editors will be tempted to try to ‘match’ subject and writer according to mutual disadvantages.
essex man
I HAVE JUST bought Esquire for the first time.
Your piece ‘Romford Days, Hollywood Nights’ was brilliant.
I was in hysterics.
I didn't think prats like Paul actually existed, let alone were willing to share their prattishness with Esquire and all who read it.
He's like a character from Viz .
As for his dress sense…the photos say it all.
I only wish I could have been with Mr Grant when he researched the feature.
If he ever decides to do an article on Sharon and Tracey's big night out, I'd love to help.
Once again, thanks for the best laugh I've had since my friend Daniel fell out of a transit van I was driving when I unexpectedly chucked a right.
ESSEX IS NOT all Basildon and Southend, Ford Escorts and Tequila Slammers.
Why not talk about the wonderful coastline, the lovely villages and the many excellent restaurants in the region?
I would have expected Esquire to be a little more imaginative than to jump on the anti-Essex bandwagon and to realize that you don't have to be brainless to live in Braintree.
food for thought
SO PETE HAMILL'S reached the top (‘Victims Are Us’, Letter from New York).
He's beaten the system.
He's side-stepped the potholes of adversity.
He's become a success all by himself.
And guess what he's doing now that he's made it?
He's looking down on us all?
Today, it seems that the only cogent ideology in our society is an obsessive focus on the individual.
Hamill neatly subverts this self-focus into yet another problem created by those who can't, and never can, make it.
He coins the term ‘victimism’ to label a community's groans of discontent at a society that endlessly places the individual ahead of all else.
For Hamill, it's your fault that you're a failure, so don't dare blame anyone else.
After all, it's you that's black and it's you that's gay.
Yes, there are times we should cut the crap and get on with the ‘real’ issues of starvation and disease, but to dismiss all problems of prejudice and inequality as whining self-pity is callous beyond belief.
I HAVE APPRECIATED Matthew Fort's delicious much-more-than-food columns in past issues, but none as much as his informative piece on oysters (‘Dinners with Walruses’, The Seasoned Cook).
Oyster fans may also like to know that the oyster is transsexual and self generating, changing sex at will several times within one season.
Freed from the inconvenience of locating a partner with whom to mate, an oyster first spouts out white spat ripe eggs, then spills milt — to create a progeny of rare independence.
O to be as organized as the oyster.
brains wanted
I THOUGH Esquire's disastrous date with Kylie Minogue was the funniest in the series.
May I hope, however, that some of your magazine's future escorts might be of a slightly higher intellectual calibre?
Or perhaps they would have the sense to be washing their hair when Esquire phones to ask them out.
INLAND REVENUE ‘Goodbye dear — have mercy’
The writer of the best letter each month will receive a Waterman Man 100 gold-nibbed pen
Encounters with Britain by Lee Eisenberg
LAUNCHING THROUGH THE APOCALYPSE
A hearty hail and fond farewell from Esquire's founding editor in chief
One year ago, my wife and I packed up our young son, double-locked the door and moved from New York to London.
Some people thought we were fortunate, others thought we were cursed.
It depended on which side of the Atlantic they were on.
Old friends in New York couldn't believe our good luck.
They envied us our escape — if it was only for a year — from that city's dread social and financial crises.
To them, the idea of life in London promised civility, culture and freedom from the fear of drugs, crime and random violence.
New friends in London, on the other hand, couldn't believe that we had actually volunteered for hardship duty in Britain.
These people held that life in America — even in the wormy Big Apple — was vibrant, exciting and forward-looking.
The best thing they could say about London was, ‘you should have been here ten years ago’.
Everybody, of course, was right.
What they believed had everything to do with where they weren't.
What a visiting Londoner sees as the soaring grandeur of New York, a fed-up New Yorker sees as sunlight deprivation.
What a disenchanted Briton sees as Britain's provincialism, a rootless American sees as respect for the past.
Go figure.
For my part, I pestered, lobbied and cajoled to get my bosses to send me over here.
This should not suggest that my wife and I are cut from the American kind of Anglophilic chintz that may of you like to poke fun at.
(Which isn't to say there aren't other reasons.)
We have always lived quite happily without shooting prints on our walls.
We don't own a picnic hamper.
What decent furniture we possess is Italian, not English.
Still, when the chance arose to come to London, we pounced on it.
We were eager to spend extended time in a city we had always enjoyed.
And I was thrilled and honoured to get the chance to help launch this magazine.
We must have wanted to come here: to do so, I gave up a most coveted job, that of editor in chief of American Esquire.
And my wife and I endured weeks of farewell parties with relatives and friends.
We never, not for an instant, regretted our decision to come to Britain.
In fact, as we now make plans to go home, we are sad at the thought of leaving this country and the people we've met.
The year will be remembered as one of the best times we ever had.
And also one of the toughest.
We knew we were moving abroad at an interesting time in world history, but we didn't realize we'd get to watch the apocalypse from here.
The year started with a bang and ended with an even bigger bang.
Within weeks of our arrival, Margaret Thatcher fell from power.
Within weeks of our departure, Mikhail Gorbachev and the Soviet Union fell apart.
The event in between were likewise not for the faint of heart.
It was Esquire's dubious achievement to be born into an economy that has been unkind to all, but one in which the advertising business has been particularly hard-pressed.
Moreover, Esquire's February launch coincided with the darkest hours of the Gulf War.
It was clear to us from the beginning that 1991 would not be a very good year to launch anything — from magazines to Scuds.
Hello, we must be going: What can you say about a year that began with the end of Maggie and ended with the demise of Gorby?
And if all that wasn't reason enough to  stay in bed in the morning, it proceeded to snow on our parade: Esquire's opening festivities were blanketed by the worst storm to hit London since 1963.
We got the message: somebody up there wasn't an Esquire reader.
At least not yet.
But the magazine brushed itself off and continued on its way.
With eight issues under our belt, we today look back at some dumb mistakes.
But we also seen buoyant magazine that has gotten better every month, a title which is building a legacy in Britain that will last.
How could it be otherwise — when you have the likes of Amis, Barnes, Bragg, Keneally, Rushdie, among others, all in the same issue?
FOUR YEARS AGO in Britain, there was really no such thing as a monthly, general-interest magazine for men.
And most people in the business thought that there never would be.
Months ago, when I first entertained questions about the prospective Esquire, everybody wanted to know why we believed a sufficient number of men in Britain were likely to buy such a magazine.
I spent hours trying to answer that query — and I'm pleased to say that experience has proved that we weren't entirely loony.
Today, the combined circulation of Esquire and its worthy competitors is 250,000 — and growing steadily.
Nobody any more asks us to explain why we exist.
The fact is, beneath all the nonsense about the so-called ‘new man’, men and the male culture have changed dramatically over the past few decades.
Conversations I've had with countless men in Britain have convinced me of it.
A great many of them, certainly those who are the prime candidates to read our magazine, are strikingly different as fathers than their fathers; they're also different lovers, husbands, bosses and sons.
In the past decade, throughout the Thatcher years, millions of men came of age.
They are now in their thirties and forties.
Most of these men, whatever their politics, grew not only richer in the 1980s, they grew smarter.
They took on a great many new responsibilities.
They may have started, or are about to start a family.
As a result, they have become more concerned not only about their children's educational well-being, but about their own cultural bearings as well.
They've come to understand that neither they, nor Britain, are islands — that their personal and national destiny are bound up not just with Europe, but with an ever-tightening world community.
They've become acutely aware that to succeed they need to be more than just well-informed, they need to be well-read in the widest sense.
And while I am not so naive as to thing that they have the time or the motivation to sample every title on the Whitbread short list, a good number of these men think they ought to.
What a magazine like ours can provide is an informed and thorough reading of the current culture.
Esquire is a prism through which is refracted a spectrum of good writing, be it the latest work of an established voice, or the emerging voice of a master in the market.
As for their outer selves, the differences between these men and past generations are also apparent.
These men feel more relaxed about their clothes than their fathers did.
They know their way around a wine list.
They cook without having to explain or apologize.
They still want value for their money — but they also expect quality and style.
For all these reasons and more, a magazine like Esquire can take a rightful and relevant place in their lives.
Do they have time for a monthly general-interest magazine?
No.
They make time for it.
Does the magazine replace their morning newspapers?
No.
It informs and entertains them in a more free-form, less habitual way, and on numerous occasions throughout their busy months.
THERE ARE SO many people who helped to make this time special that I am sorry not to be able to mention them all by name.
It would, however, like to thank Terry Mansfield, National Magazine's managing director.
Without his confidence in the title, Esquire would never have happened.
And without that, I would have never gotten to live the adventure of the past twelve months.
Terry has been a caring and invaluable friend.
The same applies to my sidekicks from Day One, editor Alex Finer, and Jamie Bill, our publisher.
It will be in their capable hands and (need I add?)
British hands that the magazine will continue to grow and prosper.
As for the rest of the staff, I will miss each one of the people who served to get this magazine on its feet.
And I want to thank those writers with whom solid friendships were formed: Melvyn Bragg, Gordon Burn, Jeremy Paxman, Michael Walsh, Jay Rayner, Colm Toibin and Grub Smith, among others.
May I wish every one of you the very best success in your endeavours from here.
But please — one word of advice: Try not to make the magazine too American.
‘Damn!
The Germans have grabbed all the wheelchairs again!’
Man At His Best
THE ESQUIRE GUIDE TO QUALITY AND STYLE
Best Man DAVID LEVEAUX
Rising star of the RSC
I'M NOT CONSCIOUS of having a method,’ says David Leveaux.
‘The thing about directing is that it depends on how you read a play.
Three directors can look at the same page of text and be reading three different pieces.’
At thirty-three, Leveaux is the second-youngest director at the RSC.
His route into the theatre was fairly typical, ‘I read English and Drama at Manchester University, along with Rik Mayall and Ben Elton.’
Work as a director and actor in the London fringe preceded a much acclaimed production of Eugene  O'Neills' A Moon for the Misbegotten in 1983.
This was followed by productions in both New York and East Berlin.
Returning to Britain in 1990, Leveaux directed Pinter's Betrayal .
His Romeo and Juliet is in rep at the RSC.
‘I try to suggest, to an actor, something in the scene other than what appears to make it move on the surface.’
Offstage Leveaux has mixed feelings about the financial crisis currently affecting the British stage: ‘The foundations of antagonism towards the arts and education have been laid very firmly.
But there is still a fantastic amount of vitality and will in the theatre.’
And the future?
‘I hope to be in the theatre somewhere if I can find one that will have me.’
Seasoned Cook BRING BACK HANGING Beef at its best is well hung, marbled with fat and very Scottish
BELOW THE STATELY salons of the Savoy Hotel there are innumerable chambers full of mysterious things that only grand hotels have any use for.
And one is full of meat, tons of the stuff — ribs of beef and saddles of lamb, sitting there in cool silence, waiting their turn upon the table.
The saddles are neat and trim, and stay there for a week to ten days.
The ribs of beef are majestic outcroppings of meat — meat-eaters' meat, almost all of it Scottish Aberdeen Angus.
The fat is the creamy foam of the grass-fed beast.
None of the washed-out white or saffron yellow of the grain- or maize-fed animal here.
The meat is marbled by a thick tracery of finer fat.
The flesh itself ranges from the blood red of the arriviste joint to the dull browny-purple bloom of those that have been there for the full three weeks.
The joint is in this condition when it is finally judged ready for the table.
A number of changes will have occurred: it will have lost ten to fifteen per cent of its weight through loss of water; the cell structures in the meat will have broken down; the proteins will have changed into individual amino acids (developing the flavour); the muscle filaments — yes, the noble carcass is no more than a collection of muscles, bone and fat — will have broken down a bit and become more tender.
In other words, the beef will be well hung and ready for the Savoy table.
EXPERT OPINION Gary Hollyhead, head chef at Sutherlands Restaurant, prefers his beef to have been hung for three weeks, for maximum tenderness and the best flavour.
‘The home chef's downfall is choosing bright red, over-fresh cuts which will usually turn out to be tough.
Remember to cook beef from room temperature or the blood and the flavour will flood out of the meat.’
It is lamentable that few butchers have the storage or the cash to put away half a hundredweight of potential turnover, watch it shrink by ten to fifteen per cent and charge the prices needed to make it all worthwhile.
Nor are we likely to find it in our cost-conscious supermarkets.
Beef, of whatever provenance, tastes better the larger the joint and with the bone in.
Cooking and eating it is a grand undertaking.
At a potential £5.50 per pound, so it should be.
never trifle with a truffle This month's culinary treat is tuber magnatum , or the Italian white truffle.
Price will depend on the quality and quantity of the harvest, but expect to pay more than last year's £1,200 per kilogram.
Keep them in an airtight plastic container with arborio rice or fresh eggs, to which the smelly truffle will impart its heady flavour.
The best way to enjoy Italian white truffles is to shave them on to hot, simple food — risotto, taglioni or fresh pasta.
Or, even easier, scramble some eggs and grate some of the heavenly fungus over the top.
All right, if you really want to feed the five thousand, preheat your oven to gas mark 7, 220°C/425°F or more.
Meanwhile, dust the meaty bit of the joint with dry mustard, flour and pepper, no salt until cooking is finished, and bung it in.
After twenty minutes or so, turn the oven down to gas mark 4, 180°C/325°F and roast for a further twenty minutes per pound.
There appears to be no method more reliable to check the degree of redness, pinkness or greyness that you desire then sticking in your knife into the thickest point of the meat.
Judge the issue by the colour of the juices that run out: the bloodier, the less well done, the clearer, the better done.
Next, turn the oven off, leave the door ajar and let your joint rest for at least forty minutes, if not longer.
You will be astonished at how much difference this will make to the tenderness and texture of the carved item.
If you can't be bothered with any of this palaver, buy a whole fillet of beef.
Allow between one and a half and two inches per person.
You want a piece with quite a bit of fat marbling the inside.
Forget what the dieticians say.
Pop it into your preheated oven, gas mark 8, 230°C/450°F, for twelve minutes per pound, basting it occasionally with a mixture of Madeira and red wine mixed in the proportions of two to one.
Then let it rest for twenty to thirty minutes.
You can brown it in hot fat beforehand if you really want to.
Then, when the guests are drumming their knives and forks on the table with impatience, I take out my fillet and slice it into the appropriate chunks.
The, and here's the clever bit, I roll each chunk in chopped fresh herbs, usually parsley, thyme and a little tarragon so that the outside edge looks as if it has moss growing on it.
It is so pretty that you don't need a sauce, which would kill the taste of the herbs anyway.
Everyone thinks you're damn clever.
And it's about the easiest piece of cooking you're ever likely to do.
The Liquid Arts GRAPES FOR GROWN-UPS Armagnac is challenging cognac as the singular delight of the brandy world
WATCHING JOHN McEnroe rant at a line judge recently, I was reminded why I like drinking Armagnac.
Armagnac, rather like SuperBrat, is appealing because of its rough edges, its unpredictability.
If Stefan Edberg is your kind of tennis player, stick to cognac.
If you want something with a bit more bite, go for armagnac.
The basic difference between France's two great grape brandies is the method of distillation.
Cognac is distilled twice, most armagnac once.
Otherwise, they are made from similar grapes, matured in the same sort of oak barrels and aged for just as long before release.
So why is cognac more expensive?
What makes cognac the international high-flyer, and armagnac the spotty, stay-at-home plodder?
The answer is several centuries of clever marketing.
Cognac is associated with smooth sophisticates, while armagnac is considered a peasant's tipple.
With the exception of brands like Janneau and Sempé, armagnac is rarely seen in duty-free lounges or glitzy cocktail bars.
This state of affairs may not last.
Three armagnac houses have been taken over by cognac firms, and double distillation (méthode Charentaise ) has begun to infiltrate the region.
There is much debate about this in the bars of Condom, the historic centre of armagnac production.
Some say the character of armagnac is under threat, others point out that double distillation actually predates single, continuous distillation in the area.
Single distillation took over because it's cheaper, quicker and more efficient, so when the authorities established appellation contrôlée for the brandy in 1935, they outlawed double distillation.
In 1972, it was allowed back into the region, like some disgraced aristocrat returning from exile.
Single distillation gives you a basic spirit which is lower in alcohol (between fifty-two and seventy-two per cent) but higher in ethers, esters and oils — the produits de queue , or tails.
These are faults — which is where John McEnroe comes in — that are smoothed out by a second distillation.
The result may be a brandy that's easier to drink when young, which is why some distillers have switched camps, but it lacks the raw earthy bite of great armagnac.
The best armagnacs are those that are distilled within days of the harvest, when there are still fermentation yeasts held in suspension in the wine.
The permitted varieties are a rum lot — Mauzac, Blanquette, Meslier, Picpoul, Clairette, Jurançon, Folle Blanche, Ugni Blanc, Colombard and Baco 22a, the only hybrid vine permitted for appellation contrôlée production in France.
The key to all of these peculiar grapes is their lack of personality.
They are as boring as a civil servants' convention, but for armagnac, they are ideal.
If you distilled something more interesting — a Riesling or a Sauvignon Blanc — it would make dreadful brandy.
Of the two main regions, Bas Armagnac produces more elegant spirits, whereas Ténarèze, with its heavy, chalky clay soil, tends to make hefty brandies that take as long as thirty years to show their true potential.
The full personality of these brandies is expressed by single distillation — full, spicy and packed with flavours of plum, vanilla and chocolate.
A really great armagnac, whether it be from Janneau, De Maillac or Château de Laubade, should stop you in your tracks.
Forget the smooth, caramelized blandishments of cognac.
This is a drink for people with real taste.
good gobble If you've had enough of lime-topped lager, why not try turkey-flavoured crisps?
Wild Turkey is giving away a free packet of turkey-flavoured crisps with every shot of the drink ordered.
Punters take note: the flavour seems to bear more similarity to yeast extract than to Bernard Matthews's feathered friends.
new classics
Oz Clarke's latest book,New Classic Wines (Mitchell Beazley, £19.99), stands apart from the usual breathless wine hagiographies and guides.
It's a provocative read which puts forward the hypothesis that there is a revolution taking place in the wine world.
Clarke argues that we are experiencing a golden age in which the newer wine-producing nations like America, Australia and New Zealand (and even parts of Europe) are giving us vintages of truly great quality that complement the traditional wines of Europe.
Focusing on both wines and wine-growers, this is a fascinating and far-sighted look at the modern world of wine.
The Outer Man FINGER TIPS Don't worry, having a manicure won't affect your manhood
OUR HANDS ARE our life.
In them our future lies.
We eat, work and play with our hands and status can be determined by the rings we wear on them.
Yet they are often neglected.
Other than the face, hands are the most visible part of one's body and invariably speak volumes about a person.
My particular concern is the very ends of the fingers — or, the nails.
Although the first three letters in the word manicure are MAN, the percentage of men who regularly submit to this soothing form of therapy can be counted on the fingers of one (perfectly manicured) hand.
For men, manicure has often been associated with slightly dubious characters.
Movies about in which Chicago gangsters, dressed in sharply striped suits, sit in barber's shops puffing cigars with a moll on a stool fiddling around with their fingers.
Lather on the face, a hot towel and a stomach full of bullets as a final shock therapy, completes the picture.
However, it is remarkable how many people, who are fastidious about personal hygiene and appearance, let themselves down by not bothering about their nails.
And please don't get me wrong.
I'm not just talking about dirty nails — which is already unforgivable — but chewed, picked and bitten nails which don't do you or your hands any favours.
A manicure is a skilled service in which you nails are cut and filed to the desired shape.
A cuticle cream is then applied and the fingers immersed in a bowl of warm water.
This allowed the cuticles, which protect the nail bed from infection, to soften.
They can be unsightly if left unchecked, but must always be treated with care.
Having been soaked, the cuticles are soft enough for the manicurist, using an orange stick, to gently push them back.
Incidentally, no manicurist worth his or her salt would cut cuticles with a pair of scissors, unless they were severely overgrown, as this can cause infection.
If your manicurist gets scissors out, immediately head for the door.
Some manicurists will then buff the nail with a chamois pad to impart a sheen on the finished item.
In the United States a clear coat of nail polish will be applied which, I think, is very Chicago G and not on.
Finally, your hands are massaged with hand cream.
Et voilà .
Ten perfectly shaped nails with gleaming white edges.
Most good men's hairdressers provide manicures, as do the top hotels, and on average they take from thirty to forty-five minutes.
If you cannot get to a manicurist, the following hints will help you achieve a salon finish for yourself at home.
First, use nail clippers rather than scissors to cut the mails.
When filing, use a disposable emery board as opposed to a metal file.
Do not ‘saw’ at the nails, but file in one direction at a time.
The best time to push the cuticles back is after a hot bath or shower when they are soft.
Use the edge of a towel to gently, but firmly, push the cuticle back.
Some good hand products to use are Crème Vitarome à  l'Avocat and Arom-essence Néroli Oil by Decleor, Develop 10 Hand Cream and Vaseline Intensive Care Lotion.
Apart from the visible benefits to your hands, and the relaxation your whole body will enjoy, a manicure is an effective way to stop biting your nails.
If you take good care of your nails, a monthly manicure would be sufficient.
A small price to pay, after all, for a major improvement.
braun and brain For the man who has achieved all he desires — except the perfect shave — here is the Flex Control 4525 from Braun (£104.99, rrp).
This state-of-the-art shaver has three positions to give you the perfect shave and a trimmer for those with sideburns and/or moustache.
skin up The Clinique Skin Survival Kit is handy for the gym, for travelling or just for helping you to keep the bathroom tidy.
Included is Lip Block, All-weather Aloe Rub, 19 SPF, Scruffing Lotion 2½, Postshave Healer and even adhesive bandages.
eternally yours
For a tired, lifeless skin, Calvin Klein has produced a new Eternity for Men skin-care range, which includes Moisturizing Shave Foam, Bath & Shower Gel, Bath Soap, Deodorant Stick, Body Talc and Body Moisturizer.
Motoring
THE CAR THAT WOULDN'T SQUEAL
The noiseless, executive-class Fiat Croma Turbo survives a thrashing
TIM ASHTON HAD just had an advertising executive's lunch 1991 style: a starter and a Perrier at l'Escargot.
The New Realism at work.
Ashton, twenty-nine, is an art director at the young and noisy agency Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury and, with his copywriting partner, Naresh Ramchandant, creator of the ‘Me ears are alight’ Maxell tape campaign that won most of the advertising awards last year, including the Grand Prix at Cannes.
He followed this with controversial Fuji commercials which used to social issues of racism and mental handicap to sell camera film.
Despite the current depressed state of the advertising industry, Ashton receives a regular stream of calls from headhunters.
His employers, confident of his loyalty, tell him that he should always go to lunch to see what the rivals are offering.
Even if it's just a starter and a Perrier.
The new Fiat Croma Turbo sits at the peak of the Italian manufacturer's range at £19, 249.
It is finished in black leather, has an ABS breaking system and a 158 bhp engine that shifts it from 0–62 mph in 7.7 seconds, and from there to a top speed of 134 mph.
It has, as they say, ‘all the toys’, and is Fiat's executive-class contender in a field in which they have consistently failed to shine to date.
Putting two and two together — car and ad man — was, unfortunately, not to prove a match made in heaven.
Ashton spent his first fifteen minutes behind the wheel blasting his way out of the London rush hour to the south-east, ‘trying to find the exhaust note’.
He failed to discover one, despite extensive use of his right foot — the car being too refined to bark like an Alfa or fart like a Kawasaki.
Ashton: ‘It's smooth, quite luxurious, hang your Armani jacket in the back’
It soon emerged that performance was high on Ashton's list of priorities as indicated by his having taken a series of lessons in Formula Fords at Brand's Hatch.
‘It's redlining it at 6,000,’ he said, referring to the straining Tachometer, while firing down a bus lane in first gear at about forty.
‘It's a chauffeur's car really: smooth, quite luxurious, hang your Armani jacket in the back.
Like one of those European taxis that you get picked up in at the airport in Paris.’
In the absence of an exhaust note, Ashton, goes in search of some ‘chirp’ from the tyres.
But, despite throwing the machine round some corners behind the Old Kent Road, there is no chirp to be heard.
Finally, during a particularly violent manoeuvre on a slip road to the M20, there was a plaintive groan from the engine.
‘Ah,’ said Ashton, ‘it does have an exhaust note after all.’
His next tack was to try to catch the ABS system out.
By now we were careering round some Kentish country lanes near Swanley.
In second gear at around sixty-five, he started aiming for puddles and loose pebbles on the road, then dropping the anchors, hoping to produce a skid.
But the Croma was having none of it.
‘This ABS thing fascinates me You just can't get it to skid, can you?
It doesn't like being driven fast.
The speed it has is for motorway shunting.
One of those dashboard light will flash up ‘change driver’ in a minute.
It doesn't like me.
On the way back to London, Ashton was getting philosophical and strategic in his thinking.
Why hadn't his own agency, HHCL, yet managed to net a car account?
‘Well it's just a matter of time.
They're all really tied up.
The relationship between agency and client demands loyalty and long-term development.
But we'll get one.
I'd love to have a Peugeot.’
A little probing reveals that Ashton once owned a Fiat of his own in his art-school days.
‘It was a 128 Sports,’ he admits, ‘which proudly announced its 70 hp on a flash down the side.
It had rust like a malignant cyst.
It kept promising it was going to explode, and then one morning I came out of the house it was just lying there like a dinosaur hulk.’
Fiat had a certain notoriety for rust problems, so the Croma is almost fully galvanized with zinc.
With the knowledge that it will last, the Croma might be an intriguing second-hand buy — after a year its value will have virtually halved, so steep is its rate of depreciation.
Ashton, however, has his eyes on other vehicles.
If he ever offers you a life, decline.
Classics THE SUIT The right suit will be lightweight, roomy and navy blue
TO WEAR double-or-single-breasted — that is the question.
Whichever you choose, you may believe you are responding to current fashion trends, but, in fact, both styles boast a long ancestry.
However clever I may be, I cannot really ‘design’ a man's suit.
History has already done that for me and the positioning of those buttons on your jacket indicate its historic pedigree.
Suits are regularly described as ‘classic’, a word perhaps too often employed by people who are afraid of change.
The suit has been around longer than 120 years.
Originally a ‘set’ of coat (the correct term for a jacket), trousers and vest (a waistcoat), it first appeared in about 1670.
Initially middleclass dress, it was adopted by the nobility and the coat was cut to be suitable for riding.
For comfort, the coat was given a distinct curve into the waist — a feature which remains a trademark of all English jackets.
Throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the suit evolved into styles which survive, if at all, only as formal dress — the evening tailcoat now worn with white tie, the morning coat often used at formal weddings, and the rarely seen frock coat.
The origins of today's single-breasted lounge suit came from another sporting garment, the Deeside coat, originally styled for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert's shooting trips in Scotland.
Essentially a single-breasted riding coat with the tails removed and the fronts considerably shortened, it retained its pronounced waist.
HARDY AMIES has been based in Savile Row since 1946.
A leading authority on menswear, he is still, at 82, a keen tennis player.
Each month Amies will cast an expert eye over the classic gentleman's wardrobe exclusively for Esquire
The Deeside buttoned right up to the neck and was finished with a neat ‘ghillie’ collar.
The Prince of Wales, later King Edward VII, instructed his tailor to turn it down, so forming a collar and ‘revers’ or lapels.
The neck button disappeared — but not the buttonhole — and today a wedding boutonnière reminds us of the sporting ancestry of the coat.
The history of the double-breasted suit is not as clear.
The doubled-breasted revers of today are the high buttonings of the riding coat turned down and opened permanently.
Another source of inspiration was the naval reefer jacket of the late nineteenth century.
Double-breasted to be fastened up to the collar, or left open, the reefer quickly ceased to be only navy blue and became a double-breasted tweed ‘casual’ coat, a direct ancestor o f the modern double-breasted suit.
To be correct, the double-breasted coat must have six buttons — two placed at the waist, two below and two above.
The top pair never fastens, are known as dress buttons.
For the last ten years interest in the double-breasted suit has been enthusiastically revived, but now the single-breasted has its champions again.
The truly classic coat has three buttons, the centre button must be exactly at the waistline and is the only one to be fastened.
The line of the coat is thus broken casually at the waist, and an air of nonchalance — and, hopefully, elegance — is achieved.
In my view, today's look for jackets is bigger; shoulders are wide but unaggressively padded.
Nowhere should the coat be tight, so it is better to buy a size too large rather than too small.
Look for a jacket that has no vents.
The suit should be lightweight — whether winter or summer (and I salute Paul Smith and the great Armani for this).
Finally, do not concern yourself with patterned fabrics.
You always look good in navy blue.
Whether the suit is for business, or wear the jacket as a blazer with khaki-coloured cotton trousers, or as a dressier suit, you will look and feel correct, as thousands of men have done before you.
a question of style: what was the last item of clothing you bought?
GEORGE O'DOWD A pinstripe single-breasted jacket and a pair of trousers, tracksuit style in an Indian print both from Gaultier in Paris.
I liked the idea of mixing the print with pinstripes
KEN LIVINGSTONE A pair of baggy, cotton-twill trousers with turn-ups, in a holiday resort south of Boulogne.
I wear them most of the time, otherwise I'd arrested for indecent exposure
DOUGLAS ADAMS A pair of jeans, from The Gap, Cambridge, Mass, USA.
As I'm six and a half feet tall, it's difficult to get jeans to fit me.
I wear them a lot.
I change out of my pyjamas into them to write
Country Matters AN APPLE A DAY…
Gallstones?
Arthritis?
Aches and pains?
A tankard of cider will do you good
THERE IS A LIGHT popping out of the holes where the tiles have slipped on the roof of the Big Barn nowadays.
The occasional burst of singing wafts up through the yellow leaves, mixed with the mouldy astringent smell of rotting apples.
Because it is autumn again, and the frosts have arrived, they are knocking up a spot of cider.
The kit has changed very little over the past hundred years.
The apples are pulped by the scratting mill, a giant mincing machine attached by a belt to the drive wheel of a Lister single-cylinder stationary engine, cooled by a little pond in the recess provided in the top of its cylinder block.
At the centre of the barn is the press, its iron worm-gears cramped down onto the cheeses, the bog horsehair bags of apple pulp that only Boy Nigel knows how to fold.
Life's good for Sam Llewellyn down in cider country
This being Dorset, the motive power for the press is supplied by a corporal and three squaddies from Bovingdon Camp.
One is now face down in the corner, snoring on a pile of old cheese cloths.
The rest are hauling at the crowbars that wind down the press, hobnails gritting on the frosty concrete.
The juice spills off the press's spout in a clear golden stream, into the tub, up the bilge pump, down the garden hose and into the old sherry barrels where the yeasts get to work, turning the sugars into alcohol.
The Boy Nigel is supervising, sitting on a kitchen chair clutching a blue Victorian ciderhouse mug, china, so as not to appall the customers with the sight of this and that lurking in the golden brew.
He is drinking slowly, because it will be a long night, and rough cider usually comes out at about eight per cent alcohol, though nobody is measuring.
The cider belt runs from Hampshire through Dorset, Devon and Somerset, up Gloucestershire and through Worcestershire and the Welsh Marches.
About now the small, tannic apples from which cider is made — ancient varieties like Brownsnouts, Kingston Blacks and Sweet Coppins — are coming up by the lorry load, shaken off the trees in the orchards by the men with long hooked poles.
And in barns at the back of yards watered by stagnant ponds, the lights burn into the night, and the driving engines clatter like African drums.
At farmhouse level, cider is hard stuff to control, in the barrel or in the head.
Rogue yeasts can reduce a year's output to paint stripper, and a musty barrel can made a hundred gallons of evil-smelling vinegar overnight.
Additives are out, except for orange squash to improve body, colour and sweetness.
Farmhouse cidermakers can make 1,500 gallons before they start paying exercise duty, so most makers stop short of this figure, or anyway bury excess barrels discreetly in the orchard.
Larger enterprises, which need a standard product, use plenty of additives.
In fact, purists claim the big companies use so many the end result is not cider at all.
The original juice may be from cider apples, but it is just as likely to be imported eating apple juice concentrate.
Sugar is added.
Natural yeasts are killed with chemicals, and a more predictable yeast added.
The resulting mixture is fermented until it is twelve percent alcohol, then watered down, filtered to remove cloudiness, dyed and carbonated.
One company even adds a clouding agent.
Between the farmhouse mob and the purveyors of alcoholic lemonade is a hinterland inhabited by giants such as Dixie of Bristol, who used to travel West Country fairs selling his wares from a thatched Ford Transit van; and Dunkertons which produces subtle, bright and preservative-free ciders that even the Boy Nigel admits are like the real thing, only better.
But there will always be a hard core, roaring down a bottomless lane in an A70 pick-up with no piston rings and ninety degrees of play in the steering, white cricket cap pulled down over watering eyes, sheepdog barking its head off as it rushes to and fro in the cargo department.
The whole works trail the sourish, musty reek of apples.
The driver drinks two gallons a day of a fluid that dissolves gallstones, cures arthritis, and can eat through the cylinder head of a Land Rover in four minutes flat.
Life, he claims, is wonderful.
And according to The Boy Nigel down in the yard, he is probably right.
The Good Restaurant Guide ‘I've found one that hasn't gone bust!’
The Inner Man PUSH, PUSH AND PUSH OFF Put your feet up and pour yourself a brandy and soda — women want you out of the delivery room
A NASTY SCENE the other night after I refuse to put my hand on The Bump.
‘Oooh…look, it's moving again,’ she says.
‘Just put your hand down there.’
But the Total Recall video is showing Schwarzenegger being squitted by the stamping press.
Naturally I say, ‘Hang on a minute’, and when I turn round she is off in the kitchen banging saucepans about.
I can't see what the fuss is about.
I mean, I've put my hand on The Bump lots of times already, and all you can say really when it jiggles about is, ‘How nice’, and ‘Isn't that interesting’ and ‘Wonder if it's a boy or a girl?’
But apparently I have to feel The Bump three or four times a day or be found guilty of Not Being Involved as a Father, or worse still, of this darkly Freudian offence called Denial.
And there is no point denying that I suffer from Denial, because this means only that I am guilty of Deep Denial.
Part of the problem is that I've already been through all this pregnancy stuff with Wife Number One.
I've gawped solemnly at fuzzy ultrasound images, and pretended to recognize the head when the doctor pointed to it.
I've been to the natural childbirth classes in Muswell Hill, I've sat on sag-bags and chanted ‘Ommmmmm’ with the best of them.
I have fretted dutifully over rival buggy-designs at Mothercare, I've read my Michel Odent and I have mopped a sweating brow through two epic labours.
I was a New Man before New Men had capital letters, but I feel like an Old Man these days, and all I can think is that by the time this one is through university I'll be nearly sixty.
Birth of a Baby Back to the days of nurses and nurseries
The one thing I never did was cry in the delivery room.
I've got friends who are war correspondents and soldiers and rugger captains and they all wept buckets — if you believe what they tell you down the pub.
The most moving thing that ever happened to them, they say — but secretly I think it is all to do with stealing thunder from the women.
They may not have got their feet up there in the stirrups with the wife, but they did get through two boxes of Kleenex.
The fact is that men don't like childbirth much, because, unlike fixing the car or mowing the lawn, or even loading the dishwasher, there is no pivotal, directional role for us to take.
You just have to sit there and see what happens — and what happens is, on the whole, pretty gruesome: the sweat-plastered hair; the nightie up round the armpits; the chipped enamel bowl full of afterbirth — and all without the soft focus of a Pethedine injection.
Babies aren't very nice for the first couple of years of their lives either, though it is modern to say the opposite.
Mothers are flattered by the total dependency; but men, if they are honest, are usually just bored, sex-starved and sleep-famished.
My first one, Sarah, did nothing but eat all the time, and my second, Tom, simply slept.
Keep one end dry and the other end wet, my father advised me, and that was about the measure of it.
Both babies would smile stickily when they saw me over the edge of the cot, which was gratifying in a way, but I knew it was only because they were programmed that way, like public relations men.
Once they were about three, and talking properly, I started to like them, and now they are nine and five respectively I like them very much, though I notice their fascination with me seems to be dwindling.
They are quite interested in The Bump, though I suspect it is really to do with power broking — who is going to get the new bedroom, and who is going to choose the name when it's born.
Sarah favours Kylie at the moment, while Tom is keen on Michelangelo, which in a few years from now will probably mean a painter again rather than a Ninja Turtle.
It is vital never to grant them absolute rights over nomenclature, or you will end up with a child called Aspirin Muesli Harris as poor Tom was for the first week of his life, until it was overruled as being pagan by the Irish Catholic nurse.
The good news I hear from feminist friends is that it's becoming old hat these days to involve the father in childbirth.
For years, it was supposed to be crucial to bonding for baby to open its eyes on Mum and Dad in the first instants of life, which I always thought was a lot of toffee.
Now it has been decided that men, with all their brow-mopping and weeping, are simply invading the seminal female experience, which should really be carried out in a darkened sweat lodge with only women as company.
I suspect there is a degree of womanly shifting of goalposts here.
If the women really are changing the parturition rules for the second time in ten years, it is probably more to keep the men on the hop than anything else — just as black people keep changing the name you are allowed to call them in order to keep whitey on his toes.
But in any case I'm not complaining if it's back to the days of sitting downstairs with a brandy and soda while midwives rush about boiling water and collecting towels.
I shall have a fat Davidoff in my breast pocket and an old crony to slap me on the back.
A nurse will bring a white-wrapped bundle which I shall cursorily inspect for gender, then pack off to the nursery for six years.
If that's what the women want, then let them have it, and if anyone accuses me of ulterior motives such as laziness, squeamishness or Freudian anxieties about symbolic castration by infant sons — I deny it all.
Acquire
good sport
In the world of sport, high-performance function meets exemplary form.
Esquire selects ten winners by Amelia Dare
THESE GOGGLES demand a Caribbean holiday, offering full UV protection with an anti-fog polyseal. £5.95 from Ski & Surf at Harrods, Knightsbridge,
EACH END of this walking axe serves a purpose.
Pull yourself up the slope with the pick head and then keep your balance by sticking the other end into the ground.
£43.50 from Ellis Brigham,
JOCKEY SKULLS are suitable for a leisurely ride in the country and racing at Sandown Park.
£80 from Herbert Johnson,
SURGE THROUGH the water with these top of the range flippers.
The fully adjustable Mares Super Fins will suit both the holiday snorkeller and the serious scuba diver. £39.75 from Ski & Surf at Harrods,
A HANDMADE Lonsdale skipping rope is standard issue for boxers and will dramatically improve fitness and stamina — skipping for ten minutes is equivalent to jogging for half an hour.
£8.50 from   
THIS SPORTS watch was developed by the 1960s Olympic ski medallist Jean Vuarnet.
Waterproof down to fifty metres, it has a removable compass attachment.
It costs £850 and is available nationwide.
For local stockists call Gary Wong at Zen, Northumberland House,
IT TAKES 150 days to produce a Brooks saddle.
Designed by and for top cyclists, it provides a high level of comfort and durability but should be worn in before undertaking a long journey.
Buy one for £45 to celebrate their 125th anniversary.
List of local stockists available from Steven Quinn, Sturmey-Archer Limited,
THE GREGSON first aid system comes complete with idiot-proof instructions and is essential for all climbers and hill walkers.
It can also be rolled into a highly visible arm band.
Available by mail order for £22.75 (excluding p&p) from Richard Shepherd at Ellis Brigham,
MADE FROM first-class bridle hide, this gun case, lined with sheepskin, deserves a most special gun.
An exceptional shooting accessory that you'll want to pass on to future generations.
Around £700 from Holland & Holland,
THIS REPTILE-LIKE suit is the latest in motorbike safety.
Complete with supportive backbone and kidney protector, it is light and comfortable and should be worn under a jacket for maximum protection.
A few have even been spotted in nightclubs.
£118 from Mocheck,
Letter from Baghdad by Patrick Cockburn
WHO'S AFRAID OF SADDAM HUSSEIN?
As the Republican Guard tightens its grip, the Iraqis stand to lose a lot more than the war
‘My monthly salary would buy me just four bottles of Johnny Walker whisky on the black market,’ said Hatim, a professor of engineering at Baghdad University.
He was investigating means of leaving Iraq.
An advertisement had appeared on one of the university noticeboards saying that Benghazi University in Libya was looking for a lecturer in engineering.
Hatim immediately applied for the job but had since discovered that so had eleven out of fifteen professors in his department, and he was not hopeful of success.
His gloom was reinforced because the Lebanese embassy had just refused him a visa and the only two countries he thought he could get into were Jordan and Romania, neither of which were likely to offer him employment.
Meeting anybody in Baghdad these days involves listening to a hard-luck story, most of which is likely to be true.
Hatim's case is typical.
At first he had under-estimated the consequences of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, returning to Baghdad from Britain last October to see two post-graduate students through their exams.
By the time he realized that war was coming it was too late to get out.
The price of flour increased forty-eight times and rice twenty-two times, making his salary almost worthless.
He could apparently still afford to give me lamb and rice, but the mood among his friends around the table was despairing.
One guest told bitter little jokes about Saddam Hussein and his family, none very funny.
Hatim asked me if I could confirm a rumour, circulating in Baghdad, that Odeh, Saddam's son, had given a birthday party for himself at which he and his 300 guests had all worn purple and drunk out of purple goblets.
Back that the al-Rasheed hotel, where I was staying, I made sporadic efforts to escape this undercurrent of hysteria.
One day I went to the swimming pool which had been closed earlier in the year after a near miss by a Tomahawk missile.
A minute after I got into the water a large woman in an orange bathing cap swam up and asked if I was a newspaper correspondent.
When I said I was, she asked if I had access to the satellite telephone, the only means of making an international call since the phone system had been destroyed in January.
She wanted me to phone a number in Zagreb to find out if her husband, who had gone to Yugoslavia for an operation on his liver just before the war, was alive or dead.
Defeat has brought poverty, perpetual nervousness and insecurity in Baghdad
I was about to go back to the hotel when a pool attendant gestured to me and whispered that he urgently needed to change Iraqi dinars into dollars.
His father was sick and the private hospital he was in would only accept hard currency.
Could I please change two hundred dollars?
Iraqis have quickly reconciled themselves to military defeat, but the real shock of last year has been the gradual realization that defeat has brought poverty.
Every Iraqi I know kept asking me: ‘Will there be another attack?’
There is a mood of perpetual nervousness and insecurity.
Everybody from taxi drivers to government ministers listens to foreign radios three or four times a day and every threatening sound from Washington is seen as a sign of a new attack.
There is no doubt about who Iraqis, almost without exception, blame for what happened to them.
Saddam's nightly appearances on television are now greeted, at least in private, with ribald commentary.
Sadoon Hamadi, the new prime minister, said at a press conference: ‘What is intended to starve the Iraqi people  so that they revolt and change their leader Saddam Hussein.’
The Security Council always tut-tutted when anybody suggested that it was trying to starve anybody to death, but if sanctions were going to be effective then people would die because they did not get enough to eat.
Already, the official ration provides only a third of people's needs.
One way of checking what people are eating is to see what they throw away.
An aid specialist had told me that before the Gulf crisis about thirty per cent of the rubbish collected by the Baghdad municipality was food scraps.
Today the garbage contains no scraps of food whatsoever.
Not everybody has had a bad war.
One day I visited a village called Temia, fifty miles south of Baghdad.
Like most Iraqi villages in the flat Mesopotamian plain, it has no centre but is, rather, a rambling collection of houses facing onto inner courtyards, all concealed from the unpaved streets by brown mud brick walls.
In the torrid heat of the afternoon the village seemed deserted so I hammered on an iron gate.
The house turned out to be owned by an elderly man in white robes called Obed Hindi Ferkhan, who lived there with his extended family.
He invited me onto the guest room, its walls decorated with pictures of Shiah Moslem saints, flanked by two pictures of Saddam Hussein in military uniform.
He was clearly nervous about having a foreigner in his house, but he also wanted to be hospitable.
A lamb I had seen munching hay in the courtyard was duly killed for lunch.
Ferkhan's main business, he explained, was spare car parts which he either bought from abroad or took from wrecked vehicles he bought up cheap.
Sanctions meant he could no longer import spares but the value of his existing stock had increased tenfold.
Ferkhan also owned land near the village and complained that lack of electricity meant that he could not pump water to his field and, as a result, he had grown only twenty tons of melons compared to eighty before the war…
Even in the villages, people talk more or less openly against Saddam.
‘At first we rejected every compromise and now we have lost everything,’ said one man.
Apart from Ferkhan, everybody was short of food.
Iraqis traditionally offer guests a small glass of very hot tea and drink it three or four times a day themselves.
Now, with the price of tea nineteen times what it was a year before, the villagers said they drink it just once a day.
Not only were they hungry, but they also felt defenceless against more allied bombing.
A former soldier named Ghanim Jaber, who had just left the army, said: ‘It's not surprising that we are afraid, but we had something to resist them with.’
If there was any popular support for Saddam Hussein anywhere in Iraq after the disasters of the war, I thought I'd find it in the Sunni Moslem towns on the Tigris north of Baghdad.
The Ministry of Information has long been refusing to let any journalist visit Tikrit, the town where Saddam was born.
Suddenly, on Saddam's fifth-fourth birthday, permission was granted to attend the festivities there.
Tikrit looked like any other Iraqi town, except that the streets were cleaner and the walkways over the road were equipped with escalators — though none were working.
The celebrations took place in a stadium and were presided over by Izzat Ibrahim al-Dhouri, vice chairman of the ruling Revolution Command Council, a lanky man in his sixties with a face like a skull.
Beside him sat Latif Nassif Jassim, the former Information Minister, who had once promised to eat American pilots who bailed over Iraq.
Local girls dressed in green and yellow ballet skirts performed dances and sang praise to Saddam.
But they were separated from al-Dhouri and Jassim by a line of soldiers clutching their Kalashnikovs, as if they fully expected the platform to be stormed by the pre-pubescent performers.
If Saddam is so unpopular, why is he still in power?
The obvious reason is that he has killed or driven into exile all opposition.
Secret police and Baath party cells are everywhere.
There are effectively two armies: the regular army and the Republican Guard, identifiable by the red triangle on their uniforms.
After the war Saddam rapidly reduced in size the regular army, once a million strong, but not the ten Republican Guard divisions, known for their loyalty to the regime.
With the number of soldiers cut to 300,000 of whom 120,000 are heavily armed Republican Guard, a military coup would be even more difficult to organize than before.
To command the army, Saddam would rely on his own family and clans whom he had traditionally promoted.
His first act after the war was to promote Hussein Kamal Hassan, at once his son-in-law and his cousin, to the position of Defence Minister.
Another cousin, Ali Hassan al-Majid, who had ordered the use of gas against the Kurds in the 1980s, was made Interior Minister.
Saddam is now more reliant than ever on other clans, which do not think they would survive his overthrow.
Saddam has created a system in which power has always divided in order to create ultimate reliance on himself.
No army corps commander can ever be sure he has enough authority over his units to contemplate a coup.
Now the army is back in control and has marked its victory by boosting up new pictures of Saddam, always with the same smile, the white of his teeth emphasized by the dark moustache.
But the smashed buildings that often surround the portraits now give Saddam's confident grimace a manic quality, symbolizing the leaders's departure from the real world rather than his control over it.
That's the trouble with you, Dad — you just don't understand my generation!’
Letter from Washington by Christopher Hitchens
COCK-UP OR CONSPIRACY?
Is the Bureau lying?
Is the Agency lying?
Are the politicians lying?
Norman Mailer thinks so
As every second-rate intellect knows — whether from training or by instinct is a matter for conjecture — the easiest way to appear wised-up and worldly is to intone, loudly and often, that one believes in ‘cock-up rather than conspiracy’.
In America, there are innumerable occasions for uttering this line.
You can't stop people speculating, after.
And there is so damn much to speculate about .
The assassination of JFK might have started the process on its own, but certainly the assassination of the assassin, while he was in police custody, set tongues wagging here and there.
Then there is the maddening fact that, of the five great investigative Ws (who? what? where? when? and why?), we can still only account for the first four in the matter of the Watergate break-in.
And without knowing why the burglars entered that ritzy complex on the Potomac river, we can't safely say we know the other Ws all that intimately.
Or consider the Iran-Contra scandal.
Outwardly intelligent people still argue about whether Ronald Reagan ‘knew’ of an enormous illegal operation run from his own White House basement.
(Reagan's own cognitive capacity admittedly made this detour a pardonable one.)
As I write, Washington is taking a second look at a once-derided theory, which maintains that the Reagan-Bush campaign made a private deal with Iran in 1980; the Iranians keeping the American hostages until after the election and the Reaganites rewarding them with heavy weapons as the price of Jimmy Carter's pelt.
So you believe either that Americans are prone to think conspiratorially or that their government has given them a lot of unbelievable explanations for incredible conduct.
You are, of course, free to think both things if you can bear the strain, and even to muse on the connection between them.
Norman Mailer has, over the years, inclined to the view that the bastards are lying to us.
Mailer was a charter member of an informal group called the Committee to Investigate Assassinations (CIA), run by a Washington lawyer, Bud Fensterwald.
He once tried to found a citizens' police under the ‘Fifth Estate’ to monitor the doings of the FBI and the Central Intelligence Agency.
He was a friend of President Kennedy's and he wrote a rather fulsome biography Marilyn Monroe, and in his most recent novel he allows the suspicion — just the suspicion — that Jack may have had a hand in killing Marilyn, and that the CIA may have winked at the killing of Jack.
I don't want to make the novel sound wacky, let alone conspiratorial.
Harlot's Ghost distils the uneasy, febrile, panicky essence of American Cold War paranoia and bottles it at a literate room temperature.
Again I intend no disrespect; the novel is anything but tepid.
But its immense length and depth allow certain ideas to arise in the context naturally.
Isn't it true, for example, that after their humiliation at the Bay of Pigs — an ideal mixture of cock-up and conspiracy — certain American and Cuban extremists began to think very ill of JFK?
Well, yes, as a matter of fact that is true.
Well then, let's show how and why they did.
This Mailer manages with a tremendous trove of close contemporary detail and reportage.
‘One Balzac,’ wrote Karl Marx, ‘is worth a hundred Zolas.’
By this he meant that authentic observation and insight will always trump the polemical or the politically correct.
Mailer's longest essay on the CIA in the 1970s was called, after Balzac's masterpiece,A Harlot High and Low .
His novel partakes of the Balzacian qualities of historical sweep, sexual energy and generational reach.
The objective spoken by the central character, but clearly articulated by Mailer himself, is to get at, if not actually become, ‘the mind of America’.
Norman Mailer; back on form with ‘Harlot's Ghost’
When I last saw Mailer and talked about the impending book, the atmospherics had turned suddenly propitious.
His most recent biographer, Carl Rollyson, in The Lives of Norman Mailer , had spoken of his (Mailer's) fear that the end of the Cold War might seem to rob the long-awaited Harlot's Ghost of its potency and relevance.
But in June and July of this year the American  mind had been reawakened somewhat by old spectres.
Oliver Stone, operating under a hail of criticism, was finishing a revisionist movie about the Kennedy assassination.
President Bush, under a drizzle of criticism, was finding his nominee for the CIA directorship, Robert M Gates, was so implicated in earlier bits of  skulduggery as to be a tough item to sell.
Senate and House committees were re-examining the 1980 election for evidence of that rogue Iranian factor mentioned earlier.
Things, in other words, were once again in the condition of being other than what they seemed.
The initials ‘BCCI’ and ‘CIA’were even beginning to be mentioned in the same breath.
Tom Mangold's book on the mad CIA guru, James Jesus Angleton, was raising the fur on numerous Washington backs.
Not only that perhaps — I must be careful not to make everything seem too connected — but social and literary life was metamorphosing.
Mailer's press and public appearances over the past few years had shown a tendency, much like everyone else's, to be a bit— well —paparazzi -orientated.
He seemed more likely to blow a kiss than to throw a punch; to be at a dinner-table than to be down in the dives; to be rubbing shoulders than to be shoving or sticking it to the comfortable (I almost said to the bourgeoisie.)
By now, the essential bloodline of the new novel has been tolerably well-advertised, and it shows Mailer back on combative form.
‘Harlot’ is Hugh Montague, an intellectual spook who is obviously indebted as a character to James Jesus Angleton.
His godson, Harry Hubbard, is a young Agency aspirant who joins up just as the Cold War is getting hot.
The action, much of it almost drama-documentary, is laid in Berlin, South America, Miami, Havana and New Orleans, and follows the plot-lines not of conspiracy theory, but of modern history with the gaps left in.
What intrigues me is that Mailer has spent years on it, has published almost 1,200 pages, is at work on part two and must have been doing all this while the Reagan/Bush/Casey/North epoch went rolling past a society and a mass media obsessed with Nancy's wardrobe and the cultivation of the perfect junk-bond.
It seemed that everybody was at least potentially prostituted.
But, as Mailer said about A Harlot High and Low back in 1976, Balzac was ‘concerned as much with secret police as with the prostitutes who passed through its pages, but then whores and political agents made a fair association for Balzac’.
After all, the harlot behaved ‘as if she loved you, and that was a more mysterious proposition than one would think, for it is always mysterious to play a role.
It is equal in a sense to living under cover’.
Here, I think, we can see what gives this subject to Mailer.
Picture Marilyn Monroe, unhappily being all things to innumerable men; James Jesus Angleton, the master of double deception who drove himself crazy by outguessing himself with Kim Philby, and John Fitzgerald Kennedy, who inaugurated the image of the role-playing, idolized actor-President; a man capable of making people suspend their disbelief.
When reality catches up with such people, it us usually somewhere neat the fraught crossroads where sex, power and violence meet.
Kennedy, now known to have shared molls, and perhaps Marilyn, with Mafia leader Sam Giancana is the incarnation of this syndrome.
The residue is to shocking that many people take refuge in illusion to escape it.
The papers and the TV, which never published a true picture of JFK when he was alive, are still unwilling to alarm the paying customers with anything too toxic, and this leaves the field to movie directors, historians and writers of fiction.
Or, as Norman Mailer puts it: ‘What a country we inhabit.
What a harlot.
What a brute.
She squashes sausage out of the minds of novelists on their hot-footed way to a real good plot.’
He put it that way several years ago.
His novel is a willed attempt to overcome the difficulty.
A solution presents itself: the book will not yield to the hectic temptations, the seductions of the fevered imagination.
It will be long, and it will be cool.
The novel has a bibliography several pages in length.
He is proud of the verisimilitude.
Read the chapters on Harry Hubbard's posting to Uruguay, he says, and you will have a portrait in miniature of the CIA station in a small country.
Several people, such as E Howard Hunt, Richard Helms, and JFK himself, appear under their real names.
Others are very lightly disguised.
Speeches, TV events, Senate hearing, newsclips and interviews are for real.
Can fiction, Mailer seems to ask, rise to the test of being as disturbed, violent and coded as recent American history?
In making this case, I mustn't present the book as didactic.
Sexual conquest plays its part, as does sexual betrayal and sexual inversion.
Mailer's old feuds with gay and feminist true believers are unlikely to abate on publication, even though women are shown are more feline and intelligent, and the chief homosexual (also the only Jew) is a smart, witty cynic.
But those seeking ground for offence will, as usual, be missing the point.
At the core of Mailer's characterizations is the idea of schizophrenia rather then paranoia.
Nobody lives up to his or her billing.
The most ferocious macho is a bisexual.
The loosest woman is a stickler for etiquette and elocution.
The CIA's best Latin American defector and informer is a convinced revolutionary.
The most sensational prostitute is a post-op transsexual.
Perhaps most compelling of all, an Agency dedicated to ultra-patriotism turns out to be a ruthless engine of internal subversion.
Again to quote Mailer's old Harlot essay: ‘Facts are wiped out by artifacts; proof enters the logic of counterproof and we are in the dream; matter breathes next to anti-matter.’
Perhaps  it is this bicameral quality in the American mind that lets the citizen read of the all-out official ‘war on drugs’ and ‘war on terrorism’on one page, and then turn the page and read of the CIA sharing a bank with Miami cartels and Abu Nidal, and still go on as if he inhabited a ‘normal world’.
Mailer's novel has as its running theme the notion of ‘Alpha’ and ‘Omega’— two states of mind coexisting in the same person.
Though this derives from psychological studies of covert actions types, it would be waste to leave it at that.
I finished the novel and went up to the Hill to watch the CIA-BCCI hearings.
And it struck me that it's those who believe in cock-ups who are ready to believe anything.
Letter from Nowhere by Tim Hulse
INTO THE TWILIGHT ZONE
In a small town in Surrey an old woman's plea for help leads to an unsettling encounter
I NEVER ASKED her name.
That's what strikes me now.
The whole thing was conducted on an impersonal level.
The paths of two lives, or three to be exact, came together for a little while and then separated.
But it left it's mark.
It shook me up, It troubles me still.
It was yesterday morning, a Saturday.
The sun was shining.
It was early and I'd already done the shopping.
Menzies, Waitrose, M&S, all ticked off.
I was walking home, a chore, accomplished, looking forward to nothing to do.
Then I heard her.
It was a thin, high-pitched wail.
‘Help me!
Please!
Help me!’
At first I thought she must be mad.
It was a house I'd passed by twice a day a hundred times or more.
I'd never paid much attention to it, it was just another little landmark on a daily journey, the last house before the railway bridge.
Once someone had pointed it out to me, together with its next door neighbour, as an example of a building style peculiar to this little area of Surrey.
There aren't many of them left, apparently, these houses with wooden facings.
It was painted while and there was an untidy hedge in front of it, divided by a rickety gate which led on to a short path to the front door.
And that's where she was lying, right in the open doorway.
I checked my stride and she shouted again.
‘Please!
Somebody help me!’
There was nobody else around.
I stopped and put down my shopping next to the hedge.
Then I unlatched the gate and walked towards her.
Waiting for the end: old age can be a lonely place
‘I've fallen,’ she said to me as I entered the little porch tacked on to the front of the house.
She was very old and she was lying on her back, her feet towards me.
The first thing I noticed was the bandages, from ankle to thigh.
(She told me later she'd just been in hospital.
It was her legs.
I didn't ask what was wrong with them.)
On her feet were the kind of shoes you don't find in shoe shops — heavy, black,surgical things.
And she was wearing a grubby red dress with a kind of paisley pattern on it.
‘It's OK, just tell me what to do,’ I said.
I think I was a bit afraid, but I was trying to sound calm.
She had a thick brown walking-stick in her right hand and she'd hooked it around a handle on the door-frame.
She kept trying to pull herself up, but she couldn't get further than lifting her head forward a few inches.
She just wanted to stand up.
‘It's me feet,’ she said.
‘They keep slipping on the mat.’
I noticed there were black whiskers sprouting all over her face.
It's OK,’ I said.
I thought it probably was going to be.
I thought it was going to be easy.
I reached down and grabbed her arms, tried pulling.
It was no good, she was a dead weight.
I stepped inside and got behind her and tried pushing her from that side.
I had a vague feeling there was probably a simple way of lifting an old woman off the floor, bit I didn't know what it was.
I needed help.
I told her I wouldn't be long and went back down the path.
There were a few people passing.
I picked a man who looked as if he was in his late thirties or early forties.
He had short dark hair and was wearing casual slacks and a light anorak.
I explained to him briefly what the problem was.
I nodded and followed me to the house.
The beetle was still on its back.
I stepped over her.
The man stayed on the other side, bent down and locked his hands behind her.
As he lifted, I shoved, although I was  aware I wasn't really helping.
Eventually we (he) got her on her feet.
‘Oh, my hair's a mess,’ she said, ridiculously, as we held her upright.
For a moment, I thought that was it, that we'd done it, that we could go now.
Then I realized that this was just the beginning.
We had to do something with her, put her somewhere.
She made it clear (I don't remember how) that she wanted to go to the back of the house, to the kitchen.
With the man holding her from behind, we moved slowly, agonizingly slowly, along the narrow hallway.
It was then I really noticed the stench for the first time.
It was a pungent mixture of stale urine and God knows what else.
(I can smell it now.
Whenever I think of it, it's there, inside my nostrils.
I'm convinced it's seeped into my skin.)
‘Hold me!’ she said, imploringly.
‘Don't’ let me fall.’
At the end of the corridor, there was a staircase piled high with carrier bags which seemed to be filled with rubbish.
When we got to it, we had to turn sharp right to get into the kitchen.
‘Hold me!
I'm falling!
You !
You're not doing anything !’
It was me she was addressing, and her voice was a mixture of fear and anger.
She was shouting at me and shouting at her own helplessness.
I was rattled.
‘I'm doing my best,’ I said, uselessly grabbing hold of an arm.
I didn't like her very much.
‘I'm sorry for shouting,’ she muttered, suddenly pathetic.
‘Its not my fault.
It not as if I've done anything wrong.’
We were in the doorway to the kitchen.
The room was a tip.
On the far side, by the window, there were plates stacked up in the sink.
The table to the left was piled high with an assortment of bric-a-brac, none of which appeared to serve a useful purpose.
Immediately to the right of the doorway was a chair.
I suggested to her that she could sit on it.
‘I don't want that chair,’ she said.
‘I want my own chair.’
She indicated another chair, on the far side of the kitchen.
Behind her back, the man and I exchanged a heavenward look which said: ‘Jesus Christ .’
The thing was, he looked like he really meant it.
At this point, and I'm not sure how it happened, it became my turn to hold her up.
I wrapped my arms around her from the back.
Her body was soft and warm and shapeless.
It was a weirdly intimate experience, holding this plump old woman close to my body, feeling her hair in my face, and yet she was a stranger.
(I never asked her name.)
I coaxed her forwards: ‘That's right, move your left leg.
That's it.
Now the right leg.’
She was heavy and it was all I could do not to let her slide through my arms.
I realized I was sweating and I was breathing hard.
My heart was pounding.
At last, we reached the chair.
I turned her round and let her fall into it.
It was finally over.
‘Well, we're off now,’ I said.
‘Can I have a cup of water?’ she asked.
It wasn't over.
I looked around for a cup.
The only ones to be seen were swimming in cold, dirty water in the sink.
I made to reach for one.
‘I don't want one of those,’ she said.
‘There should be one on the table.’
The man and I prodded at the pile of crap on the table.
There wasn't a cup to be found.
‘It's alright,’ she said.
‘I'll have some milk.’
There was a fresh bottle sitting next to her.
(I didn't ask who had put it there.)
‘Do you want me to open it?’
I asked.
She nodded.
I stuck my thumb in the top, pulled it off, and offered her the bottle.
She drank thirstily and when she put the bottle down, there was milk all over her lips, the bright whiteness of it shining on her face.
The man and I began edging out of the kitchen.
She started telling us how she had a bell which she rang if she needed help and I said I'd listen out for it.
She said a nurse would be along soon to change her bandages, and I said that was good.
‘Well, we have to go now,’ I said.
‘Goodbye.’
She held out a twisted hand and I stepped forward to shake it lightly.
‘I'm eighty-four,’ she said, with a hint of pride.
That was probably all she had left to be proud of — she was still alive.
Then the man and I left.
When we got outside, I wasn't sure whether to shut the door on the latch or leave it ajar for the nurse.
I asked him what I should do.
‘What do you normally do?’ he asked.
I said this was the first time I'd ever been there.
He seemed surprised.
‘So you don't know her?’
I said I didn't.
Then he walked off.
I never asked his name either.
I picked up my shopping and headed up the road.
And the thing is, I didn't think to myself how terrible it is that people have to live those lives.
I simply thought: I want to wash my hands.
That's all, really.
I just wanted to wash my hands.
And maybe that's what troubles me most.
‘Gerald, are you sure it's necessary to muzzle a chihuahua?’
metro
the new Metro GTi 16v — The small car to take seriously
Thirty-five-year-old stockbroker Clive Sinclair-Poulton,bottom right , has always been a Metro owner but readily admits that the new GTi surpasses all its predecessors.
‘It's both pokey and perky,’ he says.
‘The advanced 16v engine delivers real power, and the car is still small enough to be zippy around town.’
The new Metro has a tangible big car feel to it: ‘Somehow it feels more substantial than other small cars.
And Rover's refined and carefully designed interior — with sunroof, central locking and four-speaker stereo, all fitted as standard — ensure that the Metro GTi's big car feel is more than just skin deep.
Neil Perrett,above , twenty-nine and a freelance writer, was keen to stress the Metro GTi's money- and environment-saving sides: ‘The car is reasonable to insure, economical to run and has a closed loop catalyst fitted as standard.’
Nevertheless, he honestly admits that it was the Metro's performance that first drew him.
The interconnected sports suspension system ensures handling that is ‘taut and muscular’, while the streamlined styling and seven-spoke alloy wheels bear witness to the GTi's true nature.
Its British built 16v 103 PS ‘K’ series engine is all aluminium and, when matched with the close-ratio 5-speed gear box, takes you from 0–60 in 8.6 seconds and delivers a top speed of 116 mph.
James Green,right , is twenty and is just starting out in the advertising business.
It was the Metro's practicality around town that first attracted him.
‘It's neat and nimble,’ he says, ‘and the GTi's manoeuvrability is a welcome relief when it comes to tight spaces and traffic squeezes.’
However, the occasional long journey has revealed some of the Metro's hidden talents: ‘It has a surprisingly spacious interior and is extremely comfortable on a long haul.
The driving position is just right, the sports seats give firm support, and the engine is incredibly smooth’.
the life and loves of david bailey
Why did the world's most beautiful women fall at his feet?
And what makes them love him still?
An intrusive interview by Janine Di Giovanni
SOME TIME AGO, DAVID BAILEY was travelling with the artist Brian Clarke on a train from Nice to Milan when a Frenchman, carrying a newspaper, entered their compartment and sat down.
Bailey nudged Clarke and pointed to the photograph of Catherine Deneuve on the front page of the paper.
‘There's my ex-wife,’ he said.
Clarke nodded.
A short time later, a woman entered the compartment and sat down across from them carrying a copy of Vogue .
On the cover was Marie Helvin.
Bailey stared.
‘There's another one of my ex-wives,’ he said.
When they arrived in Milan, the two got off the train and, by coincidence, the first thing they both saw was a blown-up photograph of Penelope Tree.
‘Fucking hell,’ Bailey growled.
‘Another one!
I can't get away from them!’
When David Bailey was sixteen years old, he saw a photograph of Picasso's paintings in Life magazine; he says that those images changed his life.
‘It was a huge revelation to me.
It made me realize that things needn't be, that nothing is what it seems in life, that there are no rules.’
The same could be said for Bailey's life: nothing is as it appears.
The kid from East Ham who wandered nonchalantly into Vogue studios, discovered Jean Shrimpton and transformed the concept of British photography; the man who was the inspiration for Antonioni's Blow Up ; the man who married Catherine Deneuve, Marie Helvin and Catherine Dyer, and lived with Penelope Tree and Jean Shrimpton; the man who created some of the most memorable images of the Sixties and Seventies.
The man Malcolm Muggeridge described as ‘the evil eye of the twentieth century’.
NOW AND THEN Bailey at fifty-four, photographed by Julian Broad and, opposite, in his early twenties, captured by Terry O'Neill
Then there are the pictures, those Bailey images that are impossible to forget.
There are the Kray Brothers at Reggie's wedding in 1965, staring menacingly off into the distance; Michael Caine with a dangling cigarette; Jane Birkin, topless, with her arms crossed protectively over her chest; Catherine Deneuve with a brown wig and a pink flamingo.
Then there are his photographs of the   starving Sudanese; Marie Helvin naked, stiletto-heeled and sheathed in bandages; Catherine Dyer in the bloody throes of childbirth; more recently, Denice Lewis dancing in the South of France in the Pernod ads.
For David Bailey, photography has always been a diary.
He will be fifty-four in January.
He no longer drives a two-tone Rolls, no longer smokes or drinks, and he's changed the colours of his Victorian house in Primrose Hill from black to white.
But he still surrounds himself with women and he still takes his camera everywhere, although now he prefers making commercials for Reebok and Virgin Airlines to taking pictures.
He does not see himself as having sold out; he says he got fed up with magazine editors wanting throwaway images.
‘I have more freedom now.
When I first did it, it was pure hassle.
Some woman telling me which image to use.’
MARRIED LIFE Bailey's view of himself and his wife Catherine Dyer, left.
And, right, how Helmut Newton sees them, photographed in Hollywood earlier this year
He is most relaxed when he is in the converted barn in Devon that is now his painting studio; it is stone-floored and filled with light and quiet as a church.
There are African masks and Polynesian sculptures bought at Sotheby's; goats' skulls slung over doors; and hanging from the walls are his own canvases — massive primitive paintings that he says are fertility symbols of women.
After years of thinking of Bailey in terms of neutral tones, within the technical restrictions of black and white, it is a shock to see him using slashes of colour: yellow, red, blue, green.
I blink at their brightness and ask how much they cost.
Bailey says he does not sell them, but his friends Mick Jagger and the New York artist  Julian Schnabel each have.
one.
He is still on good terms with all his ex-wives and girlfriends; he is bemused that anyone should think this odd.
‘How can you spend seven years with someone and not remain friends?’
When I ask him for telephone numbers of the people who know him best, he gives me the numbers of Deneuve, Shrimpton and Helvin before Jack Nicholson, Brian Clarke and Julian Schnabel.
‘We're all mates,’ he says simply.
‘I'm reading Woody Allen's biography right now.
He does the same thing — puts his ex-partners and ex-girlfriends in his films.’
Bailey pauses and stares off into space.
Obviously, the arrangement is easy in practice, harder to explain.
‘I hate talking about all of them as though they were a lost tribe.’
‘All Bailey's women,’ says Brian Clarke emphatically, ‘are strong.
Bailey doesn't go for idiots, he's not a…what's that awful word for women?…bimbo man.’
Marie Helvin, wife number three, from 1975–85, sees nothing unusual in their relationship.
She still sees Bailey often, gets on extremely well with Catherine, Bailey's current wife, and if he is out of town for long periods of time, they speak on the telephone.
‘I need that in my life, definitely,’ Helvin says.
‘He settles me, he knows me so well.
I'm not a jealous kind of person, and my own parents were divorced five into my marriage with Bailey.
They are still extremely close, so for me, this is all extremely natural.
WIVES AND LOVERS Bailey has remained friends with the women he loved.
This page, clockwise from top: Marie Helvin, 1976; Penelope Tree, 1969; Catherine Deneuve, 1967.
Opposite page: Jean Shrimpton, 1964
‘He really, really likes women.
And the reason he remains friends with his ex-wives   and lovers is that he's a man's man, essentially, he's not the sort of man who would not have women friends around him unless they had, in some way, been involved with him.
So the women take on the role of his good friends.
And in a sense, who knows you better than your ex-wives or lovers?’
Helvin says that their break-up was so amicable that she did not move out of this Primrose Hill house for a year after the split; simply moved upstairs to another bedroom.
‘I think the reasons that he stays friends with his women is that he's generous, he's always been generous.
Always paid for everything and that sort of thing,’ says Jean Shrimpton, who lives an hour down the road from Bailey in Cornwall.
‘And the fact that all of his women get on with each other, well, that's a talent in itself.’
In Devon, Bailey and Catherine live in a rambling fourteenth-century farmhouse.
Monks once walked through Bailey's land on their way to the church in the hills.
When I first pulled into the drive, I was convinced it was the wrong house: too calm, too serene, too normal.
A plastic child's swimming pool in the front garden; toys left in the drive; overgrown wild flowers.
In the kitchen, open shelves are lined with French country pottery and baskets of fruit; in the mud room, row upon row of wellies and hiking boots.
Only the dark Porsche squatting at the far end of the drive gives some indication that a local does not live here.
Bailey gives me instant coffee and a plate of Tesco jam doughnuts, still in their plastic packet, and we sit at a dusty picnic table outside, slapping off flies.
A wasp dives into my coffee; Patch, the dog, slurps the pool water and lunges for a fly.
‘The joys of country living,’ Bailey says.
He sits back and drinks Diet Pepsi and looks content.
He says he is fulfilled.
‘It's all about fulfilment, in a way, and I guess the most immediate fulfilment is creating.
If you're a painter, you don't have to tread on anybody.
The only person Van Gogh ever hurt was himself.’
Bailey in middle age has not lost his appeal.
He is certainly thicker, his hair has gone nearly grey, but there is still the charm, the common sense, the self-effacing humour, the mischievousness.
Nothing is as it seems, he maintains: he never really saw himself as the prototype Cockney photographer from Blow Up ; he  sees himself more as Puck from A Midsummer Night's Dream .
To prove the point, he recites Puck's last speech:
‘If we shadows have offended,
Think but this, and all is mended,
That you have but slumb'red here
While these visions did appear.’
Bailey in middle age has certainly mellowed.
BAILEY'S FATHER was a tailor from East Ham.
His mother, Gladys, from whom he says he inherited his common sense and wit, was the daughter of a second-hand car dealer.
‘She was a bit inclined to make a sissy of me,’ Bailey once noted.
‘I was the only kid in sandals in the whole neighbourhood.’
At the age of twelve, Bailey stopped eating meat.
‘I thought it was a repulsive idea.
My parents thought I was queer.
I didn't eat meat and I was more interested in ornithology than football.’
In the late Fifties Bailey did his two-year National Service stint in the RAF.
‘That's the first time Bailey met posh people,’ photography writer, Martin Harrison says.
‘It was the first time that he realized there were officers and that they treat you badly because you're not like them.
He was aware of that and he worked with it.
So he picked the one profession that would work around the class system.
He was a star by the early Sixties, and then he could move in any circle he wanted.’
‘I remember that when I first got to Vogue , it was all the old school.
The was a photographer who used to say, ‘Catch a butterfly’ to the girls to make them smile.
I was more of a hooligan than what they were used to,’ Bailey snorts.
‘I don't remember what I said to the girls, but it was certainly not ‘Catch a butterfly’.
Instead, to the chagrin of fashion editors, he locked himself and the model in the studio, and emerged several hours later with the shot and the girl, sometimes ecstatic, sometimes in tears.
‘Sometimes it was a drama,’ Jean Shrimpton admits.
At twenty-three, David Bailey was street-wise, sexy, ambitious.
He did exactly what he wanted.
He wore a grey bum freezer, a black polo-neck and Cuban heeled shoes, even after a Vogue chauffeur reported back to managing editor Harry Yoxall that he had picked up ‘one of those photographers’ for a New York shoot wearing a leather jacket.
‘Vogue photographers,’ Harry Yoxall roared, ‘do not wear leather jackets.’
Bailey changed all that.
He recalls being patted on the head by one fashion editor who said, ‘Doesn't he talk cute?’, and deliberately parking his Rolls in front of the Managing Director's Humber so that he couldn't pull out.
Now, he shrugs it all off: ‘I suppose I was a threat to them.
Before me, it was the sort of‘Let them eat cake’ mentality.’
It was partially his arrogance, partially his charm, but once Bailey entered Vogue Studios, those rarefied, elitist days were gone forever.
Martin Harrison says simply that ‘Bailey ended that era’.
In contrast with the restrained, clipped haute couture shots of the Fifties, Bailey's pictures generated boldness, brashness, sexuality.
Jean Shrimpton says they has a ‘rawness’.
He rarely went for a tightframed shot, but instead honed in on whatever it was the subject had and made them give him more.
He insists that there is no secret to it: ‘I don't believe in getting someone's soul when you take a picture.
And if you do get someone's soul, it's by accident.
Otherwise, you'd be the devil.
And I'm not the devil.’
Slight smirk.
‘Very good friend, though.’
Peals of laughter.
He remembers when he first came across seventeen-year-old Jean Shrimpton posing for a Kelloggs ad with his friend Brian Duffy.
Shrimpton was to nervous and inexperienced that Duffy made her recite ‘Humpty Dumpty’ to calm her down.
A country girt straight out of Lucie Clayton modelling school, Shrimpton was beautiful, but unfinished.
‘I remember that she was standing in front of a blue backdrop and her eyes were so blue I thought I could see the back of her head,’ Bailey recalls.
I thought she was breathtaking.
And she was.’
Bailey, Shrimpton recalls, stuck his head around a corner and stared intently at her.
‘It was pre-Beatles but he looked like a Beatle.
Sort of dark and serious.’
Later, he cornered Duffy and demanded to know who she was; Duffy tried to warn him off: ‘She's too posh for you.’
Bailey was married then, to a nice girl from Clapham, and they shared a flat near the Oval in South London.
But Bailey did not believe in rules, and he wanted Shrimpton, so he got her.
He plied her with chicken chop suey from Chang's in East Ham High Street for two months before they consummated the affair on the grass of Littlewood Common, a few yards away from Shrimpton's parents' farm.
‘Bailey then was terribly attractive,’ Shrimpton says.
‘Fancied by old women, young women, men and women.
He was charming and bolshie, but that sort of bolshiness that come with insecurity.’
One night after the shoot, he drove Shrimpton back to Buckinghamshire, and she let Bailey and his friend sleep in the haystacks.
Shrimpton's mother fed them breakfast the next morning, but when her father showed up, he exploded and chased Bailey off the farm.
‘He was very much an East End boy and I was from the country,’ explains Shrimpton.
‘We were poles apart.’
She remembers Bailey taking her home to meet Gladys in East Ham: ‘She was quite severe, but I liked her, although she thought I was a hoity-toity little madam.
But I've always got on well with  mother-in-law's .’
They became a team.
When Bailey wanted Shrimpton to be the model for a Vogue shoot with a collection of British intellectuals in 1961, he had to fight to convince the fashion editor, Lady Rendlesham, who did not think Shrimpton was quite right.
‘She told me, ‘Just because you're sleeping with Jean, doesn't mean that you have to use her in Vogue .’’
‘He had to fight like mad to get me the job,’ Shrimpton recalled later.
‘As a new young photographer, he was being given a great opportunity and he could have spoilt things for himself by using me.’
In the end, he got Shrimpton the job, and that shoot was one of the assignments that launched her career.
FROM THEN ON, Bailey's career careened ahead with the speed of light.
‘It didn't go to my head,’ he jokes.
‘It went to my dick.’
‘There was something touching about his early fashion shots; a warmth that other photographers failed to capture,’ Harrison says.
‘That was the difference between Bailey and Penn and Avedon.
He was aping them to some extent, but what was different was that touching quality.’
There is Jean Shrimpton standing waif-like in a wrinkled raincoat on Tower Bridge; or tugging at her oversized jumper, one arm gently loped over her head in the hallway of 91 Heigham Road.
‘My fashion shots weren't really fashion,’ Bailey maintains.
‘They were portraits of girls.
I was never really interested in the frocks.
It was the personality that interested me.
That's why I like Penelope Tree, Anjelica Huston or Marisa Berenson.
All the girls I used weren't bimbo model types — they were people in their own right.
I photographed them as people first and models second.
They way they wore   their frocks reflected their personality.’
In 1965, his friend Roman Polanski started telling him about a beautiful French girl that ‘I would be mad for.
And I said, ‘I don't like the French.
They're too short for me.’’
But one night, Polanski introduced Bailey to Catherine Deneuve in a nightclub.
‘What did she look like?
She was alright.
She looked like a beautiful French girl.’
A short time later, he photographed her for Playboy .
‘I liked Catherine because she laughed a lot.
She's a very funny woman.
Good sense of humour.’
On a whim, Duffy bet Bailey that he could not marry her.
He jumped in a car from the Paris collections and drove to the set in the country where she was filming.
He proposed, she accepted.
‘People still write about how strange it was for me to be with someone like Catherine,’ he says.
‘I remember one journalist went on about her black dress from Yves Saint Laurent at the wedding, and how I wore cords, as if they were shocked that Catherine Deneuve would be with someone like me.
The truth is, it was me who introduced Catherine to Yves Saint Laurent!
I told her to go to Saint Laurent.’
They were together for four years, but Bailey recalls: ‘I don't think we ever saw each other.
My secretary would phone her secretary and arrange meetings.
Once we were in New York at the same time and stayed in separate hotels.
We were just too busy, so it ended.
Enter Penelope Tree, daughter of the late Marietta, former ambassador to the United Nations, and a billionaire banker father.
She was seventeen, five-foot-ten inches tall and Bailey thought she looked Egyptian, ‘Like Nefertiti’.
It was the height of the Sixties, and their Primrose Hill house rocked with energy, with hippies, and a constant flow of people and parties.
Cezar, Bailey's Brazilian butler, later recalled that he never knew what to expect in those days.
One day Penelope would bring home a Tibetan holy man, another time the entire Black Panther party.
When they split up, Tree stayed away for a year, but reemerged to send Bailey a telegram when he married Marie Helvin.
Marie Helvin was the daughter of a Japanese mother and an American father.
Growing up in Hawaii, she saw herself as a ‘gawky, flat-chested string bean with a frizzy mass of hair’.
But to Bailey, Helvin had the most perfect body in the world: ‘She was so exotic, like an orchid.’
Bailey collapses into laughter.
‘And I was like a weed.
The orchid and the weed.
She's so exotic and I'm so common.’
Helvin was already and established model in Japan when they met, and was becoming extremely popular in Europe.
She remembers not being able to sleep the night before her first shoot with Bailey.
‘He was so famous when I met him, and I was very intimidated.
I had heard all these stories, you know, the usual model gossip.
That he fucked everyone, that he was difficult to work with.
But I thought he was kind, and easy.
He wasn't arrogant, he was very businesslike.’
Two months later, they had a drink together after a shoot.
Helvin moved in, and they were together for a decade.
‘I remember that he slept with the cameras next to his bed,’ she says.
‘They became an extension of himself.
It's his eye.
With Bailey, wherever we went, the camera was with us.
If we went to the movies, or even for fish and chips, he always brought the camera.’
Helvin recalls that when Bailey published his book of nudes,Trouble and Strife , in 1980, there was little flak from the press.
‘It was a very positive response.
I did the pictures, but I remember being horrified that these pictures were going to be printed.
For me, I did they because I lived with an artist.
They were really the first nudes that he had done since Jane Birkin posed topless in the Sixties.
It was the first book of its kind.’
It was Bailey's next book,Nudes (1984), that started an uproar among the feminists.
‘No one really understood that it wasn't anti-women, but rather pro-women,’ he insists.
‘Christiana instead of Christ.
I remember Germaine Greer slagged me off, but it was the best review because it was an intelligent one.
What they didn't realize was that for me, women in the end have everything because they have the ability to create life.
Men struggle to paint or take pictures, but the idea that women can create life is the most frustrating thing to men.’
Helvin remembers the response.
‘I remember seeing some of those photos for the first time, I mean the ones with women with chicken heads laying eggs.
Some of they were really weird,’ she laughs.
Helvin says that Bailey has changed nowadays, has mellowed, but in a positive way.
A few years ago, she went to Nepal to see her foster children and asked Bailey to accompany her.
‘He said, ‘You know, I've changed.
Now I have a family.
I have to think about things more carefully.’’
Brian Clarke agrees: ‘Bailey has changed profoundly since he's had children.
He used to be a humble Hannibal Lecter.
He used to frighten everybody.
He achieved with words what Lecter did with dentures.
But now, I think he's come into a great second flowering.
Seeing Bailey with his kids is touching.
It's tough love.
Real.
A lot of people say that since Bailey had kids he's become human.’
Almost all of Bailey's time now is spent with commercials, and he wants to move into feature films.
The day I met him in London, he was disappointed because a black comedy thriller with Dennis Hopper and Kyle MacLachlan had fallen through.
‘I think you should get an Oscar just for making a film,’ he grumbles.
‘People like Kubrick deserve Oscars just for getting it together.’
David Bailer does not think about the past very often.
He thinks it's ‘nice’ that people credit him with changing British photography, with breaking down the class barriers, with producing memorable images, but he also seems slightly amused by it all.
‘There's no secret,’ he says.
‘Like Count Basie said, four beats to the bar and no cheating.’
Bailey likes that.
He grins widely.
‘No cheating.’
Profile
eurobrat
Patrick Robertson was eleven years old when Mrs Thatcher came to power.
Now he heads an organization of which she is honorary president.
Robertson runs the notorious Bruges Group, pledged to opposing European federalism at all costs.
But just how far will he go? by Christopher Silvester
‘WE'LL GET STUFFED if we try and play the game by their rules, because they're better at it than us.
What we've got to do is actually make them respect us.
We've got to be downright nasty.’
Patrick Robertson is talking about how he thinks we should deal with those duplicitous European politicians when they attempt to bounce us into their scheme for economic and monetary union at the Maastricht summit in December.
Robertson is the twenty-three-year-old secretary of the Bruges Group, the all-party pressure group he founded while still an Oxford undergraduate, and which is dedicated to exposing the terrors of federalism within the European Community.
The Group has attracted support from former Tory and Labour cabinet ministers and earlier this year acquired Mrs Thatcher as it figurehead.
‘It has done extraordinarily well from preposterous beginnings,’ says right-wing political columnist Bruce Anderson.
‘That young fellow Robertson has got himself a market share and nobody else is offering a similar product.’
If John Major signed the proposed treaty at Maastricht without first securing substantial concessions, Robertson intends to go on the warpath with a national campaign to reverse the decision.
This would be a feat of public agitation that he likens to the Anti-Corn Law League of the 1830s and 1840s, which successfully pressed home the case for free trade (and caused a split in the Tory Party in the process).
‘What an astonishing, bold conception that is!
What an amazing thing for a young man to come up with!’ says Lord Harris of High Cross, the sixty-six-year-old economist and crossbench peer who is the Bruges Group's former chairman.
He has come to expect surprises from Robertson.
‘I have adopted, almost theatrically, an avuncular role towards him, chastising him when necessary, but I am full of admiration.
He's a natural doer and thinker and organizer, easily bored by detail, but brilliant at conceiving conferences and programmes of action, and he can hold his own with academics three times his age.’
If John Major signs the proposed treaty at the Maastricht summit in December, Robertson intends to go on the warpath
Conservative MP William Cash believes the Bruges Group has played an important role in directing opinion outside Parliament and is in no doubt about the urgency of the issues.
‘This is not theology,’ he says.
‘It's about practical politics: British jobs, competition, unfair practices, the quality of democracy, and parliamentary scrutiny.’
The fact is, he argues, that parliamentary scrutiny in Italy and France is inadequate compared to that in Britain and Denmark, and   federalism seeks to superimpose these inadequate and alien procedures upon our political system.
The Group's influence extends beyond Britain, with various affiliates in the other eleven member states of the EC.
All these groups are concerned that the EC should develop organically as a co-operative trading bloc and not as a bureaucratic United States of Europe.
An undisclosed number of MPs on both sides of the House of Commons pay the £35 membership subscription for the information and publications provided by the Group, but they are not required to pledge support for its aims.
‘We judge our support on the basis of the MPs we talk to, lists that are drawn up, early day motions that are signed,’ says Robertson, who believes he can count on the public support of maybe seventy Conservative MPs if it comes to a confrontation with John Major.
At present, Robertson is very excited about a discovery made by Alan Sked, a lecturer at the London School of Economics who sits on the Bruges Group's academic advisory council — it's governing body.
Sked has found a memorandum that was written on August 29, 1960 by Alain Peyrefitte, the French Minister of Information under de Gaulle's first presidency.
Essentially, it outlines means for getting France around EC laws while paying lip-service to federalism and political union.
‘It's a cynical document,’ says Robertson, ‘an eye-opener about French foreign-policy goals.’
He wants John Major to read the Peyrefitte document before he goes in to bat at Maastricht.
The fundamental issue, apart from stemming the tide of federalism, is the destiny of Europe as a whole, and that includes the recently liberated countries of Eastern Europe.
In her Bruges speech, which was delivered in September 1988, before the rout of Communism in Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Romania, Mrs Thatcher identified the need to leave the EC door open for these countries.
When John Major is invited to sign the treaty devised by Jacques Delors, he should not only by thinking about the likely effects on the British economy, but also about Eastern Europe's moral claims on the existing members of the EC.
PATRICK ROBERTSON was born in Edinburgh at 11.22pm on October 19, 1968 (he recently wrote to the hospital to find out the precise hour and minute for his astrologer).
In 1971, his father Craig was employed by the British Tourist Authority as deputy manager of its Rome office and his mother Evelyn began teaching there.
For ten years, from 1971 to 1981, Patrick and his brother Dom lived in Italy, in a coachhouse on a country estate just outside Frascati.
He went first to an Italian private school and then to the finish English school in Rome.
The years in Italy were followed by a couple of years in France, where his father was in charge of the BTA's Paris office, but rather than go to school in France, Patrick was sent to Dulwich College.
This he describes as a ‘complete upheaval’.
He wasn't prepared for the formality of life in an English public school — particularly its petty humiliations.
However, the Dulwich experience taught him to toughen up.
Politics was only an occasional distraction from adolescent concerns.
He was a Marxist in his early teens, but thereafter became increasingly right-wing.
In retrospect, he says, ‘Thatcherism didn't really offer anything to kids at the age of fourteen.
I didn't really like her very much.
I thought her tone was so overpowering.’
He was only eleven when Mrs Thatcher came to power; he now runs an organization of which she is the honorary president.
For the final two years of his schooling he switched to Kingston College of Further Education, where he became fascinated by British political history (‘I was living in the nineteenth century,’ he says).
Oxford followed: he won a place at Keble College to read Modern History.
‘Oxford was a complete disappointment — not snobby, it really isn't snobby — it didn't make any sense to me at all.
I didn't really like the people at OUCA [the Oxford University Conservative Association], they just struck me as spotty spods.’
Nonetheless, he threw himself into the Union, making an ‘absolute’ fool of himself and becoming disillusioned.
Then, at a stroke, something happened that gave him a powerful sense of purpose.
He read about Jacques Delors's federalist vision from which he recoiled in horror.
At a Burns Night party, some months earlier, he had bumped into Norman Stone, the Regius Professor of Modern History at Oxford.
Stone was then, as now, a fully paid-up Thatcher supporter, and a tireless polemicist.
Robertson and Stone agreed that something must be done to resist the Delors plans.
So Robertson began writing letters to academics with free-market views, using Stone's name as an imprimatur.
‘All the people I wrote to thought I was a lecturer.
They assumed I had a doctorate or something.’
Gradually replies filtered back to him.
John Bowys MP expressed support, as did his research assistant, Mark Worthington.
At this point, Robertson was not aware of Mrs Thatcher's Bruges speech.
Worthington obtained a copy for him and suggested Bruges as the title for the Group (he later became its parliamentary liaison officer).
Robertson found himself agreeing with its sentiments.
He knew virtually nothing about European federalism, but here was Mrs Thatcher warning us that political union was on the cards.
Lord Harris agreed to be chairman and a group of academics, about half of those whom Robertson had approached, turned up to an informal first meeting at Dean's Yard, Westminster (‘Suddenly all these distinguished geezers I had spoken to on the phone were there in this room’).
It was decided to form a politically independent, all-party group as a company and launch it on February 8, 1989 at the Reform Club.
‘It was electric — the most exciting, most demanding period of my life,’ says Robertson, though he reckons that, as a vociferous, opinionated twenty-year-old he ‘must have looked like such an arsehole’.
Throughout 1989 and 1990 the organization gathered momentum.
It attracted such sponsors as Sir James Goldsmith, Lords Hanson and White, and Rocco Forte.
Lord Young, then Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, addressed the Group in May 1989, Norman Tebbit followed in January 1990, Nicholas Ridley and Peter Shore (a veteran Labour critic of the EC) spoke in the summer of 1990.
By then, the Group was occupying an office in Whitehall Court, turning out publications that attracted press attention, while Robertson, who was still only twenty-one, attracted his share of mockery.
Last autumn, the Group held a congress of European economic liberals in Vienna, a few weeks before the EC's Intergovernmental Conference in Rome.
Academics from France, Spain, Britain, and Germany gave papers about different aspects of the   Community: European law versus the constitutions of member states, monetary union, the European approach to world trade policy.
Alan Sked put forward a plan for European union, endorsed by the Group's council, that eschewed bureaucratic federalism.
The Bruges Group could no longer justifiably be accused of negativity or subversion of European ideals.
The Bruges Group is not, Robertson emphasizes, anti-European.
BETWEEN LUSTY inhalations of the Marlboro cigarettes that he chain smokes, Robertson speaks with a passionate sincerity and an impressive grasp of his brief, which covers all matters European, from legal niceties to gossip about Europhiles.
He is not some hack student politician who has commandeered a pressure group and turned it into a vehicle for self-advertisement, his eyes trained all the while on a safe Tory seat.
He once candidly described himself in an interview as ‘a manipulative little bastard’, but his mission, as he sees it, outstrips everyday politics in its importance.
He is a zealous Cassandra, frantically warning us about the Trojan Horse of Monsieur Delors's federalism.
Robertson regards France as probably the most sinister and duplicitous force in the EC, as well as the country with the highest ‘democratic deficit’(this term, widely used in the Euro-debate, means a lack of democratic accountability).
‘They've got a policeman in charge of the Ministry of Information, and they've got a daft Prime Minister in Edith Cresson.
I mean she's just thrown in there, I suppose, the make Mitterrand look good…
Mitterrand thinks he's God, of course.
He's had two seven-year terms.
What king got more than fourteen years?’
France is not the only one of our European partners (for ‘partners’, says Robertson, read ‘competitors’) to have a hidden agenda for extracting nationalistic advantage from federalism.
The poorer countries — Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland — are already receiving vast amounts of aid.
The Germans and the French, unlike the British, pursue a foreign policy that is suffused with a latent anti-Americanism.
‘The federalists want to neuter the entire continent and turn it into a giant blancmange,’ says Robertson.
Germany needs a policy of high interest rates to counteract the upward pressure on its inflation rate, caused by the integration of East Germany.
It has an ageing population and social security laws which will generate a massive public expenditure burden and necessitate tax increases.
Meanwhile, Britain has been steering in the direction of low-tax economy for the last ten years.
The German economy, Robertson believes, is completely incompatible with our own.
‘They have apprenticeship systems and guilds and they're starting to say quite criminally anti-European [he means anti-free market ]things.
In their heavy construction industry, for example, a maximum value of only twenty per cent of any project can be contracted to firms from outside Germany.’
The downfall of Mrs Thatcher, the arrival of John Major at 10 Downing Street and the Gulf War took the spotlight away from the Group's activities for a few months.
But in the aftermath of the war, Robertson and Alan Sked were responsible for a political blunder which put them in the news again.
Robertson had just returned from holidaying in India when Major proposed his Kurdish safe havens policy to a meeting of EC leaders.
Robertson and Sked thought that it was a good idea but the without troops to back it up, it would be a non-starter, mere ‘gesture politics’.
By Robertson's admission, they issued an ill-considered and badly-written press release accusing Major of ‘wobble’.
This caused a minor storm, even though Major eventually followed their advice and deployed troops.
Several Conservative MPs repudiated the Group and Mrs Thatcher dissociated herself from the critical remarks.
The press was clamouring for blood and Lord Harris told Robertson that he would have to tender his resignation to the academic advisory council.
Lord Harris admits Robertson has ‘some weaknesses that, if not curbed, could totally cancel out his strengths’, but he defended him before the academic advisory council, on the grounds that he had not been sufficiently protected by guidelines, and that it would be difficult to find a replacement with his many gifts.
Robertson was reprieved and new procedures were laid down, which meant that his memos and press releases would in future be vetted by an executive council.
THE TURNOVER of the Bruges Group is about £200,000 per annum, most of which goes on publications, travel expenses and salaries (Robertson earns a modest £8,500, with accommodation paid for).
The funds come mainly from individual donors, although there have been corporate donations from Hanson Trust PLC and one or two others.
Apart from holding public meetings and publishing pamphlets, the Group has also been involved in advising private companies, and even some government agencies, about the implications of EC law.
In the last few months there has been a flood of people seeking membership, and several regional groups have been set up.
The aim being to have Bruges Groups in every large town by December.
The Group has also been seeking allies in Eastern Europe.
It is planning to hold a public meeting this month in Warsaw city hall, to be addressed by Nicholas Ridley and possibly Mrs Thatcher.
Its purpose is to trumpet the claims of the Eastern European nations to EC membership and to arrest the federalist bandwagon that would render such a transformation almost impossible.
At Maastricht, Robertson argues, John Major has ‘got to nobble that man Mitterrand’ and inform him bluntly that Britain is not going the sign the treaty as it stands, and that she is fully prepared to take the political consequences, both in Europe and domestically.
‘This will force France to decide whether or not she's prepared to call our bluff.
They know that if we veto the changes to the Treaty of Rome, they'll have to start from scratch, and none of the institutions of the EC would have any legal or political purchase over what they are doing…
And that, to me, is such a logical, straightforward position to take when you're dealing with someone who is basically pissing all over you — on a whole range of issues from world trade, to agricultural policy, to monetary union, to the social charter.’
But he suspects Major will fudge the issue by signing the treaty and accepting the so-called ‘Delors Compromise’, whereby Britain will be formally committed to monetary union but its implementation will be left to a later parliament.
He is worried that the British electorate has no inkling of the consequences of economic and monetary union — the fall-out in terms of unemployment and the unaccountability of EC institutions.
He thinks we are about to become the victims of a gigantic racket.
‘The more you know,’ he says wistfully, ‘the more despondent you feel.’
Memories
the other code
‘In my boyhood we yearned to see the Poms defeated.’
Thomas Keneally recalls his lifelong love affair with Rugby League
‘IN A WAY I OWE MY EXISTENCE to Rugby League.
In the Australian bush in the early 1930s, my mother-to-be was the daughter of a locomotive driver who watched her like a hawk and forbade her to go to the crasser ends of town.
This was on the north coast of New South Wales, in a place called Kempsey, three hundred miles north of Sydney.
Such was the reach of Rugby League: having been founded at the George Hotel in Huddersfield in 1890, it had now reached Kempsey, twelve or thirteen thousand miles distant.
Somehow she managed to attend a game of Rugby League.
There was a tough little five-eighth — what you insist on calling a stand-off half — playing for Kempsey that day.
My mother noticed that he threw a punch on the referee's blind side.
This caused the large man who was marking him to hit him back more overtly.
My father's forwards, believing this blow was unprovoked, rushed in to defend him.
There was a brawl of props and hookers, second rowers and locks (back rows, I think you call them) from which my father extricated himself, standing back on the sideline wearing that universal five-eighth's look of perky innocence.
No one told the Poms they were meant to go quietly: Captain Ellery Hanley, main picture, powers his way to a Great Britain victory over Australia, Sydney, 1988.
Inset, from left, Australian full back Clive Churchill, Leeds, 1948; The Kangaroos, 1908; Daily Messenger, in the first Australian touring team of 1911; action at Wembley, 1973
So when the Rugby League team next appeared to play basketball with the town's women's team, my mother picked my father out.
There are old men still up there who say, ‘Your old man was a wonderful five-eighth, but he used to come the knuckle.’
With such a provenance, it was obvious that we would always be a Rugby League family.
My eighty-three-year-old father, of Irish descent, still burns a candle in church to ensure the defeat of this or that team whose coach he dislikes or whose reputation he considers inflated.
In my babyhood, he had asked the great Australian centre Dave Brown to let me be photographed with an enormous stuffed lion Brown had brought back from a Kangaroo tour of Great Britain.
Caressing it, I absorbed the message about who should be beaten at all cost: the English.
RUGBY LEAGUE came out of the north of England because a number of Yorkshire and Lancashire businessmen thought that talented lads should be compensated for time they took off from the pit or the plant.
It therefore had a proletarian ethos.
It took eighteen years before the game moved officially to the appropriately proletarian environment of Australia.
The first season was played in 1908.
The first Australian team was South Sydney, named the Rabbitohs these days, because in the hard times of the Thirties the sand-dune dwellers of that part of the city subsisted by rabbit hunting.
The Rabbitohs were to contribute to international Rugby League one of the great backs of any era, Clive Churchill, the Little Master, so dazzling there is even a stand named after him at the Sydney Cricket Ground.
His kicking duels with the French full back Puig-Aubert were the talk of winter mornings at school.
The story was that Puig-Aubert would often snatch a smoke when play was downfield, and we lived in hope of catching him in such an act of Gallic braggadocio.
In my boyhood, we yearned to see the Poms defeated.
On Sydney suburban grounds we looked at teams clash, Wests and Souths, St George and Balmain, Norths and Detective Sergeant Bumper Farrell's Newtown Bluebags, and decided that this or that lock or halfback would cut a swathe on heavy northern grounds in England.
But then we would send our teams away, and they'd come back with no better than an honourable defeat in the Test Series.
From the first touring team of 1911, featuring the great Daily Messenger, to 1963, Great Britain was supreme.
Men like Jim Sullivan, McTigue, Karalius, the brilliant centre Eric Ashton and his winger Billy Boston, thwarted us.
Then on a cold day at Swinton or magical centre Reg Gasnier and the Thornett brothers won the Ashes at last from Eric Ashton's Lions.
I was twenty-eight when it happened, and had spent therefore a whole youth in the shadow of the British Lions.
WE WERE IN PART educated by the Poms.
Their big forwards made a science of gaining the hard yards up the middle, purely as a prelude to sending the ball wide to their backs.
I remember that the performance of the enormous Wigan props, Ken Gee and Frank Whitcombe, caused the people at the Sydney Cricket Ground in 1946 to cry, ‘That's it.
No more bloody food parcels for Britain!’
Accustomed from childhood to the soggy paddocks of Ilkley, Bradford, Warrington and Wigan, the Poms could handle like a dream and moved the ball magically through many and quick hands.
But once we had digested the British skills, we took them over.
The Great St George team of the 1950s and 1960s, the  team that produced Gasnier and the great lock Johnny Raper (famous for having once walked through the streets of Ilkley wearing nothing but a bowler hat and a tie), was the team that introduced scientific cover defence.
A growing athleticism and professionalism came into the game in Australia.
From 1974 until 1988, the Poms didn't win a Test Match.
We had yearned for supremacy and now had too much of it too easily.
Even nationalists such as myself began to tire of it, until the modern British revival that came unexpectedly at the Sydney Football stadium in the Third Test 1988.
They made the cure permanent by beating the Kangaroos last autumn at Wembley.
It was probably the finest game I have seen.
No one had told the Poms they were meant to go quietly.
Led by Ellery Hanley, they survived everything thrown at them, including a decimating individual try by Australia's Mark McGaw, and struck back within minutes.
Afterwards we all said that it was good for the game that the transplant of power which had begun at the Sydney Football Stadium in our bi-centennial year had taken so robustly.
I HAVE TWICE SEEN the Australians try to beat the Poms at Wembley.
It is a long way from Kempsey, New South Wales, to Wembley.
If people coming down from the North wearing British Coal Rugby League jumpers think they're travelling away from home and the event is rather special, imagine the feelings of an Australian as he goes up that long concourse to the Vatican of the inflated rubber bladder.
With a group of other Australians, I first went there in 1973, to see Graeme Langland's Kangaroos take on the Lions before a much smaller crowd than honoured Ellery's boys last year.
The train out to Wembley was packed with the usual Antipodean detritus of Earl's Court.
They sang their tribal songs: ‘…
The beer is crook and the girls all look…
Like you, you Pommie bastard.’
Apart from these racial insults, the atmosphere was genial, and all of us had seen enough of our boys to expect the best.
The Kangaroos were killed, above all by a second rower called Phil Lowe.
He scored two tries that day.
He would later come to Australia and play for my club, Manly-Warringah.
Watching him, we all became aware that the style of play was beginning to favour forwards who should run as fast as wings or centres.
As the aircraft carrier made the battleship obsolete, Phil Lowe established that the lumbering forward was about to join the mastodons in extinction.
Characteristically, we won the next two Tests.
The second of the two is dear to my memory.
We shouted ourselves first-class to Leeds, drank in the lounge of one of better hotels until match time, and strolled down to Headingley in a biting wind, Eastern Australian writers and film makers.
Phil Lowe was as dangerous here as he had been at Wembley.
But the great Australian five-eighth, child of English emigrants to Australia, Bobby Fulton, clinched the game.
Lockwood, the Great Britain second-rower, hit him.
Fulton lay on the permafrost, miming a cerebral haemorrhage.
Lockwood was sent from the field.
The Australian trainer came on with a bucket of water to try to revive the apparently comatose Fulton.
Fulton opened one eye and said, ‘You're not going to put water on me on a bloody cold day like this, are you, Alf?’
Ninety seconds later he intercepted a Great Britain pass and ran sixty-five yards to score.
This served as a wonderful trigger for the crowd.
They spent the remaining thirty minutes of the game yelling, ‘Get home, you convict trash!’
In the day's savage cold, all of us revelled perversely in the insult.
IN THE EARLY 1970s, my wife and I moved out to the northern beaches of Sydney.
Sydney is a big as Los Angeles, and I was now far from the two teams I liked — Wests and St George.
I fell from the observance of the high rituals of Rugby League.
But gradually I began to write occasional pieces for newspapers.
This led to the highest possible in Rugby League other than actually playing for a good team: I began to be invited to games by the committee.
I walked into the dressing room and saw Graham Eadie.
I saw Max Krilich, child of Croatian migrants, and — close up — his famous nose, broken thirty-six times in the service of Manly and Australia.
I saw that superb five-eighth, Ian Thompson, in the majesty of his sweat and grime.
I saw the infant children of one of the finest second-rowers in the Phil Lowe tradition, Crusher Cleal, playing with their father's steaming boots.
For a number of seasons, before I began teaching at New York University and going to the Horn of Africa during the early part of the season, I was a tipster for the Sydney Morning Herald .
I knew I had arrived in Rugby League the day I walked into a bar in the Australian snowfields and a twelve-year-old boy came up to ask me, ‘Why did you pick Souths to beat Balmain?’
My greatest moment in Rugby League came much later, in 1989.
Balmain, a municipality named for a swashbuckling surgeon of convicts, had come again to the Grand Final and were heavily favoured.
They were playing the Canberra team from the Federal capital.
All the commentators said they had no chance, except Bob Hawke the Prime Minister, who of course lived in Canberra and had to say that, and me, former tipster for The Sydney Morning Herald and occasional commentator and writer on the game.
The great Aboriginal winger, Chicka Ferguson, was on the wing with Canberra, and in the last minutes, when Balmain had already sent their two most powerful forwards off, and when Bob Hawke was already on his way down from the VIP box to present the shield to Balmain, Chicka scored a wonderfully impossible weaving and kinking try to tie the game.
There were twenty minutes of extra time played, in which a kid called Martin came on — he had never played in first grade before — and scored the clinching try for Canberra.
Later in the dressing room, everyone was suffering cramps.
I saw the ageing winger Chicka being rubbed down on a massage table and smoking a cigarette.
My friend Roy Masters, former St George and Wests coach and a fine writer on politics and the game (which in Australia often blend into each other), took me up to the table and said, ‘Chicka, you know Tom, don't you?’
Chicka looked up, wincing with the exquisite pain of an extraordinary victory and said, ‘I know you, mate, you fucking tipped us.
Good on yer.’
I took those words down.
It's my intention that they appear on my gravestone.
Rivals
the grudge match amis v barnes
The cues are chalked.
The balls are racked.
The green baize awaits.
On one side is Martin Amis, the boy who hates to lose.
And playing on his home turf is Julian Barnes, one of the game's true gentlemen.
The tension is high.
Today is the big one…
MARTIN AMIS:
BY ANALOGY WITH Whirlwind White and Hurricane — or, these days, better say Holocaust — Higgins, I am known, in the snooker world, as Earthquake Amis.
A flair player, one who relies on natural ability , his only academy the pool halls and borstal rec-rooms of a misspent youth : inconsistent, foul-tempered, over-ambitious, graceless alike in victory and defeat, and capable of missing anything .
On the other hand, I do hit the ball tremendously hard and with various violent spins.
A while ago I considered changing my snookering nickname (which I am at complete liberty to do, because I'm the only one who uses it), to take account of the New Weather: global warming, and so on.
I briefly became known as Ozone Amis.
But the past summer saw a reversion to the Old Weather (cloud and warm rain: England in July, where the cricketer casts no shadow), and somehow Earthquake has stuck.
I have thought long and hard and often, over the years, about a subtle nickname for my opponent.
Let's see.
Snooker frames with Julian last about twice as long as they do with anybody else.
His play is marked by exaggerated, even psychotic caution, as if , after the slightest lapse on his part, I will coolly rise from my chair and assemble a century clearance — rather than a single miscued jump-shot double-kiss in-off .
Otherwise he is persistent, deliberate, gentlemanly, and unpitying.
He is at his strongest (and I am at my weakest) when only six or seven balls remain, when wariness is all.
Oh, how he loves to thwart and hamper…
Blizzard Barnes, then, I quickly rejected: the temperature's right, but the agitation is way off target.
The way he wears you down, the way he bleeds you white — if his name were Julian Barnes, he would have long been known as the Glacier.
The appealing aptness of slow-moving natural processes led me to flirt with Geology Jules.
Finally, though, because his style resembles not a force of nature so much as a medium of measurement or response (response to pressure, atmospheric pressure), I settle on something less personal: Barometer Barnes.
We used to play for money, he and I, twenty years ago.
Pounds sterling changed hands, in note form — and they really mattered.
A win or a loss could affect how well you lived for a day or two.
I nearly always won, as I remember; and as we left the club or the hall I would make quite a show of hailing a taxi, offering to drop Julian off at the nearest tube.
Then, years later, when he bought his own table (and a house big enough to put it in), and we started playing regularly, almost weekly, we wondered whether we should go on playing for money.
Because the money didn't matter now, and our games were more evenly and bitterly fought, and we agreed that the rivalry shouldn't — and indeed couldn't — get any tenser.
It's all a nightmare anyway.
Unlike the Barometer, who is largely faithful and wholly site tenacious, The Earthquake puts out all over town.
My casual opponents include a biographer, an entrepreneur, a political analyst, a tennis pro, a handyman, a philosopher and a hustler.
All these players can make me flinch and squirm; but it's nothing compared to the complicated torment meted out by the Barometer.
With him, even when I'm an inch away from clear victory, I sometimes wonder if I have ever suffered so.
Why is this?
Because we have ‘contrasting styles’, and go back a way, and are both novelists?
No.
It's because there's nothing in it.
We're equal.
Each frame is decided by the tiniest psychological edge, by sniggering fate — by the sneer of the snooker gods who determine the rub of the green.
I prepared for the match with an early night, a breakfast rich in carbohydrates, and, later that morning, a secret visit to a local club, where, with a pensive pint of low-alc lager, I practised alone: to get the spasms our of my cueing arm, to neutralize the excitement (ie panic) of one's induction into the verdant six-bagged oblong.
With epic nonchalance I motored north.
We've each had our hot streaks, I won't deny: the whammy has changed hands many times.
For a while, as Julian once accurately and hauntingly said to me, ‘You now come here with fear in your heart.’
But in recent weeks the whammy has been mine: just.
Barometer Barnes received me calmly.
He was pretending to take an interest in the Edberg-McEnroe fourth-rounder at Wimbledon, further claiming to see an encouraging paradigm in Edberg, the expressionless icicle, versus McEnroe, the scowling has-been.
Of course, we hardly needed to say, as we made our way upstairs, that we were both nervous wrecks.
Our cues bespeak us — both, coincidentally, presents from our wives (pious admirers of their husbands' baizecraft).
The Barometer's cue is a one-piece broadsword, the Earthquake's a two-piece rapier, which, moreover, comes in a yob-heaven black leatherette case with twin combination locks.
His tip is ponderously broad, half the size of the cue-ball; mine is as slender as a sting — excellent for spins and miscues.
The blinds were lowered.
The gentlemen ruminatively chalked.
I felt confident and self-possessed, and recovered quickly from the catastrophe of losing the toss.
The pattern of our recent frames has been as followed.
I go into the end-game (the colours) with a lead of about 30 — and then win on the black.
The equivalent in tennis would be a 6–0 lead in the tie-break, and eventual victory at 19–17.
This was, at least, an improvement on an earlier pattern, where I went into the end-game with a lead of about 30 — and then lost on the black.
That's the Barometer for you: never more dangerous than when in the portals of the slaughterhouse.
The man's an animal.
My brain is encrusted with scar tissue from all the frames he has pinched and nicked.
I can so easily fall apart…
In frame one I went into the colours, feeling completely hysterical, with a lead of about 30 — and won on the brown! 61–32.
No sweat.
Rack ‘em.
Frame two, I say with tears of pride in my eyes, was a near duplicate, 51–14, my opponent disgustedly resigning with blue, pink and black still on the table.
I was impressed.
I was astounded.
I hadn't relaxed or over-reached or crumbled or collapsed.
I saved all that for frame three.
All wobble and tremor, the Quake just wasn't making it on the Richter Scale.
His eyes now lit by a weak leer of hope, Barometer Barnes closed me out on the pink 35–43.
Here's a little confession.
Julian and I are not terribly good at snooker.
But we can be terribly bad at it.
The longest, if not the highest, break of the day was my five-baller, which scored 8 (green, yellow, three reds).
There was also a 15 (me), a 13 (him) and a (12)(me).
My opponent secured his frame three win, for example, by rifling in breaks of 4, 7, 6, 5 and 3.
The fourth frame, though, was an all-howler affair, a series of abject calamities.
The builders on the scaffolding  outside must have thought that the house contained a pack of feral beasts, groaning at their captivity, their ill-treatment, their lousy food.
At one point the score stood at 13–18, without a colour being potted.
The only ball that seemed to find the pocket was the white, in a bad dream of in-offs and in-withs — plus, from Julian, a world-class in-instead , the cue-ball struck with such prodigious unintentional sidespin that after a deadened impact it ambled on grimly into the corner bag.
Altogether appropriately and ingloriously, the frame ended with the Barometer's in-off the black, the ball lasering in on the middle pocket at a preposterous angle.
58–46. 3–1.
The taste of victory is sweet.
Actually I felt strangely subdued as I drove home.
Gutted for the Barometer, no doubt.
He took it like a man, which is better than I would have taken it.
I would have taken it like a boy.
Later, though, I felt tremendously happy and high-souled.
I felt as if I had singlehandedly wrecked San Francisco.
I occurred to me that all the pleasure of snooker comes either in anticipation or retrospect.
On the table, everything is a falling-short, hamfisted, cross-purposed — a mortified groping.
Come to think of it, the same goes for tennis, chess, poker, darts and pinball.
Asked about his writing, the great Jimmy White once admitted that he wasn't much good at it, adding: ‘Not much good at the reading neither.
Either.’
I can read and write, and to a high standard.
As for snooker, well, to approach the televisual ideal, by which we all measure ourselves, I'd have to do nothing else for the rest of my life.
Then snooker might work out and measure up, with everything going where you want it to go, at the right weight and angle.
Then snooker might feel like writing.
JULIAN BARNES:
TO PREPARE MYSELF for this latest, and biggest Grudge Match, I run through the list of my opponent's useful weaknesses: over-caution, middle-pocket anxiety, last-six-colours angst, plus a Plutonic rage whenever snookered more than once a frame.
Then I soberly tick off my own failings: defeatism, fear of the black off its spot, terror of the fourth ball in a break (not a regular terror for obvious reasons), plus a tendency to play my best only when several frames down.
Finally, I admit our shared deficiency: that of not being very good at snooker.
We make up for this, however, by an almost psychopathic competitiveness.
My theory has always been that since Martin and I loathe losing to one another at games, this burns off any other rivalry between us.
Lately, I've been wondering about this theory.
Perhaps we're just as competitive professionally, merely better-mannered: perhaps beneath our relaxed admiration for one another 's work lies the same rage to kill.
Our first frame is a macédoine of flukes and in-offs, a banquet of incompetence.
Given that our five-frame match is likely to last anything up to six hours at our normal rate of play, I have decided to spring a new psychological tactic on Martin: I shall eat bananas throughout the match, as top tennis players do.
Also, I've decided not to brush down the table or re-mark it or clean the balls: I reckon a few bad kicks and some low-lying grit on the baize will unsettle him more than they will me.
The trouble is, if you're not hitting the balls anywhere near the pockets, dust is scarcely a major factor one way or the other.
This frame, in which my highest break is eight (a fluked red plus follow-up black) would be too boring to describe in the mildest detail (yes, yes, he wins).
The only memorable moment comes when Martin commiserates with me over an ambitious red that squirms in and out of a pocket.
This is memorable because, as all Martin's sporting opponents agree, words like ‘Great shot’, ‘What a winner’ and ‘Oh, tough’come reluctantly to his lips.
But he knows about this tiny character flaw, and is working on it.
So as my red skims the pocket, he tries very hard to say ‘Bad luck’.
Except that some inner grudgingness fights against full articulation.
What comes out is ‘ck ’.
Oh well.
0–1.
I eat half a banana.
Martin occasionally, and fancifully, likes to picture himself as a daredevil cuester, a flashing Jimmy White to my grinding Cliff Thorburn.
The truth is that we are both trainee Eddie Charltons: slow, grim, defensive and almost joyless.
(I sometimes wonder why we do it.
We very rarely seem to enjoy it, and the pleasure of victory expresses itself mainly as relief from the self-loathing of defeat.)
If frame one was poor, the start of frame two is even worse.
It's a question of who stumbles into mediocrity first.
And at this level of stressful incompetence, escape into averageness seems a matter of chance rather than will.
I eat another half banana, thrash vainly at long pots, and resign when rather seriously behind.
(The score?
Oh, I expect Martin will remember the score.)
One thing, however, that is widely known about my snooker is that I am never more dangerous than when being profoundly humiliated.
The third frame begins to go my way.
Martin becomes careless, I settle for some solid red-and-colour, red-and-colour stuff.
He misses a risky plant, I take on some banana, and win on the pink.
Now this is more like it, this is turning into a match.
What better display of character than to overturn 0–2 into 3–2?
By frame four I'm beginning to flow.
I ease a few points ahead, Martin puts in a break of 12, I confidently reply with one of 13, and even before we reach the colours Martin is beginning to display the McEnroic aspect of his game that always encourages opponents.
‘Story of my life,’ he growls when a red declines to go into a pocket for the simple reason that he has hit it at the wrong angle.
Yet somehow, unaccountably, I find myself 16 behind needing the last three colours to even the match.
Still, I fancy my chances.
A smooth blue using the half-butt, a character-building cut on the pink, and then it's all down to the black.
Martin seems to be missing by a distance as we joust it round the table, so after half a dozen exchanges I go down with much confidence on a half-ball cut into the bottom left-hand pocket.
Frame ball.
It clips the pocket, and bounces away, but everything's all right, the black is clearly going safe.
It rests sweetly against the cush.
They we both notice the white rolling at the acutest of angles towards the middle pocket.
No danger, not really, I mean, you never get an in-off like that, practically parallel to the side cushion.
The ball continues its slow but dogged motion, brakes at a patch of dust, trickles on, and mockingly drops.
Gutted.
1–3.
Mega-gutted.
Martin says ‘ck ’.
Giga-gutted.
I don't think it was the bananas.
After considerable reflection, a discussion of the match with a wide circle of friends, a session with a sports psychiatrist, and two calls to the Samaritans, I decide that I lost because Martin played much better than I did.
Yes, that seems to be it.
When push came to shove, the lad showed big-match composure.
I console myself by reflecting that not only do I have a higher lifetime-best break than he does (34–30), I also hold several other table records.
For instance, Most Humiliating Break: five balls for seven points (three reds and two yellows)including two flukes.
Losing From An Unassailable Position: I once dissipated a lead of 65 points with only two reds left on the table.
And finally, Most Reds Potted In A Row Without Managing To Get A Single Colour With Them: 15 over two consecutive frames.
Martin had better look out.
These are titles I cherish and do not intend to give up easily.
This page Simon Godfrey, left, wears Aran wool sweater from Principles.
Lisa B wears Aran wool sweater from Kent & Curwen.
Graham Fink, right, wears Aran wool sweater by Austin Reed.
Opposite page Lisa B wears men's wool cardigan by Joseph.
Godfrey wears rib cotton sweater by Nicole Farhi; cotton track pants by Rykiel Homme.
Fink wears oatmeal sweater and corduroy trousers by Joseph Abboud; cotton-wool socks by Falke
Fashion
close knit
This winter, the sweater returns with a vengeance.
From the high street to the designer houses, it is bigger and chunkier than ever, in natural muted colours.
Whether you're at home or venturing outside, the cold war is definitely won.
Leading advertising man Graham Frank and Simon Godfrey, a scenic artist, join singer and model Lisa B to demonstrate the new wool order
Sprawl in the comfort of mohair, cashmere and pure wool   
Left Wool-mohair bouclé sweater and cardigan, velvet trousers all by Dolce e Gabbana; cotton-wool socks from Sock Shop.
Centre Pure cashmere sweater by Ballantyne; wool mix socks from Debenhams.
Right Rollneck wool sweater by Paul Smith; velvet track pants by Rykiel Homme; wool mix socks from Debenhams.
Sofa and chair loaned by George Sherlock Antiques, London SW6
Indulge in the luxury of camel, alpaca and chenille 
Opposite left Camel-wool-acrylic sweater and cardigan, wool trousers, all by Nicole Farhi; wool polka dot scarf Paul Smith; cream ribbed socks from Sock Shop.
Opposite right Alpaca wool sweater and cardigan by Artwork; cotton track pants by Agnès B; wool mix socks from Debenhams.
Right Acrylic chenille sweater by Dolce e Gabbana
Families
a man's complete guide to divorce
With yet more changes to the divorce laws, men need to know, more than ever, where they stand by Marcel Berlins
THE DIVORCE LAWS SAY THAT MEN AND WOMEN should be treated equally.
But ten times as many children of divorce live with their mothers as with their fathers; more than eighty-five per cent of divorces, granted on the grounds of unreasonable behaviour, are given to wives complaining about their husbands' conduct, and the number of wives made to pay off their ex-husbands is still tiny.
Whatever the law says — and there's now a new law on the future of children which abolishes the concepts of custody and access — in reality divorce is still largely a woman's prerogative.
But is this the inevitable consequence of men's continued economic dominance, or the failure of our divorce legislation to give men their due?
In short, can a man lose his wife without losing his shirt and his kids as well ?
It isn't easy.
THE GROUND FOR DIVORCE
The first problem is that although we claim we no longer look at such concepts of ‘fault’ and ‘who's to blame’when dishing out the money, or the children — even judges now realize that most marriage break-ups have two guilty parties — the law still forces one spouse to complain about the other.
In theory it says that there's only one ground for divorce — the marriage has irretrievably broken down.
OK, seems sensible.
But does that mean you can go to court and say ‘My marriage is definitely over’ and get an immediate divorce?
No, because that would smack of ‘divorce on demand’, which, we're told, is politically unacceptable.
So the law has to play a little con-trick.
There may only be one ground for divorce — irretrievable breakdown — but the only way you can prove it is by proving you've got one of five grounds going for you:
adultery (hers)
unreasonable behaviour (hers)
desertion (hers)
two-year separation (when both of you want the divorce)
five-year separation (if she doesn't want to end it)
Adultery
Officially responsible for nearly a third of the 150,000 divorces granted annually.
In 1989 more than 25,000 divorce decrees were made because of the husband's adultery, 18,000 because of the wife's.
Yours or hers, the law's the same.
No problem, you'd think.
You find out your wife's  been doing it with your best friend, whip in your petition for divorce and before you can say ‘one-night stand’ you're a free man.
The law doesn't make it that easy, quite apart from making you prove her infidelity (she may deny it).
The adultery on its own isn't enough.
You've also got to find it ‘intolerable to live with her’.
It's fine if she's got seriously involved with her lover and wants to leave you anyway.
But what if she's just had a tiny indiscretion, a few drinks with a work colleague that went too far, followed by tears and remorse and ‘I swear to you it'll never happen again, I love only you, darling’?
Can you still get your divorce on such puny, immediately regretted unfaithfulness?
Yes, if you want.
Adultery, like virginity, has no halfways.
The law doesn't distinguish between an isolated lustful incident and a serious long-standing affair.
If you swear that her little one-off has so turned you against her that you couldn't possibly bear to live with her any longer, you'll get your divorce.
Remember, though, divorce laws don't discriminate.
If she wants to end it after your trivial flingette, that's her right.
Real adulterous life is not as simple.
The discovery of unfaithfulness is followed by anger and recriminations, anguish and uncertainty.
And questions: to forgive, to try to mend the marriage, or to end it?
But how long do you have to decide whether her adultery should end in divorce?
How long can you still live with her in the same house while making up your mind?
The law's got an answer — six months after discovering the adultery.
Plenty long enough to discover whether you find it intolerable to live with her.
Don't worry if, in an emotional moment, you've told her: ‘I forgive you.
I want us to stay together.’
It doesn't bind you, and it can't be held against you.
That six months ‘make your mind up time’ is still there.
But don't do it too often, or your story that life with her is intolerable wears a little thin.
It even OK to sleep with her — whether you're still together in the same house or living apart.
Strictly speaking, you can make beautiful love to your wife for five months and three weeks after finding out that she's been with someone else, and then turn round and say ‘I find it intolerable to stay with you’.
Don't try it though.
You may have to prove your sincerity to a judge and he may be cross enough with your behaviour to refuse you the divorce.
Unreasonable behaviour
The reason given in around forty-five per cent of divorces and, if you believe the statistics, nearly 60,000 men are guilty of it, but fewer than 9,000 women.
But that's not the truth.
In fact, unreasonable behaviour is often used as a means of getting a quickie divorce where husband and wife both want one but don't want to wait for the two-year separation period; and because the age of chivalry is still not dead, men are often willing to let their wives petition for divorce when the fault is fifty-fifty, or even when the women are more to blame.
It is also used when there has been adultery but the parties prefer to present their break-up with less stigma and embarrassment.
To get the divorce you have to show that your wife has behaved in such a way that you ‘cannot reasonably be expected’ to live with her.
But what's ‘unreasonable’?
By whose standards?
Who draws the line?
It all depends.
There are marriages where the husband coming home drunk and throwing plates at his wife is normal; in others such conduct would be outrageous and unacceptable.
So the law says: look at the circumstances of the particular couple involved, look at the characters and personalities of the husband and wife, look at the conduct issue.
Would this behaviour be unreasonable in the context of these two people?
Some examples of unreasonable: habitual drunkenness, violence, constant abuse and threats, humiliating the spouse in front of others, excessive meanness, addiction to gambling, having a sex change, not speaking for months.
But a man who claimed that his wife wasn't being affectionate enough was refused a divorce — she wasn't being unreasonable, that's just the kind of woman she was.
And so to sex.
To deliberately refuse to have sex is unreasonable; and some wives (and a few husbands) have got their divorces by claiming that their partners demanded too much sex, or wanted kinky sex.
Once-a-week sex, said one judge, was not unreasonably rare.
It all depends on the individuals involved.
What's excessive or disgusting to a vicar's wife may be the height of pleasure to a pop star's.
But it's not enough just to show that you're incompatible sexually.
A woman who wanted a divorce because her husband made love to her not very often and not very well didn't get it.
The fact that he had a lower sex drive than she did wasn't considered unreasonable behaviour.
Desertion
Your wife has left you for a continuous period of two years.
Desertion was once a popular ground for divorce.
These days it's  hardly worth a mention.
Only a thousand people a year use it; but it's useful if she's really decamped and you don't know where she is.
Two years apart
This is the civilized, amicable ground of divorce.
You and your wife have been separated for a continuous two-year period, and you both agree to the divorce.
It's usually a trouble-free procedure, but occasionally there's a problem over whether you've really been living apart.
Where there's not much money around, a couple is often forced to stay in the same house.
But the courts will only agree that they're living apart if the husband and wife run totally different lives.
They must sleep in separate rooms, not even eat meals together, and share as little as possible.
And, of course, not sleep together, which they mustn't do if they're living apart either.
Warning: a couple of nights of passion can be fatal to a two-year-separation divorce.
But who's to know and who's to tell?
Five years apart
The unfriendly divorce.
She won't agree to the two-year version; hasn't committed adultery (not that you can prove, anyway), or behaved unreasonably to you.
You've got no option but to wait the five years.
THE SHARE-OUT
The marriage has broken down; you've got your legal grounds for divorce.
But what's she entitled to financially?
Let's get rid of a big myth.
The ‘alimony drone’— the leech-woman whose divorce gives her a meal ticket for life so that she can spend her days lolling by a pool peeling grapes while ex-hubby slaves twenty hours a day to earn enough to keep in her in luxury — does not exist here.
We don't even use the word alimony in English law.
The truth is grimmer.
Unless you're pretty well-heeled, everyone suffers.
Two apart can't live as cheaply as two together.
What the law does it to lay down priorities.
And the first priority are the children.
If there aren't any, the philosophy behind our divorce laws is simple — try, if at all possible, for a ‘clean break’ settlement between you and your wife, which will mean that the two of you are rid of each other for good— no painful writing of the monthly cheque, no waiting for the phone to ring when you haven't sent it.
Regular payments stretching into infinity are definitely out of fashion.
What's in is the lump-sum once-and-for-all payment.
The two of you — and your lawyers — will look at your financial position, at your wife's, at how long you've been married, whether or not she's working (and if she isn't, what sort of work she'll be able to find) and eventually come up with a sum which is supposed to be fair to both of you.
And goodbye.
If there's a house, you may be forced to sell it and split the proceeds, but not always.
It's negotiable.
The vast majority — more than ninety-nine per cent— of financial settlements following divorce are reached by agreement between the parties.
Only if you can't agree will you need a judge to decide.
Sometimes a clean break just won't work, where, for instance, there isn't any capital sum available for you to pay your wife and she hasn't any job prospects; then you may be saddled with having to fork out ‘periodic payments’— the English term for alimony.
There's no fixed legal rule laying down how much she's entitled to; what counts are the individual circumstances.
The good news is that payments stop if she remarries.
And remember, what's cash for the goose is cash for the gander — if you've got a wife much richer than you are, or a higher earner, it's you who might have Christmas on divorce.
IT'S ALL DIFFERENT WHEN YOU'VE GOT KIDS…
Who gets the children?
In principle, the law is clear — children go where it is in their best interests to go.
Your child's welfare is the ‘paramount’ consideration; what you and your wife want is secondary.
Most decisions about a child following divorce are agreed by the parents, and the judge rubber-stamps them.
But not always.
The judge can decide that what the parents want isn't in the child's interests, and can order something else.
When there's a dispute between parents, a judge has the last say.
Under a new law, the Children Act of 1989, which comes into force October 14, there's a checklist of the criteria which the courts must look to when deciding the children's future.
Factors include: what the children themselves want — how much weight is given to their wishes depends on their age and level of understanding; their physical, emotional and educational needs; the possible harmful effect of moving them away from where they're settled; which of you is more capable (financially, emotionally, practically) of meeting their needs.
In theory, fathers and mothers are treated equally.
There's no law that says that  children should preferably be with their mothers.
In practice the younger the child, the more likely it is to go with mum, and seventeen out of every twenty children do so.
It's not necessarily anti-male prejudice — men are more likely to be full-time at work and less able to look after the kids.
The new law also does away with the concepts of custody and access.
Instead, it promotes a new philosophy — that both parents have parental responsibility for the children and not just, as was often the case under the old law, the parent with whom the children were living.
A ‘residence order’ will say where the children will live; and a ‘contract order’will set out the arrangements for the other parent to see the children — what used to be called access.
It's for you and your ex-wife to work out when you see the children (assuming they're with her).
The courts will interfere only if the two of you can't agree.
These days judges are keen that children should see and remain close to both parents after divorce.
Unless you've done something awful, the courts won't deny you contact with the kids just because your wife doesn't like it.
Who gets the home?
It's in your name and you paid for it; so when you split up, it's yours, right?
Wrong, or, rather, it depends.
Whose name the place is in doesn't matter very much; what's more important is how long the marriage has lasted, what contributions each of you has made (not just financial — the law considers the home-maker who brings up the children to be just as important as the breadwinner who brings home the money), and probably the most important factor, the future of the children.
There are really two questions: who can stay in the home and how is the financial stake to be divided?
If you have children of school-going age, the law isn't going to chuck them out of their settled home.
So if they're going to remain with their mother, you're the one who'll have to pack and go.
You'll still retain your share in the value of the house; but won't be able to do anything about it until the kids grow up.
Sometimes the agreement at the time of the divorce, or the judge's order, will say that when the children finish their education, or reach a certain age, the house will sold and the proceeds split between the couple.
But that means waiting for years before you can get part of your investment back, and your ex-wife will be faced with finding a new place with limited funds.
These days the deal is often struck at the time of divorce; and usually it's that the house goes to your wife, for good.
But you may get to keep the other assets from the marriage, or pay less to her over the years.
Who gets your money?
If you're the earner, and she's looking after the children, it's usually down to you to make regular payments for the children's upkeep at least until they reach the age of seventeen — and longer if they're still in education.
And that often also means paying for your ex-wife if she's not working or doesn't earn very much.
But you've now got a new wife or girlfriend and there's a new child to look after and the money won't stretch.
The short answer is that it's going to be tough on your new family.
Your new commitments will be relevant in working out how much you can afford to pay out, but the law will favour the children of your first family — after all, no one forced you to take on another relationship, and it would be unfair to the children of your first marriage if they suffered because you chose to do so.
Fair enough, perhaps, but your ex-wife had got a rich new boyfriend.
Can you stop paying?
You might be able to negotiate — or ask the court to order — that you pay her less, if her guy is supporting her.
But it won't make any difference to your obligations to your children.
DIVORCE ON DEMAND
It's coming.
Within a year or two the government (of whichever party) is expected to put to Parliament a radical reform which would do away with the charade of having to prove marriage breakdown.
Instead, a divorce will be there for the asking, but only when the parties have agreed on the finances and the children.
At the moment, the divorce is given and then, often, the real bitterness starts as husband and wife fight over cash and kids.
The new law will insist on conciliation and agreement, on everything, before the decree is given.
With this make a difference to modern man's divorce?
Don't count on it.
THE LAWYERS
There is no such thing as right and wrong — only who's got the better lawyer.
Too cynical?
Perhaps, but getting a good solicitor is important, and that means hiring someone who is experienced in divorce work.
Do not just go to the solicitor who did you conveyancing, or walk into your nearest solicitor's firm on the high street.
They may be good and experienced at divorce, but they may not.
So it's worth asking around, and putting in a bit of homework before choosing your solicitor.
Or get in touch with the Solicitor's Family Law Association,, whose members are all experienced divorce lawyers.
Our divorce laws are still, regrettably, largely adversarial.
Your wife will have her lawyer to look after her interests, and you'll have to have yours to look after yours.
But the trend is towards taking the bitterness and confrontation out of divorce, and in the last few years there has been a growth in the number of ‘mediation’ and ‘conciliation’(not to be confused with reconciliation) services available.
They're designed to take the heat out of the dispute by getting the husband and wife to talk sense rather than war, especially about what happens to the kids and the money.
Conciliation facilities are available in the county courts where you go for the divorce.
There is also an independent service with trained mediators, most of them solicitors.
Information can obtained from ,.
Shock of the New
ALL TIED UP
Piero Fornasetti lives on in these pure silk ties
FORNASETTI TIES are creating a new trend in British menswear — the fashionable legacy — of a visually startling, much-plagarized designer.
His silk ties, now retailing at £39.50, are the latest addition to a wide range of consumer products which, since the maestro's death three years ago, has been orchestrated by his son Barnaba.
Piero Fornasetti, a Milanese whose contribution to the decorative arts in the Twentieth Century has been described as visionary, trained as a painter and sculptor.
Eager to capitalize on the commercial potential of his designs, he launched a collection of stark, monochrome headscarves for ladies.
They featured graphic motifs such as newspaper print and musical scores, which, by the mid-Fifties, had become a fashion byword for cosmopolitan chic.
But it is his talent as a designer of decorative furniture and domestic accessories that is mainly responsible for Fornasetti's enduring renown.
Chairs, plates, umbrella stands, waste-paper baskets, lavatories: no household object, however lowly its function, appears to have escaped the ironic Fornasetti touch.
His work, which fuses the best of both the photographic and surrealist schools, is characterized by witty visual allusions,trompe-l'oeil and a teasing distortion of perspective and scale.
The Fornasetti Rinascimento , underscored by Thames & Hudson's recent commemorative publication Fornasetti: Designer of Dreams , by Patrick Maurie, with photography by Richard Davies — takes the form of a three-pronged initiative.
The V&A is running a retrospective exhibition from early October to late January next year, placing special emphasis on the self-portraits and designs for objects and interiors.
Meanwhile, Themes and Variations, the decorative art gallery in Westbourne Grove which takes it name from Fornasetti's celebrated dinner plate collection, is holding a month-long show, beginning October 10.
It will feature tables and cabinets from the Fifties, along with some contemporary pieces for which the gallery is sole British agent.
And Liberty, which provided Fornasetti with his first outlet in Britain thirty years ago, is staging a selling exhibition in furnishings department from October 2 to November 6.
So if you're too busy or too lazy to attend exhibitions, too broke or too reserved to splatter seventeen separate hues upon your sofa, but would appreciate a practical piece of shocking new art to jolly your life up — then perhaps a Fornasetti tie will prove the happy solution.
Crime
the sex war killings
anatomy of a mass murder
It was the last day of term at the University of Montreal.
Marc Lepine entered the classroom holding a semi-automatic rifle.
He yelled at the students to separate themselves — women to the left and men to the right.
Then he murdered fourteen women.
Marc Lepine hated feminists
THE DOCTOR: So Lepine walks into the Ecole Polytechnique.
He kills fourteen engineering students, who happen to be women, and then himself.
It's not what you call a rational act.
I think it was an isolated incident.
I will not feel responsible, aligned or guilty simply because he and I are both men.
MYSELF: It may have been the isolated act of a madman, but that doesn't mean it's isolated in history.
His act must have causes and consequences.
THE DOCTOR: Solutions.
Everybody wants solutions.
SEPTEMBER, 1989.
Imagine an easy, balmy heat and the trees of Montreal turning yellow and red and orange.
It the new term, and Marc Lepine, twenty-five years old, scruffy, fairly lean, with a young ungainly beard on his slightly spotty baby face, leaves the bus at the junction of Queen Mary and Côte-des-Neiges.
He passes the attendant in the security booth at the entrance to the University campus, and takes the gently inclining road to the Ecole Polytechnique, the engineering faculty of l'Université de Montreal.
Perhaps he walks on the right side, with just the metal grid fence separating him from the rolling fields of graves — in no hurry, since there is no class for him to make.
Lepine had applied to the Polytechnique school of Engineering in 1986, but was offered just a conditional place pending the completion of a chemistry course.
He managed this by the spring of 1989, though the registrar, Claude Brisset, is ‘99.9% sure’ of having seen no further application.
So he had no business there; he was trespassing.
Stalking.
DEATH IN THE CAFETERIA: One of Marc Lepine's victims lies dead, food unfinished
At the fork halfway up the hill you must keep by the cemetery side to find the Poly, which comes into view as you reach the parking lot at the top of the hill.
At some time, surely, Lepine must have stopped and looked around himself: at the dreary, lumpen Ecole Polytechnique, and the other squat and block-like faculty buildings of sandy yellow brick, with the high tower of the University pavilion rising in their midst.
The tower is modern in design, and ordinary, and phallic, with a top of green copper and geometric columns in half-relief, like ribbing of a sort.
It stands at the crest of the hill, which falls away to Queen Mary Boulevard, North Montreal and Saint-Hubert.
NATHALIE PROVOST (STUDENT): Let me say to all the young women of Quebec who want to study to be engineers, don't give up!
It's a marvellous profession through which we can help our fellow citizens, an enriching one which, like medicine, saves lives…
Je veux que les filles se tiennent les coudes …we must not be defeated by this misery.
THE ECOLE POLYTECHNIQUE — in fact, the engineering department of just about any university — is traditionally a male enclave.
It was founded in 1874, and admitted its first female student in 1948.
Only 3.9% of Quebec's engineers are women, well below the Canadian quotient of 11.8%.
In 1989, some 16% or 900 of the Polytechnique's 5,000 students were female, of which Nathalie Provost was one, although women made up 56% of the student body of the University at large.
THE DOCTOR: There's something fundamentally absurd about your attributing reason to a lunatic.
MYSELF: He felt threatened by those students.
Cheated of power and position.
THE DOCTOR: And so all men do?
MYSELF: Maybe.
I think that you can see the world reflected in any relationship, any time, any action, no matter how small.
Marc Lepine killed fourteen women, in Quebec, here, now.
Not in any other place, not at any other time.
THE MONTREAL GAZETTE , FEBRUARY 7, 1990: MONTREAL'S MASS KILLER WAS RAISED ON VIOLENCE.
THE PAST.
We're not original, most of us.
We follow our parent's line.
We become doctors, nurses, hoteliers, lawyers or writers because our parents were.
Only a fraction of us really break the mould: immigrants usually, or women; others on the up and up.
The fourteen female students of engineering at the Polytechnique.
Or Marc Lepine.
But there's always some manner in which we can't quite break free, and most of us will find ourselves one shocked moment holding a girlfriend or boyfriend in the way we've seen our parents holding each other for years.
Lepine, né Gamil Rodrigue Gharbi, was born in Montreal to Monique Lepine and her Algerian husband, Rachid Liass Gharbi, on October 20, 1964.
They had been married for about a year.
She was a nurse, and had at one time been a nun.
He was a businessman, an entrepreneur whose roller-coaster fortunes had taken the family to Puerto Rico and Costa Rica for about four years.
In 1969, the family moved back to Montreal.
Rachid's fortunes turned for the worse, and the marriage was affected.
Monique filed for divorce in 1974 and at the proceedings in October 1976, she told the court that Rachid ‘was a man who did not seem to have any control of his emotions’; that he believed ‘women are not men's equals and that women are servants to men’.
The divorce was granted two years later.
Monique explained that she and the children had undergone psychotherapy for a year.
‘The family,’ she said, ‘had difficulties expressing the need to be loved.’
NOELLA MIRVILLE (NEIGHBOUR): He was always in a hurry.
He leapt up and down the stairs as if he was in a race.
THE KILLER: Shy, polite would-be engineering student Marc Lepine gatecrashed class with a gun.
‘I'm fighting feminism,’ he shouted before opening fire
MARTHE CASSETTE (NEIGHBOUR): He was a shy withdrawn man, who was always polite and sweet.
THE LANDLORD: He was a quiet guy.
Sometimes he played the music a little loud.
He always paid the rent on time, but he was late for December.
THE DETECTIVE: So what happened?
He was a quiet guy.
Sometimes he played the music a little loud.
He looked like a skinhead.
At first everybody thought he was homosexual.
Everybody was talking about the skinny blond guy he lived with.
You going to pick up on everybody who tells you that about his neighbour?
You can't act on suspicion.
You can't even pick up every quiet guy who dresses like a skinhead and lives with blondie.
ON SEPTEMBER 5 — a week before he was first seen on campus — Marc Lepine acquired a firearms certificate from the Sûreté du Quebec.
In late November, on the strength of this certificate — attesting to his own mental good health, and that the gun was to be used only for reasonable purposes — Lepine went to Checkmate Sports, a hunting and fishing store in north Montreal, and purchased a Sturm-Ruger Mini-14 semi-automatic rifle, ammunition and a magazine clip.
The gun, manufactured by Sturm-Ruger Police Firearm Services of Southport, Connecticut, is described by them as ideal for hunting small game — coyotes, marmots — but has always been popular with criminals and psychopaths.
HERE IN THE STORE is where you should feel a little scared, except it still seems like a game, and the hardware lining the walls, to the uninitiated, still like toys.
Brownings; Sturm-Rugers; Smith and Wessons; more: it must be a game.
It's when you pick up one of the guns, feel the metal, that their potentiality strikes you, and you marvel at the precision and care put into them.
Would that half of our consumer goods were manufactured with such care, such precision, such detail.
THE DETECTIVE: When you load the gun, then you know what you're holding.
You feel power and you become someone else.
A Marc Lepine.
Someone to be scared of.
THE DOCTOR: I feel the same thing when I'm holding a syringe: the power to fuck up someone's life.
DEATH AS LIFE'S END (the Doctor), as a crime (the Detective), or just as butchery.
Maybe it's wrong to think of death, and therefore murder, as something quite so big.
Maybe for those who know how to kill it's just like talking to strangers on the tube.
Maybe after you overcome the awkwardness of the first, or the second time, it's really very easy.
CORONER'S REPORT, SECTION 224: Lepine was seen on the campus at least ten times before December 6: in September at the student co-op, then three times the next month in the Polytechnic building, in November at the administrative building, and four times in the first week of December, and the last time in the cafeteria on the ground floor.
I SAT THERE in October of last year, and read about the assault on a woman on the campus a week before.
I was surprised I'd been let in at all, surprised that I'd been able to wander freely about the second and first floors of the cold labyrinthian building of stairwells, escalators and concrete locker-lined corridors.
ON WEDNESDAY December 6, the campus of l'Université de Montreal was white with a thick blanket of snow.
In the cafeteria of l'Ecole Polytechnique, where Christmas decorations hung on the windows, there were slightly fewer people than usual, but the photocopiers along the corridor on the second floor were quite busy, as student stood duplicating notes and articles for their exams.
This was the last day of term; after it, a short recess, finals, and then the holidays: Christmas, the New Year — skiing in the Laurentians or the Townships and skating on Quebec's frozen rivers and lakes.
In Polyscope , the faculty newspaper stacked in bins by the Polytechnique's front doors and on the tables of the cafeteria and the first-floor lounge, a cartoon strip portrayed a classroom of agitated students, toques on and satchels at the ready, held in their seats by a teacher marking on the blackboard IL RESTE 30 SECONDES —‘30 seconds remaining’— the end of the academic year!
LEPINE LIVED in a small room in the back of a shared flat on Bordeaux Street, not far from his mother's house and in view of the iron girders of Jacques Cartier bridge, spanning the Saint Lawrence river.
On December 6 he was wearing a Skate Rags sweater, and his Work Wearhouse jeans.
LOUIS LECLAIR (DIRECTOR, SAINT-JUDE'S HOSPITAL): He did his job like anybody else.
There was nothing unusual about him and he wasn't fired.
He left because he wanted to continue his studies.
LEPINE WAS clean-shaven.
At Saint-Jude's Hospital, he was considered unsightly.
Louis Leclair — the uncle of one of the victims, Maryse Leclair — was director there and Dominique Leclair — Maryse's cousin remembers: ‘The employees didn't want him to serve them their lunch because of his acne.’
So they put him in the kitchens.
Cleaning work, but well paid.
Lepine took a cap, put on his Kodiak boots, and scrawled a few letters; to two friends, and on to the public at large.
The boots, the parka, the cap, the new kit: hunters are a fastidious kind.
Maybe Lepine was disappointed with the green garbage bag for a carry-all.
He attached the magazine clip, and slipped the new Sturm-Ruger inside the bag.
On his way at last.
Lepine walked to his rented car.
No chances with the bus, and besides, he wasn't going to be paying any more bills.
Lepine was first seen at the school between four o'clock and about twenty minutes past, sitting in the registrar's office on a bench near the door, obstructing the way of students.
Several times, he is seen rummaging about in the garbage bag, possibly trying to conceal something.
He speaks to no one, and no one addresses him until the employee at the counter asks if she can help at all .
Levine doesn't answer and leaves the office.
A SURVIVOR: One of the wounded, above, on her way to hospital, December 6, 1989.
Police chief Pierre Leclair in charge of the scene, below, learned his daughter Maryse was one of the dead
Some twenty minutes later, at about a quarter to five, he is seen on the third floor of the Polytechnique, in one of the corridors lined with student lockers, pressed against the wall and holding a long object  in the green garbage bag, with a smaller white plastic bag by his side.
The next time he is seen, it is in the corridor a floor below, leading to room C-230.4, beyond the photocopiers, where Professor Bouchard is listening to student presentations in mechanical engineering.
THE HARDWARE: In late November, Lepine bought a Sturm-Ruger Mini-14 semi-automatic rifle, ammunition and a magazine clip.
The manufacturers describe the gun as ideal for hunting
At about ten minutes past five, Lepine enters classroom C-230.4.
He approaches the student making her presentation with his Mini-14 held in both hands.
‘Everybody stop everything!’ he yells.
Nobody does anything.
Lepine fires a shot at the ceiling, and cries out: ‘Separate yourselves.
The women to the left and the guys on the right.’
He barks the order again, but the students, in their nervousness, remain a mixed group.
He point to the right-hand side of the room, and tells the men in the class to move that way; then he points to the left with his other hand and tells the women to stand by the wall.
The sexes separated, he hollers: ‘OK, guys, get out!
The women, you stay there.’
The men start to leave, and Lepine yells after them: ‘Grouillez-vous le cul .’
‘Move ass!’
CORONER'S REPORT, SECTION 222: They left running and fled in different directions.
They thought it was an end-of-term joke, and that the aggressor was shooting blanks.
INSIDE ROOM C-230.4, Lepine approaches the nine women gathered in a group at the bottom of the class.
‘Do you know why you're here?’
Lepine asks.
‘No,’ says Nathalie Provost, one of the students.
‘I am fighting against feminism,’ says Lepine.
‘We're not feminists,’ says Provost.
‘We're just women trying to be engineers.
We're not trying to prove that we're better than men.’
PROFESSOR YVON BOUCHARD: I didn't see him walk in.
When I saw him, he was two or three feet from the students presenting their project.
He asked all the men to go to one side of the room and the women to the other.
Nobody moved.
We thought it was a joke.
PIERRE ROBERT (STUDENT): He came in real slow, then after the shot he became more nervous, and started talking real fast.
We thought he was going to rob us.
After he ordered us out we thought somebody would be waiting, to take our wallets.
LEPINE POINTS the Sturm-Ruger, and starts shooting from left to right at the assembled women.
He fires about thirty shots.
René Beauchemin comes out of a washroom and sees the students running and hears cries for help within the classroom.
‘It was difficult to help because it was dangerous for us, you know.
I opened the door.
He was smiling.’
And: ‘I don't know why he didn't shoot me.
He was still shooting, but most of them were girls, you know.’
NATHALIE PROVOST: I was so terrified at seeing somebody killing my friends.
All I could think was that he didn't look like Robert Redford.
He was an ordinary guy.
ON THE FLOOR, Provost and two others lay wounded.
Six lay dead: Hélène Colgan, shot once; Nathalie Croteau, twice; Barbara Daigneault, seven times; Anne-Marie Lemay, three times; Sonia Pelletier, nine times; Annie St-Arneault, three times.
Lepine leaves the classroom, and shoots at the students by the photocopiers.
He wounds a boy and two girls.
Lepine stops at the door of study room C-228, raises his rifle and aims at a student at the bottom of the room.
He shoots twice, but his clip is empty.
He is heard to mutter: ‘Oh shit, no more ammo,’ and then ducks into the fire escape stairwell and reloads.
Sylvain Souillon, working on Le Polyscope , hears the shots.
He knows what shots sound like because he hunts, but he still thinks they might have been only firecrackers.
He runs out into the corridor and collides with his friend Richard, who is carrying a chessboard, and the pieces scatter over the floor.
They see the wounded.
‘Richard tried to help one of the girls lying by the photocopier lying in a pool of blood.
They I understood.
When you see the blood you know it's for real.
Then I saw him.
He looked completely calm.
He moved very slowly.
He was crazy.’
Lepine, the gun reloaded, walks back to room C-228, but the students inside have locked the door.
He fires at it three times to try and open it, but without success.
He retreats along the corridor and passes the three injured, shooting another student in front of the escalators.
He turns, but the girl has managed to flee by the fire escape as Lepine makes his way to the bookstore.
He shoots twice at the cashier, but misses both times.
‘It's like a nightmare, only you don't wake up.
He shot.
I was waiting with both hands over my ears, as if that would do something.’
Appearing to lose direction, Lepine wanders about, shooting occasionally.
He passes the Financial Services Centre at room B-218 and is moving to B-211 some twenty paces on, when he hears Maryse Laganière trying to lock the door of the Finances Office.
He turns back and tries to stop her, but fails.
He moves to the window alongside, and sees her inside the office moving away from the door.
He shoots twice through the window and kills her.
Less than ten minutes have passed since the first shot.
The first calls to police cars indicate that a gunman has taken twenty women hostages and is firing shots in the air.
The police are directed not to the Polytechnique, but to a nearby student residence, and do not arrive at the Polytechnique until nearly twenty minutes past five.
Lepine makes his way down to the ground-floor cafeteria where the nursing student Barbara Maria Kleuznick is standing by the cash and service area, and he kills her with two shots.
There are still some hundred students in the hall, but most of them manage to flee through the kitchens or the far door near the Polytechnique's main entrance.
Lepine proceeds, shooting at random.
He injures another student, yells at a couple hiding under the tables to get out.
He does not shoot them, but at the Polyparty end — an  area of open seating — he shoots Geneviève Bergeron twice and Anne-Marie Edward four times, killing them both.
‘We were scared the bell was going to ring for the end of classes,’ says Sylvain Souillon.
This would have brought more people out into the corridors and foyers.
Lepine climbs the escalators, which have been put out of service.
Arriving at the third floor, he finds a number of students in the corridor, and wounds three of them.
One of them, a girl, remains by the top of the escalator, in order to prevent any other students from coming up and into the killer's path.
Meanwhile, Lepine has walked further along the corridor to the large lecture hall, B-311.
Amazingly, the material engineering course is still in progress.
Maryse Leclair is giving a presentation with two others on the lectern at the front of the class.
It is now about twenty-five minutes past five.
Fifteen minutes of shooting has elapsed, and outside the building there is confusion amongst the police as to the number of vehicles on the scene, and as to just who is in command.
Some cars are having trouble with their radio calls.
Lepine yells at the three students on the lectern to get out, but nobody moves.
He yells, ‘It's not a joke’, and then he shoots Maryse Leclair, who falls wounded.
Lepine turns around and starts spraying the students in the front rows with gunfire.
Most of them hit the floor, but he manages to shoot Maud Havernick four times as she tries to flee, and fells Michèle Richard with another shot before she reaches the door.
Then he walks up the aisle in the centre of the classroom, shooting at the students lying beneath the desks.
DIANE GAMOCHE (STUDENT): I was hiding beneath two desks, and he stopped and shot at me twice but nothing happened.
He walked away five or six steps and I was still there.
You think, God help me I don't want to die, and you close your eyes and you sill see him.
It's like a bad dream, and you see a guy pointing a gun at you, but he's still there when you open your eyes, and he won't go away.
Then he pulled the trigger.
I don't know what happened.
LEPINE FINDS Annie Turcotte between the fifth and sixth rows, and kills her.
He wounds three others.
GENEVIEVE CAUDEN (STUDENT): A bullet just grazed me a little bit.
I put my hands over my ears because I didn't want to know what was happening.
LEPINE CONTINUES shooting about the classroom, and then returns to the lectern where Maryse Leclair is crying out for help.
He takes out his hunter's knife, and stabs her three times.
She dies.
They Lepine lays the knife on the professor's desk, as well as his cap and two boxes of ammunition, each holding another twenty cartridges.
He has left another box by the door.
He removes his parka, wrapping it around the muzzle of his Sturm-Ruger, and sits back on the step of the lectern.
He mumbles, ‘Oh shit’, puts the gun to his head and shoots himself.
CORONER'S REPORT, A-41563: The head and face are deformed as a result of multiple fractures in the facial area.
A major explosion to the head and scalp of the deceased has resulted in an abundant leakage of cerebral matter.
GENEVIEVE CAUDEN: The professor came to me and said it was alright because the guy had shot himself, but I couldn't move.
Then after a long time I got up with the help of a friend.
When I got up I saw a friend by my side with a lot of blood, and I saw she was dead.
I saw only her and my professor.
I didn't see anything else.
THE VICTIMS: Five of the fourteen who died, left to right: Nathalie Croteau, 23; Maud Havernick, 29; Maryse Leclair, 23; Anne-Marie Edwards, 20, and Geneviève Bergeron, 21
‘WE TREATED it as a hostage-taking’, says John Dalzell, director of communications for the Montreal Police Force.
It was an office which Pierre Leclair held at the time.
CUM COMMUNIQUE, 25 01 90: Towards 18:30 Pierre Leclair, on the scene, decided a strategy of communications with M Lessard.
(Leclair is shortly replaced by Claude St-Laurent, director of Distract 13, because of the death of his daughter, Maryse, in room B-311.)
THE NEXT DAY, fourteen roses were planted in the snowbanks outside the Polytechnique with a card in Gothic script which read:Father, in the name of your son I pray to you on his behalf.
Forgive him because he didn't know what he was doing.
Help us to understand.
It hurts .
In the pocket of the jacket Lepine had removed before shooting himself, the police found handwritten letters to two friends and his three-page suicide note.
It began:
‘Please note that if I commit suicide today…it is not for economic reasons (for I have waited until I exhausted all my financial means, even refusing jobs) but for political reasons.
For I have decided to send Ad Patres the feminists who have always ruined my life.
It has been seven years that life does not bring me any joy and being totally blasé, I have decided to put an end to those viragos.
‘I had already tried in my youth to enlist in the Forces as an officer cadet, which would have allowed me to enter the arsenal and precede Lortie in a rampage.
They refused me because asocial.
So waited until this day to execute all my projects.
In between, I continued my studies in a haphazard way for they never really interested me, knowing in advance my fate.
Which did not prevent me from obtaining very good marks despite not handing in my theory works and the lack of studying before exams.
‘Even if the Mad Killer epithet will be attributed to me by the media, I consider myself a rational erudite that only the  arrival of the Grim Reaper has forced to take extreme acts.
For why persevere to exist if it is only to please the Government.
Being rather backward-looking by nature (except for science), the feminists have always had a talent to enrage me…‘
ON THE THIRD PAGE he listed nineteen prominent women in the province of Qf Quebec and some of their telephone numbers; an  assassination list.
Amongst the named were the ex-Minister for Women's Affairs, a provincial political activist, some prominent labour leaders, leading members of the media, policewomen and the first firewoman in the province.
At the end, he added: ‘Nearly died today.
The lack of time (because I started too late) has allowed those radical feminists to survive.
Alea Jacta Est .’
A POLICE GRAPHOLOGIST, and then Dr Yves Lesage, a psychologist, examined the letter.
Lesage, who works at the Institut Pinel for the Criminally Insane, testified that ‘it is possible that people with serious emotional problems might take the letter, identify with its contents and use Lepine as a model’.
As Lepine would appear to have done: the Lortie to whom he referred was the Canadian Armed Forces Corporal Dennis Lortie, who had killed three and wounded fourteen when he burst in on the Quebec National Assembly with a machine gun five years earlier.
In the following months, Lepine was not without his grim and unsavoury disciples: sympathetic voices on radio talk shows; graffiti artists, taunters of women and guntoters; and a freed multiple murderer who, upon hearing of Lepine, ‘wrote all the women I knew, telling them they were safe from me’.
THE FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY team described Lepine's suicide as of the polyhomicide/suicide kind.
‘In such individuals, a person or a group of persons can be identified in a negative manner and become the target of the sum of the subject's aggressive emotions.’
Criminal psychologists make an important distinction between the serial murderer, for whom the celebrity status found in murders of a repeated pattern is a prime motivation, and multiple murderer, for whom the polyhomicide acts as an aggrandized suicidal act.
Serial murderers have long identified women in their sights, but the Polytechnique massacre was the first incidence of multiple murder in which women have been identified as the target group.
BERGERON, Geneviève
COLGAN, Helène
CROTEAU, Nathalie
DAIGNEAULT, Barbara
EDWARD, Anne-Marie
HAVERNICK, Maud
KLUEZNICK, Barbara Maria
LAGANIERE, Maryse
LECLAIR, Maryse
LEMAY, Anne-Marie
LEPINE, Marc
PELLETIER, Sonja
RICHARD, Michèle
ST-ARNEAULT, Annie
TURCOTTE, Annie
IN THE CORONER'S REPORT, Marc Lepine is filed alphabetically with his victims.
There is a sense in which even he, the perpetrator, is considered the victim of the crime, his crime, as if it was somehow larger than himself.
THE DETECTIVE: There's a hole at the middle of this case as big as the hole in Lepine's head.
There's no point in asking questions that we can't answer.
Whether he was shy, had red eyes, was quiet or not.
For every pimply, dejected murderer I can give you one who looks like a movie star, for everyone who won't talk, one who will gab your ear off.
Lepine, he doesn't matter anymore.
One dead Lepine as one arrest we don't have to make, and for my bosses, one dead Lepine is fourteen solved murders.
Not bad for the books.
There are plenty of women who have been beaten or who are dead now, and their murderers are still running around.
Let's give priority to the living.
ON THE SATURDAY three days after the massacre, eight of the bodies were exposed in a hall of the University pavilion for the families and friends of the students.
The coffins were lined with roses, and hundreds of telegrams lined the walls.
On the Sunday, some six thousand members of the general public filed in the bitter cold up the steps to the Oratoire Saint-Joseph and grieved.
Then, on the Monday, a solemn cortège of nine white hearses in three rows of three, followed by the limousines carrying nine of the families, politicians and dignitaries, arrived for a funeral mass held at the ornate basilica of the Notre Dame cathedral in old Montreal.
The service was televised, but demand was such that tickets had to be issued to the mourners, arriving by coachloads.
Three thousand five hundred entered the cathedral.
Five thousand stood outside, in the Place d'Armes, listening to the service on speakers specially rigged for the occasion.
In a nationwide poll conducted in the second week after the massacre, the question was asked: ‘Some people believe that this tragedy says something about the problem of male violence towards women.
Others believe that the killer was plain insane and feel that nothing more should be read into it.
Do you think that this tragedy says anything about the problem of male violence towards women?’
Fifty-nine per cent said no.
Taken by region, the highest percentage to reject any further meaning in the massacre was in Quebec: sixty-five per cent.
THE DOCTOR: So what did you expect?
MYSELF: If an Arab entered a room and separated fourteen Jews from the rest, or a white man in a peaked hood with slits for eyes the same number of number of blacks, nobody would be wasting their time denying the anti-semitic or racist nature of the crime.
Nobody would be calling it an isolated or random act.
THE DOCTOR: We're more accustomed to Arabs and Jews, or whites and blacks, as being enemies.
There's a battle-line there we're used to demarcating.
This is different.
We don't like the idea that men and women are suddenly enemies.
ON THE SATURDAY after the massacre, there was a service for Marc Lepine attended by about twenty relatives and friends.
There was a small ceremony inside the church, although the body was not brought to the chapel but taken directly to the crematorium.
Lepine was not cremated for a few days yet, until after the despatch of a couple of his victims also being tended to at the Côte-Des-Neiges cemetery, opposite the mountain, alongside the University of Montreal, where Marc Lepine joined his victims in the silence at the centre.
Design
think ink
The fountain pen has joined the wrist-watch as an essential male accessory by James Dowling
Classics of their day, from top to bottom: 1927 Onoto Pump filler; 1910 Conklin Crescent Filler No 50; 1924 Onoto Pump Filler; 1937 Conway Stewart Dinkie; 1930 Chilton Pump Filler; 1931 Wahl Deco Band; 1930s Namiki; 1931 Beaumel Combination; 1935 Wahl Doric Oversize; 1935 Conklin Nozac; 1930 Le Boeuf No 8; 1935 Wahl Doric; 1939 Eversharp Skyline
IT WAS OBVIOUS the fountain pen was back in favour when it began turning up in advertisements for financial services, computers and instant coffee.
A pen with a nib radiates authority, quality and other old-fashioned virtues.
The creation of the modern fountain pen is usually attributed to Lewis E Waterman in the 1880s.
It flourished for decades, with manufacturers vying with one another over technical developments, styling and warranties.
But it was dealt a near fatal blow when the ballpoint appeared at the end of World War II.
By the Seventies, ballpoints reigned supreme and, once schools allowed their use, the future for fountain pens looked bleak.
Curiously, it was the advent of the word processor which proved the fountain pen's salvation.
Now you only used a pen to sign your name — a role for which the elegant, smooth script of the fountain pen was admirably suited.
People started rediscovering old pens.
A good-looking, pre-war pen cost less than a third of its modern cousin, and wrote just as well.
Pen companies introduced replicas with updated workings.
The antique fountain-pen market is in its early stages, with the first International Pen Show and Auction being held in Geneva, November 1–3.
But you can find a specialist stall-holder at most antique markets.
If the pen's barrel is not cracked and the lever is capable of movement then it should be possible to repair it for less than twenty pounds.
Parker
George S Parker was a teacher of Morse code in Wisconsin who sold pens, made by the John Holland company, to supplement his income.
In the late 1880s, he was able to make major improvements to this pen, and was to be found assembling them every evening in his hotel room.
He would pause only to take a meal in the dining-room, where he would sell his pens to visiting salesmen.
Several years later, advertisements were touting Parker as ‘the largest bona fide manufacturer of fountain pens in the world’.
In 1921, Parker created a pen that broke all the rules, officially called the Duofold but known as the ‘Big Red’.
Early fountain pens were made of black rubber and were semi-disposable; the Duofold was a bright reddish-orange colour, much larger than other contemporary pens and thus capable of holding more ink, guaranteed for twenty-five years — and nearly three times the price of an average pen.
In 1933, Parker brought out the Vacumatic, a fountain pen without an ink sac, and in 1941 came the Parker 51, the most famous pen in the world — so streamlined it was advertised as the ‘pen from another planet’.
1 New Parker Duofold £225 3 1936 Parker ‘Golden Web’ Vacumatic, £95-£150 6 1970 Parker T-1, in titanium, £400-£550 7 1927 Parker Duofold, £1,000-£1,400 9 1952 Parker 51 Aerometric, £100-£175
Waterman
Lewis E Waterman began his career as an insurance salesman in New York.
One day, an important but superstitious client cancelled his insurance policy when the pen Waterman had given him to sign with refused to work.
Early in the 1880s, Waterman realized that the problem was the feed.
With nothing more than a saw, pocket knife and file he resolved how to let just the right amount of ink out and air in, and made a fountain pen to his own design.
When one of his clients asked to buy the pen, Waterman was in business.
His success was due not only to the quality of his pens, backed by a five-year warranty, but also to his extensive advertising and publicity efforts.
When Lindbergh flew the Atlantic, he made notes with a Waterman; Admiral Byrd's expedition to the Antarctic was equipped with Watermans filled with non-freezing ink; and Lloyd George signed the Versailles Treaty with, you guessed it, a Waterman.
1920 Waterman 52, in nine carat gold, private collection 4 1929 Waterman Patrician, £1,000-£1,250 5 New Waterman Rhapsody, £183 8 1927 Waterman 58, Penfriend's Museum
Sheaffer
As a jeweller, Walter Sheaffer was familiar with most of the pen makers of his day.
The time was right for original ideas, and Sheaffer had his share of them.
The first successful self-filling pen was the Conklin: it had a rubber sac, which was squeezed by a bar attached to a crescent of metal protruding through the side of the pen.
It was efficient and simple, though untidy.
In 1907, Sheaffer went one better and invented the lever filler, which was patented the following year.
In 1924, Sheaffer introduced the Radite Lifetime, the first plastic pen.
It was expensive, but had a lifetime guarantee.
More innovation came in the Thirties in the shape of the first streamlined pen — the Balance.
During the war, the conical Triumph nib arrived, still regarded as the finest nib ever made.
Sheaffer was one of the first to introduce the ballpoint to America after the war.
But he continued his work on the fountain pen and, in 1952, introduced the Snorkel range, which was filled by means of a thin retractable tube under the nib.
This, along with a range of cartridge-filled pens designed for schools, enabled Sheaffer to outsell Parker in the US.
Montblanc
The Simplo Filler Pen Company of Hamburg, founded in 1906, produced a large black fountain pen with a distinctive white cap stud —‘like Mont Blanc, mostly black, white at the top and the greatest among equals’, according to one of its partners.
The first Montblancs were filled by unscrewing the nib section and filling the barrel with an eye dropper.
But the ink often leaked through the screws and damaged clothing.
So Montblanc began to specialize in the Safety pen, in which the whole nib section could be screwed back into the barrel, thereby sealing the ink container like a cork in a bottle.
It still had to be filled with an eye dropper, but the pen proved so successful that Montblanc continued producing them until the outbreak of World War II.
In 1924, Montblanc launched its most expensive pen, the ‘Meisterstuck’, or masterpiece.
Still being produced today, it is one of the world's most recognizable pens.
3 New Montblanc, in sterling silver, £475 4 1949 Montblanc Meisterstuck 144, Penfriend's Museum 8 1924 Montblanc Safety Filler 2F, £275-£400 9 1940 Montblanc Meisterstuck, £800-£1,100
Fiction
christopher columbus and queen isabella of spain consummate their relationship
santa fe january 1492
by Salman Rushdie
COLUMBUS, A FOREIGNER, follows Queen Isabella for an eternity without entirely giving up hope.
— In what characteristic postures?
Proud yet supplicant, the head held high but the knee bent.
Fawning yet fearless; possessed of a certain saucy vulgarity, he gets away with it by virtue of his confidence man's charm.
However, as time passes, the ingratiating aspects of his stance are emphasized; the sea-dog raffishness wears a little thin.
As do his shoes.
— His hope.
It is of what?
Obvious answers first: he hopes for preferment.
He wants to tie the Queen's favour to his helmet, like a knight in a romance.
(He owns no helmet.)
He has hopes of cash, and of three tall ships,Niña Pinta Santamaria ; of, in fourteen hundred and ninety-two, sailing across the ocean blue.
But on his first arrival at court, when the Queen herself asked him what he desired, he bowed over her olive hand and, with his lips a millimetre away from the great ring of her power, murmured a single, dangerous word:
‘The Reception of Christopher Columbus by Ferdinand and Isabella’.
by Eugene Deveria (1808–1865)
‘Consummation.’
—These unspeakable foreigners!
The nerve!
Consummation, indeed.
And then following in her footsteps, month after month, as if he stood a chance.
His coarse epistles, his tuneless serenades beneath her casement windows, obliging her to have them closed, shutting out the cooling breeze.
She had better things to do, a world to conquer and so forth, who did he think he was?— Foreigners can be dogged.
And also, on account of language difficulties, fail to take a hint.
Then again, let us nor forget, it is considered de rigueur to keep a few foreigners around.
They lend the place a certain cosmopolitan tone.
They are often poor and consequently willing to perform divers necessary but dirty jobs.
They are, moreover, a warning against complacency, their existence in our midst reminding us that there are quarters in which (hard as it is to accept) we ourselves would be considered foreigners, too.
— But to speak so to the Queen!— Foreigners forget their place (having left it behind).
Given time, they begin to think of themselves as our equals.
It is an unavoidable hazard.
They introduce into our austerities their Italianate blandishments.
Nothing for it.
Turn a deaf ear, look the other way.
They rarely mean real harm, and go too far only infrequently.
The Queen, be assured, can look after herself .
Columbus at Isabella's court is quickly burdened with the reputation of a crazy man.
His clothes are excessively colourful and he drinks, also, to excess.
When Isabella wins a military victory she celebrates it with eleven days of psalms and the sonorous severities of priests.
Columbus crashes about outside the cathedral waving a wineskin.
He is a one-man debauch.
— See him, the drunkard, his huge shaggy head filled with nonsenses!
A fool with a glittering eye dreaming of a golden paradise beyond the western edge of things.
‘Consummation.’
The Queen plays with Columbus.
She promises him everything he wants at luncheon and cuts him dead later the same afternoon, looking through him as if he were a veil.
On his saint's day she summons him into her inmost boudoir, dismisses her girls, permits him to braid her hair and for a moment to fondle her breasts.
Then she summons her guards.
For forty days she banishes him to the stables and piggeries.
He sits forlorn on horse-munched hay while his thoughts run on distant, fabled gold.
He dreams of the Queen's perfumes but awakes, gagging, in a pigsty.
Toying with Columbus pleases the Queen.
And pleasing the Queen, reminds himself, may help him to achieve his purposes.
Pigs rootle by his feet.
He grits his teeth.
‘Pleasing the Queen is good.’
—Does she torment him merely for sport ?
Or: because he is foreign and she is unused to his ways and meanings.
Or: because her ring finger, still hot with the memory of his lips, his breath, has been — how-do-you-say?—touched .
Tentacles of warmth spread backwards from her finger towards her heart.
A turbulence has been aroused.
Or: because she is torn between the possibility of embracing his scheme with a lover's abandon, and the more conventional, and differently (maliciously) pleasurable option of destroying him by laughing, finally, after much foreplay, in his foolish supplicant face.
Columbus consoles himself with possibilities.
Not all possibilities are consoling, however.
She is an absolute monarch.
(Her husband is an absolute zero: a blank, couldn't be colder.
We will not speak further of him.)
She is a woman whose ring is often kissed.
It means nothing to her.
She is no stranger to blandishments.
She resists them effortlessly.
She is a tyrant who numbers among her possessions a private menagerie of four hundred and nineteen fools, some grotesquely malformed, others as beauteous as the dawn.
He, Columbus, is merely her four hundred and twentieth idiot.
He is her clown, her performing flea.
This, too, is a plausible scenario.
Either: she understands him, his dream of a world beyond the world's end, so profoundly that she's spooked by it, she turns first towards it, then away;
Or: she doesn't understand him at all, nor cares to understand.
Take your pick.
What's certain is that he doesn't understand her .
Only the facts are plain.
She is Isabella, all-conquering Qing Queen.
He is her invisible (though raucous, multi-coloured, wine-bibbing) man.
‘Consummation.’
The sexual appetites of the male decline; those of the female continue, with the advancing years, to grow.
Isabella is Columbus's last hope.
He is running out of possible patrons, sales talk, flirtatiousness, hair, steam.
Time drags by.
Isabella gallops around, winning battles, expelling Moors from strongholds, her appetites expanding by the week.
The more of the land she swallows, the more warriors she engulfs, the hungrier she gets.
Columbus, aware of a slow shrivelling inside him, scolds himself.
He should see things as they are.
He should come to his senses.
What chance does he have here?
Some days she makes him clean latrines.
On other days he is on body-washing duty and after a battle the bodies are not clean.
Soldiers going to war wear man-sized nappies under their armour because the fear of death will open the bowels, will do it every time.
Columbus was not cut out for this sort of work.
It is getting him nowhere.
He tells himself to leave Isabella, once and for all.
But there are problems: his advancing years, the patron shortage.
Once he decamps, he will have to forget the western voyage.
The body of philosophical opinion which avers that life is absurd has never appealed to him.
He is a man of action, revealing himself by deeds.
But without the possibility of the voyage he will be obliged to accept the meaninglessness of life.
This, too, would be a defeat.
Invisible in hot tropical colours, unrequited, he remains, dogging her footsteps, hoping for the ecstasy of her glance.
‘The search for money and patronage,’ Columbus says, ‘is not so different from the quest for love.’
— She is omnipotent.
Castles fall at her feet.
The Jews have been expelled.
The Moors prepare their last surrender.
The Queen is at Granada, riding at her armies' head.
— She overwhelms.
Nothing she has wanted has ever been  refused.
All her dreams are prophecies.
Acting upon information received while sleeping, she draws up her invincible battle plans, foils the conspiracies of assassins, learns of the infidelities and corruptions for which she blackmails both her loyalists (to ensure their support) and her opponents (to ensure theirs).
The dreams help her forecast the weather, negotiate treaties, and invest shrewdly in trade.
— She eats like a horse and never gains an ounce.
The earth adores her footfall.
Its shadows flee before the brilliance of her eyes.
Her face is a lush peninsula set in a sea of hair.
Her treasure chests are inexhaustible.
Her ears are soft question marks, suggesting some uncertainty.
Her legs.
— Her legs are not so great.
— She is full of discontents.
—
— No conquest satisfies her, no peak of ecstasy is high enough.
—
See: there at the gates of the Alhambra is Boabdil the Unlucky, the last Sultan of the last redoubt of all the centuries of Arab Spain.
Behold: now, at this very instant, he surrenders the keys to the citadel into her grasp: there!— And as the weight of the keys falls from his hand into hers, she,she , yawns.
Columbus gives up hope.
While Isabella is entering the Alhambra in listless triumph, he is saddling his mule.
While she dawdles in the Courtyard of the Lions, he departs in a frenzy of whips, elbows, hooves, all rapidly obscured by a dustcloud.
Invisibility claims him.
He surrenders to its will.
Knowing he is abandoning his destiny, he abandons it.
He rides away from Queen Isabella in hopeless fury, rides day and night, and when his mule dies under him he shoulders his ridiculous gipsy patchwork bags, their rowdy colours muted now by dirt; and walks.
Around him stretches the lush plain her armies have subdued.
Columbus sees none of it, not the land's fertility nor the sudden barrenness of the vanquished castles looking down from their pinnacles.
The ghosts of the defeated civilizations flow unnoticed down the rivers, Guadalthis and Guadalthat, their names retaining an echo of the annihilated past.
Overhead, the arabesque wheelings of the patient buzzards.
Jews pass Columbus in long columns, but the tragedy of their expulsion makes no mark on him.
Somebody tries to sell him a Toledo sword; he waves the man away.
Having lost his own dream of ships, Columbus leaves the Jews to the ships of their exile, waiting in the harbour of Cadiz.
Exhaustion strips him of his senses.
This old world is too old and the new world is an unfound land.
‘The loss of money and patronage,’ Columbus says, ‘is as bitter as unrequited love.’
He walks beyond fatigue, beyond the limits of endurance and the frontiers of self, and somewhere along this path he loses his balance, falls off the edge of his sanity, and out here beyond his mind's rim he sees, for the first and only time in his life, a vision.
It's the dream of a dream.
He dreams of Isabella, languidly exploring the Alhambra, the great jewel she has seized from Boabdil, last of the Nasrids.
She is staring into a large stone bowl held aloft by stony lions.
The bowl is filled with blood, and in it she sees (Columbus dreams her seeing) a vision of her own.
The bowl shows her that everything, all the known world is now hers; everyone in it is in her hands, to do with as she pleases.
And when she understands this (Columbus dreams) the blood at once congeals, becoming a thick and verminous sludge.
Whereupon the Isabella of Columbus's weary, but also vengeful imaginings is shaken to her very marrow by the realization that she will never,never , NEVER! be satisfied by the possession of the known.
Only the unknown, perhaps even the unknowable, can satisfy her.
And at once she remembers Columbus, he envisions her remembering him, the invisible man who dreams of entering the invisible world, the unknown and perhaps even unknowable world beyond the edge of things, beyond the stone bowl of the everyday, beyond the thick blood of the sea.
Columbus in this bitter dream makes Isabella see the truth at last, makes her accept that her need for him is as great as his for her.
Yes!
She knows it now!
She must must must give him the money, the ships, anything, and he must must must carry her flag and her favour beyond the end of the end of the earth, into exaltation and immortality, linking them for ever with bonds far harder to dissolve than those of any mortal love, the harsh and deifying ties of history.
‘Consummation.’
Isabella, in Columbus's savage dream, tears her hair, runs from the Courtyard of the Lions, screams for her heralds.
‘Find him,’ she commands.
But Columbus in his dream refuses to be found.
He wraps around himself the dusty patchwork cloak of his invisibility and the heralds gallop hither and yon in vain.
Isabella screeches, beseeches, implores.
Bitch, bitch.
How do you like it now, Columbus sneers.
By absenting himself from her court, by this final and suicidal invisibility, he has denied her her heart's desire.
Serves her right.
Bitch!
She murdered his hopes, didn't she?
Well then.
In doing so she has laid herself low as well.
Poetic justice.
Fair's fair.
At the dream's end he permits her messengers to find him.
Their hoofbeats, their waving frantic arms.
They plead, cajole, offer bribes.
But it's too late.
Only the sweet self-lacerating joy of murdering possibility remains.
He answers the heralds: a shake of the head.
No .
He comes to his senses.
He is on his knees in the fertility of the plains, waiting for death.
He hears the hoofbeats approaching, and raises his eyes, half-expecting to see the exterminating angel, riding towards him like a conqueror.
Its blacks wings, the boredom on its face.
Isabella's heralds surround him.
They offer him food, drink, a horse.
Good news, they shout.
The Queen has summoned you.
Your voyage: wonderful news.
She saw a vision, and it scared her.
All her dreams are prophecies.
She ran from the Courtyard of the Lions, shouting for you, the heralds report.
She will send you beyond the stone bowl of the known world, beyond the thick blood of the sea.
She's waiting for you in Santa Fe.
You must come at once.
He stands up, like a requited lover, like a groom on his wedding day.
He opens his mouth and it almost spills out, the bitter refusal: no.
‘Yes,’ he tells the heralds.
(Yes.
I'll come).
A LITERARY LIFE: SALMAN RUSHDIE
Salman Rushdie was born in Bombay in 1947, went to school in England and then studied at Cambridge.
His first novel,Grimus , was followed by Midnight's Children , massive sprawling tale, entirely apposite to its subject, India.
Midnight's Children won Rushdie the 1981 Booker Prize and established his reputation.
Shame , his novel of Pakistan, was short-listed for the Booker Prize and is believed by many to be his finest work.
The Satanic Verses dealt with vast themes of religion, the clash of two cultures and the immigrant experience in Britain.
Haroun and the Sea of Stories , a novel of great charm, was written at the suggestion of his son.
The Jaguar Smile chronicles his journey to Nicaragua, and Imaginary Homelands is a kind of intellectual autobiography.
His work has been translated into over twenty languages and is a prime example of the brilliance and fecundity brought to the English novel by writers who have landed on these shores.
Fiction
crystal rooms
A Dangerous Rendezvous FINAL EPISODE
A serial by Melvyn Bragg
Synopsis Harry, aged twelve, has been abandoned in London.
Deuce, a pimp, has added him to a clutch of boys he is taking to a hotel.
Nicholas de Loit, MP, is on his way to the same hotel.
IN THE GLASS-TRIUMPHANT atrium of the bullishly refurbished hotel, one small boy felt very cold.
He was frightened, despite the encouraging winks of Deuce and the occasional smile from Doug; disoriented amid the tropical forest-sized plants, the silent, ceaseless escalators, the glass walls and lifts, the page boys in scarlet and green livery and all manner of sights which would normally have thrilled him and been companionable to his mind and stored for his sister.
He was cold, very cold despite the hothouse temperature of the atrium.
The two other boys were sitting neatly on a sofa in the distance but they failed to acknowledge them.
He wanted to be gone, even though Deuce made reassuring promises and Doug could one day turn out to be a friend.
He wanted to be two hundred miles away, where he had come from — even in that bleak house in that wasted corner of the sleet-driven estate.
But he was in thrall to Deuce, who now reappeared in the distance followed by an over-liveried porter who was carrying two large suitcases.
‘Only lef’ then ‘ere this mornin', did we?
Less suspicious, see?
Class,’ Doug confided admiringly.
‘Now, Norf.
You and me's ‘is nefyews up ‘ere for ‘oliday, OK?’
Harry nodded, or perhaps it was the threatening clatter of his teeth which caused his head to simulate assent.
He followed his fellow nephew and new uncle across the black and white mock-marbled floor to the glass lift.
Deuce attempted no conversation and the porter, a man of about Deuce's own age, who looked cannily  at his guest as if to say, ‘I know you .
You can't fool me ’, offered none either, save for saying ‘Here we are, sir’ when they reached the eighth floor.
Harry again experienced a sudden lethargy of the lower limbs, which he overcame by the thought of the greater paralysis at being trapped in the glass lift, forevermore exhibited up and down the tropical conservatory.
‘Suite 817,’ said the porter as he opened the door and now, with a tip in prospect, he did stir himself and pointed out the televisions, the radios, the mini bars, the bathrooms, the telephones, the heating, the wardrobes, the list of amenities and the double lock on the door ‘advisable even in daytime, sir, and even when you are in residence’.
Deuce's calculation of three pounds was the correct amount to encourage reticence without seeming to indicate anxiety.
Outbluffed, the porter left quite cheerfully.
‘Now then,’ said Deuce, looking critically around the large sitting room which seemed to Harry to be the sort of place the Queen of England would live in, ‘this won't do at all.’
He looked at his watch.
‘Go down for the boys, Doug, and be smart , right?
Then I want this lot livened up.’
He opened one of the suitcases and took out an expensive tape recorder and a neat little package of cassettes.
‘Chop chop,’ he said.
Doug left.
‘You,’ said Deuce, frowning.
‘You are cold.
Yes?’
‘Yes,’ Harry said, through teeth clenched against the cold and the deeper cold of fear.
‘Right, my son.
A bath.’
Harry followed Deuce into a bathroom.
He was overwhelmed.
Thick pink towels were stacked on a rack, other pink towels were over a rail.
The washbasin was surely made of marble and the taps, gleaming as gold, were surrounded by a platoon of little bottles and cases, all matching.
There was a pink carpet on the floor, pink tiles everywhere and a bath with a curtain half drawn across it.
Deuce leaned into the bath with a curtain half drawn across it.
Deuce leaned into the bath and turned on the golden taps which fed water through a central feed at a prodigious rate.
‘Get undressed!’ he yelled.
Harry obeyed, slowly.
Deuce found a circular box of herbal bath powder and smelled it deeply.
‘Just the ticket for a cold boy,’ he said.
‘Clothes off.
Chop chop.’
Once again Harry's deep reluctance was overcome only by a deeper fear of what Deuce might do if he disobeyed.
He slid out of his clothes and the crumpled pile curled around his ankles like litter.
While he was doing this, Deuce was gaily cascading powder into the bath, now and then yelling out, ‘Just a little bit more!
And a little bit more!
I'm forever blowing bubbles!’
The bath was soon drawn, the foam white and thick, the mirrors steamed up.
Deuce gazed at Harry in a way which made the boy cover himself.
‘Very pretty,’ said Deuce.
‘Thin but not skinny.
Nice set of shoulders.
Lovely little chest.
Prime chicken.
‘In you go.
Nice little bot.’
He slapped Harry lightly on the buttocks and as the boy shivered down through the foam into the hot, stinging water, Deuce clapped his hands.
‘A bubble bath!
Who'd have thought it?’
And with that he disappeared.
For some minutes Harry sat extremely still to leach the sting.
It was somehow too much of an effort to lean forward and turn on the cold tap and besides, he wanted the heat.
The discomfort would go, and it did, and he slid down, his head resting just above the thick lace of foam.
He looked at the bubbles intently: they could be frogspawn or snow just fallen, or clouds, or millions of tiny crystals, almost invisible.
Would Jake really be back for him at the Crystal Rooms at six?
Jake had loved the place, Harry know that for certain, and he could see why.
There was nothing, not even that hotel sitting room, to compare.
Harry remembered the crystal chandeliers and as the warmth began to work through him he dozed.
He dreamed of a multitude of chandeliers, all lit up with candles, coming slowly down from the ceiling, while he and his sister Mary watched.
Somewhere there was his mother's voice and music, music making the chandeliers clink and shiver in tune.
‘She's here!’
Harry looked around, startled.
Who?
Where was she?
At the door one of the boys said, ‘Hurry up, mate.
Duty calls,’ and then slammed the door.
Harry clambered urgently out of the bath, pink from the piping-hot water and covered in foam.
Where was she?
The bathroom was now a spooky place.
He rubbed himself briskly and not too thoroughly and put on his clothes with all speed.
Who was she ?
The music came from next door and when he left the bathroom and turned into the sitting room he felt dizzy.
The two boys were in their white underpants and nothing else, dancing to the music coming from Deuce's tape recorder.
The curtains had been drawn, furniture rearranged, lights seductively positioned.
Two men were dancing, or rather standing around and twitching a little as the two boys danced around them, brilliantly, Harry noted.
The men were old, Harry thought, in dark suits, and one was bald and wore glasses.
Nevertheless they smiled and waved at him as he came in and Deuce, at the tape recorder, came over, arms open, as if he had been away for weeks.
‘Harry!
So pink!
So clean!
So hot !
Why don't you take something off?
At least your anorak, eh?
Look at them.’
He pointed to the young dancers weaving intricate patterns around the stiff men in dark suits.
‘They appreciate the central heating.
So should you,’ Deuce said.
He helped Harry take off his anorak and tugged at the boy's pullover, but Harry resisted and Deuce backed off.
‘New,’ he murmured, it seemed to no one in particular.
‘Just in from the North and fresh as fish.’
The two men waved to him again and one of them pointed to a table which was labouring under a monstrous number of bottles.
Harry went across and picked up a Coke.
He looked across to Deuce and held it up.
‘Help yourself!
Compliments of the house!’
The Coke was cold and Harry drank it gratefully, even though he could feel that it brought him out in an instant sweat.
Then he saw one of the boys turn his back on the man he seemed to be dancing with, hook his fingers in the skimpy underpants, wriggle them down to reveal his bottom and then wiggle the bottom until it shook like a jelly.
The man, it was the bald one with the glasses, knelt down on both knees and grabbed the bottom and began to kiss it ardently.
Harry felt a jolt of breath pump out of his mouth.
His chest tightened, head ached.
He knew he could not dare go out of the main door.
He went slowly across the room past the bathroom he had just relinquished and found the door beyond that.
He pushed.
‘Who is that?’
The cultivated magisterial voice arrested him?
‘S'me in ‘ere, OK?’
Doug's voice.
‘Thank you very much.’
‘Push off, will you?’ said the older voice.
Harry fled into the bathroom and locked the door.
There were no windows.
Honourable Member
NICHOLAS KEPT TELLING himself that he had never before done this — as if he were somehow engaged in research and thereby exonerated.
But he could not deceive himself.
He never had been capable of self-delusion which, in sprightlier moments, he thought might have been the true cause of his notable lack of advancement in politics.
Now he walked with a sense of fatefulness which he would have mocked had it not been so inescapably serious.
No mockery permitted: mockers would be prosecuted.
For it was, in truth, as if his legs followed a route from which he could not turn them back — along the sales signs in Oxford Street occupied by a bedraggled army of Christmas bargain hunters, and off that up to the grandiose frontage of the hotel.
A phone call from the house phone, the sound of throbbing popular music and a number — 817.
Into the glass lift.
His emotional life had been neither happy nor successful.
He'd had an intense affair at Oxford which had drifted through almost a dozen years of indeterminate life and ended in a brutal rejection.
Caution after that, caution even after the criminal penalty was lifted, caution even when the social stigma was reported extinct, and in that caution only the occasional pleasure of a chance taken and soon regretted.
Once love for a woman but hopeless from the start and perhaps needing to be.
Companionships easier with heterosexuals and few enough of these; Mark by far the closest.
There were flings, of course, but Nicholas was inept at all forms of promiscuity except gossip.
He did not see the point of it.
He was a liberal conservative gentleman from a line of such who had cultivated their patch of Wiltshire since one of the first gentrifications four centuries previously.
Homosexuals must have occurred previously in the family, but they were not recognized.
Judges, two bishops, a general, a few MPs, a colonial governor and assorted establishment males were recognized.
Nicholas was well inside that tradition.
Save for…but he refused in his quaint but thoroughly determined way to evade or apologize any more.
Save for nothing.
But the big emotion had eluded him, the great love, the true passion.
In his romantic intransigence that was what he wanted more than anything.
He had come to this.
He disliked the exploitation, and could not suppress a colonialist guilt.
Just sex.
Bleak holiday sex.
Paid-for-sex.
Even the sighs seeking a tip.
Fine if you could chop it away from feeling and treat it as a mere sensation.
But if you could not, if you wanted affection and love, if you wanted passion above all, the great thing, then such forays left scars.
Young men; but never boys, until now.
Why the horror, why the compulsive fascination, by what  despairing route had this new and unexpected compulsion carried him through semi-tropical plants in a glass lift to an afternoon such as he would sworn never to attend — he did not know.
He seemed helpless in its grip.
The door opened and Nicholas gave a name, not his own, to a natty young man he detested on sight.
Inside the room, half dark and pumped with drubbing pop music, he saw two all-but-naked slender youths writhing before two stout pinstriped gentlemen and decided to walk out immediately.
The door was bolted and chained behind him.
His host had darted across the room presumably to bring him a drink and as he looked around he saw other doors, other lights — so this spectacle which did not shock him nor dismay him but which he did not wish to be a part of, might not be the only play.
‘Bubbly,’ said Deuce, offering a slender glass.
‘Compliments of the house.’
The fee, by no means negligible, had already been paid in cash through the contact.
‘Thank you.’
Nicholas took it and sipped.
Not bad.
‘Coat?’
It seemed a ridiculously important point of decision.
Did he want to take off his coat?
He heard in his mind the catchphrase of a long-forgotten Northern radio comedian: ‘I won't take me coat off, I'm not stopping.’
Was he stopping?
Deuce did not press the point.
He never did with his clients.
That was his golden rule.
‘I have a lad might suit…
’ His ‘instant portrait’— on the accuracy of which he prided himself enormously — was that the client was most likely a starter, could very well be a married man, children off his hands, time on his hands, going back to his own public school days (the velvet collar on the overcoat was a giveaway) and the boys will be boys bit or just realized very late that what he really fancied was a bit of the other and had to wallet to get it.
One of the tarts might do later on but not to settle him in.
The new could do that.
‘New,’ he said, ‘not a hand laid on him.
Where the hell…?’
‘Harry.’
He shook the door quietly and spoke quietly but Harry clamped his hands to his ears and backed away.
‘Trouble with this door,’ Deuce explained to Nicholas, who stood a few paces away sipping his champagne too quickly and ignoring the come-on of one of the dancing youths.
‘Poor boy can't get out.
Shoddy workmanship wherever you look.
Can't very well send for the house carpenter, can we, eh?
One, two, three,’ as he counted he stood back and then launched his shoulder at the door with surprising impact.
It cracked, the slender bolt was wrenched out and Harry face contorted with terror.
He curled up to avoid if he could the worst of the blows.
‘Harry, Harry my boy,’ Deuce was very calm, ‘what a silly lock.
Dear me.
We was worried about you.
Where's Harry? they all said.
Maybe he can't get out.
Fetch him, they said, he's missing the party.
So here I am.
Eh?
What do you say?’
Like a trapped animal being crooned out of its last redoubt, Harry, his mind all but blank with the terrible force of an unnameable fear, allowed himself to be coaxed out of the bathroom and into the small hall.
There he turned and say a tall blond-haired man holding out an empty glass.
What Nicholas saw was a sweet-faced young boy, wet hair plastered across his forehead, eyes wide shining with alarm, face flushed with heat or panic.
His posture was that of a wild thing: alert and trembling, searching, longing for the escape from this intolerable pressure.
Nicholas wanted to hold him and say: you are safe, you will be protected.
He wanted to hug the fear out of his body.
He wanted to soothe and calm him and, in the same instant, tell him that he would never want for anything, not as long as he, Nicholas de Loit, MP, had anything to give.
In this most strange place and in this short moment Nicholas lost his heart and knew for certain that at last, at very last, without doubt or question, he had fallen in love.
HE REALIZED IN THAT instant that this was the love he had been hoping for, his quest fulfilled.
He knew now how fully, as time had passed, he despaired he would ever meet it.
In all its unmistakable force it was before him.
He also realized that it would be chaste, that he would never physically consummate this love and that was fine.
It was a passion that could exist without that.
He realized in that instant that his entire life would be changed utterly — that this was no sentimental longing, no passing fancy or phase, this was a feeling he would live by, whatever the costs.
And he realized the boy's terror: he could feel the imprint of the boy's feelings as strongly as if they were his own.
He also knew that the next few minutes could lose what chance had so miraculously delivered up to him at long last.
His life depended on the next few minutes.
‘He looks as if he needs a drink,’ said Nicholas, planing his voice into a gentle neutral tone.
‘Good idea.
Harry?
Wake up, chop chop.’
Harry's gaze was fixed on the stranger and still looking at him he nodded.
Deuce slipped away for the drink.
Nicholas, although his chest was threatening to burst from the pounding within, was sadly well studied in the art of disguising his true feelings.
Let him not be frightened of me; let his fear stay outside of me, Nicholas prayed.
Let me be the one who protects him, the one he trusts.
‘It is noisy here, isn't it?’ said Nicholas.
‘There's a room over there, I think.’
He nodded towards the second bedroom.
Deuce arrived with a Coke and the champagne, which he poured too quickly: the head spilled over the glass, soaking Nicholas's hand.
He dismissed Deuce's apologies and explanations abruptly.
‘We could go in that room, couldn't we?’
He pointed.
‘Much quieter.’
‘Certainly,’ said Deuce.
‘Certainly is.
Now then, Harry.
Got everything you want?’
Harry nodded, not trusting himself to speak, clutching the neck of the bottle, not trusting himself to drink.
But he followed the tall man into the other bedroom.
Nicholas locked the door absent-mindedly.
‘Would you like to watch the telly?’
Without waiting for an answer, Nicholas switched on the television and handed the zapper to Harry, who flicked from channel to channel with lessening enthusiasm.
Afternoon programmes were not designed for him, but he stayed on a black and white film.
He sat only a few feet from the screen, perched on the edge of the bed, a study in confusion and misery.
Nicholas's arms ached to hold and comfort him but he kept his distance, sitting in an armchair with maximum space between them.
He watched Harry for a while and then, cautiously, opened the mini bar and took out a block of chocolate.
There were a couple of splits of champagne there but he would drink no more until this was resolved.
‘Chocolate?’
Harry turned and focused on the bar.
He took it with a courteous ‘Thank you very much’.
Would you like something more substantial?
Sandwiches?
I'm sure…‘
Harry shook his head and just as well.
It would be impossible to whistle up room service.
The noises from the next room grew more explicit.
‘So you're new to London?’
‘Yes.’
Harry had eaten a square of the chocolate and somehow felt bound to answer questions by way of thanks.
Besides, this man did not frighten him.
‘This morning,’ he added.
‘First time.’
‘How did you get here?’
‘Jake.’
Harry swallowed hard as the figure of Jake surfaced in his mind.
‘He brought me down.’
He hesitated.
‘He had to bring a load.
Then we went some places.
Do you know the Crystal Rooms?’
Nicholas shook his head.
Harry's expression softened and Nicholas was jealous of that which could have such an affecting influence on him.
‘Deuce says Jake'll be back there at six.’
‘Deuce?’
‘Out there.’
Harry was puzzled that Nicholas seemed not to know him.
‘The man with the drinks.’
‘How did you get to know him?’
‘This morning.
When I couldn't find Jake.
Doug, that's a boy, and Deuce, they passed on Jake's message.’
‘I see.’
A few more offhand questions and Nicholas had the full picture of Harry's London life.
He knew also which town he came from and the existence of a younger sister.
He had formed his own view of Jake although Harry had not coloured it by any comments other than the barest fact.
It was enough to know.
Nicholas had a suddenly furious need to get the boy out of this place.
The bedroom, when not included in the suite, was an independent unit.
Its door could be opened from the inside and led directly to the corridor.
Harry returned to watch television in which Nicholas knew he was not interested.
He sought for the right phrase.
‘Tell you what,’ he said, ‘rather than sit about here, why don't we wander down to those Crystal Rooms now?
Where are they?’
‘Leicester Square.’
‘That's it.
Then if Jake has come back earlier, so much the better.
If not, I don't know — we could go to a movie.’
Harry's expression began to relax for the first time in Nicholas's company.
‘There's a stack of cinemas in Leicester Square,’ he said, ‘Jake says nowhere else like it in the world.’
‘Good.
Good.
Well then.’
Nicholas stood up as if all had been thoroughly discussed and decided.
Harry glanced at the through door.
‘Don't worry about — Deuce and the others.
He knows me.
I'll phone him up later.
Unless you want to go in there?’
Harry shook his head and looked clearly at Nicholas.
It was a look of pure and honest questioning.
I won't fail you, Nicholas said to himself, believe me.
I won't let you down or let anyone else hurt you again.
‘Shall we go?’
He opened the door and ushered Harry out.
He closed it carefully behind him.
He saw that Harry noticed his care and smiled, put a finger to his lips, all a bit of fun at Deuce's expense.
Harry was reassured.
The glass lift took an interminable time arriving and as they descended, Nicholas felt as exposed as Saint Sebastian.
They walked out of the warm lobby and gasped, both of them, as the December wind whipped down the street and slapped them into the open air.
Nicholas welcomed it; the tension across his chest was severe.
He took some deep breaths.
He walked slowly down towards Oxford Street, as if he were walking aimlessly.
‘There's a fair in Covent Garden at this time of year,’ he heard himself saying.
‘Not a very big business but there's a Big Wheel, I've certainly seen that, and sideshows — it's almost on the way.
Would you like to see it?’
Harry looked up at him, twisting his neck like a sparrow, Nicholas thought, and giving such a grateful, sweet, longing look.
Nobody should look like that.
Nicholas's heart lurched violently.
‘All right,’ they boy said, the flat phrase making more poignant the transparent eagerness.
‘Let's grab a cab,’ Nicholas said, ‘this wind's bitter, isn't it?’
Harry was puzzled at being addressed in such a grown-up way, but pleased.
A black cab drew in to the pavement a few yards ahead of them.
Nicholas went to the front window.
The driver pressed a switch to bring it down.
‘Covent Garden, please.
The Fair.
The best way is probably down King Street.’
‘Norf !’
Doug's voice pierced the wind.
‘Norf!
‘Old on!
‘Old on!’
He raced up to them and grabbed Harry by the arm.
What do you mean ‘oppin' off like that?’
‘Leave him alone,’ said Nicholas.
‘Harry, get in the taxi.’
‘No you don't.
‘E's none o'yore bizniss.’
‘Harry.
Ignore him.’
Nicholas held out a hand to encourage and, if necessary, to help the boy up the high step into the cab.
‘You don't touch ‘m, mister!’
Doug's cry alerted the taxi driver, who turned his full attention to the scene.
Nicholas felt himself flushing despite the bitter day.
‘In you go, Harry, and you — let him alone!’
‘'E's my cousin.
Ask ‘m, mister.’
The appeal was to the cab driver.
‘This man ‘e jus’ come to take off my cousin.
We don' know ‘oo ‘e is from Adam.
‘E could be anybody.
‘Oo are you, then?’
Doug was throwing himself into the part with relish.
Two pedestrians gathered at suitably spaced distance.
The taxi driver knocked off his engine.
‘This lad your cousin, son?’ he asked Harry.
‘Course ‘e is!’ said Doug, ‘jus’down from the Norf, see.
Right?’
Harry nodded at that one and the driver looked suspiciously at Nicholas.
‘This is ridiculous,’ he said.
‘Harry — come on, now.’
‘Hold on, hold on.’
The taxi driver, a soberly spoken old man, was clearly worried and would not have it brushed aside.
‘Let's get this sorted first.’
‘I am a Member of Parliament,’ said Nicholas, flushing even more furiously and unable to repress this dangerous admission.
‘I have my card.
Just a moment.’
He put his hand in his jacket pocket, searching for his wallet, and as he did, Doug, serious now, yanked Harry towards him and whispered in tones from which all traces of his cockney accent were now absent.
‘Member of Parliament.
Run, North, run; just run like hell.
You go that way.
Run !’
Nicholas, dishevelled, his expression in disarray, the taxi driver ready to condemn, Doug truly alarmed: ‘RUN!’.
Harry ran.
He glanced over his shoulder to see Doug running too, back towards the hotel.
‘Harry!’
Nicholas's voice checked him for a moment but when he turned he saw that the taxi driver was out of the cab and attempting to restrain him.
‘Harry!’
Harry ran.
Twisting into the first side street and then a smaller street off that and along its full length he ran and ran as fast as his legs would carry him.
He ran across streets and squares, ran past swerving traffic and Christmas shoppers and commuters thronging to their stations.
He just ran away from it all, sobbing until he thought he would choke.
JAKE PARKED THE VAN in the usual place and caught the Northern Line down to Leicester Square.
Fiona would own him one after this.
She would owe him a big one.
He gleaned some satisfaction from that future prospect.
All he had done was what she had told him to do and when he phoned from the motorway to tell her he'd done it she'd gone mad!
What he think he was doing?
The police would be on to them.
‘Get the boy back.
Say you lost him in the crowd.
Go to the police themselves if you had to.
Report it.
Stupid bastard!
No.
OK.
She had said that.
She had.
She admitted it but that was, she had drunk more than her share, that was, it was not to be taken seriously, there were, she couldn't even remember saying it, it could have been him, he was drunk wasn't he, misunderstanding or even making it up, after all he had done it, not her, he had taken the boy to London, she was asleep, didn't even hear them go, he had taken the boy and left him there, OK, lost him there, easy to do in London but better find him or all hell would break loose and she was not going to carry the can, not for anybody.
Jake looked at his watch for the hundredth, maybe the five hundredth time.
Five-thirty.
He would be in Leicester Square about six.
The boy wouldn't have strayed far.
And he would ask a few questions, say he'd been looking for a few hours.
But the boy wouldn't stray far.
He had loved those arcades, would have stayed all day.
A Police Officer
‘HEY.
WHAT IS IT you are looking for?’
Harry whimpered as if he were being threatened.
‘Don't be frightened.
I've been watching you.
You look a bit lost.’
She smiled and Harry decided against flight.
‘Let's see if we can help.’
She held out her hand.
Harry backed away.
‘Are you on your way somewhere?’
‘Yes.’
The voice was the merest whisper.
‘Yes,’ he repeated, more loudly, though it hurt his throat to do so.
‘Do you know where?’
Harry nodded.
‘Tell you what, I'll take you.’
She moved nimbly and took his arm in a firm but not hurtful a grip.
‘I'm used to taking people places,’ she said.
‘I know you'll think this is funny but I'm a police officer.
Plain clothes.
Very plain.
So.
Where is it?’
Again Harry could manage no more than a whisper.
Called on to repeat information he failed to do so.
‘I'll tell you what.
Would you like an ice cream?’
Winter or summer, ice cream never failed.
‘There's a shop near here, a shop , sell absolutely nothing else.
I'll buy you an ice — nothing flash, mind — and you come up with some answers.
OK?’
Harry nodded and allowed himself to be led up into Long Acre.
In the alleyway in which she had found him he had been protected from the evening surge of the wind, but as they began to walk towards the west it seemed to attack him.
He tilted his head down and held the woman's hand more firmly as they bent into it.
He was over Charing Cross Road and well into the Square before some instinct of recognition made him look up and see the place which was still the jewel of London, the haven of fantasies, the last known post of security, the Crystal Rooms.
‘Stop here,’ he said.
‘Please.’
He stood in front of it and then turned slowly to face the Square, willing his salvation.
The wind scudded people by; the Christmas films were giant illuminated in the fast-darkening city.
‘Please,’ he begged.
‘Just until six.
He'll come back here.
I know he will.’
THIS COMPLETES A FIVE-PART NOVELLA COMMISSIONED FOR ESQUIRE         
This Sporting Life
the price of fame
When Bobby Charlton was in the team that won the World Cup, they shared £28,000 — and he had the worst haircut in the world.
But times have changed.
Now even losers are worth millions.
And Bobby's had a haircut by Gordon Burn
IT WAS THAT MOST ENGLISH of English occasions — an anniversary.
July 30, 1991.
Twenty-five years to the day since England beat West Germany 4–2 in extra time at Wembley to win the World Cup for the first time and, so far, only time in a glorious (etc, etc — the back pages that morning were awash, as they had been for days, with nostalgia and breast-beating and rush-of-blood reminiscence) footballing history; the apotheosis of the game, which, according to one writer at the time, ‘lives like an extra pulse in the people of industrial England.’
‘Except in the celebrations that greeted the end of World War II, I have never seen England look as unashamedly delighted by life as it did during the World Cup,’ Arthur Hopcraft has written.
‘This was, of course, the true England of the industrial provinces, of blood-black brick and scurrying wind and workers’ faces clenched tight against the adversity of short-time working and the memory of last month's narrow miss on the pools.’
‘It is easy to understand, although some austere persons elaborately refuse to understand, why these crowds in the industrial towns pay shillings they can badly afford to see twenty-two professionals kick a ball about,’ JB Priestley wrote after being taken to a local derby march between Nottingham Forest and Notts County.
‘They are not mere spectators in the sense of being idle and indifferent lookers-on…
There is thrust into their lives of monotonous tasks and grey streets an epic hour of colour and strife that is no more a mere matter of other men's boots and a leather ball than a violin concerto is a mere matter of some other man's catgut and resin.
It has yet to be proved to me that these men out of the dingy side-streets ever did anything better with their free time and their shillings.’
Priestley was writing in the Thirties; Hopcraft in the Sixties.
In the Nineties, it goes without saying, it was another England — de-industrialized, post-industrial, an England whose representatives were, by and large, strangers to the dingy side-streets and the scurrying wind — who had gathered under a rotunda at the National Portrait Gallery to watch a portrait of one of the heroes of ‘66 and many people's idea of the Greatest Living Englishman, Bobby Charlton, being unveiled.
The painting was a sponsored job — British Gas had put up the necessary.
And the unveiling was a full-dress media event.
Guests entered via a thicket of tripods and swaying umbrella flashes and quickly became rimed with the sweat and muck of media heat.
It oozed from under the rugs and the thatches of Grecian 2000; made atlases of blouses and bulging summerweight suits; flowed in fan-shaped alluvial deltas down barer, pocky/downy carcinogenically tanned backs.
And yet, cruising the crowd for those overheards that can often give clues to the deeper meaning of an occasion, it became clear that one or two paying punters, a few common or garden turnstile cowboys, had slipped in through the security net.
‘Coach.
Came on coach this morning,’ I earwigged one middle-aged man telling another in an unadulterated northern accent.
He was wearing brilliantine and a dark blazer and a Neil Kinnock-style pseudo-military-type tie with a midget knot.
In his hand was a copy of the 1966 World Cup Souvenir programme, shrouded in cellophane.
‘Of course I'd have walked.’
‘All the way from Bolton?’
‘Bury…
He's a cosmic footballer’.
What was arresting wasn't what they were saying: minimal prompting would have elicited numerous similar testimonials to Bobby Charlton's qualities as an Englishman, an athlete, walker-on-water, inter-galactic being, ambassador and father.
What was interesting was that, while the hero of the hour was still in a back room, under wraps for the time being like his likeness in oils, the conversation was taking place only inches away from the player whose  last-minute goal in ‘66 guaranteed that the Jules Rimet trophy was coming to England.
Geoff Hurst's maitre d ’ demeanour advertised that he was open for business — he's the one who has been able to make his World Cup exploits play for him in recent years; he's semi-permanently on the road with an old-ones-are-the-best-ones floorshow and anecdotal package.
But he remained unjostled in his personal space, which was all too obviously dead space; dead air; unhappening; the souvenir programme stayed in its plastic packet.
Spotting a void, however, the public relations person for the National Portrait Gallery steered me forward to fill it.
‘Rhubarbrhubarbrhubarb…
Bobby…rhubarbrhubarbrhubarb…rhubarbrhubarbrhubarb…momentous occasion for the country…rhubarb…great ambassador for Britain,’ Hurst started helpfully.
He was wearing brown basket-weave shoes and a suit with pronounced machine-stitching around big lapels meant to give it that above-the-ruck bespoke look.
His mouth opened and closed while portraits of notables revolved on some sort of belt contraption behind him and my mind strayed to Phil Collins's story about the time he went up and asked Steve Davis for an autograph: ‘He didn't even glance at me, just sent me off to get a  pen, and then signed his name, still without looking at me.
And that was it…
That is my memory of him.’
A quarter-of-a-century late, in other words, Geoff Hurst has been able to parlay his football achievements into money-in-the-bank.
The team he was a part of in 1966 shared £28,000 out of a total competition profit of a million pounds.
A million pounds is the going rate for an ordinary player in today's inflationary market.
This summer Liverpool paid £2.2 million for the Derby defender Mark Wright and £2.9 million for his team-mate, Dean Saunders.
Manchester City paid £2.5 million for Keith Curle, an uncapped Wimbledon defender who earlier in his career had fetched £5,000.
These players will wear their prices as conspicuously as the plugs for Rank Xerox, Mars, Esso, Candy which, even on the field, keep them locked into the culture of commercial transactions.
Although they may occasionally still be allowed to be creatures of intuition and athleticism and skill, the logos say they are always a digit in the equation, a blip in the electronic spreadsheet of some global, transnational corporation.
The trademarks seem increasingly to wear the player.
They create a drag-like static that slows him down and pollutes what you would have to call his aura.
The suave personal manner and the bleached smile — the style pioneered by Kevin Keegan and currently apotheosized by Gary Lineker —‘the totalitarianism of the totally pleasant personality’ in a phrase of Norman Mailer's — these have paved the way for the FA's new cash-rich, super-sanitized super league which will come into being next season.
Although clearly no pauper, and equally obviously ‘a great ambassador for the game’ as everyone stresses, Bobby Charlton remains mysteriously unclaimed by commerce and untouched by the dead hand of blandness.
The force field around him is filled, not with the echoes of computer keys tapping and the fall-out from easy patter, but with the flickering after-images that are the legacy of a living icon and a once-great player.
‘A shot from Charlton, especially if hit on the run from outside the penalty area, is one of the great events of the sport, not because it is rare, which it is not, but because the power of it is massive and it erupts out of elegance,’ Arthur Hopcraft, who followed Charlton's career from shy schoolboy to elder statesman, wrote in his classic account of the English game,The Football Man .
‘He is never clumsy or desperate in movement, he can rise very close to the athletic ideal…
He is the player we bring to mind first when we ask ourselves what football looks like when we enjoy it most.’
When Bobby Moore — still trim, still neat, the Mod That Time Forgot — stepped forward to unveil the portrait, Bobby Charlton was shown to be wearing a halo — a luminous skidmark, or slather in the paint, lighting the night sky above his head.
There was a prolonged crash of shutters and an intensification of the heat as the professionals fixed this moment for transmission and then eventual filing, along with the others in his life.
In the line up for group shots which, in addition to Charlton and Moore included Geoff Hurst, George Cohen and Ray Wilson, was Peter Edwards, the artist.
Charlton had the decency to colour up at the bare-faced plugs for his product that the worthy representing British Gas had been able to lever into his opening peroration.
Peter Edwards stood out among the suits in his British Gas/Bobby Charlton Sports School sweatshirt, royal blue on white.
The changing face of football, from top: ‘A shot from Bobby Charlton erupts out of elegance,’ said Arthur Hopcraft; Keegan and Lineker paved the way for the cash-rich super league; this summer Candy-sponsored Liverpool paid more than £5 million for Mark Wright, left, and Dean Saunders
I asked Edwards whether putting this on for the unveiling — maximization for the sponsor, the click and clack of computer keys tapping — had been part of the deal.
‘He'd been wearing this over the shirt he wore for the sitting,’ Edwards said, ‘and at the end of the last sitting just as he was leaving, as an afterthought, he said, ‘Oh you better have this’and took it off and gave it to me, like the end of a football match.’
There was a reception for Charlton afterwards, so I didn't want to keep him.
I had just two questions: how did it feel to be made immortal?
And why had the hair that has given Clive James and others so much fun over the years been tidied into a conventional razor-styled crop at last?
Charlton was twenty-eight in 1966 and on his way to becoming a chrome-dome.
The hair that was to become part of the national furniture, the touchstone for English men of a certain type and a certain age, already streamed out behind his skull like, in Clive James's words, ‘the tail of an undernourished comet’.
An emblem for baldies everywhere in the era of yeah-yeah and the Fab Four.
He treated the first, metaphysical part of the two-parter with the leeriness it deserved.
‘Although I'm there on the wall, it's not me.
It's football and the World Cup ‘66.’
‘But it is you.’
(Pause)‘Yeah.
I know.
But I don't think I'd better think about that.
Makes me embarrassed.’
And the Samson job?
‘Me an’ me wife was just sittin' in one night an' I says: ‘Oh, it's bloody useless.’’
He was looking skywards the way he did as a player: he would flick at the ball with the outside of his left foot while leaning back looking at the sky.
‘Me daughters didn't want me to do it.
But anyway — snip!
And that was it.
She's a good barber me wife.
I feel really British.
It's good.’
The Express Traveller by Michael Shanahan
hong kong
Shop till you drop among the world's most madding crowd, or stay far from it in the fragrant forests of The Land Between
THE JUNKIES OF HONG Kong have the perfect means of escape from the constant downtown din, which can rattle the nerves of even the most hardened city-slicker.
Join them at Queen's Pier in Central or the Aberdeen Marina Club to be transported by traditional Chinese junks to the nirvana of the South China Sea's myriad peaceful islands, which form most of the colony.
A shopper's paradise: street markets team with life
Boats can be hired for a reasonable daily rate, and charter companies can tailor any trip to your needs.
If the call of the sea does not tempt you, seek the tranquillity of The Land Between — also known as the New Territories — that corridor of land between the fleshpots of Kowloon and the Chinese border.
Here, high-rises give way to fragrant forests, green hills, carefully tended terraced fields, duck and fish farms, traditional stone-walled villages and air free from the fumes that take your breath away when you're downtown.
This is the side of Hong Kong few shop-till-you-drop visitors bother to explore, yet forty per cent of the colony's land area comprises country parks.
The best way to get there is to hire a car and driver — for as little as sixty dollars a day.
Opt for a self-drive car only if you want to spend the whole day struggling to get off Hong Kong Island.
Equip yourself with Another Hong Kong — invaluable for anyone determined to get off the beaten track.
WHERE TO EAT
Eating out is the national pastime.
The following are among the best of literally thousands of restaurants.
The Chinese Restaurant (The Hyatt Regency,) is a Twenties-style Shanghai teahouse, serving modern Cantonese food at its finest.
The snake soup and the duck-and-mushroom broth in hollowed-out papaya are delicious.
Old favourites like civet cat and woodpecker vie with the Peking duck and drunken prawns for your attention.
At the top of Victoria Peak,JK's on the Peak () is the local for Hong Kong's swankiest residents.
Sit out on the veranda and drink in the stunning view as you sip your gin pahit (pink gin).
The food is nouvelle , but not to starvation point, and of a consistently high quality.
The menu is changed regularly but the grills are a constant, cosmopolitan feature.
The Tasmanian lamb, Scottish beef and South China Sea tiger prawns are special.
Another breathtaking view, this time over Victoria Harbour, is available through the floor-to-ceiling windows of Grissini (Grand Hyatt,).
The designer Italian menu, which varies from superb to bland, includes specialties like marinated vegetables with seafood, zucchini-layered lasagna in pesto sauce and veal medallion with diced artichokes.
It is advisable to book before you leave the UK: this is Hong Kong's current ‘in’ place.
Gaddi's (The Peninsula Hotel,), first described as ‘the best restaurant east of Suez’ more than forty years ago, is still the place for HK's serious shakers and stakers.
It can be as stuffy as many of its clients, but there is no denying its discreet splendour.
The food is seriously French and the bill is serious in any language.
With Wolfgang Amadeus providing the background buzz, Austrian eaterie Mozart Stub'n () packs them into a tiny floor space.
The food is hearty, and the Schnapps ice cold.
Best value is the cheese fondue, and the chef is proud of his Wiener schnitzel.
Bukhara (Sheraton Hotel,) is no flock-walled Indian restaurant specializing in vindaloo and ten pints of lager.
The decor is ethnic-meets-rustic with stone arches, low beams and wood furniture, and the tandoori food is among the best you can find in the world.
Go with a crowd if you want to try the house special, which is a leg of lamb marinated in dark rum, braised in the oven and finished in the tandoor.
WHERE TO STAY
Hong Kong has a glut of hotel accommodation at present, and even the top places will give a discount if you bargain.
The Hilton (), represents stability in the ever-changing world of Hong Kong hostelries.
It may be plain to look at, but the service is great, and the prices reasonable.
Certain hotels have traditional class, and in HK it's The Peninsula ().
Check into the Marco Polo Suite and have a full-time valet and chauffeur-driven Rolls at your beck and call for only $1,333 a night.
About two-thirds of the rooms at The Regent () offer a view of Victoria Harbour and across the bay.
In a de luxe terrace suite, you can soak up the sights from your own outdoor Jacuzzi.
Wanchai used to be the hostess-bar district, but it has moved up in the world and is now home to one of the colony's classiest new hotels,The Grand Hyatt ().
Ultra-modern and apparently inspired by a Thirties liner, it houses JJ's , the best night spot in town.
For years, the Mandarin Oriental () was synonymous with Hong Kong, but the old favourite is falling by the wayside.
Many regulars are, however, loath to move elsewhere, for Central is central.
The coffee is the best in town.
Across from the Peninsula, but in a different price world, is the YMCA , splendidly situated and only a block from the Star Ferry Terminal.
Use what you save to take afternoon tea in the lobby of the Pen ().
For ‘nightlife’ in many of the hostess clubs in the Suzie Wong district, read ‘rip-off’.
But you could take the Yum Sing — Night on the Town — tour run by the Hong Kong Tourist Association.
You get a couple of standard drinks, a plate of fruit and an hour's chat with a hostess, but wake up in the morning with your wallet intact.
THE ESQUIRE WALK
Walking through the streets of Hong Kong is an experience akin to a rugby match.
You'll be jostled, pushed, elbowed and have your feet stamped on by the seething hordes that are just going about their daily business in the city.
No one says sorry, and you'll be greeted with looks of astonishment if you apologize.
But don't let that put you off, because as with most cities, the only way to get to know the place is on foot.
Start on the Kowloon side, at the Cultural Centre — it is probably the most misnamed construction on earth — it looks like a bizarre ski-jump which has gone very wrong.
Head towards the Star Ferry terminal and take one of the green-and-white boats across Victoria Harbour to Hong Kong Island.
The trip gives you a wonderful view of the sky-scraper-packed waterfront and, more importantly, a chance to sit in relative peace.
Disembarking, you'll be greeted by the sight of old Hong Kong —rickshaws and their drivers.
These are purely tourist attractions these days; the drivers are all over sixty, and taking you more than a few yards could prove fatal.
Ahead of you is the unmistakable headquarters of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank — another modern masterpiece — the world's most expensive office block.
Some say it tells ‘the entire story of architecture’, others ‘the entire story of architectural mistakes’.
Aim for Des Voeux Road , road with its rattling trams, and saunter through this shopaholic's paradise.
If you have a strong stomach, pop into the Central Market ; the butchers and fishmongers can always spot a squeamish visitor and slaughter one of their victims at just the right moment.
Crossing Jubilee Street , you will see the famous dai pai dongs (street restaurants); few gweilob , which translates literally as ‘roundeyes’, eat at these stalls, but it really is a worthwhile experience.
On to Wing On Street, better known as Cloth Alley , where you can find silks, linens and wools at incredibly low prices, and where the salesmen know exactly how much you need for a shirt or a suit.
Turn right at the top into Wing Sing Street, known as Egg Street .
Tons of eggs are distributed from here each day, and you can buy anything, including hundred-year-old eggs.
They are not really that old, but taste like it.
Finally, take a cab to the Mandarin Hotel, where the Chinnery Bar serves ice-cold beer.
You'll probably need it.
The Business Traveller by Brian Moynahan we have ways to make you stay Hoteliers are using a whole new bag of tricks to keep their guests — and wallets — on the premises
DESIGNER JEANS, DESIGNER water, designer food.
These we know: Ralph Lauren, Perrier,nouvelle cuisine .
But designer hotels?
Designer beaches?
There is little that you will come across in your travels that cannot be designed with your psyche, and your cash, in mind.
Some methods are primitive, others subtle, all work.
Let us take the hotel, bearing in mind the fundamental principle of modern hotel-keeping: the perfect guest never leaves the hotel.
A hotel is no longer a series of bedrooms built above a restaurant, which you have to leave to do anything except sleep and eat meals.
It has sprouted shopping malls, discos and nightclubs, beauty salons, gymnasia, news kiosks, coffee shops.
It always had one bar.
Now it has several and one of them is themed to represent the genuine local product: ‘the pub’ for a hotel in London, ‘the tapas bar’for one in Madrid.
However, the provision of services does not necessarily mean that you will use them.
You may have a yen to go to a real pub.
So methods have been developed to dissuade you from wandering off to somebody else's cash register.
Sir Billy Butlin was the first to deal with the problem of the straying guest in his original holidays camps.
He wasn't too subtle but he was effective.
He surrounded them with barbed wire .
Literally.
Clacton-on-Sea became Stalag Luft-am-Meer.
But barbed wire is a somewhat crude way of turning a guest into an inmate.
The same desirable effect is now achieved with more delicacy.
The hotel designer is careful to put darkened glass in all public rooms.
You are thus unable to look at the great outside and feel you are missing something.
In hot climates, the air-conditioning in reception is kept icily high to contrast with the sweaty streets.
The designer makes sure that there is only one exit at the front and that coaches and cars sweep up to it, making it unattractive to cross.
The hotelier doesn't mind if you stay in your room.
Given the mark-up on room service, he quite likes it.
But he has a problem here.
The more bedrooms he can pack in, the better.
That means small.
But big is beautiful to the traveller.
Ergo , the arrival of the wide-look hotel room — light-coloured walls and carpets, big mirrors and gilt light fittings.
A colourful, but simple repro picture or two and simple wallpaper.
Complicated patterns make a room shrink.
And a headboard for the bed.
It takes up very little space and makes a room look substantial.
Now, the beach.
This is a place where you are unlikely to spend much money.
A designer beach is therefore a stretch of derelict sand with a cash-generating oasis behind it.
Miami is a wonderful example of the art — the ocean, a long line of hotel pool areas and almost nobody on the beach in between.
The trick is to create a garden of Eden, with shade and sun, fountains and flowers, a bar and barbecue, all focused on the pool, that you must cross before you get to the sand.
In this oasis, you will disperse funds on food and snacks and cool drinks.
The pool used to be a problem since swimmers were non-spenders.
So it was designed to be attractive to look at, but with curves, ovals and an absence of  straight lines to make it difficult to swim in.
A genius then suggested a solution to the skin-flint-swimmer syndrome.
He put the bar in the pool.
The watering place became a watering hole.
Unless you are actually underwater, you may be dimly aware that music is playing poolside.
This is, of course, designer music.
It is not intended to be noticed, but to induce.
The noise is not sophisticated — it has been recorded without vocals and with a minimum of tone.
Some hotels programme their canned music in twenty-four hour cycles, varying by location and the hour.
The lifts and reception area have their own tape, always bland, often with a national theme — Gilbert and Sullivan for London, subdued flamenco for Spain.
Like the theme bars, this is to reassure you that you are indeed in England or Spain, without you having to go out to verify it.
Restaurants and cocktails bars have slow and classical tapes.
These are high-spending areas, and the management wants you to linger.
The coffee shop is low spend, high turnover.
No lingering here.
The music is urgent, disco and rock numbers to speed you on your way.
The shopping arcade is a stroll-and-browse region and the preserve of medium tempo Lawrence Welk.
The pool area, the tanning yard to the trade, runs what is known as ‘multi-generation pop’.
It may not thrill, but it certainly does not offend either.
It's all a matter of design.
The Esquire Review NINE PAGES IN THE LIFE OF THE CULTURE
The Temperature Gauge for November
COLD Ice T The New Jack party is over Buying property in France Or Italy for that matter Death cigarettes Not very funny Football shirts Make the Robin Reliant look well designed Ice cream as a sex substitute Yuk Kenneth Branagh Is there no escape?
Isotonic drinks The party is over Soviet statues The icons of communism topple Smart drugs Safe, legal and absolutely useless John Major First anniversary of the coup Gazza crop Who wants to look like a Roman emperor?
HOT Canada Ice Desalinated iceberg water — in the shops now Buying East German Hurry, hurry, while stocks last — one fifth has to go Tequila-flavoured lollipops Lick every bit — even the maggot Bobble hats and berets Essential headgear for the winter Sex as an ice cream substitute Yum, yum Dustin Hoffman Makes his gangster debut in Billy Bathgate Organic fruit juices The scam is only just beginning Barry Manilow The icon of trash culture on tour Kane toads The real thing.
Suck one and see Private Eye Happy thirtieth birthday Long hair The Heathcliff look returns.
Reputations RICHARD NEVILLE — a comic and cosmic summer spent with Robin Williams
I CANNOT guarantee cool neutrality in this assessment of Robin Williams.
After an encounter during a summer holiday in Sydney, which included being the butt of a four-hour tongue lashing, I cannot write with detachment.
At that time, I was making a TV series with an old friend of mine.
Our stories were drawn from the fringes of science, the environmental front line and Californian whackiness.
In return for tardy assistance with his holiday plans, the comedian agreed to view some of our rushes, and to let us film his reactions for broadcast — without fee or hassle.
Williams: awkward, introverted, Chaplinesque
Robin, his wife Valerie and their son Zachary had moved into an eyrie on the mansion-studded Barrenjoey peninsula overlooking the turquoise sweep of Palm Beach.
The glassy inlet was flecked with yachts and windsurfers, while the adjacent ocean rolled its bodysurfers into pristine, uncrowded sands.
Tamed native birds flocked on the poolside boardwalk of their rented hideaway, ‘Hawksnest’, as we met for the first time, and Robin encircled his shyness with a stream-of-consciousness banter, made easier by the antics of a visiting cocker spaniel, which bit the head off a parrot.
Robin's holiday, a marital swansong as it turned out, ran smoothly.
He jogged on the beach, swarthy and sweaty, bumping into the locals, including Peter Weir.
He parties, played in the sand with the kids, bought a bellyboard and learned how to crest the foam.
He claimed he was relaxing and winding down.
Even trying to prove it with pauses between the jokes.
But no, it was hopeless.
His eyes darted along the beach in reckless agony, which no amount of jogging or kayaking was able to dispel.
He needed a comedy fix.
And fast.
‘Monday's not a good day,’ I said, as we piled into the Citröen.
A tour of Sydney's nightspots.
What a laugh…
Each club was deader than the last; frigid and dirty, empty or inhospitable, with Robin increasingly silent and me feeling guilty for living in Hicksville.
An off night, I assured him, as we re-traced our twenty-mile drive to Palm Beach, where Robin wrapped himself in a blanket in front of the TV, soothing his cold turkey by watching videos of the local comedians, while I made a mental note to move my life and family to a flat above 42nd Street.
‘We'll try again Friday,’ I whimpered.
Something had to be done with his mounting energy.
We got our film crew and sat Robin down in front of our rushes.
First story; a couple of sex therapists teaching extended orgasm techniques: Robin said it would be better to extend the period of time after the orgasm —‘you know, three days of sleep’.
When the couple urged viewers to trim their fingernails before intercourse to heighten exploratory pleasures, Robin replied, ‘That's a Jewish technique — only the women cut their nails during intercourse.’
But Robin still hungered for a night on the traps: so we found ourselves at the Harold Park Hotel, the crowds milling into the street, silhouetted against the lights of the adjacent Greyhound track.
This time I had taken the precaution of tipping off the organizers in advance and swearing them to silence.
The pub was dangerously packed.
When Robin burst on stage in a Hawaiian shirt and baggy trousers, the crowd cheered and applauded — barely able to comprehend that Robin had landed in Oz, let alone materialized before their eyes without oopla or hype.
From the moment he opened his mouth the pub was in uproar.
Years later, the jokes are a blur.
I can still hear the clatter of coins as they rained on the stage in a steady downpour of acclaim, a habit derived from the days of the gold rush.
One woman, a local comedienne, flashed her bare breasts to grab his attention, inspiring a burst of ad libs on foreplay, sperm, babies and fatherhood.
Dripping with sweat and disoriented by the jocular fusillades of the locals, vying to zap the master, Robin rushed into the wings.
‘They don't like me,’ he said.
‘Those coins…‘
‘Idiot — that's adulation!’
‘You're putting me on.’
Back he scampered, to thunderous acclaim and a blizzard of silver, wowing them for hours.
Backstage, drying off with a towel, he asked: ‘Was I any good?’
Then it was off to Benny's, the all night showbiz bar.
Mobbed by local comedians, whole work he was able to compliment, having viewed their tapes.
He engaged them with zest, stretching and testing them like a martial artist, to catalyse their own divine spark — just as he was later to do as the teacher, John Keating, in Dead Poets Society .
Another movie,Awakenings , harnessed his gift of empathy.
As the Oliver Sachs figure, he was awkward, introverted, Chaplinesque and observant, picking up clues on the mental state of his patients, which had been overlooked by worldlier colleagues.
Yet he was driven, persistent, and indomitable, a mixture of Schweitzer and Schwarzenegger, as Robin observed, which coincides with the twin streams of his own spirit — the philanthropy of his humour and the thrust of his ambition; his desire to be liked — both in life and on the screen.
In the role of parry in The Fisher King , his latest film, Robin moves from practitioner to patient, a journey through the external trappings of madness to the inner recesses of a divine dementia.
This film is about humour and healing, without doctors or drugs.
It operates in a world of synchronicities and shared unconsciousness, driven by love, a desire to be whole and the pursuit of grace.
Here, for once, is a look at the causes and consequences of a bar-room massacre, where the gun-play is fleeting and ketchup is mostly kept in the pantry.
On his talkback show, Jack Lucas, a loudmouth Manhattan DJ, castigates a popular bar for its yuppieness — itself a projection, like so much yuppie-phobia, as he's a leader of the pack — and a maniac fan slaughters the clientele.
Three years later, a suicidal Lucas meets Parry, our old friend, the idiot savant — lovestruck, optimistic and naked under the Rorschach clouds.
Parry is tormented by demons.
It's a role with its antecedents in Mork — except this planet is not Ork but Manhattan's skid row.
The Fisher King shimmers with insights.
Parry is Robin Williams's finest role, uniting his disparate selves — while avoiding the pitfall of being holier and hippier than thou.
It is Robin's last night in Sydney.
The candle-lit table on the edge of the Pacific is laden with fresh local rock oysters and prawns.
A few friends, a new stack of ethno/religious/tribal music from the Third World (my birthday present), his holiday over, our new show soon to be launched.
The astonishing strains of a duo from Mali fill the air, and then it begins: ‘What is this Richard, the United Nations Greatest hits?’
A burst of laughter, another joke, more laughter, more jokes, laughter/jokes/laughter/jokes in an escalating feedback spiralling higher, robbing the guests of the ability to eat, straining our jawbones, while Robin is relentless, driven, reckless, focusing on me as the host — host of the dinner, but of his wit — reducing my voluble everyday self to a tongue-tied Zeppo Marx, hallucinating, hungry, exhausted, and in pain, until kapow!
I fall to the floor as though dead, twitching with laughter, convulsing with mirth, dizzy with excess.
Go home, Robin Williams, go home.
Enough is enough.
And I hardly got to know him at all.
Music SEAN O'HAGAN — the rebirth of British soul
IN HIS provocative book The Death of Rhythm & Blues , America's premier black music journalist, Nelson George, discussed the ‘gentrification’ of soul music in the Eighties.
Using examples such as Luther Vandross, Alexander O'Neal and Anita Baker, he argued that the airbrushing of contemporary American soul for an upwardly mobile ‘adult’ audience had neutered the music's gritty, emotive, urban core.
While today's soul singers tend to reflect the mores of a new black middle class, their erstwhile role — as an authentic voice or urban black experience — had been filled by rap artists.
The Young Disciples, ‘talkin' loud and sayin' something’
However, although transatlantic reports concerning the death of soul may not be exaggerated, Britain is a different matter.
This year may well be the year in which British soul's new generation emerges after a decade dominated by the synthetic beats of hip-hop and house.
Earlier in the year, a single called ‘There's Nothing Like This’, by the exotically named Omar, entered the top ten of the pop charts.
The record exemplified British soul's new attitude — confident, positive, populist — and distinctly post-modern.
The computerized drumbeats were overlaid with real instruments — all, incidentally, played by Omar, a regular soul renaissance man also blessed with a singular singing voice.
Omar is part of a multiracial London club network of singers, rappers and musicians who have grown up listening to modern ‘cutting edge’ music and their parents' record collections.
Thus, Stevie Wonder and Al Green are just as likely to be cited as influences alongside the likes of Soul II Soul or Public Enemy.
The short but colourful history of Omar's single and accompanying album is testament to the power of today's young, hip, musical taste-makers.
It started life in a small London reggae label, Kongo    Records, run by Omar's father, Byron Lyefouk, who shifted 40,000 copies of the album with minimum publicity.
After a huge impact on the labyrinthine London club scene, it was re-released through Talkin' Loud records, a Phonogram offshoot specializing in jazz-rap and modern soul and managed by Jazz FM DJ, Gilles Peterson.
Peterson sees the Talkin' Loud stable as a ‘breeding ground for the Nineties sounds of soul and jazz attitude.
It's jazz and soul as a street thing, a club thing,’ he says, ‘which is where both those forms of music started and thrived in the first place.’
As one of London's most influential club DJs, Peterson is in constant and close proximity to the streets and the clubs.
Out of that same after-hours milieu come The Young Disciples, who comprise two British DJs, Femi Williams and Marco Nelson and an American songstress, Carleen Anderson, who is the daughter of soul legends Bobby Byrd and Vicky Anderson, two members of James Brown's legendary JB's.
‘We're the disciples of Marvin Gaye, Curtis Mayfield and James Brown,’ explains Williams, ‘but we're also a product of eight years of the British club scene, the whole hip-hop and house explosion.’
The Young Disciples' debut album Road To Freedom , is another convincing example of the diversity and sense of purpose that invests this British nouveau soul scene.
What is most telling here, however, is the sense of history and lineage that both the Omar and Young Disciples albums exude.
They sound like they are sure of their place within the ongoing scheme of things.
If America has indeed ruptured its soul tradition with a sanitized, easy listening — dare I say it — imitation soul, it seems ironic, but nonetheless welcome, that tomorrow's soul legends may hail from Britain's musical melting pot — where the young bloods are, to misquote James Brown, ‘talkin' loud and sayin' something’.
Books MICHAEL BRACEWELL — remembrance of punk past
AS A favourite subject for discussion among the Late Show generation, punk rock falls somewhere between post-modernism and interest rates.
It ranks high among those topics which you fear may bore your listeners, but which, secretly, you take very seriously.
Jon Savage's new book,England's Dreaming: Sex Pistols and Punk Rock (Faber, £17.50), is a superb account of the manner in which punk rock happened.
Savage has made a flawless narrative out of the punk era, but, more importantly, he has revealed the facts behind the mythology.
The effect is not dissimilar to that of seeing a major city from the air: zones and landmarks become topographically clear; boundaries and scale are established.
For the rest of us, I suspect, recalling punk rock is a rather self-indulgent activity.
At the time, after all, we despised the manner in which our elders were so nostalgic for the hippy era.
We took pride in the notion of disposability.
History (we thought) was redundant.
Being at a northern red-brick university, my experience of punk, superficially, was that of wearing silly clothes in defiance of roving squads of hostile engineering students who, in general, liked nothing better that to get drunk and listen to Lindisfarne.
But the real problem lay in the dim realization that punks weren't supposed to be at university.
They were supposed to be stealing cars from Hammersmith housing estates, or setting fire to the dustbins outside Harrods.
But spiritually, I would guess, the middle-class punks who were obediently getting their degrees were the ones upon whom the movement left its deepest mark.
Eight years later, punk rockers with honours degrees were going to concerts by The Jesus and Mary Chain — married to girls who worked at the Institute of Contemporary Art, or living with men who created (or deconstructed) advertising campaigns.
In 1979, when punk rock became ‘intellectual’, with groups such as Joy Divison, it was easier to be a middle-class punk.
The titles of punk rock singles were then being taken from Penguin Classics, or from European cinema.
Being an oik was no longer necessary.
All you had to do was wear a long raincoat and a glum expression — the rest was simply implied.
Punk rock was over by then anyway (real punks claimed it finished in 1976, but who were the ‘real’ punks?) and in its place there was an orgy of cross-cultural pollination, based entirely upon received ideas.
Punk had shaped a whole section of urban society, and, in some cases, had liberated the imagination of the young middle classes.
My favourite memory of being a pretend punk is drawn from the summer of 1978.
I was attending a garden party in Reigate, and feeling very pleased with myself in my third-hand dinner jacket, scarlet ‘Hoofer’ trousers, and a lapel-badge which said: ‘We are all prostitutes’.
I gazed with contempt upon my peers, all of whom were listening to the Eagles and drinking Bucks Fizz.
Anarchistically, I stubbed out my cigarette on the patio.
I oozed cynicism and boredom (I hoped) from every pore.
Just then a girl called Sabrina came bouncing up.
‘I say,’ she said, ‘are you a punk rocker?’
My lip curled.
‘I used to hate punk rock,’ she continued, ‘and then I heard The Stranglers.
Now I love it.’
Confounding her floral-print frock, Sabrina was all enthusiasm.
‘Fuck off,’ I said, rudely.
The truth of the matter — that I was never really a punk — can be gleaned from the fact I wrote to her later, and apologized.
ALL IN THE FAMILY William Randolph Hearst Jr had arguably the best seat at the twentieth century.
From this vantage comes a high-spirited memoir (The Hearsts: Father and Son , Roberts Rinehart, £16.95) of where he went (everywhere) and who he met (everyone) as a newspaperman and heir to the publishing empire.
Whether quoting ‘Pop’(‘Success is a frame of mind’) or Groucho Marx (‘When it's 9.30 in New York, it's 1937 in Los Angeles’), Hearst slips the reader the inside story on some very high times.
BIGSHOTS
This month sees the publication of Heroes and Antiheroes (André Deutsch, £20), a collection of portraits by the giants of the renowned Magnum photographic agency.
The pictures of the smokers alone are worth the price of admission: Burri's series on the cocky Che Guevara chomping on a cigar; Cartier-Bresson's puckish Jean Genet drawing on a cheroot; Erwitt's vain Mishima posed with a cigarette; and Halsmann's immortal Hitchcock (above).
The introduction is by John Updike.
IN PRINT
Mao II by Don DeLillo (Cape, £14.99).
The author of White Noise and Libra , DeLillo is an American master.
The Tax Inspector by Peter Carey (Faber, £14.99).
Brilliant new novel of redemption and rebirth from the winner of the 1988 Booker Prize.
An Act of Terror by André Brink (Secker, £14.99).
Massive novel concerning terrorism and conscience.
Saint Maybe by Anne Tyler (Chatto, £14.99).
Joyous, sad, totally delightful.
From the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of The Accidental Tourist .
Parliament of Whores by PJ O'Rourke (Picador, £14.99).
PJ turns his attention to the US government: ‘What the fuck do these guys do all day and why does it cost so goddamned much money?’
TELEVISION
JIM SHELLEY — the magic of animals
I REMEMBER realizing why we watch so many nature programmes.
It was during the episode of Supersense on chemical warfare and trap strategy.
A female sand wasp was shown uncovering a lurking trapdoor spider, paralysing it with her sting and laying her eggs in the spider's body.
When the eggs hatched, the young wasps fed on the body of the spider, which was still alive.
Clearly these insects were on to something.
Nature programmes always do one thing: they shake our faith in the idea that man is the superior species on earth.
Animals are so clever.
They can do things we cannot.
They can do the things we want to do (like the above).
If only we can observe them, perhaps we can learn from them.
Perhaps we can copy them.
At the very least, perhaps we can protect ourselves.
The ‘sight’ episode of Supersense (the sequel of which,Lifesense , begins this month on BBC1) had a four-eyed fish whose eyes are divided so it can simultaneously watch above the water for predators and below the water for prey; the woodcock which has developed 360 degree ‘wraparound’vision; bees which see colours in flowers man cannot and a map of the sky from which to navigate.
Man, you realize, is just trying to catch up.
Animals, you get the impression, know what they are doing.
They know what they're  here for.
They're so calm.
They just get on with it.
While Man has stopped developing, animals seem to learn, adapt and change all the time.
Animals are not only more ingenious and better suited to life, they also have weird sex and commit weird murders.
The murders are the key.
Animals have violence licked.
They have all the best ways in-built : stings, stuns, teeth, tentacles…some of them have harpoons, lassoes, switchblades.
The have poisons.
They lay traps.
We watch such things with horror and envy.
Envy because we can't do them and horror because they might start doing them to us.
The most watched nature programmes are predator versus prey, bullies versus victims.
When the puffer-fish escapes the jaws of the moray eel by inflating itself, we think, ‘Perhaps I could do that when the moray eel comes for me’.
We cheer when a meerkat eats up a scorpion or a rattlesnake just for the hell of it.
It gives us hope.
Animal programmes force us to look at our fears: we stare into the eyes of the enemy (bats, rats, snakes, sharks, wasps).
We look at them in close-up and we learn.
We learn that we're even more terrified of the wasps than we ever realized.
We learn why we are frightened by wasps and it makes us more frightened.
We look at the Caira spider, which has no web, but simply mimics the smell of the female moth and waits to devour the male moths that land on him.
What if some animal learns to do that to us?
Haunted by the fear that perhaps man is not the superior species, we seek salvation and find it because the animal kingdom is presented to us as a world of such wonder and magical beauty that we can believe in God's kingdom and therefore our divine right to rule.
In a God-less world, the likes of Attenborough and Bellamy are magicians or missionaries, conjuring up in our hearts the conviction that, yes, God must have created kangaroos.
He must have.
Maybe only He can save us.
THE ANIMAL KINGDOM
THE SEXY: sea horses, panthers, black mambas, stingrays, river dolphins, cheetahs, blue-ring octopuses, owls
THE GREAT: gorillas, hippos, sloths, ants
THE HORRIFIC: praying mantises, barracudas, hornets
THE WEIRD: thorny devils, hump-headed parrot fish, red howler monkeys, mantis shrimp  
IF TEACHERS TAKE schoolchildren to the Toulouse-Lautrec exhibition at the Hayward Gallery between October 10 and January 19, with they be liable for prosecution under Section 28 of the 1988 Local Government Act?
After all, Toulouse-Lautrec, like many other artists of the late nineteenth century, was obsessed with lesbianism.
Born in 1864, Toulouse-Lautrec was physically deformed by a rare bone disease, probably the result of aristocratic inbreeding, and bad falls sustained as a child.
Paradoxically, he specialized in sporting pictures until the age of twenty-four.
From 1888, however, installed in Montmartre on a private income, Toulouse-Lautrec gave free rein to his insatiable appetite for cheap flesh and seedy sensuality.
But it wasn't really such a leap from paintings of riders to pictures of top-hatted toffs playing around with tousled tarts.
They were both demi-mondes of physical extremism, raw athleticism and slave-master relationships.
Moreover, Charles Darwin's revelations about out bestial beginnings had dealt a severe to Victorian man's self-image.
Who better than a renegade aristocrat to revel in man's proximity to animals — hence all those feline females and canine males.
Film ANNE BILLSON — the great British biopic
SO YOU THINK someone should make a film about your life?
Here's what you have to do to get the celluloid treatment.
Take lots of drugs.
Become embroiled in a seamy sex scandal.
And then round it all off either by killing someone, or — if that seems too drastic a step — by getting yourself killed.
Put yourself in Fifties or Sixties costume, throw in a couple of vintage cars to set the scene, and you've got it made.
We can rearrange Gary Oldman's hair into an exact replica of yours.
Now prepare to be immortalized.
‘Let Him Have It’
The British film industry has churned out many such tales in recent years.
Let's hear it for the Great British Biopic, based on the sort of real-life story which might have leapt straight from the pages of the tabloids, and which in some cases actually did: Ruth Ellis, who shot her feckless lover and paid the ultimate price, in Dance with a Stranger ; Sid Vicious, the smack-addled punk who stabbed his girlfriend in Sid and Nancy ; Joe Orton, the homosexual playwright whose lover battered him to death with a hammer in Prick Up Your Ears ; Josslyn Hay, twenty-second Earl of Errol, who was shot to death in Kenya, in White Mischief ; Christine Keeler, John Profumo and Stephen Ward in Scandal .
‘Prick Up Your Ears’
‘Scandal’
The latest soul to hit the big screen is the unfortunate Derek Bentley, the mentally subnormal nineteen-year-old who was hanged in 1952 for the Croydon warehouse murder — a murder committed by; his companion, sixteen-year-old Christopher Craig, who was too young to swing.
Let Him Have It is the case history of an outrageous miscarriage of justice.
As a public information service, it is invaluable.
As a film, it potters along in second gear.
‘Dance with a Stranger’
Any of these real-life case histories might have provided the basis for a terrific movie.
Instead, what we get are sensational violent highlights linked by tepid speculation about the reasons why.
This is tabloid film-making in which the protagonists are cardboard cut-outs, played by lookalike actors whose portrayals, however skilful, are doomed to be little more than glorified Mike Yarwood impersonations.
On April 10, 1955, a blonde woman fired six shots outside a public house in Hampstead…
At nine o'clock on November 2, two men were seen clambering over the gates of a warehouse in Tamworth Road, Croydon…
Do you recognize the suspects?
These are not so much movies as big-budget episodes of Crimewatch UK .
Perhaps it would have been better to use the subjects as springboards for complete fiction, leaving the pedantic detail — and the risk of libel suits — behind, and taking off into the story-telling stratosphere.
Ed Gein, the Wisconsin farmer who upholstered his chairs with human skin, was transformed, via a lot of artistic licence, into Norman Bates.
Charles Starkweather, the rebel without a cause who, in 1957, went on a casual killing spree with his fourteen-year-old girlfriend in tow, ended up on screen as Kit Carruthers in Badlands .
These are no longer case histories; they are living, breathing movies with independent existences of their own.
What we get are sensational violent highlights linked by tepid speculation about the reasons why
So you still think someone should make a film about your life?
Well, off you go and start taking those drugs, getting involved in that sex scandal, committing those murders.
The audience will know your name, they will know what you did, they will know when you did it, and where.
But if you want your life story to grip them by the throat and take them along for a rattling good ride which will haunt them for years to come — forget it.
ON RELEASE
‘HOMICIDE’
Written and directed by David Mamet.
A terse and gritty thriller in which an investigation into a mysterious death leads cop Joe Mantegna through both the mean streets of the present and the horrors of the past as he confronts his own identity.
‘CITY SLICKERS’
A comic romp starring Billy Crystal in which a group of disgruntled New Yorkers play out their frontiersmen fantasies on a two week cattle-drive in New Mexico.
Guess what?
They end up learning a great deal about themselves and each other.
Good fun, even if it has a predictably upbeat ending.
‘THE FISHER KING’
A visual treat.
Terry Gilliam's lavish recreation of New York as a landscape fit for adventure provides the setting for two casualties of urban torment — Jeff Bridges's talk-show host and panhandler Robin Williams — to heal each other 's wounds [see Reputations, page 138].
‘EDWARD II’
Derek Jarman's adaption of Christopher Marlowe's play about reckless and obsessive love.
Passionate, minimalist and experimental.
‘MISSISSIPPI MASALA’
The year's fashion for interracial love stories continues with Mira Nair's rich tale about the hierarchy of colour.
Fine performances by Denzel Washington and Sarita Choudhury and an intriguing plot make this a fine follow-up to Salaam Bombay !
Trends ANDY DARLING — a plague of Nazi video games
The television screen shows a distant building silhouetted against the skyline.
Above it flies a swastika.
To the left a chimney belches smoke.
In the foreground there is a sign saying, ‘Treblinka 2km’.
This is the opening scene of Concentration Camp Manager , one of a host of fascist computer games which are currently the blight of European cities.
The aim of the game is to gas as many Jews as possible and then sell off the residual gold teeth.
At this point the following text appears onscreen: ‘You have liberated Germany of its sole parasite.’
With Anti Turk Test the sole parasite is the guest worker Turk.
On Paki Bash the single obstacle preventing a strong Aryan nation is the Asian immigration.
NEW GIRL ON THE BLOCK: ‘I'm a woman with a man's brain,’ says Tara Newley.
A singer and songwriter, Tara is currently working on a solo album to follow the success of her single with E-Zee Possee, ‘Breathing is E-Zee’.
The daughter of Joan Collins and Anthony Newley, twenty-eight-year-old Tara, has learned to live with having famous parents.
‘It's like having a sign around my neck saying ‘kick me’.
I've had to work twice as hard to prove myself.’
According to Shimon Samuels of the Paris-based Simon Wiesenthal Centre, the games were first sold on Nazi memorabilia stalls at flea markets in Austria.
Eastern Europe also provided an enthusiastic market, as Commodore 64 computers, obsolete in the west, were sold for a song to young people eager for unity and a non-communist identity.
Over 140 different games have since been found throughout Germany, Italy, Holland, Japan and, most recently, here in the UK.
There is no obvious source and distribution methods vary, although many of the games are believed to be manufactured in Lincoln, Nebraska, home of the US National Socialist Party.
In the UK, the Public Order Act, with its Incitement to Racial Hatred clause, is likely to be invoked if anyone dealing in the games is arrested.
Shimon Samuels, meanwhile, has been lobbying both the German and French governments, questioning their lack of endeavour in hunting down suspects.
In Germany, owning Nazi material is legally akin to hard drug possession, but to date only one arrest has been made.
Unfortunately, the crop-haired young man picked up by the police turned out to be a journalist trying to infiltrate a skinhead gang for a story.
The final scene of Concentration Camp Manager : the player has been promoted to the Gestapo and is torturing a victim
Le Nité Grité GILBERT ADAIR — codes that are meant to be cracked
During the Fifties, Roland Barthes wrote, for a French weekly journal, the articles eventually collected in book form as Mythologies .
During the Seventies and Eighties Umberto Eco wrote his not dissimilar essays for a Milanese daily.
Though neither was primarily a journalist, their dual example has revolutionized journalistic practices and conventions all over Europe.
That is a fact.
Its corollary is that precisely because of their prior example, they have made it increasingly difficult to write intelligently on popular culture.
Not because of their undoubted erudition, acuity and (not least) charm have pre-empted everything we, their successors, might have to say on the matter (culture is evolving at too vertiginous a speed for that to happen), but because we aren't alone in having read Barthes and Eco and assimilated their methodology.
Photographers, video promo directors, copywriters, the designers of record sleeves and typefaces — all of those who labour in the field of populism — have also read them, and they are far cleverer, certainly far cannier, than the self-styled semiologists who flatter themselves that they are ‘decoding’ their products.
Decoding?
What is the point of decoding artefacts whose ‘codes’ were actually designed to be cracked, like those phoney communiqués which were fed to the German Intelligence Service during World War II?
Why expend energy unearthing the potentially cultish properties of a technological novelty when its cultishness has been deliberately programmed into it by its sly devisers?
Why endeavour to demystify the ‘subtext’ of a lager commercial when that supposed subtext could scarcely lie closer to the surface and is being forced on one's attention the way a card-sharper forces a card?
It's possible that the sluggish progress of satellite TV, for example, derives in part from the considerably less than state-of-the-art feel of its dishes.
Who wants to have one of these metallic cloth caps clamped to their house, reeking of a proletariat culture of tabloid newspapers and darts championships?
No matter how poor the programming, if these dishes had been as glossy and futuristic as compact discs, say, then they might have caught on as rapidly as, well, CDs themselves.
Compact discs are, in fact, a primary instance of preprogrammed cultishness.
Who can resist those mercurially silvery little discs with just a hint of credit card iridescence to reinforce the enigma inherent in all records — that, until they are played, their mysterious surface autism offers no clue as to what might be within?
Who can resist that surplus value of necessary superfluousness (without futility there can be no real sense of luxury) represented by the random key that allows you to play tracks in any order you like?
Why, even the little perspex boxes, snapping open and shut with the chic click of a silver cigarette case, have been designed for maximum tactile jouissance .
It would be nice to imagine the reader, having ingested the reader, having ingested the above, musing, ‘Oh, I never thought of that’— which is, after all, the response elicited by all cultural commentators — but I have no illusions that I'm teaching anything to the individual or individuals responsible for the original design.
It was, as the French might (but, alas, don't) say, the nité-grité of the whole exercise, the nub of the marketing operation.
If, then, this column is going to be devoted to what could be called the ecology (or Eco-logy) of popular culture, it's obliged to recognize that none of the emblematic artifices and artefacts of that culture, be they movies, commercials, headlines, photographs, typefaces, fashions or fads, can any longer be trusted to be ‘innocent’; that even if the crisp elegance of the typeface in which this article is embedded emits a ‘meaning’ as much as does the text itself, that meaning is also just as conscious and deliberate.
‘The medium is the message,’ said McLuhan in order to demonstrate how suspect the message was.
Now we ought to acknowledge that the medium itself is no less suspect.
ESQUIRE PROMOTION WINNERS
DOMINIC MAHONY Inspired by Jim Fox's win at the 1976 Montreal Olympics, Dominic, 28, came into pentathlon via fencing four years later.
He fits in his taxing training and competing schedule with a demanding job as captain of the Life Guards.
RICHARD PHELPS, 29, has been called the most consistent pentathlete in the world.
He was silver medallist at the 1980 Junior World Championships, fourth individual at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics and a member of the bronze team at Seoul in 1988.
In his spare time he works as a reclamation engineer.
GRAHAM BROOKHOUSE, 29, juggles a career as a financial advisor with his athletic life.
He came into pentathlon through swimming, his strongest event — and is still struggling with the fencing.
Training for one sport is hard enough, but Britain's Olympic pentathlon squad trains for five: show jumping, épée fencing, pistol shooting on duelling targets, 4000 metre cross-country run and 300 metre swim.
Wearing the latest active weekend wear from Debenhams — the perfect survival kit for every man's wardrobe — they prove that sporting more than a dash of style is no sweat.
CHARIOTS OF FIRE From left Debenhams sweatshirt, £13.99. jogpants, £13.99; Sweatshirt, £13.99; jogpants £13.99.
T-shirt, £6.99; jogpants, £13.99.
T-shirt, £6.99; cotton turtleneck tied round hips, £14.99; shellsuit trousers, £22.50.
Cotton poloneck, £14.99; cotton jogpants, £17.99.
Piqué poloshirt, £8.99; shellsuit trousers, £22.50.
Overleaf left Debenhams piqué polo top, £8.99; trousers, fencer's own.
Right Long-sleeve polo shirt, £16.99; trousers, fencer's own.
YOUNG GUNS Far left Debenhams wool lumber jacket, £69.99, over Trader stonewash denim shirt, £19.99. over Trader crewneck T-shirt, £6.99.
Trader denim jeans, £19.99.
Left Puffa jacket, £69.99, over shirt, £19.99, over crewneck T-shirt, £6.99.
Fisherman knit jumper tied round waist, £19.99.
Trader jeans, £19.99.
Previous page ,bottom left corner .
Left Debenhams lambswool jumper, £24.99; cotton chambray shirt, £15.99; tie, £7.99; Mill washed cords, £29.99; casual Gibson shoes, £34.99.
Right Wool check  jacket, £90; brushed cotton twill shirt, £17.99; antique rose silk tie, £10.99; washed gabardine trousers, £29.99; shoes, £59.99.
Previous page ,top right : Debenhams wax-coated parka, £69.99; wool check jacket, £90; long sleeve polo shirt, £16.99; crew-neck T-shirt, £6.99; leather/cotton crochet gloves, £14.99.
TOP OF THE WORLD Clockwise from top Debenhams wool check jacket, £90; brushed cotton twill shirt, £17.99; antique rose silk tie, £10.99; washed gabardine trousers, £29.99.
Lambswool jumper, £24.99; cotton chambray shirt, £15.99; tie, £7.99; mill washed cords, £29.99.
Jacket £90; Trader rugby shirt, £19.99.
Baseball blouson jacket, £49.99.
Wool lumber jacket, £69.99; heavyweight crew-neck jumper, £24.99.
Trader stonewash denim jacket, £29.99; shirt, £19.99; crewneck T-shirt, £6.99; loose fit jeans, £19.99.
GREG WHYTE The new boy on the squad, this 24-year-old teacher is known as the court jester on the international circuit.
After the jokes and stunts, his main talent is swimming.
MARCUS DALY-FERRIERA, 27, is a Royal Engineers corporal and came to pentathlon through the Army Triathlon in 1987.
He's looking forward to travelling to Israel and Australia early next year to train for the Barcelona Olympics in 1992.
SHAUN MORGAN The 25-year-old Royal Engineers corporal is a swimmer first, having entered pentathlon in 1986.
He has a serious nature and his powers of concentration are a boon when it comes to his gruelling training schedule.
DEBENHAMS MENSWEAR is available at most Debenhams stores.
Prices correct at time of going to press.
Esquire COMING NEXT MONTH
THE MOUSE IN THE CORNER
A NEW INSPECTOR WEXFORD SHORT STORY BY RUTH RENDELL
‘There in the kitchen, on the floor, she found the body of her stepfather, Tom Peterlee, lying face downwards, with a wound in the back of the head.
It was still faintly warm.’
Chief Inspector Wexford is convinced that Arlene Heddon knows more about her stepfather's brutal murder than her remarkably consistent answers suggest.
By why would anyone kill this ideal husband?
The mystery deepens.
And then the ram-raids begin…
ALSO IN NEXT MONTH'S ISSUE:
A user's guide to World Music.
The joy of skiing.
Christopher Hitchens in Washington and the despondency of the Democrats.
Dinner jackets and accessories.
PLUS win a state-of-the-art television in the Esquire Arts Quiz of the Year
ON SALE NOVEMBER 25       
The Gaming Page
The Esquire £100 Prize Crossword
The Man Within No 3
ACROSS 1 Give bad reviews to dumb show — he might be in this (9)6 Old-time US lawyer and rocker (5)9 Reversing of French vehicle went quickly (5)10 Dynamic object contains fungus (9)11 Main entrance where he went Up the third time?(3,5)12 Baldwin shortly takes on church position (6)14 The man himself (7,6)16 New sandpit from E. Europe used to treat shoes (4,3,6)21 Gauges placing a thousand rows (6)22 Seller hears another way to say in other words (8)25 Phone round Esquire readers with article on things observed (9)26 One lady posed as the one with tattoos (5)27 Equipment in ship for sketches he's appeared in (5)28 One put her away immediately (9)
DOWN 1 Do one in for equal wages (6)2 Sprint up with lace undone in typical family (7)3 Request he received from the British Empire?(5)4 Concentrating so in form for plans (10)5 Queen that is raised for the country (4)6 Peg holds this original drier (4–5)7 Solvent with less substance?(7)8 Relative amount needed to be filthy, he said (6)13 High fashion involving exercise with English lords (3,7)15 Common sense about riot disorder and love of ill fame (9)17 He went up to the city which went with the flow (7)18 Fail to keep appointment with his comedy?(5–2)19 Prevents injection of energy for champion of prevention (6)20 Keep alien in bad weather (6)23 Make ten to five when you do it (5)24 Strike one for chastity which he went Up the second time
Image Problem What do the following have in common?(a)(b)(c)
IMAGE PROBLEM ANSWER:
They have all had one Number One hit record but no others records in the British charts —(a) Lee Marvin, ‘Wand'rin’ Star’(1970),(b) Clive Dunn, ‘Grandad’(1971),(c) Nick Berry, ‘Every Loser Wins’(1986).
November Watch
THE FIRST INTELLIGENT HOROSCOPE FOR MEN
Whenever Mars is in Scorpio, megalomaniacs go into a hyperactive frenzy.
This month, the males of planet Earth will divide into two groups: those who are making a bid for supreme power, and those who are holding their ground against such bids.
Whichever camp you are in, the same celestial advice will apply — hit below the belt.
SCORPIO (Oct 24 — Nov 22)
Scorpios love nothing more than a chance to break a social taboo.
Sex, death and bowel movements are you three favourite fascinations.
This month, if you can haul yourself away from such hypnotic topics, you should find a universe waiting to be conquered.
Income:Potentially pleasing.
Career:Opportunities abound.
Sport:Woe betide your adversary.
Sex:Try to disguise your boundless lust behind a modicum of feigned restraint!
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23 — Dec 21)
On the soccer field of life, Sagittarians are (of course) the centaur forwards.
Not only do you have to be up there, in the thick of the action, the whole time, but you also specialize in following your balls!
This month, though, the sky suggests mental agility is your best asset.
Sex:Whoever…
Income:Whenever…
Expenditure:However…
Creativity:Whatever…
Travel:Wherever…
Work:Whyever…
Opportunity:Forever…
Adventure:Whichever…
Success:As ever.
CAPRICORN (Dec 22 — Jan 20)
Capricorns are well known for their blunt mannerisms.
You never mince words and appreciate candour in others.
So I'll give it to you straight.
It's a shitty month.
You will face endless obstacles.
In the end there will be a breakthrough, but, by god, you'll have to work for it.
Sex:Unpredictable:Money:All too predictable.
Creativity:Stilted.
Status:Jilted.
Social life:Tedious.
Work:Mind-numbing.
Ambition:Redundant.
Struggle:Abundant.
Survival:Just.
If in doubt:Trust.
AQUARIUS (Jan 21 — Feb 19)
Aquarians hate statements that begin, ‘Aquarians hate…
’ You loathe to be categorized.
That's why you carefully cultivate eccentric habits to set you apart from others.
This month, you look set to be especially colourful if not spectacularly successful.
Income:Likely to surprise.
Career:Expect creative fulfilment but little worldly reward for it.
Sex:Prepare to discover a new sensual dimension to your life.
Pressure:Increasing towards the end of the month.
PISCES (Feb 20 — Mar 20)
Some men are led by their hearts, others by their groins.
Pisceans put their feet first…
That's why you always stick a tentative toe into the water before committing yourself, and why you tend to spend so long in shoe shops.
This month, try to get a foothold on freedom.
Income:Liable to fluctuate wildly.
Career:Expect to spend a lot of time being told exactly what to do.
Sex:Much the same as career, only considerably more enjoyable.
Creativity:Inspired.
ARIES (Mar 21 — April 20)
Though Arians are infamously impatient, they can be cool customers when the stakes are high enough to make them concentrate.
This month brings plenty to occupy you and inspire the necessary note of uncharacteristic caution.
Just watch the ‘pros’ and ‘cons’below.
Income:Inextricably linked to the need to compromise.
Career:On the verge of metamorphosis.
Sex:Insufficient to fulfil your ravenous appetite — but then, what on earth ever could?
TAURUS (April 21 — May 21)
As a Taurean, you work well with others as long as it is you who calls the shots.
You don't suffer fools gladly, especially when they have power over you.
This month, a close companion will try to push you into something unappealing.
Maybe it's time to make them your ex.
Sex:Remember, this is not a solo venture!
Finance:Expect stability (for better or worse).
Career:The question to ask yourself is not ‘can I get what I want?’, but ‘do I really want it?’
GEMINI (May 22 — June 22)
Geminis are traditionally supposed to have the memory of an elephant but the concentration span of a butterfly.
Like a computer, it's not that you're clever, it's just that you can access old records with amazing speed.
This month, however, you'll have a lot of new data to process.
Ambition:Will cause you to rush in where angels fear to tread.
Income:Will reflect how carefully you pursue your ambition.
Sex and Sport:Full of potential for conquest.
Career:Demanding.
CANCER (June 23 — July 23)
Cancerians are guarded characters.
Rather than wear your heart on your sleeve, you keep it under your hat.
While this arrangement is no less likely to confuse a cardiologist, psychologically speaking, it gives protection plus an air of mystique.
This month, you may need both.
Sex:Expect a dangerous invitation.
Income:On the up.
Expenditure:A loan shark's dream customer.
Sport and Career:Great — as long as you play your cards close to your chest.
LEO (July 24 — Aug 23)
Though you may wish to insist it is not true, the fact remains that Leos are as stubborn as the stains on a butcher's tunic.
As far as you are concerned there are only two ways to do anything: your way and the wrong way!
This month, events are due to prove you right.
Smart arse!
Ambition:Surprisingly attainable.
Income:Depressingly predictable.
Expenditure:Annoyingly unavoidable.
Investments:Satisfyingly valuable.
Sex:Gratifyingly available.
VIRGO (Aug 24 — Sept 23)
Virgos are fêted for their powers of perception.
You could be emperor of the universe by now, were it not for your habit of turning your hypercritical gaze inward instead of using it to devastate others.
This month, however, you'll spot a winner nobody else can see.
Act on it.
Insight:Impeccable.
Income:Potentially stunning — but only if you're brave.
Career:See Income.
Sex:The more you hold back, the more you'll have to hold back from.
Sport:Go for it.
LIBRA (Sept 24 — Oct 23)
Libran magnetism knows no bounds.
You've got a smile that can charm the knickers off a nun.
This month, with Venus — your planetary ruler — in your own sign, there'll be no stopping you.
Just ask sweetly for what you want, and they'll fall over themselves to provide it.
Sex:Abuse your powers of attraction.
Income:Lend us a tenner?
Expenditure:See income.
Fame:Hollywood beckons.
Sport:You have an unfair advantage.
Ambition:Enviably fulfillable