

The Magical World of EURO DISNEY RESORT
GREAT NEWS FOR THE YOUNG OF ALL AGES!
The most magical show on earth is coming to Europe.
The brand new year round EURO DISNEY Resort is scheduled to come alive on 12th April 1992 just across the Channel in France, 20 miles east of Paris.
Set in 5,000 acres of landscaped grounds, the resort's lovely lakes, gardens and woodlands are spread over an area one fifth the size of Paris, comprising the deluxe Disneyland Hotel, 5 further resort hotels, the Camp Davy Crockett and the Nightime Festival Disney Entertainment Center, all nestled around the development's star attraction, the unforgettable EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
35 years of Disney magic, imagination and expertise have gone into making this self contained world of fun and fantasy by far the greatest and most dazzling amusement centre in Europe.
Just as you would expect the fabulous Theme Park combined America's colourful past, present and future in one glorious location, and those same world famous attractions you can see in California and Florida — MAIN STREET USA, FRONTIERLAND, ADVENTURELAND, FANTASYLAND, DISCOVERYLAND — will all be lovingly re-created right here in Europe.
Once inside EURO DISNEYLAND you can look forward to exhilarating non-stop fun and entertainment on a vast scale.
Following the Magic Kingdom's tradition, all rides are included in your entrance ticket so you can have unlimited access to the fairground's facilities and enjoy them to your heart's content.
Transport, too, is free within EURO DISNEYLAND — it comes in all shapes and sizes and will carry you from one ‘land’ to another amidst a riot of colourful characters, street shows and parades.
A sparkling array shops, bars, refreshment stalls and restaurants are scattered right across the Park, catering to all tastes and pockets so you can take a break any time between rides, sit back and watch the magical world of Disney unfold before your very eyes.
The make believe world of Disney is a truly magical experience that knows no age barriers.
It conjures up one's own favourite dreams and appeals to the child in every one of us, young and old.
Now you can come and enjoy it in Europe's very own Magic Kingdom — just a relatively short coach and ferry ride across the Channel   
Above: Le Visionarium in Discoveryland Right: Alice's Curious Labyrinth in Fantasyland
ALL COSMOS FUNBREAK HOLIDAYS TO EURO DISNEYLAND INCLUDE YOUR GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKET TO THE THEME PARK Worth over £19* for an adult 1 day pass and over £34* for an adult 2 day pass!
Main Street USA
Step back in time and enjoy this nostalgic re-creation of turn of the century small town America.
Vintage automobiles, horsedrawn street cars and traditional marching bands pass alongside quaint old stores and cafes where ragtime music is played.
Highlights are the Harmony Barber's shop, where tuneful quartets warble old time melodies, and the colourful street parade of familiar, lovable Disney characters.
Frontierland
Here the legends of America's old pioneering spirit are atmospherically recalled.
You can stroll on wooden walkways past the shops and saloons of an authentically constructed Wild West town and watch a bank robbery or ritual high noon shoot out.
Or travel on the Mark Twain's Mississippi-style steam boat down the Rivers of the Far West, and thrill to the Big Thunder Mountain's Runaway train trip which plunges from rocky heights down a dangerous mine shaft.
Even more spine tingling is the spooky Phantom Manor — filled with coffins and spectral dancers — haunted by 999 mischievous and realistic-looking ghosts.
Adventureland
EURO DISNEYLAND's most exciting theme park offers high seas jaunts, mystic Oriental sagas and the exotic bazaar and treasures of ‘1001 Nights’.
Visit Adventure Isle, with its evil Captain Hook, and ‘La Cabane des Robinson’ where the Swiss Family Robinson lived.
Or join a crew of swashbuckling buccaneers on ‘Pirates of the Caribbean’ during their attack on a colonial fort — it's a startling show of ‘Audio Animatronics’technology.
Fantasyland
We all have special fairy tale memories that date from our childhood.
In this  enchanting corner of the Park they are brought to life by the magic of Disney.
You can see the ‘Chateau de la Belle au Bois Dormant’ where Sleeping Beauty slumbered in her forest castle, and a wealth of favourite childhood characters like Peter Pan, Pinocchio and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
Or you can go flying with Dumbo and lose yourself in the wonderland of ‘Alice's Curious Labyrinth.’.
And don't forget the charming show ‘It's A Small World’— a floating musical global trip in miniature dedicated to children everywhere.
Discovery
This fascinating world is devoted mainly to inventors and visionaries throughout the ages.
At ‘Le Visionarium’ you can travel across time with Jules Verne and at ‘Orbitron’fly round the universe in Leonardo de Vinci inspired machines.
Or you could try out the flight simulator techniques at ‘Star Wars’ where you feel as if you're really taking part in a full scale intergalactic battle.
Whatever you do, don't miss Michael Jackson's stunning 3D musical space show ‘Captain EO’, presented for the first time in Europe by ‘Star Wars’ film producer George Lucas and ‘Godfather’Director Francis Ford Coppola.
At ‘Videopolis’ there's further non-stop action, ranging from live daytime attractions to high-tech nightclubs.
Above: Phantom Manor in Frontierland.
Below: Big Thunder Mountain in Frontierland
Experience the Magic with COSMOS
THIS BROCHURE IS DEVOTED SOLELY TO THE MAGIC world of the EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park, located in the EURO DISNEY RESORT near Paris.
At COSMOS we feel that, to do it justice, this sensational larger than life attraction truly deserves one's total and undivided attention.
What's more — given the Magic Kingdom's wide appeal among people of all ages and particularly among families with young children — we strongly believe your FUNBREAK holiday should be truly carefree and easily affordable, with the convenience of Door to Door service.
With this in mind, we have drawn from our 30 years of experience as one of the most successful tour operators in the UK, to produce the COSMOS ‘all inclusive — all on board’ programme of exciting FUNBREAK holidays to the spectacular EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park, so you and your  family or friends can sit back and look forward to a truly memorable time in this spectacular wonderland of fantasy and make believe, whilst making sure you don't pay more than you need to.
Great Value for Money and no hidden extras!
Your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday is carefully planned to give you the maximum time spent at the EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park, whilst your travel and accommodation arrangements have been sensibly selected to combine comfort and convenience at truly low prices.
Just compare Cosmos value — we are convinced you won't find a better deal anywhere!
COSMOS 30th ANNIVERSARY 1962–1992
ALL THIS IS INCLUDED!
Comfortable Travel By Touring Coaches
Selected from the best of British and Continental fleets and equipped with all the modern facilities to make your journey smooth and carefree.
(See page 6).
Good Quality 2 star Hotel Accommodation
Located in the ‘Region Parisienne’ outside Paris, your hotel accommodation for 2 or 3 nights will be in well appointed rooms with private facilities inclusive of Continental style buffet breakfast (See page 5).
Door To Door Service
With Cosmos your holiday price already includes your transfer from your hotel to the entrance of the fabulous EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park and back again to your hotel in the evening, so you don't need to worry about the extra expenditure or having to find your way around.
Guaranteed Entry Ticket to EURO DISNEYLAND
Remember when comparing prices that your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday already includes your entry ticket  to the EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park —(worth over £19* for an adult's 1 Day Pass and over £34* for an adult's 2 Day Pass), guaranteeing you entry into the Theme Park.
Free Local Departures
For even greater value you may join a COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday from any of over 90 FREELINK regional pick up points throughout England and all Wales — again at no extra cost to you!
(See page 7).
Professional Service
For your peace of mind during your FUNBREAK holiday on the Continent you can rely upon your COSMOS Representative, on hand to help if your require assistance.
Absolutely No Surcharges
No ifs, no buts…the price confirmed to you at the time of booking is the price you pay.
(See page 12).
Holiday Security and Protection
We want to ensure your peace of mind when you choose to book a COSMOS holiday, and for you to enjoy your holiday to the full and return believing you have received good value for money.
The COSMOS Consumer Protection Plan covers virtually every aspect of your holiday from the moment you pick up our brochure to the moment you arrive back home (See pages 12, 13).
Great Deals for Families…with Child Prices from only £79
Going by coach is one of the most economical ways to travel to EURO DISNEYLAND.
This means great savings for you and your family — so there is more to spend on really enjoying your holiday.
With COSMOS all children 2 to 15 years of age at the time of return travel qualify for the specially reduced child prices advertised in the holiday pages as long as they share a room with 2 adults.
Most hotels used in this brochure accommodate three people in a room comfortably.
Availability of four bedded rooms is, however, limited and we recommend you book early to avoid disappointment.
UNDER 2'S TRAVEL FREE!
Children under 2 years of age at the time of return travel go free, but must travel on an adult's lap unless there is a free seat available.
On all holidays no deposit is required but the cost of cots and foods is payable at your hotel on the Continent.
Free holiday insurance is also provided if parents are covered by the COSMOS holiday insurance (See page 15).
3 in a Room…
SAVE MONEY up to £15 off!
One adult 16 years of age and over, sharing a room with two other full fare paying adults can benefit from a generous £5 per night reduction on the cost of the holiday worth £10 off a 3 day holiday and £15 off a 4 day holiday.
Go in a Group…
A FREE HOLIDAY FOR YOU!
Going on holiday in a group can be lots of fun — and save you money with Cosmos.
As the organiser you can have your own holiday free by getting together friends or family in a group as small as 15 full fare passengers only.
Our group booking desk is available Monday to Friday from 9.00am to 5.30pm.
Our staff will be pleased to answer your enquiries and take your booking.
To qualify, groups must be full fare paying passengers travelling on the same Cosmos holiday on the same date from the same departure point.
A free holiday does not include optional insurance premium.
To make a reservation phone us on 081–460 3188.
Your Hotel Accommodation
Your hotel accommodation has been sensibly selected to combine comfort and convenience at really low prices.
All hotels are at least 2 star establishments, many from well known groups, such as CAMPANILE, PRIMEVERE and CLIMAT DE FRANCE, offering comfortable rooms with private facilities and telephone.
Most hotels have a bar and restaurant with low-price fixed menus and special menus for children.
Your hotel accommodation is reserved on a bed and breakfast basis, with Continental breakfast served buffet style so you can eat as much as you want.
The map below shows where most of the hotels used by Cosmos are located in relation to‘greater Paris’ and the EURO DISNEY RESORT.
All establishments enjoy good access by road to the Theme Park so your coach journey from your hotel should not take more than one hour given normal traffic connections.
SINGLES — a fair deal
Many clients feel, and Cosmos agree that it is unfair to discriminate against single travellers by levying expensive ‘single supplements’.
Cosmos will accept individual bookings on a ‘guaranteed share’ basis — we charge the basic price and introduce you to another single traveller.
If you do not find someone to share with you, you will be accommodated in a single room at no extra charge.
Your Holiday Choice
3 Day FUNBREAKS
Departures every day from 24 April to 31 October and Fridays from 6 November to 18 December.
Including 1 day PASS to EURO DISNEYLAND from Regional departure points (See page 8).
Including 2 day PASS to EURO DISNEYLAND from London (See page 9).
4 Day FUNBREAKS
Departures every Thursday from 30 April to 29 October and…
Departures every Friday from 24 April to 18 December.
Including 2 day PASS to EURO DISNEYLAND from London and Regional departure points.
(See pages 10 and 11).
Convenient Door-to-Door Service from COSMOS
It's all plain sailing when you take a COSMOS break to EURO DISNEYLAND.
You can step on board conveniently close to home, know your luggage is in safe hands and travel in carefree comfort to your hotel near Paris.
No airport delays, no language problems and no other hassles to disturb you as you relax in comfort — all the way to your destination and back.
Travel in Comfort
Only the very best coaches, offering the ultimate in modern travel, are used to ensure your safety and comfort.
To help your journey pass quickly and with maximum relaxation, our coaches offer the best in comfort and convenience and onboard facilities which include:
Reclining seats with head and arm rests
On-board wash room and toilet
Large non-smoking and small smoking areas
Air-conditioning or forced air ventilation
Individual fresh air ventilation
Individual reading lights
Stereo systems
Four independent braking retarder systems
On board Representative
Services on Board You will find our drivers are experienced professionals — skilful, calm and courteous.
They handle their vehicles with the care that comes form many years experience behind the wheel…a definite plus making your journey smooth and carefree.
On board your COSMOS Representative will look after you during your continental journey offering attentive service.
Departures from London
Your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday to EURO DISNEYLAND departs, Central London from the Travellers Check In at 35–36 Woburn Place, London WC1.
If you wish to join in London, please make sure you indicate so on the booking form on page 16.
Final timings and detailed joining instructions will be sent with your travel documentation.
(Please note that holidays advertised on Page 8 are not available from London).
Joining at the Channel Port
You may, if you wish, join your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday at the Channel Port.
However, please note that holidays do not necessarily return to the same port of departure.
Clients joining in this way should indicate so in the appropriate box on the booking form on page 16.
Final timings and detailed joining instructions will be sent with your travel documentation.
COSMOS…
FOR YOUR ALL ON BOARD ALL INCLUSIVE TRIP TO THE MAGIC KINGDOM!
WITH FREELINK FREE LOCAL DEPARTURES
FROM OVER 90 TOWNS AND CITIES THROUGHOUT ENGLAND AND WALES
The Cosmos FREELINK service offers home town starting facilities at ideal travelling times from ore than 90 towns and cities nationwide.
Tour pages indicate which departures are available from FREELINK pick-up points.
Just check the facing table to find how easy it is to commence your holiday.
With FREELINK you have an unrivalled choice of holidays with the convenience of home town departures and the outstanding value for which Cosmos has long been famous — an unbeatable combination from Europe's number one coach tour operator.
DEPARTURE TIMINGS
The facing table indicates the location of FREELINK pick-up points and a TIME BAND code for each departure.
This brochure is published up to a year in advance of your holiday date, however, we aim to provide clients with the optimum service possible, therefore, our Operations Department plan each FREELINK route approximately 8 weeks before the date of departure.
In this way we are able to reduce delays and waiting times at individual joining points and, of course, avoid major roadworks where possible, especially on motorways.
Just check the code for your selected departure point against the panel below to find the departure and return Time Band applicable.
Departure and return timings advertised on this page are for guidance only.
Exact timings and location of your FREELINK pickup point will be forwarded with your travel documentation.
If, however, you book your holiday within 6 weeks of departure date, final timings and detailed joining instructions will be given over the telephone or on Viewdata at the time of booking.
You should plan to be at your FREELINK pick-up point not later than 15 minutes before scheduled departure.
FREELINK is a free service offered to clients by Cosmos and does not form any part of your holiday price.
It will not always be possible therefore to guarantee availability for a specific joining point on the FREELINK service, nor can the FREELINK service be available to clients who have not made a reservation for this service at the time of booking.
DEPARTURES
Every Friday — Saturday — Monday from 1 May to 12 October
Departures Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Sundays and departures up to 30 April and from 13 October available from Leeds — Manchester — Stoke/Clayton — Birmingham — Northampton — Luton and London only.
3 Day Funbreaks
REGIONAL DEPARTURES
DEPARTURES EVERY DAY from 24 April to 31 October and weekly FRIDAYS FROM 6 November to 18 December.
YOUR FUNBREAK HOLIDAY
DAY BY DAY
DAY 1 — U.K. TO YOUR HOTEL NEAR PARIS
You may join your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday at your nearest convenient pick-up point and travel to the Channel Port for your short ferry crossing to France, where you will be met by your Cosmos representative.
Continue your journey south for a late arrival at your hotel accommodation
DAY 2 — VISIT THE EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK
A day entirely dedicated to the fantasy world of EURO DISNEYLAND.
After breakfast, board your coach for the drive to the EURO DISNEY Resort and the entrance to the fabulous EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
You will be there from the time it opens in the morning, until the evening, when our coach will be waiting to drive you back to your hotel.
DAY 3 — RETURN TO THE U.K.
After breakfast, reboard your coach for the journey to the French coast and your short ferry crossing back to Britain.
Once across the Channel, continue by coach to your home destination.
FRIDAY, SATURDAY & MONDAY departures from 1 MAY TO 12 OCTOBER AVAILABLE from ALL FREELINK Pick-up points.
All other departures available from LEEDS-MANCHESTER-STOKE /CLAYTON-BIRMINGHAM-NORTHAMPTON & LUTON.
For departure details see page 7.
YOUR HOLIDAY PRICE INCLUDES
RETURN TRAVEL BY MODERN COACH from your local pick-up point in the U.K. to your hotel accommodation near Paris.
RETURN FERRY CROSSING to France
2 NIGHTS ACCOMMODATION at a 2 star hotel outside Paris, offering comfortable rooms with private facilities.
2 CONTINENTAL STYLE BUFFET BREAKFASTS at your hotel on the Continent.
TRANSFER TO EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK from and to your hotel accommodation on day 2.
1 DAY GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKET TO EURO DISNEYLAND including your personal guide to the EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
SERVICES OF A PROFESSIONAL COSMOS REPRESENTATIVE at the UK Channel Port and during your stay on the Continent.
ALL TAXES AND ROAD TOLLS including VAT.
LOW CHILD PRICES apply to children 2 to 15 years of age at the time of return travel, when sharing a room with 2 adults (See page 5).
£10 OFF! for a third adult sharing a room (See page 5).
SINGLES — the COSMOS ‘Guaranteed Share’ scheme saves you money (See page 5).
REMEMBER!
Your holiday price already includes your GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKETS to EURO DISNEYLAND worth over £19 per adult at the time of going to press.
3 Day Funbreaks
FROM LONDON
DEPARTURES EVERY DAY from 24 April to 31 October and weekly FRIDAYS from 6 November to 18 December
YOUR FUNBREAK HOLIDAY DAY BY DAY
Day 1 — U.K. TO YOUR HOTEL NEAR PARIS
Your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday departs from ‘TRAVELLERS CHECK-IN’ at 35–36 Woburn Place LONDON WC1 at approximately 8.00 am.
From here travel by coach to the Channel Port for your short ferry crossing to France, where you will be met by your Cosmos representative.
Continue your journey south for evening arrival at your hotel accommodation.
Day 2 — VISIT THE EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK
A day entirely dedicated to the fantasy world of EURO DISNEYLAND.
After breakfast, board your coach for the drive to the EURO DISNEY Resort and the entrance to the fabulous EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
You will be there from the time it opens in the morning, until the evening, when your coach will be waiting to drive you back to your hotel.
Day 3 — RETURN TO THE U.K.
After breakfast we return to EURO DISNEYLAND for more fun and thrills.
Your coach will be waiting to depart from EURO DISNEYLAND at about 2.30pm for your return journey to the French coast and your short ferry crossing back to the UK.
Continue by coach for arrival back to London at approximately 11.30pm.
YOUR HOLIDAY PRICE INCLUDES
RETURN TRAVEL BY MODERN COACH from London to your hotel accommodation near Paris.
RETURN FERRY CROSSING to France
2 NIGHTS HOTEL ACCOMMODATION at a 2 star hotel outside Paris, offering comfortable rooms with private facilities.
2 CONTINENTAL STYLE BUFFET BREAKFASTS at your hotel on the Continent.
TRANSFER TO EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK from and to your hotel accommodation on day 2.
2 DAYS GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKET TO EURO DISNEYLAND including your personal guide to the EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
SERVICES OF A PROFESSIONAL COSMOS REPRESENTATIVE at the UK Channel Port and during your stay on the Continent.
ALL TAXES AND ROAD TOLLS including VAT.
REMEMBER!
Your holiday price already includes your GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKETS to EURO DISNEYLAND worth over £34 per adult at the time of going to press.
4 Day Funbreaks REGIONAL & LONDON DEPARTURES
DEPARTURES EVERY THURSDAY from 30 April to 29 October from LEEDS — MANCHESTER — STOKE/CLAYTON — BIRMINGHAM — NORTHAMPTON — LUTON & LONDON
YOUR FUNBREAK HOLIDAY
DAY BY DAY
DAY 1 — U.K. TO YOUR HOTEL NEAR PARIS
You may join your COSMOS FUNBREAK holiday at your nearest convenient pick-up point and travel to the Channel Port for your short ferry crossing to France, where you will be met by your Cosmos representative.
Continue your journey south for a late arrival at your hotel accommodation.
DAY 2 & 3 — VISIT THE EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK
2 days entirely dedicated to the fantasy world of EURO DISNEYLAND.
After breakfast, leave your hotel to board your coach for your drive to the EURO DISNEY Resort and the entrance to the fabulous EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
You will be there from the time it opens in the morning until the evening, when your coach will be waiting to drive you back to your hotel.
DAY 4 — RETURN TO THE U.K.
After breakfast, reboard your coach for your return journey to the French coast and your short ferry crossing back to the UK.
Once across the Channel, continue by coach to your home destination.
For departure details, see page 7.
DEPARTURES EVERY FRIDAY from 24 April to 18 December.
Departures between 1 MAY to 9 OCTOBER available from ALL FREELINK pick-up points.
All other departures available from LEEDS — MANCHESTER — STOKE/CLAYTON — BIRMINGHAM — NORTHAMPTON — LUTON & LONDON only.
ADULTS FROM £165 CHILDREN FROM £99
YOUR HOLIDAY PRICE INCLUDES
RETURN TRAVEL BY MODERN COACH from your local pick-up point in the UK to your hotel accommodation near Paris.
RETURN FERRY CROSSING to France
3 NIGHTS HOTEL ACCOMMODATION at a 2 star hotel outside Paris, offering comfortable rooms with private facilities.
3 CONTINENTAL STYLE BUFFET BREAKFASTS at your hotel on the Continent
TRANSFERS TO EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK from and to your hotel accommodation on days 2 & 3.
2 DAYS GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKET TO EURO DISNEYLAND including your personal guide to the EURO DISNEYLAND Theme Park.
SERVICES OF A PROFESSIONAL COSMOS REPRESENTATIVE at the UK Channel Port and during your stay on the Continent.
ALL TAXES AND ROAD TOLLS including VAT.
The COSMOS Consumer Protection Plan
We want to ensure two things happen when you choose to book a Cosmos holiday.
Firstly, we want you to book the holiday that is right for you.
Secondly, we want you to enjoy your holiday to the full and return both relaxed and satisfied believing you have received good value for money.
The Cosmos Consumer Protection Plan cover virtually every aspect of your holiday, from the moment you pick up our brochure to the moment you arrive back home, and because we want everyone to know where they stand with us it clearly spells out our obligations to you and your commitments to us when you book a holiday with us from this brochure.
OUR COMMITMENTS TO YOU
1.
Your Reservation
On receipt of your completed booking form and deposit we will reserve your holiday.
Your booking is taken to be confirmed and accepted in respect of all persons travelling when we despatch our Confirmation and Account to the person signing the booking form or to the Travel Agent through whom the booking was made.
Please note that special requests cannot be guaranteed.
2.
Our Price Guarantee
The prices of holidays in this brochure are based on known costs prevailing on 22 July 1991 using exchange rates quoted in the World Value of the Pound table published in the ‘Financial Times’ on 23 July 1991.
WE GUARANTEE THAT THE PRICE OF YOUR HOLIDAY WILL NOT BE SUBJECT TO ANY SURCHARGE WHATSOEVER.
Once you have made your booking and paid a deposit, then the cost of your holiday cannot be increased.
This guarantee applies only to confirmed bookings made at least 6 weeks before departure.
WE RESERVE THE RIGHT AT ANY TIME TO INCREASE ANY ADVERTISED HOLIDAY PRICE WITHOUT LIMITATION; IN WHICH CASE, THE REVISED PRICE WILL BE ADVISED AT THE TIME OF BOOKING.
3.
Our Assurances on Standards and Assumption of liability
Our brochure descriptions are based on the information obtained from Euro Disney, our Staff and Representative's regular visits and from hotel management and owners.
However, please remember that brochures are produced up to twelve months in advance and there may be occasions when an advertised facility of entertainment is not available during your particular holiday, especially if it is out of high season.
Bad weather, essential maintenance or cleaning, lack of support or demand may all affect the actual availability of particular activities or facilities; so, for instance, can such things as local licensing laws, religious or local holidays, or local authority or government restrictions.
Similarly, coach itineraries may have to be changed, sometimes at short notice, due to weather, road or traffic conditions, mechanical breakdowns, police activity etc.
Unfortunately coaches are not infallible and do occasionally break down or need replacing and certain on board facilities may occasionally fail.
Traffic conditions may be unexpectedly heavy at times and for this and other reasons outside of our control, journey times may be longer and arrival times delayed.
Though the coaches are scheduled to take you all the way to and from your accommodation, on occasion it may be necessary for Cosmos to employ a local coach for part of the way to and from your hotel in order to comply with strict Driver's Hours regulations imposed to ensure your safety.
In these instances, Cosmos will do the utmost to ensure the least possible inconvenience to our clients.
Holiday accommodation understandably experiences considerable wear and tear and at times the standard of decoration or furnishings may suffer or the operation of technical systems (e.g. hot water) may prove to be less than adequate.
Linen (where provided) is not always as large as we are used to at home and towels in particular can be fairly small.
Building work can suddenly appear from nowhere without any apparent notice and the general standard of hygiene and public utilities, drainage, plumbing and services in general may not be as sophisticated as in the U.K.
The list of the sort of aggravations that could arise may appear to be daunting.
This is certainly not our intention and the chance of any of these things disturbing your holiday is quite small.
As a responsible Company we feel it only right to point out these possibilities, however unlikely.
If you have a particular problem, please tell the tour escort or representative and/or the Hotel Reception Desk at the time so that, if possible, it can be dealt with there and then.
Having said all that, we want to give the following assurances about our liability to you:—
(A)
YOUR HOLIDAY.
We accept responsibility not only for the acts and omissions of our own employees and agents but also for those of our suppliers with whom we contract to provide a holiday or reasonable standard.
This paragraph does not apply to claims relating to death, bodily injury, illness or personal property.
(See (B) and (C) below).
(B)
PERSONAL INJURY.
We also accept responsibility for the negligent acts and/or omissions not only of our own employees or agents but also of our suppliers and sub-contractors and their servants or agents (provided of course that any such negligent act or omission is within the scope of or in the course of their employment) in respect of claims arising as a result of death, bodily injury or illness caused to the person who signed the booking form and/or any other person named on the booking form.
However, we accept no liability for the acts or omissions of any air or sea carrier performing any domestic, internal or international carriage of whatsoever kind.
We refer you in this respect to paragraph 9 below.
(C)
OTHER MISADVENTURE.
If you or any of those named in your booking have the misadventure to suffer illness, personal injury or death during your holiday arising out of an activity which does not form part of our foreign inclusive holiday arrangement with you or any excursion offered through us we will offer where appropriate and within our reasonable discretion:(i) our general assistance;(ii) the payment of initial legal costs where with our prior agreement you or any of those named in your booking take legal action provided such assistance is requested within 90 days from the date of the misadventure: provided that the total aggregate spending under (i) and (ii) above shall not exceed £5,000 per booking form.
Paragraph (ii) above will apply only if your do not have a Legal Expenses section in your Holiday Insurance Policy.
Furthermore, in the event of there being a successful claim for costs against a third party, costs actually incurred by us will be recoverable from you.
Claims under this section (C) should be addressed direct to: Customer Relations Manager, Cosmos Coach Tours Ltd, Tourama House, 17 Homesdale Road, Bromley, Kent BR2 9LX.
All claims under this paragraph (3) shall in respect of both liability and quantum fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the country in which our contract with you was made.
4.
If we change your holiday arrangements
We plan our holidays to give you the maximum enjoyment.
Although it is unlikely, we may occasionally have to change your holiday arrangements.
For instance, departure timings may change, a hotel may close down or overbook, we may have to amend an itinerary, or sales of that holiday may not reach a level which would be economical for us to operate.
In the unlikely event that we have to make one of the following changes to holiday arrangements before departure date and within 6 weeks of departure, we will give passengers paying the full brochure price a reduction of up to £30 per person on that price depending on circumstances and the time of modification:
Your date of departure
Your UK departure time by more than 12 hours
Reduce the length of your holiday (number of days)
Your accommodation to a lower official category for the full duration of your planned stay.
If we have to make any of the above mentioned changes, we will inform you or your Travel Agent as soon as is reasonably possible before departure and you then have the choice of:
(i)
accepting the changed arrangements as notified to you or
(ii)
purchasing another holiday from us or
(iii)
cancelling your holiday.
If you choose (i) or (ii) we will reduce the price of your holiday on the scale shown below and if you choose (iii) we will refund any monies you have paid to us and where you are advised of the change within 6 weeks of departure, we will issue a credit note for the relevant amount shown below towards the cost of a future Cosmos holiday taken before 30th November 1993.
Compensation per person
No. of days notification before departure 
Compensation per person
Nil 
This section does not apply in the event of outright cancellation of your holiday as opposed to change(s) to holiday as opposed to change(s) to holiday arrangements (see paragraph 5 below).
The maximum reduction given per full fare paying passenger under this section is £30 irrespective of the number and timing of changes made to a booking.
No reductions or credit notes will be given under circumstances amounting to a ‘force majeure’ which means: war or threat of war, riot, civil strife, industrial dispute, terrorist activity, accident, natural or nuclear disaster, fire, airline failure, closure of airport or ports, and adverse weather conditions.
Very occasionally it may be necessary, due to unforeseen circumstances, to change a hotel of some other part of your holiday arrangement after the holiday has commenced, in which event we will do our best to maintain the overall standard of the holiday arrangements.
PLEASE NOTE : Although it is unlikely, if we have to change your confirmed Freelink departure and/or return point we will inform you/your Travel Agent as soon as possible, and offer you the nearest available alternative.
If the alternative Freelink pickup and/or set down point is more than 10 miles away from the one your originally booked, we will contribute £5 per person towards any extra costs that may be incurred by you and £10 per person if the alternative is more than 30 miles away.
5.
If we cancel your holiday arrangements
Although it is unlikely, if we are forced to cancel your holiday arrangements we will inform you as soon as possible and you will be offered the choice of an alternative holiday of at least comparable standard, if available, or a refund of all monies paid.
Unless you notify us or your Agent within the time mentioned in our offer or in any event within 7 days of the date of the offer, we will be entitled to assume that you have decided to choose a refund.
6.
Delayed Departures
We would like to guarantee that departures will never be delayed.
The vast majority of delays are caused by traffic problems which are, of course, beyond our control.
Departure timings advertised in this brochure for departures from London (T.C.I.) or Freelink pick up points are approximate.
This brochure is published up to a year in advance of your holiday date.
However, to provide our customers with the optimum service possible our Operations Department plan departure schedules approximately 8 weeks before the date of travel.
By doing so, we are able to reduce delays and waiting times at individual joining points and, of course, whenever possible plan to avoid major roadworks and motorway restrictions.
Exact timings and location of your pick-up point will be forwarded to you with your travel documentation.
If, however, you book your holiday within 6 weeks of departure date, final timings and detailed joining instructions will be given over the telephone or on Viewdata at the time of booking.
We will do our utmost to keep departure delays to a minimum.
7.
Special Requests
If you have a special request please advise your Travel Agent at the time of booking and ensure this is either correctly noted by the Agent on our computerised Reservations system or given to our Telephone Reservations department as appropriate.
You must also confirm your request in writing in the relevant box on the booking form.
Your request will be passed on by us to the supplier concerned but we do not guarantee that your requirements will be met.
If your special request can only be met at an additional cost, that cost will either be invoiced to you prior to the departure or should be paid for by you locally whilst abroad.
Unless specifically agreed by us in writing at the time you make your booking, we cannot accept any booking which is made conditional upon a special request being satisfied.
Please note it is not possible to request specific coach seats in advance.
8.
Our Complaints Procedure
We will always do our best to resolve complaints amicably.
If, however, we are unable to resolve any dispute arising out of a complaint than the complaint may be referred to Arbitration under a special scheme devised by arrangement with the Association of British Travel Agents but administered independently by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
This scheme provides for a simple and inexpensive method of Arbitration on documents alone under which the customer's liability in respect of costs is limited.
The scheme does not apply to claims for an amount greater than £1,500 per person.
There is also a limit of £7,500 per booking form.
Neither does it apply to claims which are solely or mainly in respect of physical injury or illness or the consequences of such injury or illness.
The rules of the scheme provide that the application for arbitration must be made within nine months of the date of return from the holiday but in special circumstances it may still be offered outside this period.
9.
Conditions of Carriage
Transport of any kind is subject to the conditions of carriage of the company actually providing that transport.
These conditions are likely to embody the provisions of the law of the country of the company concerned or be the subject of international convention or ‘special contract’ with government(s); any of which may limit or exclude the liability of the carrier.
Where we are held to be contracting carriers for the purposes of air or sea carriage please note that our liability is limited in the manner provided by relevant international conventions, ‘special contract’ with Governments or UK statute law.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION PLEASE READ CAREFULLY
YOUR COMMITMENTS TO US
1.
Booking Form and Deposits
Your completed booking form showing all clients' names must be accompanied by the appropriate deposit of £30 per person.
No deposit is payable for infants under 2 years of age at the time of return travel.
Holiday insurance cover will automatically be provided unless you delete the wording ‘YES’ from the insurance panel of the booking form.
The person signing the booking form confirms that he/she has the authority of all other persons mentioned on that form to make the booking on their behalf and that he/she has read and accepted the Consumer Protection Plan and the information contained in this brochure.
If you are booking a late-offer holiday any information and conditions issued in conjunction with that offer are also part of your contract.
If in doubt you should check with your Travel Agent.
2.
Balance of Payment
Our Confirmation and Account will show the total charge for the services to be provided by us.
If any additional charge, outside of our Price Guarantee, becomes applicable, a revised invoice will be sent to you showing the charge.
The balance is due for payment six weeks before departure or within 7 days of the invoice date, whichever is the later.
If you book through a Travel Agent, you should ensure that you pay the agent in sufficient time to allow payment to reach Cosmos by the due date.
If you book within eight weeks of departure, you must pay the total cost of your holiday at the time of booking.
If for any reason the balance is not received by us by the due date, we reserve the right to cancel bookings covered by the Confirmation and account and levy a cancellation charge as though there has been a cancellation in accordance with paragraph 4.
Any money paid by a customer to a Travel Agent in respect of a booking for a holiday in this brochure is held on behalf of the customer until the date on which we despatch our confirmation of your holiday booking.
Thereafter, any money held by the Travel Agent in respect of the booking is held on behalf of Cosmos.
3.
If you Change your Booking
Should you wish to change your holiday arrangements in any way we will endeavour to meet your wishes to the best of our ability.
A handling fee for any such change of £10 per person (up to a maximum of £40 per booking form) will be charged to cover administration costs.
If you make any change to your booking within 6 weeks of departure date then the change will be treated as a cancellation and the cancellation charges shown in paragraph 4 will apply.
4.
If You Cancel your Booking
A cancellation can only be accepted in writing from the person who signed the booking form or in writing from the Travel Agent through whom the booking was made.
The cancellation will be effective from the date it is received at our offices.
In the event of a cancellation either for one or all persons named on the booking form, we will levy our scale of cancellation charges, which is based on the estimated expenses and losses suffered by us as a result of cancellations.
The scale is as follows:
Period before scheduled departure date within which written notification is received by Cosmos
More than 42 days 
Departure date or after
Amount of cancellation charge as a % of the total price inclusive of extras (but exclusive of insurance premiums) *
Deposit amount
If the reason for your cancellation falls within the terms of your insurance cover, you may be able to claim a refund of your cancellation charges from the insurance company.
We undertake to refund the deposit in full if you cancel because of redundancy, provided we are notified at least 8 weeks before departure and on receipt of confirmation from the employer concerned (provided you have been in your current employment for the last 2 years).
5.
Your Holiday Insurance
You understand that it is a condition of us accepting your booking that you take out for yourself and for those for whom you book our recommended holiday insurance (details on page 15), or that you arrange a policy yourself giving comparable or better cover under all sections.
Insurance premiums will be automatically added to your final invoice unless your alternative insurer is clearly indicated on your booking form.
6.
Your Responsibilities
(a)
It is your responsibility to ensure that you and those for whom you are booking are in possession of valid passport and any appropriate visas (please see Holiday Information on page 14).
Be sure to check passport and visa requirements with your Travel Agent well in advance particularly if you are a non-British passport holder.
Your are responsible for any charges, fines etc. that may be levied by authorities in the U.K. or overseas for noncompliance of regulations in this area and any such amounts will be recharged to you.
(b)
Similarly, it is your responsibility to check with your doctor as to what vaccinations or  inoculations are advisable for your destination.
(c)
You must be responsible for a reasonable standard of behaviour by yourself and by those for whom you have booked.
We reserve the right to decline to accept or retain any person as a client if their behaviour is, in our opinion, or in the opinion of the driver, hotelier or accommodation owner or manager or other person in authority, likely to cause distress, damage, danger or annoyance to other people or to property.
You understand that we shall be under no liability to pay any refund or compensation to or costs incurred by any person whose behaviour is thus unacceptable.
7.
If you have a complaint
We do our best to give you an enjoyable, trouble free holiday, but occasionally even the best laid plans can go wrong.
If you have a problem or complaint it is important, and in your own interest, to tell our representative so that steps can be taken to resolve the matter on the spot.
If the complaint cannot be resolved there and then, complete one of our Client Liaison Forms in resort and then you must notify us in writing within 60 days of the date you returned from holiday.
Because of the difficulties of investigating a complaint too long after the event, we will not consider any complaint unless notified to us in writing within that time.
All holidays in this brochure are sold by Cosmos Coach Tours Ltd.
HOLIDAY INFORMATION
YOUR HOTEL ROOM
Holiday prices are based on twin bedded rooms with private facilities of at least private shower and w.c.
All rooms accommodate up to 3 adults with a small number of rooms able to accommodate two adults and two children.
Three or four bedded rooms usually mean a twin bedded room with extra folding beds (or bunk-beds) which means you need to be prepared for having less space in the room.
Single rooms and rooms for four adults are not available.
Cots can be hired from your hotel but please note that cots are not allowed in four-bedded rooms.
HOLIDAY MEAL ARRANGEMENTS
Your holiday price includes Continental style buffet breakfast as described on the holiday page.
Your hotel offers a relatively inexpensive fixed price menu if you wish to take advantage of this.
You must however consider that, except for 3 day London only departures, arrival at your hotel will be around 11.30pm (Continental time being usually ahead by 1 hour) when the hotel restaurant may be closed.
We therefore recommend you have your dinner on board the ferry before disembarkation in France.
Equally, during the summer months (when the Euro Disneyland Theme Park is open until late at night) the return to your hotel may be between 9 and 10pm.
In these instances you may choose to have your dinner at the Euro Disneyland Theme Park before returning to your hotel.
YOUR EURO DISNEYLAND TICKET
All holidays in this brochure include either a 1 day or 2 day entry ticket to the Euro Disneyland Theme Park.
All attractions inside the Theme Park.
All attractions inside the Theme Park are included in your entry ticket price (except ‘Shooting Gallery’).
Because Cosmos have purchased your ticket in advance for inclusion in your holiday package your entry into the Theme Park is guaranteed.
You will receive your entry ticket from your Cosmos Representative on day 1 or your holiday.
No refunds will be made by Cosmos in the event of your ticket being lost or stolen nor can we be called upon to replace your ticket with a new one.
In the event of you losing your ticket you will have to purchase a new ticket at the full price at the Entrance to the Theme Park in order to gain access into EURO DISNEYLAND.
Please note that EURO DISNEYLAND does not guarantee entry to visitors wishing to purchase tickets on the day.
HOLIDAY DURATION
The duration of holidays is described in number of days.
In all cases the duration includes day of departure from U.K. and day or arrival in U.K. in the number of days specified.
FERRY CROSSINGS
The complexity of the Cosmos Coach programme requires some flexibility in obtaining the required capacities from Channel ferry operators.
For 1992 our programme is based on the following routes: Ramsgate — Dunkerque; Dover — Calais; Dover — Boulogne.
Individual tours are allocated the appropriate ferry crossing closer to departure date.
Details of your outboard and inbound ferry crossing will be included in your travel documentation.
However, we reserve the right to direct tours to alternative ports if necessary.
Changes, if made, will not detract from the interest of your holiday.
VACCINATIONS AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS
At the time of going to press no vaccinations were required for British Citizens travelling to France.
As regulations frequently change, we recommend that you check with your doctor as to which innoculations are advisable.
You should also refer to the DSS leaflet ‘Health Advice for Travellers’(T.3).
FOREIGN CURRENCY AND TRAVELLER'S CHEQUES
We suggest you take your holiday spending money partly in foreign currency, partly in traveller's or Eurocheques.
All are best ordered from your local bank at least a week before departure.
Traveller's or Eurocheques are by far the safest way to carry money as they are easily cashed for a small service charge and the value is recoverable if they are stolen or lost.
BAGGAGE ALLOWANCE
One suitcase per person (30’ x 18’x 10’) plus a small holdall to keep on the coach for overnight stops.
Weight limit for all holidays is 44 lbs (20 kilos) per person.
IMPORTANT!
PASSPORTS AND VISAS
Please note it is the responsibility of the client to be in possession of a valid passport and any visa which may be required.
Long delays in obtaining passports and visas often occur; be sure to apply well in advance of the anticipated departure date.
British Passport Holders must have either a full British passport (valid 10 years only) or a 1-year-only British visitors passport.
All non-British or non-E.E.C.
Passport Holders who require visas to enter France MUST obtain an entry visa for France or the French authorities will no allow you to continue on your tour unless visa requirements are met.
BROCHURE PHOTOGRAPHY
Please bear in mind when looking through this brochure that, at the time of going to press, the Euro Disneyland Theme Park was still under construction.
Therefore, all pictorial content is intended to be merely representative of the entertainment themes available within the Euro Disneyland complex and not specific.
Pictorial matter released by the Euro Disney Company is indicated by the copyright notice © Disney.
YOUR MONEY IS SAFE
Cosmos, Europe's largest Coach Tour Operator, is a bonded member of the Tour Operators' Study group (TOSG) an association of Britain's leading Tour Companies.
Cosmos is bonded to ensure that all holiday money paid in advance by our clients is safeguarded.
Cosmos is also a member of the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) and sells exclusively through ABTA Agents.
In recent years a number of unbonded, non-ABTA Coach Tour Operators have gone into liquidation leaving their clients without holidays or protection.
The security of TOSG and ABTA is your protection against disappointment.
Always look for the ABTA symbol and book only with a bonded ABTA member.
USEFUL INFORMATION ABOUT EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK
Theme Park operating hours:—
The operating hours should be used as a guideline and are subject to change.
All attractions inside the Theme Park are included in the price of one ticket (except ‘Shooting Gallery’).
French and English are the official languages used throughout the park.
The French Franc is the official currency used in the Park.
All major credit cards are accepted.
SERVICES AVAILABLE IN EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK
Baby care
Stroller rental
Disabled guest information
Wheelchairs
Currency Exchange
Some services require a nominal fee 
BOOKING YOUR HOLIDAY
IT COULDN'T BE EASIER WITH COSMOS VIEWDATA
Your first stop — the ABTA Travel Agent
With over 7,000 ABTA travel agents in the UK there is bound to be one near you.
They are there to make your Cosmos Holiday booking easy and most of them will be directly connected to our computer via our Viewdata system and therefore have access to all the latest information, prices and holiday offers at the touch of a button.
They will help you with the choice of holiday and the selection of accommodation or simply offer you advice if you are experiencing any difficulty in making up your mind.
Once you have made your choice they will make the booking on your behalf and will handle all aspects of your holiday from then on.
Or phone us yourself
We have our own offices in London and Manchester.
Both are open Monday to Saturday (except Bank Holidays), normally from 9am to 6pm.
Just telephone the nearest Cosmos office to make a holiday booking for any UK departure point.
Making your booking
When your agent contacts us via Viewdata or telephone to make a ‘firm’ booking, they will be given a ‘Booking Reference Number’which will be entered on the booking form.
You will be asked to sign the booking form and the agent will retain this form on your behalf.
If you decide to make the booking direct with Cosmos you will need to telephone our central telephone sales office and a booking reference will be given to you.
You should complete the booking form (including entering the reference number) and send the form and deposit to our Bromley office.
This booking form and deposit must reach us within 4 days.
Alternatively, if you require a little time, a booking can be held on ‘Option’ for 24 hours during which time you must make the booking ‘firm’otherwise the booking will automatically be released.
Please Note: Options are not given within 6 weeks of departure date.
For any bookings received from overseas, an additional booking fee of £20 per person applies to cover the considerably increased communication costs involved.
Late Bookings
We have a fast reservation service for all late bookings within 6 weeks of departure.
Our Viewdata system features a ‘Search’ facility to enable the agent to show you last minute availability and prices.
You can then book, confirm and finalise the details of your holiday on the spot.
Your Confirmation and Account
As soon as we can, we will send you a Confirmation and Account, confirming all the holiday details.
The balance due should be paid by you at least six weeks prior to departure.
Holiday Prices
The prices contained in this brochure were valid at the time of publication (October 1991).
We shall endeavour to maintain prices shown but we reserve the right to increase any price shown at any time without limitation, in which case you will be advised of the revised price at the time of booking: after which the price will be in accordance with our price policy, shown in the Cosmos Consumer Protection Plan on pages 12/13 of this brochure.
Group Bookings
To give you time to get your group together, we will hold your reservation on option for up to four weeks (providing this is more than 12 weeks before departure) without any financial obligation.
After this we shall, of course, require the normal deposit.
The actual names will only be required 12 weeks prior to departure, after which there will be an amendment charge if there are any changes.
Customers with impaired mobility
Cosmos, in line with most Tour Operators, endeavour to accommodate all customers, including those with disabilities.
However, our experience indicates that certain holidays are not suitable for customers who rely upon wheelchairs for mobility or have certain other disabilities.
To ensure the suitability of the holiday you have chosen, we strongly urge that you or your Travel Agent telephone the Cosmos office prior to booking.
Notwithstanding the above, Cosmos cannot accept any liability regarding the suitability of individual holidays and must reserve the right to decline a booking should it be considered that we will be unable to meet in full our contracted obligation to customers.
Special Requests
Should you have any special requests — such as adjoining rooms or a room on a low or high floor — advise us at the time of making your booking by completing the ‘Special Requests’ panel on the Booking Form.
Although we cannot guarantee that your requirement will be met, we will certainly pass on your requests to the Hotel concerned, and make every effort to satisfy your requirements.
If any additional cost is applicable it will either be invoiced to you prior to departure or should be paid for locally in resort.
Unless specifically agreed at the time of making your booking, we cannot accept any reservation which is made conditional upon a Special Request being satisfied.
Included in the Holiday Price
RETURN TRAVEL BY MODERN COACH from your local pick-up point in the UK to your hotel accommodation near Paris.
RETURN FERRY CROSSING to France.
2 OR 3 NIGHTS HOTEL ACCOMMODATION at a 2 star hotel outside Paris, offering comfortable rooms with private facilities.
2 OR 3 CONTINENTAL STYLE BUFFET BREAKFASTS at your hotel on the Continent.
TRANSFER TO EURO DISNEYLAND THEME PARK from and to your hotel accommodation.
1 or 2 DAY GUARANTEED ENTRY TICKET TO EURO DISNEYLAND including your personal guide to EURO DISNEYLAND.
SERVICES OF A PERSONAL COSMOS REPRESENTATIVE at the UK Channel Port and during your stay on the Continent.
ALL TAXES AND ROAD TOLLS incl.
VAT.
PORT TAXES and passenger charges.
WHAT'S EXTRA
Holiday Insurance (see this page).
All meals and personal expenses.
Gratuities to your driver and escort which are left to your discretion.
INSURANCE
NEVER TRAVEL WITHOUT IT
We have negotiated a special Travel Insurance scheme with the Home and Overseas Insurance Company Limited (a subsidiary of the Eagle Star Insurance Co.
Ltd.) of Mitre House, 177 Regent Street, London W1R 8LA, so that all persons travelling on holidays advertised in this brochure will be covered under a Master Policy held by us, on payment of the insurance premium, unless they indicate to the contrary on their holiday booking form.
Premiums
(per person)—£9 
Limits of Coverage
— The amount of cover is as follows:
Cancellation
— Up to the cost of the holiday.
The Insured Person has to bear the first £25 of each and every claim, except in respect of claims for deposits only where the Insured Person has to bear the first £10 of each and every claim.
Missed Departure
— Up to £350.
Personal Accident
— Capital sums only — £15,000.
Medical and Other Expenses
(not applicable in the UK) including Curtailment — UNLIMITED (Within 12 months of the date of occurrence).
The Insured Person has to bear the first £25 of each and every claim.
Hospital Benefit
— £15 per day whilst in-patient in hospital abroad up to maximum of £500.
Personal Property
(hired, loaned or entrusted property is not covered)— Up to £1,000 to include:— Single articles limited to £200.
Jewellery and photographic equipment limited to £200 in all.
The Insured Person has to bear the first £25 of each and every claim.
Personal money limited to £250.
The Insured Person has to bear the first £25 of each and every claim.
Delayed baggage
— up to £100.
Loss of Passport Expenses
— Up to £100 for reasonable additional hotel and travelling expenses.
Personal Public Liability
— Indemnity limit — £2,000,000.
Legal Expenses
— Up to £5,000.
europ assistance
THE EUROP ASSISTANCE EMERGENCY SERVICE FACILITY IS INCLUDED
Unfortunately space does not permit us to show here the terms, conditions and exclusions of the insurance but a cover note setting these out in full will be sent to you with your booking confirmation.
If you do not then find this cover to your satisfaction you may return the cover note to us within 7 days for a full refund of the premium paid.
In any event, you may ask for a specimen copy of the cover note before booking should you wish to examine this in advance.