

GH making things happen
It's great to start the New Year with lots of excitement in the air and that's certainly the feeling at GH: so much to celebrate, so much to share, so much happening and you're part of all of it.
For a start, it's Good Housekeeping's 70th Birthday this year, in March to be precise, but we don't intend to let such an important anniversary slip by in just one month, so we'll be celebrating throughout 1992 with lots of extras and special treats for you.
This year is also a major anniversary for the Queen: 40 years on the throne is a remarkable achievement, and her continuing popularity proves the success of her reign.
To mark this special occasion, we've compiled a unique feature (page 56) which I'm sure you'll enjoy.
Dieting may not be high on your enjoyment list, but we've made pleasure a priority in Slim Plan — GH's unique three-part diet programme which we're launching in this issue (page 82).
The GHI team has devised and tested recipes that will excite your tastebuds and not the scales, making sure you can still enjoy food while losing weight.
There's nothing more soul- destroying (and I speak as a seasoned dieter here!) than those inflexible diet regimes: no meals out, no dinner parties, no treats.
Slim Plan is not a bit like that — for more inside information, read what Cookery Editor Moyra Fraser has to say on page 7.
Whether you are a keen follower of horoscopes or just a casual glancer, the chances are you won't miss your stars in each issue, which is why I'm delighted to welcome an extraordinarily talented new astrologer to Good Housekeeping .
The most important thing about stars is that they work for you, so simply turn to page 152 and see for yourself.
If you're anything like the GH staff, you'll be wanting to know more about Stella…watch this space.
Thousands of you have kindly let us know much more about yourselves by filling in the questionnaire in our November issue.
The results are published this month (page 20) and they make fascinating reading.
As we've always known at Good Housekeeping , you have clear views on life and you're not backward in putting them forward!
I'm also thrilled by the terrific response to my December letter, when I asked you to pinpoint the key issues that you believe should be tackled by the Government in order to put Britain back on the right tracks for 1992: not surprisingly, childcare comes high on your list, as it does in the questionnaire.
Your thoughts and suggestions will be passed on to No 10.
Many of you may have noticed that Good Housekeeping is now on sale at the checkout in Sainsbury's, which has gone down brilliantly with shoppers, as I discovered when I visited my local London branch.
I can't think why all supermarkets don't put GH at the checkout.
Newsagents, from whom the majority of you buy your magazines, tell me that issues of GH have been selling like hot cakes over the Christmas period.
So again, it's our thanks to you and here's to a great 1992 for all of us.
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF  
GH's Sally O'Sullivan checks in with readers at Sainsbury's
inside GHI
MOYRA FRASER, Cookery Editor, introduces Slim Plan — the tried and tested New Year diet to help you lose weight and enjoy it too!
It's that time of year again when thoughts inevitably turn to weight, and the problem of how to get rid of those extra Christmas pounds.
Choosing the right diet is the key, and to make it easy for you we have devised a three-part series,Slim Plan (page 81), backed by all the knowledge, research and thorough testing you have come to expect from the Good Housekeeping Institute.
Fiona Hunter, our nutritionist (see below right), is a qualified dietician who spent six years working in the NHS.
During this time she helped hundreds of overweight men and women to lose weight for the sake of their health.
She is also a lover of good food, so we have both made certain the GH diet not only works but tastes delicious too.
Slim Plan is a safe programme that has been specially designed to help you to achieve sustained weight loss.
It's flexible, so you can either count calories or follow a weekly menu plan — just make your choice.
The low-calorie (and that means low in fat as well) recipes can be enjoyed by all the family, so you won't feel there's any need to deny yourself good food while you're slimming.
For those not counting calories quite so strictly, there's this month's dinner party, designed especially for the cook who wants the best of all worlds — dishes to prepare ahead and freeze, and dishes requiring little, or no, last-minute attention.
The Good Food Fast recipes on page 143 provide warming ideas to please vegetarians and meat-eaters alike.
They include a filling, spicy bean soup and a winter vegetable casserole — both of these recipes are low calorie and low fat, so you can add them to your Slim Plan collection!
The Institute is made up of two departments:Cookery , which devises, develops and double-tests every recipe featured, and Consumer Research , where experienced researchers investigate whether domestic goods and products live up to the claims made by manufacturers.
So that you can discuss this research in greater detail, we have two consumer advice lines:
0839–141414 Practical advice on choosing and using products for the home.
0839–141416 Household advice, including stain removal, cleaning and specialist services.
0839–141415 Food, cookery and nutritional advice.
All calls are charged 48p/minute (9.30am–5pm).
Moyra (left) and Fiona devise balanced Slim Plan recipes
GH first thoughts
The fridge, the manor house, British Rail and the Chardonnay
There are no original conversations in a marriage.
Or very few.
In the beginning, maybe, when the meaning of life, or the preferability of semi-skimmed milk to skimmed might be debated, but once past the first anniversary, many of the conversations follow a well-worn route from one topic to the next and back again, taking in most of human life.
A discussion in our house on (let's say) the necessity of buying a new fridge will move swiftly to the education system (via the rival claim of school fees to the purchase of the fridge) and whether a move to another area might obviate the need for paying them, taking in a quick discourse on the immorality of contributing to the divisive education system in this country anyway; this will lead to the if-we-sold-our-suburban-villa-we-could-buy-a-Georgian-manor-house-in-the-country conversation; which will in its turn move on quite quickly to the horrors of British Rail and the greatly increased subjection to them that such a move would entail; then we get to leaving all our friends behind, and to debating whether having them to stay at the weekends would not be perfectly satisfactory; which will remind us that two or more of them are coming to dinner that very night and we'd better get down to the off-licence; then it's shall-we-get-Muscadet-or-the-Chardonnay- again and for-heaven's-sake-get-enough which will get us back to the fridge, on account of last time we got the Chardonnay, I didn't put it in it soon enough.
It's rather like a trip on the Circle Line; you can get on at any point really, and you'll get to the fridge, or the move, or the school fees sooner or later and then back to the beginning again.
The conversation can sometimes take a detour, via the Animal Line (this extends to the rest of the family): ‘Do we have to have all these bloody animals, the house is like a zoo…
That dog has absolutely ruined the lawn…
Will somebody please feed that cat…
It's your turn to clean out the goldfish…
I don't care if Arabella is allowed to keep her hamster in her bedroom, you're not going to…
No we cannot have another guinea pig, who do you think has to look after all these animals when you get tired of them…
Oh, darling, don't cry, he was very old, that mouse, I'm sure he didn't suffer at all, I'll get you another one I promise…
Do we have to have all these bloody animals…’ and possibly the Dry Cleaning Line: ‘Where's my new suit…
It's at the cleaners…
What on earth is it doing at the cleaners…
You asked me to take it…
That was weeks ago…
It wasn't weeks ago, it was last Thursday…
But I need it this morning for a meeting…
I'm sorry, I just forgot, couldn't you wear the grey one…
No, I'll get it on my way in, just give me the ticket…
Well, if you're going could you pick up my white jacket at the same time…
I really haven't got the time to start picking up everybody's cleaning, I'd better wear my blue suit…
You can't, you took it to the cleaners on Saturday…
There is in our house a running conversation about keys.
Never was so much intellect and emotion expended by so many on so little.
On and on it runs, ranging from staccato to legato, and becoming fortissimo when anybody is about to leave the house.
‘Where are my keys, I can't find them anywhere…
I don't know, but just take mine…
No, no, I have to have my own, I feel lost without them, they can't be far away, I had them when I brought the shopping in…
I hope you've locked the car up, three times last week I found it open, it really is terribly dangerous…
No of course I haven't locked it up because I can't find my keys…
Mummy, why are your keys in the vegetable rack…
Does anybody know who's got the spare key to the back door, I just cannot understand why people can't put it back where it belongs…
Where does it actually belong…
With the others obviously…
But the others aren't actually there…
Could someone possibly find just one of the four new keys that were cut only last Monday…
How can four keys possibly get lost in five days…
I thought there was supposed to be a key kept under the flowerpot in the porch…
There is, look it's here…
Oh, that flowerpot, well it's no good putting it under that one, it's supposed to be under the one with the camellia in it…
Mummy will you leave the side door open…
Why can't you take your key…
I haven't got it any more…
Does that mean you've lost it…
No, of course I haven't lost it, it's in the bike shed, in my bicycle basket…
Well, for heaven's sake, get it out of the bike shed…
I would but it's locked and we can't find the key…
Conversations with one's children are extremely predictable, especially as they hit adolescence; there cannot be a parent out there who doesn't know this one:
‘Sarah's having a party, everyone's staying, so can I?’
‘Who's everyone?’
‘Everyone.’
‘Well, maybe I should phone her mother.’
‘What on earth for?’
‘Well, to make sure it's all right.’
‘Make sure what's all right?
Don't you believe me or something?’
‘Yes of course I believe you, but I'd just like to make sure she's really expecting you all.’
‘Well, she is.
There's no point in phoning, nobody else's mother will be phoning, they're all allowed to stay without any of this fuss, I'll just look like a complete idiot, and anyway, what do you think's going to happen, we're not going to have an orgy or anything.’
‘No, but I'd just like to…’
‘Oh, for heaven's sake…’
A circumspect phone call to Sarah's mother at this point usually reveals that the party is timed to end at 1am at the latest, that she is extremely sorry, but she simply doesn't have room for all the children to stay and every other mother has already phoned.
I get tired of all this from time to time and attempt to get off the Circle Line and branch out into new conversational territory.
It's a fruitless task.
The other night I ladled out the lasagne, took a swig of Sainsbury's Vin Ordinaire and said determinedly, ‘The political scene is very interesting at the moment, isn't it?’
There was a brief stunned silence, and then the entire family went into fits of laughter; after which my husband remarked that the wine wasn't cold enough and maybe we should get a new fridge.
‘Keys: never was so much intellect and emotion expended by so many on so little’
Penny Vincenzi is a journalist, author of best-selling novel Old Sins, and mother of four daughters
you WRITE to us
We pay £25 for our star letter and £15 for all others.
Keep writing!
THE FUN OF BEING 40
I have just finished reading Facing Up To Age (November GH).
I am 46 years old and have not had anything lifted, tucked or masked.
Of course, I have the odd wrinkle, and my middle is not as flat as it could be, but so what!
Now that my sons are becoming more independent, I have time for myself and confidence in middle age that I lacked as a youngster.
A lifelong love of fashions means I have not only the nerve to try something original, but the experience to put my own version of style together.
There must be thousands like me who don't need to go to the whingeing depths of Germaine Greer and her ilk, or spend time and money trying to look eternally young like Joan Collins and Elizabeth Taylor.
It's time we shouted our message from the rooftops — being over 40, middle-aged, whatever you call it, is fun .
Sure the menopause has its misery, but not for ever and not everyone suffers.
I really do see this age as a time to widen horizons.
As far as wrinkles and saggy bits go, the majority of my friends look the same, and I don't waste five hours on daily maintenance like Cher.
I think Anne Bancroft and Judi Dench look best for their ages, with naturally, healthy, ‘glad to be alive’ expressions on their faces.
HERE'S TO REAL WOMEN
My most significant thought about Facing Up To Age was that we all do it in our own way.
I do not know this vast army of women who disintegrate at menopause, nor the hordes who scrabble blindly for their lost youth.
A positive attitude towards ageing doesn't happen overnight, it comes with age.
For some, the first grey hairs, facial lines and signs of gravity taking over may herald the end of a meaningful life.
If so, I don't know these women!
I admire the determination of Taylor, Collins and Welch, but not their looks.
Youth is simply an attitude of mind.
Greer seems to be saying, ‘I'm old, I'm angry, let me be taken seriously.’
Where has she been for the last decade?
I cannot believe middle-aged women feel this rage.
If men want young women, they don't want them packaged in an old body and mind.
They want them young.
I cannot believe that using make-up, wearing nice clothes and caring for our bodies labels us as empty-headed, approval-seeking creatures.
Most of us do these things for ourselves.
My money is on Dench and Rigg — serenity, experience and vitality.
They change their public roles to suit their changing appearance.
They are not grey, dumpy and invisible, but real women who are not the products of the plastic surgeon's skill.
STAR LETTER: A GREAT BONUS FROM GH
I'd like to thank you for the feature Redundancy —Your Survival Guide (September GH).
We gained £600 because of it.
My husband, a fairly highly paid scientist, was made redundant last March.
He registered with the DSS and filled in all the forms.
We were not terribly surprised when he was informed that he would only receive the basic amount, since he had been lucky enough to get a golden handshake.
It was only as I read your article that I realised my husband hadn't been receiving an allowance for a dependant — me!
Next time he went to sign on he armed himself with a photocopy of the relevant pages.
It turned out that the forms had all been filled in correctly but the DSS hadn't read them properly.
It took over a month for the reassessment to be worked out — worth almost £600.
There has been no word of apology or interest paid on money retained.
So thank you GH for proving your worth time and again— I've been a reader since my marriage 25 years ago!
IT'S ALL IN THE EYES
It is easy to see who looks best in Facing Up To Age : Anne Bancroft.
Why?
Well, I masked those different faces with paper and concentrated on the eyes.
In my opinion, Jackie Collins' eyes seem dead, empty and without expression.
Vanessa Redgrave's look as worried as Germaine Greer's.
Judi Dench's eyes are secretive, Diana Rigg's are withdrawn.
Raquel Welch has frantic eyes while Kate O'Mara's are lost in some dream.
Anne Bancroft's are happy and serene.
That is surely the real essence of beauty, no matter what the age.
Ed's comment:
These are just a few of the very many amusing, illuminating and thoughtful letters we received on this subject.
Without doubt, Anne Bancroft emerged as your shining example of growing old gracefully, with Judi Dench following in second place and Diana Rigg a close third.
Thank you everyone for taking the trouble to write.
I'm sorry we don't have enough space to print all of your letters.
A COOK'S COMPLIMENTS
I'm writing with an eye on the oven because the filo pastry left over from the Salmon & Pesto Parcels is turning golden on the Filo-Topped Apple Pie .
The parcels (made smaller) formed the starter to a recent dinner party, followed by Pork & Watercress Casserole (all from Slim Cuisine November GH).
But I have a complaint.
Everyone — the food Philistine, the stodge bod, even the figure-conscious one — wanted seconds of each course, so there were no leftovers.
As a cook with only spasmodic enthusiasm, I always consider these my reward for the work involved, but the hallowed compliments made up for it.
I must admit there was more enjoyment than effort in making this easy, yet delicious meal.
a look for a LIFESTYLE
When you have a favourite style, it's simple to build a wardrobe around it, as Liz Cole-Hamilton, mature student and mother of four, discovered
Although Liz Cole-Hamilton, 41, has worked throughout her marriage, she has now decided that the time has come to take on a new challenge.
With a career in speech therapy behind her, Liz decided to go on to study for a post-graduate degree in Marine Archaeology at St Andrews University, where her husband David is Professor of Chemistry.
This she combines admirably with looking after 14-year-old Alex, 12-year-old Rosie, and 5-year-old twins Fifi (Fiona) and Nicky: ‘It was a new direction but something I'd always been interested in.
I enrolled under my maiden name, because I wanted other students to know me as a person first, as opposed to a professor's wife.
Also, if I didn't succeed, it wouldn't reflect on him.’
They live in a tiny village in the golden countryside around St Andrews.
Only around 100 people live there — Liz knows them all, and has a marvellous photograph of almost everyone, from 80- year-olds to tiny babies, gathered together outside their house.
This was once two cottages, a one-up, one-down 16th-century croft, and a more conventional one from the 1920s — they now ramble into each other at different levels.
Children's drawings and posters pile up with books and cups of coffee in the relaxed, completely family-orientated interior, and every time she found somewhere to put a newly ironed outfit, you could be sure one of the three cats would jump onto it, curl up and fall asleep.
Liz and her family love colour, although she admits that she gets into a rut buying navy and black ‘because it goes with everything’.
Fashion Editor Caroline Baker was delighted to hear that she has always liked ethnic clothes.
‘Ethnic clothing has become classic — once you have a certain skirt or blouse you can go on wearing it and never have to buy another.
You can build a wardrobe around it, blending it with all your usual clothes.
‘This kind of fashion is going through its biggest revival since the 70s, triggered by French designer Christian Lacroix's distinctive Spanish embroidery, bright colours and huge skirts,’ said Caroline.
‘Now that buyers have seen it on the Paris catwalks, it's appearing again on the high street.
Ralph Lauren has been a big influence too, with his Navajo and Santa Fe prints.’
Stylish, well-made ethnic clothing is available by mail order from Wealth of Nations, Denny Andrews, and Traidcraft.
Liz's day starts at 7am.
‘The next two hours are a mad scramble to get everybody out of the house with the right gear.
The twins go to school at 8.45, and I leave just after them to work in the library.’
In the winter she does weight training, because her studies involve diving, and the equipment is extraordinarily heavy.
Lunch is usually a sandwich and then she works until the twins return at around 3pm.
‘Then I catch up with what I should have been doing all day.
The children are very helpful and tolerant of my work — although I think it's sometimes a pain for them.
I don't have any help in the house, as I prefer to use that part of my budget for the twins’ child minder, Audrey.
Then we all have a family dinner in the evening, and by around 9.30pm I'm aching for sleep.
I might try to read, but the words often don't make much sense!’
Although she is now slim, Liz confesses to a terrible struggle with her weight, which makes peasant-style clothes, such as Monsoon's glorious Tibetan embroidered skirt (see page 16) particularly good for her: ‘I put on a great deal of weight after the twins were born, and when I started diving, it became very obvious because fat floats, so you have to balance your weight with extra diving weights.
I once had to step out of the water with 5½ stone of weights on me, and it was then I resolved to diet.
I lost 3 stone in around 5 months, but I am still slightly pear-shaped.’
She celebrated by buying a pair of tight Levi 501s.
‘It was a wonderful feeling — as if I was walking on air.’
Caroline pointed out that, in most cases, leggings, combined with a long-line sweater or shirt, are a stylish, comfortable way of hiding a less-than-perfect bottom.
Hand-knitted sweaters are hot fashion items this winter, and can be treasured for years to come.
The Cole-Hamilton family all looked great in hand-knits taken from the Rowan Book Number Ten (£4.95),The Original Annabel Fox Collection (Anaya, £19.99),The Kim Hargreaves Collection (Anaya, £19.99) and Kaffe's Colour Book (£3.95)also from Rowan .
LIZ'S BEAUTY CARE
Liz has always taken a great deal of interest in make-up and admits to being ‘so vain that I wear Revlon's Aqualash waterproof mascara when diving’.
Make-up artist and hairdresser Yanina advised, ‘Bright browns are always best for blue eyes — they really bring out the colour.
Although Liz has olive tones in her skin, there's quite a lot of blue under her eyes, so any blues will make her look more tired.
I always start with the eyes, because it gives the moisturiser a chance to sink in, and it also means I can wipe away any spills without reapplying foundation.’
After applying a dark brown eyeliner, Yanina used a pinkish shade from an eyeshadow compact of red-browns by Prescriptives, and worked along the eyelid and socket, up to the brow line, and then blended the highlighter along the brow line.
The final touch was a coating of No 7 brown-black mascara to her lashes — much softer than harsh black.
Liz always wears foundation or tinted moisturiser, which Yanina applied next, because they help to protect her skin from St Andrews' bitter East winds: ‘I love Lancôme's Maquimat Beige 031 — it's a bit expensive, but I find it lasts for ages.’
When we saw Liz's auburn colouring we instantly thought of pre-Raphaelite curls, and prepared to get out the tongs.
But Liz revealed her hair was naturally curly and that she prefers to dry it straight.
Yanina sprayed Daniel Field's gel Body Builder then scrunch-dried the hair, using a diffuser to maximise the curl: ‘Braun's Control Hairdrier (£28.99) gives a gentler heat and separates,’ said Yanina.
The result was a bubbly, natural style, very much in tune with today's trends towards waves, and quicker to achieve in Liz's busy day.
Above — far left: Even in the depth of winter, Liz has to brave the North Sea, as part of her degree course in Marine Archaeology.
Her diving buddy looks on
Above — middle left: Dressing for warmth is an important factor in St Andrews, but layering wool, cotton and silk also works well as winter moves into spring.
Liz wears Workshop silk blouse, £85; John Smedley turtle-neck sweater, £52; Monsoon Tibetan mirrored skirt, £179.95
Above: Liz's life is very sociable — meeting fellow students, David's colleagues and village friends — and occasionally there is a formal event, such as a party at the University.
David wears his formal robes, while Liz steps out elegantly in this Nightingales green taffeta ballgown, £48, with net underskirt, £19.99; Russell & Bromley suede court shoes, £79.99; Aristoc black opaque tights, £1.89; Traidcraft earrings, £3.50
The family keeps warm in striking sweaters hand-knitted in Rowan yarns.
(The prices shown below are for yarns only.)
From left: Liz wears an ‘Asante’ sweater by Jean Moss, about £44.40, pattern from Rowan Book Number Ten; John Smedley sweater, £52; Jaeger pink jeans, £59; Accessorize hat, £24.95; Traidcraft embroidered glass-bead earrings, £2.95.
Nicky wears ‘Thurso’ sweater by Annabel Fox, about £31.50; Nipper dungarees, £20.95.
Alex wears ‘Tile’ sweater by Annabel Fox, about £59.
‘Thurso’ and ‘Tile’from The Original Annabel Fox.
David wears ‘Chelsea Style’ sweater by Kim Hargreaves, about £95, from the Kim Hargreaves Collection.
Fifi wears Annabel Fox ‘Happy Coat’ cardigan, about £27.30, pattern from The Original Annabel Fox; Nipper jacket, £32.95, skirt, £18.95 and shirt, £20.95.
Rosie wears ‘Byzantine’ sweater by Kaffe Fassett, about £49.40, pattern from Kaffe's Colour Book; Jeffrey Rogers leggings, £14.99; Herbert Johnson beret, £75
Left: Liz wears Jaeger chambray shirt, £75; Wealth of Nations Hungarian waistcoat, £49.50; Traidcraft earrings, £12.50
Far left:Liz in her own make-up 
Left:Liz, with her daughter, Rosie, wears Workshop silk blouse, £85; John Smedley claret turtle-neck sweater, £53 
Below left — Face:Maquimat Beige 031 (£16) and translucent Poudre Majeur (£18), both by Lancôme; Shadowbase Concealer by Almay (£5.25)— apply it with a brush, after using foundation, to give a more natural effect Cheeks:02 Blusher by Prescriptives (£15.50)— a few light swirls give your face natural warmth Eyes:03 compact of red-browns by Prescriptives (£20); No 7 Fashionline Chocolate Kohl (£1.95) and No 7 Superlash in Brownish-Black (£2.80), both by Boots Lips:Moisture Rich Lipstick in Tawny Blonde (£4.55) by Almay 
Below:Well wrapped-up against the bitter East winds, Liz wears In-wear mulberry hooded parka with detachable lining, £199.50, and cotton/Lycra leggings, £29.99; Pringle mauve rollneck sweater, £48; Scotch House cashmere scarf, £65; Traidcraft earrings, £12.50.
Fifi (right) is snug in her Skiss green/blue padded jacket from Harrods, £49; Nipper pinafore, £49; Scotch House scarf, £11.
Nicky (left) sports a Puma sweat-top with logo, £19 and pants, £14.50, both from Harrods; Scotch House tartan scarf, £11 
GH women in the 90s
Your views, your thoughts, your future
Thousands of readers responded to our Women In The 90s questionnaire, and your views on everything from politics to passion came across loud and clear.
VICTORIA McKEE reports
Woman in the 90s are positive, tolerant and determined to reach their life goals in their own way.
That's the key message that came over from your answers to our November questionnaire.
There are certain problems that must be solved (childcare is number one), certain inequalities, both in the workplace and home, that are still to be ironed out, but in your personal lives you know precisely where you are going.
Your relationship is certainly not dominated by the man in your life; you feel very positive about your sexuality, have no problems with leading the way in the bedroom and are well able to cope with any indiscretions in your marriage.
Of course you still have many unfulfilled wishes in life, but you have a firm grip on your direction and separate your aspirations from reality with intelligent candour.
Out of the many thousands of respondents to our questionnaire, under a fifth were full-time housewives.
The largest group works full-time outside the home, while others work part-time or at home, or run their own businesses (8%), sometimes from home.
That is what you do .
We also asked you what you would prefer to do — and the picture is very different.
‘Run my own business’ was your favourite choice.
This confirms the trend towards women starting their own businesses (40% of new, small businesses are now begun by female entrepreneurs, many home-based), and avoiding macho and masochistic corporate cultures — where the majority of you feel ‘women lack the confidence to reach the top’.
Overwhelmingly, you do not see full-time salaried employment as your ultimate goal.
But only 42% believe that ‘positive discrimination is essential if women are to achieve their full potential in the workplace’, though there is a keener positive response from women aged 35–44.
By far the greatest area of agreement among all women, whether housewives or workers, is the need for a better system of childcare in Britain.
85% agreed that ‘more women would work if there were better childcare facilities’.
This figure rose to 93% of women with children under 9, showing a more universal agreement on the subject of childcare than on any other issue.
Politicians and employers please note!
Just under half of the housewives (49%) agree with Barbara Cartland and Lady Lothian (organiser of the Women Of The Year lunches and patron of the National Council of Women) that theirs should be a salaried job.
(Almost as many of the part-time workers, 43%, and 39% of full-time workers agreed with this proposition.)
For those who work outside the home, out of many choices, it was their ‘relationship with colleagues’ that gives them the most satisfaction (80%), with flexibility of working hours (68%) and pay (60%) trailing behind.
Women in the 90s believe that their best interests are still not being represented by politicians; despite all the talk of ‘women's charters’ and changing demographics in their favour, 76% sense a ‘bias towards men’.
But only 31% believe there should be a separate ministry for women.
Despite the unpopularity of politicians, John Major is considered one of the best of the political bunch, with 67% agreeing that he is doing a good job as Prime Minister, housewives, particularly, approve of his performance (74%), which should raise his confidence for the election.
The Queen should not , in your opinion, abdicate in favour of Prince Charles (61%), and those of you who answered the question, ‘Is there any member of the Royal family you'd rather see as the future king/queen?’, chose the Princess Royal (placing her way out ahead of the Princess of Wales).
What worries women most in the 90s is their husband or partner losing his job.
This is a real sign of the times and completely eclipses global fears about ecology or famine.
Another major worry for women is being left on their own.
Pollution ranks among the top three concerns for 28%.
‘Not being able to support myself financially when old’, and ‘having to care for an elderly relative’ are some of your other major worries; ‘losing my job’does not feature as a key worry for most.
The vast majority of the women who completed our survey disagreed with the proposition that ‘men enjoy sex more than women’.
Almost as many shattered the popular misconception that women prefer a cosy cuddle to the sexual act, and that they prefer their husbands or partners to initiate/take charge of their sex lives.
It seems very few of you don't like to feel in control!
And a substantial 47% were not satisfied with the frequency of lovemaking with their husbands/partners.
Intriguingly, many of the women in second or subsequent marriages were more content with this aspect of their sex life than those in their first.
STILL IN LOVE
Never mind the divorce statistics, an encouraging 92% of those married, or living with their partners, said they are still in love.
Women in second marriages are more likely to have had an affair than those in their first, and women who work full-time are, it seems, more prone to extra-curricular passions than either part-time workers or housewives.
But overall, 75% of you have not had an affair — although only 65% are confident that their husband/partner has not been unfaithful to them.
11% don't know whether he has or not, and 4% don't want to know.
Contrary to popular belief, honesty is considered the best policy.
If he was unfaithful, despite soaring divorce figures and growing evidence that most petitions are brought by women, the majority would not want the affair to wreck their marriage.
Far from flinging him out, you would rather discuss what has gone wrong and try to put it right (apart from women in the North, who feel more strongly that their errant man should be shown the door).
One in 10 of you bravely admitted that you wish you'd married a different man, but your main concern is still to try and make things work.
Are we making any headway in encouraging our partners to share domestic responsibilities?
Hardly, is the answer.
Cooking is still almost exclusively ‘women's work’(82%), as is cleaning (77%), grocery shopping (70%) and childcare (52%).
But choosing furniture and interior decoration schemes is a joint task for 57% — so the legalisation of Sunday opening of stores, to facilitate such joint decisions, might be welcome.
Holidays are chosen together by 51%, and interestingly, diy remains a male preserve for only 52%.
Looking after children is certainly not a joint commitment — you're more likely to garden together than share responsibilities for the children!
STRONG FEELINGS
If women could only have one child, girls came out head and shoulders favourite, with only half as many choosing boys.
Many women wish they had more children (29%), and a resounding 87% agree that ‘children are hard work but worth the effort’.
Ironically, although 95% consider ‘a woman shouldn't feel obliged to have children’, an overlapping 82% suspect that ‘women who don't bring up children are never really fulfilled’.
And being a wife/partner is a much higher priority in most women's lives (81%) than being a mother (69%) or a wage earner (47%).
When asked, ‘What is your husband/partner's most annoying habit?’, the scope and variety of the answers was riveting.
They included: ‘reading the paper when I want to talk’, ‘picking toenails’, ‘noisy eating’, ‘re-hanging dirty shirts’, ‘falling asleep in the evening’, ‘interrupting when I'm talking’, ‘leaving hair in the sink plughole’, ‘monopolising conversation’, ‘impatient driving’, ‘not keeping promises’, ‘lack of ambition’, and ‘not phoning home’.
However, ‘lack of communication’ emerged as the most common complaint, with ‘untidiness’running second.
Arguments are more likely to be over domestic chores and money, than children or sex (which caused very few rows indeed — only 11%).
And arguments with children are overwhelmingly likely to be about untidiness, with their sex lives the least likely topic for dispute (2%).
85% of women felt parents should talk more openly with their children about sex — but 80% would refuse to allow their teenagers to sleep with their ‘regular boyfriend/girlfriend at their parents’ home’.
Lest we seem obsessed with sex, we should point out that only 18% of our respondents ranked it ‘very’ important in their lives — with the largest group (47%) putting it at a more discreet ‘quite’important.
Romance is high on the agenda, though.
A touching 86% agreed that ‘sex is most fulfilling with the person you love’.
The biggest worry of 1992?
Redundancy
An affair won't necessarily rock a marriage
Blondes don't have more fun
Housework should be a salaried job
‘No’ to cosmetic surgery — health is more important
Couples are more likely to share the gardening than the childcare
Twice as many women would prefer to have a baby girl than a baby boy
Women who work full-time are more likely to have affairs
Women enjoy sex just as much as men
STILL CONTROVERSIAL
The love-hate relationship goes on: you voted Margaret Thatcher both most interesting and most boring woman
YES PLEASE
Ustinov — your favourite: Prince Charles a close second
BOTH AS BORING AS EACH OTHER It's a photo-finish between Neil and Terry — streaking ahead of tedious Paul Gascoigne and tiresome Jeremy Beadle
THE BEST…
looking woman: Diana is still your favourite beauty
AND THE REST…
Nobody wants to look like material girl Madonna
new FASHION IDEAS
Modern fabrics and manufacturing techniques are revolutionising underwear.
Lycra has created a new look: a more feminine, flirty feel for the 90s.
Padding is moving from shoulders to chest — yes, bosoms are back!
Underwear for off-the-shoulder wedding dresses, backless ballgowns and skimpy summer fashions has always been difficult to find, but the new backless and strapless bras and basques combine support with comfort and good looks.
The return of figure-hugging fashions calls for smooth, seamless underwear, and now there's lots of choice, both for the well-endowed and smaller busted.
Wider bra straps are another new feature.
And there's a very welcome trend towards more comfy, flattering bigger briefs, fitting to the waist.
Here's our guide to what's new in the undercover world.
Satin smooth
Telltale lines are taboo under clingy tops and knit fabrics.
Lycra blends give the smoothest outlines.
Gossard basque 779 (pictured), in stretch satin
Berlei Body Action B501 bra with moulded cup
Rosy Les Flamboyants stretch-satin underwired body with new, wider straps.
Also two-piece (bra and long-line briefs).
Bare your back
Daring, low-backed fashions need versatile bras that can be worn three ways: strapless, halterneck or with low crossover strap.
Silhouette style U180 strapless bustier (pictured)
Triumph Amourette three-way bra.
Lovable three-way bra, in spotted stretch net.
Strapless glamour
Strapless bras are summer essentials, and one of the most glamorous undercover options.
Adhesive inserts inside the band keep them up, giving you more confidence.
Many come with detachable straps, which are more functional for day use.
Van Dell Katrien 50% cotton bra (pictured).
Lou 1150 frothy lace bra with scalloped edges.
Triumph Amourette 131 TR bra with matching maxi briefs.
Padded presence
The new padded bras mean that even flat-chested women can have curves — essential for low-cut necklines or clingy tops.
Gossard Wonderbra (pictured), deeply plunged, lightly padded with detachable foam inserts, straps movable to halter style.
Playtex Super Look Body Language bra, straps movable to halter position.
Lovable Includer bra with all-over padded cup plus inserts and detachable straps.
Romantic prints
Pretty florals and classic paisley feature in lovely lingerie that makes you feel beautifully dressed — even when you're undressed.
Gossard Moods underwired bra (pictured), tea-rose print on stretch net lace with wide straps.
Lise Charmel paisley in linen and cotton with pleated satin inserts from the Sahara range.
Playing with colour
Wonderful high-fashion colours are also creeping into underwear ranges.
Charnos Anya stretch-lace underwired bra in moody mulberry (pictured), from the Sensations Collection.
Matching long-line briefs, £19, s, m, l, Also in classic navy and slate grey.
Warners Andante underwired bra in stretch lace.
Matching waist briefs in s, m, l, xl, £32.
In gold and champagne.
All-in-one comfort
Sleek and sexy under tight clothes, the all-in-one fulfils the role of both bra and briefs, providing comfort and light control.
These are underwired for total practicality:
Silhouette U144 lace and stretch satin bodyshaper (pictured) comes with detachable suspenders.
Charnos bodyshaper in stretch lace.
Van Dell Melanie.
Triumph Amourette pantie corselette.
Gossard Rapture
Layered look
Lingerie that doubles as clothing is all the rage: a bustier under a suit; a bra as a bikini.
If you won't dare to go bare, the layering effect of a lace body over another body creates a stunning evening or party look.
Pictured: Triumph Amourette stretch lace bodyshaper.
Worn over Playtex Super Look Secrets bodyshaper, for details see below.
All-over stretch net long-sleeved body by Laura Jane at Fenwicks, in s, m, l, £29.99.
In red, black and white.
New concepts
Playtex Super Look Secrets bodyshaper offers all the control of a corset in a soft, stretchy fabric.
An invisible support panel in the bra cup does away with underwiring, and there is a tummy-flattening panel.
Sizes 32B–38C, £39.99.
Playtex Secrets cotton-rich full briefs, with a reinforced tummy panel, are a cross between briefs and a girdle, sizes s, m, l, xl, £19.99.
For full figures: Xquisite Comfort style 500 bra by Exquisite Form has a unique underarm seam which allows independent movement of top and bottom bands.
Do you know your real bra size?
Seven out of 10 women wear the wrong size bra.
The only way to make sure your bra is exactly right for you is to be professionally fitted in a department store or specialist underwear shop.
Berlei and Gossard run free Focus On Fitting workshops in department stores nationwide, advertised in local newspapers.
For details of local Playtex stockists with professional fitters, phone 0483–721121.
TIP: When you're putting on your bra, bend forward so that your breasts fall snuggly into the cups.
Going backless: Silhouette U180 bustier, £17.99
Smooth outlines: Gossard basque 779, £28.50
Left Van Dell Katrien bra, £25.95
Right Gossard Wonderbra, lightly padded with foam inserts, £13.25
Prints charming: Gossard Moods underwired bra, £13.99
Left Triumph Amourette bodyshaper, £46.99, over Playtex Super Look Secrets bodyshaper, £39.99 Right Silhouette U144 bodyshaper, £29.99
Full colour: Charnos Anya bra, £21 and briefs, £19
HIGH STYLE
low budget
Diy fake flowers and tapestry kits, English-style interiors and fun plaques for your garden
IN FULL BLOOM
Any would-be Jane Austen heroine will love the restrained elegance of Zoffany's new floral wallpapers and fabrics.
The Floral Book collection features delicate patterns based on romantic designs in old-fashioned tones of primrose, lavender and rose.
Wallpapers start at £15.56/roll and fabrics at £19.50/m.
RICH TAPESTRIES
Tapestry is all the rage at the moment, and experienced needlewomen and nervous novices alike will love Primavera's new range of fruit and flower tapestry kits.
With patterns ranging from bold lemons to blowsy foxgloves, the kits start at £24.95.
Primavera will donate 25p from every kit ordered to the NSPCC.
SHINE ON
For instant sunshine in the gloomier corners of your garden, why not install a sun-shaped wall plaque from Tile Talk?
Made from terracotta, they measure 16in across and cost £30 each.
Other designs available.
PAINTED LADIES
Auriculas are the most desirable of flowers but if you aren't green-fingered, or would like to have them all year round, Carless & Gray sells diy fake-auricula kits which you assemble and paint yourself.
They'll brighten any room — group them together in clusters of three or four for the most eye-catching effect.
The kits cost £17 each and are available in four colours.
GEE UP
Long regarded as the epitome of everything middle-of-the- road, G Plan has got a new image.
Its latest catalogue is full of stylishly shot pictures of all its ranges, but prices remain very reasonable.
The Monterey three-seater sofa in Hudson fabric (shown left) costs £833.
The GH guide to the best in film, TV, video, arts, theatre and books
Have a good time!
TELEVISION
Singing detective Michael Gambon returns for a sleuthing encore as classic fictional detective Maigret in a new ITV series.
The six-part drama, adapted from Georges Simenon's novels, is set in 1950s' Paris, but was shot in Budapest.
Ciaran Madden plays Madame Maigret, and guest stars include Cheryl Campbell, Ann Todd and Christopher Benjamin.
Sundays from 9 Feb.
To mark the 40th anniversary of Her Majesty The Queen's accession to the throne, the BBC is to screen a unique TV portrait.
Director Edward Mirzoeff filmed a year of the Queen's working life and the cameras also captured intimate family moments — a party after Princess Eugenie's christening, a dance at Balmoral and the Queen relaxing with her grandchildren.
Elizabeth R is on BBC2 on 6 Feb.
I spy…
Tom Conti makes his TV comedy debut in a new seven-part drama,Old Boy Network , from the same stable as Porridge and Yes Minister .
Conti plays a disgraced MI5 agent returning to Britain from his adopted Russia and forced to team up with an old espionage adversary (John Standing)— but who is spying on whom?
Sundays from 16 Feb, on ITV.
Antique antics…
Lovable rogue Lovejoy (Ian McShane) returns to BBC1 on 12 January.
As ever, trouble and romance are to be found along with the Chippendale, and ever- tolerant Lady Jane Felsham (Phyllis Logan) is at hand to bail our hero out.
Thinking woman's pin-up Inspector Morse finds himself in sunnier climes for a new series of ITV's most popular detective drama.
Never has he been so at home as in Italy, land of food, wine, his beloved opera…and romance — which plays a leading role this time around.
Kevin Whately follows in John Thaw's footsteps as the ever-faithful Sergeant Lewis; guest stars include Diana Quick, Jim Broadbent and Frances Barber.
From 5 February.
Michael Aspel , who made his first TV appearance in 1957, hosts The Trouble With The Fifties , an LWT special which revives the decade's golden moments with vintage clips and an audience of anyone who was anybody at the time.
(Don't miss our exclusive interview with Michael Aspel in next month's GH.)
Over on Channel 4 , Frank Muir introduces TV Heaven , a new series celebrating the best of 35 years of the small screen.
Treats in store include Elsie Tanner's GI wedding for Coronation Street fans,On The Buses, The Persuaders, The Frost Programme and the pilot episode of Upstairs, Downstairs .
Sundays from 25 January.
40 glorious years
Michael Gambon as French super-sleuth Maigret, with Ciaran Madden as his wife
Double-crossing Tom Conti
GI bride Elsie Tanner
BOOKS
Book Reviews by Gillian Fairchild
Domestic Pleasures by Beth Gutcheon (Hutchinson, £13.99).
This is a love story, with a lot more going for it than slush and mush.
Martha Forbes is a lively young American single parent whose not altogether nice ex-husband is killed in a plane crash.
She is then obliged, under the terms of his will, to deal with his lawyer, Charlie Leveque, whom she has never met but loathes on principle.
Their initial relationship is one of icy formality, but as time goes on they seem to have more in common…
There are endless obstacles to romance, in the shape of their teenage children, ex-lovers and Charlie's ex-wife, all of whom pitch in to make them doubt their true feelings.
This is an honest, warm book, full of mis-understandings, closenesses and delightful absurdities.
Cross Of Fire  by Colin Forbes (Pan, £15.99).
A pacy thriller which sees the return of Tweed, imperturbable Deputy Director of the SIS.
From the moment his attractive colleague Paula shins up a fir tree on page two with her .32 Browning automatic, it's clear we're in for a ‘when the going gets tough, the tough get going’ sort of book.
The plots, counterplots, dead bodies and other nasty goings-on are laced with a soupçon of romantic interest to take it out of the boys- only category.
Blooming  by Audrey Slaughter (Doubleday, £13.99).
Set in the glossy world of women's magazines, it centres on Rose Summers a plump, talented, unsophisticated girl who rises to top editor.
The professional and personal uncertainties she suffers on the way up give heart to this novel, which is at its best exposing the machinations of editorial top brass.
Ms Slaughter, herself a former magazine editor, gives the book a real stamp of authenticity.
In Brief:Radio Romance  by Garrison Keillor (Faber & Faber, £14.99)is an enjoyably dotty and raunchy tale about two restaurateurs who run a radio station called WLT (With Lettuce & Tomato).
Kissing The Gunner's Daughter  by Ruth Rendell (Hutchinson, £14.99)is another well-honed Wexford mystery, this time focused on the young daughter of a murder victim.
ART
The swinging 60s hit the road in Ready Steady Go , the South Bank Centre's touring exhibition.
The selectors have chosen artists making their mark at the time: Allen Jones, Howard Hodgkin, Bridget Riley and David Hockney.
At the Royal Festival Hall from 21 Jan, followed by Burnley, Coventry, Ipswich, Stockport, Wakefield (071–928 3002).
Spot some New Masters At Art 92  , London's leading contemporary art fair, 23–26 Jan at the Business Design Centre.
Paintings from 50 of Britain's most progressive galleries will be on show; prices from £75 (071–359 3535).
To celebrate the 90th birthday of British potter Dame Lucie Rie, a major exhibition is to be opened on 30 Jan at the Crafts Council Gallery by Sir David Attenborough, a collector of her work (071–278 7700).
Featuring everything from classical Corinthian architecture to a leather jacket bought recently in London's Kings Road, the new European Ornament Gallery opens at the V&A on 26 Feb.
Look out for ceramics, textiles, furniture and drawings (071–938 8500).
European decorative art at the V&A
FILM
The all-singing, all-dancing Bette Midler gets to do just that in her new film,For The Boys .
As Dixie Leonard, Miss M struts her stuff opposite funny man Eddie Sparks, played by James Caan — a dynamic duo destined to entertain homesick American troops for half a century.
On stage, the chemistry is magical, off stage it's explosive.
Certificate 15 For The Boys opens on 7 February.
The tables are turned when suave, successful Dr Jack MacKee (William Hurt) gets a serious throat infection.
The supercilious surgeon becomes a patient and has to suffer bureaucratic confusion, overcrowded waiting rooms and unnecessary procedures — just like everyone else.
With Christine Lahti as the long-suffering wife,The Doctor opens on 21 February (Cert 12).
Small wonder…
Jodie Foster makes her debut as director with Little Man Tate , a sensitive film about a 7-year-old prodigy (played by Adam Hann-Byrd) torn between love for his mother (Foster), and admiration for the brilliant psychologist (Dianne Wiest) intent on nurturing his genius.
Foster, whose own career started at the tender age of 3, discovered 9-year-old Adam in a New York classroom: ‘It was him wanting to be something that drew me,’ she says.
Little Man Tate opens on 17 January (Cert PG).
Dynamic duo Bette Midler and James Caan playing For The Boys
Jodie Foster in Little Man Tate
VIDEO
The Pope Must Die — Papal pandemonium as larger-than-life Robbie Coltrane heads for divine expiration.
Class Action — Father and daughter Gene Hackman and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio do battle in a crowded courtroom.
Robin Hood, Prince Of Thieves Kevin Costner is the sexy Swashbuckler.
Goodness, it's Robbie
THEATRE
Making her debut at the Royal National Theatre in February, Frances Barber stars as a hotel manageress in Richard Eyre's revival of the Tennessee Williams classic,The Night Of The Iguana .
Her down-at-heel 1940s hotel on the edge of the Mexican jungle has few guests, but each is extraordinary — from the defrocked priest (Alfred Molina) to an artistic spinster (Eileen Atkins).
From 6 February.
HOME IS WHERE THE ART IS
This treasure-trove of collections is proof that, when it comes to home making, imagination and ingenuity are more important than money or design trends
Artist Elizabeth Jane Lloyd's home has evolved over many years into a colourful, cluttered house of collections: ‘We've never set about doing anything major.
It's grown into a different shape over the years,’ she says of the abundance of jugs, pebbles, paintings (almost all done by members of the family), china, and even animal skulls, which jostle each other to form displays everywhere you look.
The effect is warm and friendly, rather than the immaculate ‘designer look’ that you might expect to find in a house full of talented people.
Elizabeth Jane Lloyd paints flowers — she describes herself as ‘an ordinary oil painter’— and has often shown at Kew Gardens.
Her husband, Jeff Hoare, paints large, colourful abstract landscapes, and three of their four children have degrees in fine art: Sarajane is Fashion Director at Vogue magazine; Tessana is also a painter, currently working on an exhibition of pictures of 1990s architecture; and their brother Pom is a furniture designer and carpenter who also paints.
Paintings occupy every square inch of the walls in the entrance hall, ‘painted by both sets of grandparents, uncles, all the children — the whole family, in fact.
We don't need to collect paintings — there are too many people here doing them’.
The house overlooks the River Thames, and is where Elizabeth Jane grew up (her old nursery has been converted into a second kitchen).
She and Jeff moved back into it after her mother died, and the whole family has been there ever since.
The children grew up here too, and now ‘although none of them actually lives here, they're constantly popping in to visit’.
The interior will continue to evolve as the inspiration takes them, or as their needs change, ‘depending on how much energy we have and who's not too busy working,’ says Elizabeth Jane.
The glorious Indian-blue paint on the bathroom walls will doubtless be replaced by another striking colour mixed by a member of the family.
The collections will multiply and divide, as friends and family bring interesting objects back from travels around the globe.
But, unlike houses which change as fashions do, swinging expensively from florals to stripes, the transformation will continue to be gradual — you could call it organic — and inexpensive, ‘all done on air’, as Elizabeth Jane puts it.
As a home that is much more diy than designer, it is an inspiration for anyone wanting to create all their own decorative effects.
DISPLAY DOS AND DON'TS
Keep collections visible but out of the way of day-to-day living: deep windowsills and cabinets are ideal, or tables that aren't used regularly.
Don't use walls just for paintings — they're also ideal for collections like Elizabeth Jane's dried flower circlets.
Collections don't have to be expensive, or acquired all at the same time.
Once you have a theme you can be on the lookout for souvenirs on holiday, or provide people with inspiration for presents.
Don't worry about items in a collection being too similar — a collection of ducks, for example, might be made of wood, iron, china, plaster, stuffed fabric, bright, dull, plain or patterned.
You could even include duck feathers, or pictures of ducks.
Elizabeth Jane's china display on the Welsh dresser, for example, is basically blue and white china, but incorporates honey-coloured pottery, glass jars and grand porcelain teapots.
Introduce a bright splash of colour to the room and show your collection off more vividly by painting a strong background colour inside your cabinet or shelf, like the deep pink background behind the reject Royal Worcester plates in Elizabeth Jane's kitchen.
Top left: Elizabeth Jane (left) with daughter Tessanna, at the front door, which has a special piece of duckboarding to protect the house if the Thames should flood
Left: This Welsh dresser is in the second kitchen, which used to be Elizabeth Jane's nursery when she was a child.
The dresser is part of the family's everyday life: plates are used regularly, the jars contain beans and pasta, and there are a number of jugs from Elizabeth Jane's collection
Left: Tessanna on the stairs, beside one of her father's paintings.
The hall is crammed with pictures by several generations of the family, from grandparents downwards
Above: A profusion of garlands adorns the muted yellow walls of the dining room.
Creating flower wreaths and circles is a family tradition — Elizabeth Jane has been making them for as long as she can remember.
Her book, Enchanted Circles (Conran Octopus, £16.99), shows how fresh or dried flowers, lace ribbons, tiny fake pearls, berries and even candles can be glued onto a stiff card base, or woven into a stiff card base, or woven into a wire or vine garland.
The circles also make wonderful unusual presents
Top left: Elizabeth Jane's father installed this shelf above a kitchen window and it now makes a colourful setting for a blue and white plate collection.
The pebbles are marble, from Greece, while the jugs are used by Elizabeth Jane for her flower paintings
Left: ‘As we're all artists, we mix paint colours ourselves.
This one was based on an Indian blue,’ says Elizabeth Jane.
Friends often give her shells for her collection
Left: This quirky medley of feathers, birds' eggs, driftwood and skulls shows how even objects you might pick up on a country walk can make attractive — as well as interesting — displays
Above: The original kitchen range was designed by Elizabeth Jane's father, and has never been covered up or modernised.
Indeed, the house has never had central heating.
‘It gets perishingly cold,’ says Elizabeth Jane.
The animal skulls resting on the mantelpiece came from as far afield as Arizona and India, and some were brought back to be drawing subjects in more works of art
FEBRUARY
The Gardener's Year
Brave the cold this month — it's time to start pruning, planting fruit trees and herbs, and sowing vegetables, says HAZEL EVANS
NEW IDEAS
Black flowers make a chic choice, especially for a patio, balcony or small garden, where they'd look stunning against a white wall or in a hanging basket.
Mix exotic black poppies and pansies (see above) with their white counterparts, adding white petunias for more impact.
Thompson & Morgan's Black Flowers Mixed contains poppies, pansies, hollyhocks and carnations (£2.99 from garden centres or by mail order; see Address Book , page 38).
Thompson & Morgan also has a new annual from America,Nemophila ‘Pennie Black’, which has almost-black flowers with scalloped, silvery-white edges.
A mat-forming plant, it is an unusual candidate for a hanging basket.
INDOOR PLANTS
Houseplants are good for you, according to Californian a laboratory that has been doing research for NASA into the use of plants in space.
It found that the risk of pollution in the home is comparable with that of chemicals or radiation in industry.
They also found that houseplants purify the air.
Chrysanthemums remove benzine, which has been linked with cancer; philodendrons absorb formaldehyde; and the humble spider plant removes carbon monoxide.
The more foliage a plant has, the better it is at removing pollution.
FRUIT & VEG
If you sowed tomato seeds last month, now is the time to prick them out, ie transfer them into small pots, or, if you have sown them in soil blocks, to reduce them to one per cell before moving on to a pot.
Wait until you can see the first true leaves between the two seed leaves.
Discard plants with ragged leaves — signs of a poor crop.
Pot up the seedlings into 3in pots and keep them in a warm place.
If you've not yet sown tomato seed, consider a new orange variety, Sungold, from Thompson & Morgan.
It's a delicious, heavy-cropping tomato.
Available from garden centres or by mail order.
Consider growing shallots if your soil is well drained.
With their mild taste, they're useful in cooking, especially in French recipes.
Simply push the bulbs firmly into the soil, 9in apart, leaving the top third exposed, and by the autumn you'll have clusters of plump bulbs to lift.
During the first few weeks, check that they haven't been lifted by frost or pecked out by birds.
The bulbs are on sale in garden centres and agricultural stores.
Pot up one or two strawberry plants for a special treat: bring them into a cool greenhouse or conservatory, watering sparingly.
At the first sign of new leaves, give them more water and move them to a warmer place (about 10–16°C, 50–60°F).
They should fruit in May.
HANDY BINDER
Cut out and keep your exclusive Gardener's Year in our useful binder.
With 12 clear plastic pockets, it's a bargain at £1.98.
Send a cheque, payable to Good Housekeeping , to GH/Garden, 72 Broadwick St, W1V2BP.
THE HERB GARDEN
Now is a good time to plant herbs, and there are many unexpected places where you can grow them: a rock garden will happily accommodate marjoram, thyme and savory, while a shady corner can be used for mint and chives.
Lungwort (Pulmonaria offinicalis ) makes a change in a dark corner, while sweet woodruff (Galium odoratum ) romps away in these conditions.
Use them in herbal teas or potpourri.
Try seeding salad burnet (Sanguisorba minor ), which has a cucumber-like taste, and creeping mint (Mentha pulegium ), also known as pennyroyal, in crevices in paving or a wall.
This is a good place, too, for the mat-like camomile ‘Treneague’, which gives off a strong aroma as you tread it underfoot.
Prostrate thyme (Thymus serpyllum ) is another good crevice plant (see above).
Finally, a boggy patch where the ground is often waterlogged can happily accommodate comfrey (Symphytum officinale ), a vigorous grower.
The marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis ) and English mace (Achillea decolorans ) will also take moist soil.
For herb seeds, contact Suffolk Herbs, and for plants, Hollington Nurseries.
Pansy ‘Bowles Black’
Bring strawberry plants indoors for an early crop
Prostrate thyme makes a good ground-cover plant
JOBS TO DO
Nip annual weeds in the bud by dosing the ground with a contact herbicide like Fisons' new Weedmaster (£2.59/500ml sprayer, from garden centres).
It will knock weeds out as they emerge, then go on to tackle persistent perennials like dock and nettles.
You can use it in shrub beds and can plant within days of the weeds dying down.
If you avoid chemicals, hoe to chop up weed seedlings.
Use cloches to warm the ground for sowing salads.
Dig over, place the cloche on top, and cover ends with glass.
Start off dahlia tubers indoors or in the greenhouse to give you shoots for cuttings to increase your stock.
Plant tubers in a 6in tray of moist potting compost so that their tops are just covered.
Once shoots appear, be sure to give them plenty of light.
See next month's Gardener's Year for the next step.
You can also take cuttings from indoor chrysanthemums.
Choose healthy young shoots, 2in long, from around the base.
Cut them off at the base with a razor blade or craft knife.
Dip in a rooting aid such as Murphy's Hormone Rooting Powder (£1.09/50g, from garden centres), then poke them halfway in, 1½in apart, around the rim of a pot filled with two parts potting compost to one part sand.
Enclose in an upended clear polythene bag — give one shoot a gentle tug after a month to see if it has finally rooted.
PLANNING
If you want something different from the standard offerings of garden centres, order fledgling plants in plugs of soil, and seedlings.
Half-hardy annuals, candidates for hanging baskets and boxes, can be bought in trays, each plant in its own separate piece of compost.
They cost from £7.49 for a tray of 35 plants.
Or you can pay a little more and buy young plants, at prices from £11.99 for a pack of six young geranium plants delivered to you in April.
As a change from lobelia, try a new campanula in blue and white, ‘Bellissimo’, which flowers all summer (from Thompson & Morgan).
Also worth trying is the new deep blue forget-me-not,Myosotis Spring Symphony from Suttons, ideal for beds or baskets.
Dobie's, Suttons and Thompson & Morgan all have mini- plants on offer.
To avoid disappointment, it's best to telephone to see what's still available.
SECATEURS TO SEND FOR
Take the pain out of pruning with our secateurs, tested and recommended by the GHI.
Lightweight, medium-sized, with hardened steel blades, our testers pronounced them perfect for women gardeners.
They give a clean cut, keeping plants healthy and strong.
Just £9.50, they're guaranteed for five years.
To order turn to page 148.
PRUNING
Late-flowering climbers and shrubs like Clematis ‘Jackmanii’,Hydrangea paniculata , winter jasmine and honeysuckle should be pruned now.
Cut unwanted stems of the clematis back hard, to 1ft from the ground, leaving just a framework of stems.
Prune Hydrangea paniculata to within one or two buds from the main stems.
Flowering shoots of winter jasmine,J. nudiflorum , should be cut back to within two or three buds from the main stem, while the oldest stems on honeysuckle should be cut back close to the base.
In all cases, use your common sense, removing dead and diseased wood.
Remove stems on grape vines that have borne fruit, and cut the vine back to its main framework.
Tackle large-flowered and cluster-flowered roses (hybrid teas and floribundas, to give them their former names).
First remove any dead, diseased or frost-damaged stems, cutting back until a healthy green colour is reached.
Then take out thin, twiggy wood and branches that cross each other— you're aiming for a goblet shape.
Finally take off half the length of the remaining stems in the case of large-flowered, and one-third for cluster-flowered roses.
Make a slanting cut just above a bud facing outwards and in the direction you want the rose to grow.
Plant tubers indoors for stocks of dahlias like ‘Inca Royale’
Now is the time to prune large-flowered roses
GH open line
Our panel of experts helps solve your problems
DR CATHY MORRIS
MEDICINE
Cathy Morris works part time in hospital medicine.
She has two children
DR JENNY COZENS
PSYCHOLOGY
Jenny Cozens is Honorary Research Fellow at Leeds University.
She is a writer and broadcaster and has two children
PROF TED WRAGG
EDUCATION
Ted Wragg is Professor of Education at Exeter University.
He frequently broadcasts on radio and TV and has three children
‘HE'D LIKE TO BE A DOCTOR’
Our son is reading physiology at university.
His original aim was to study medicine but he narrowly failed to reach the required A-level grades.
He still wishes to pursue a medical career, and has been told that he will almost definitely get into medical school.
At present the county council pays his tuition fees and we pay his living expenses, which we can continue.
But we would find it extremely difficult to pay for his tuition as well.
Do county councils fund second degrees?
Our son has said he will get a bank loan if necessary.
Professor Wragg writes: Your Local Education Authority is obliged to give your son a grant for his first higher- education course.
There is only a slim chance of a further grant, although your son should certainly apply for it, and appeal if he is turned down.
The true cost of a medical degree is extremely high — currently tuition fees are £11,105 per year, and a bank loan would entail enormous repayments.
Your son should enquire about special funds for mature students at whichever medical school he applies to.
‘I AM PAINFULLY SHY’
I suffer from debilitating shyness, which means I socialise very rarely.
I feel that I should face up to this problem, now that I am nearing 40 and can no longer hope to ‘grow out of it’.
Are there any organisations which specialise in helping people like me?
Dr Cozens replies: I haven't heard of any groups aiming to help shy people.
This may seem surprising, but I don't think it matters — the important thing is that you're right in thinking that mixing with a group of people is the way to get over your problems.
You could look for a course in assertiveness or self- esteem — in London the Women's Therapy Centre (071–263 6200) can help; outside it is a question of asking around, possibly at the local library.
However, any group activity will help, and if you choose one in which you are interested, you are likely to forget your shyness in your fascination with the topic.
The only way to conquer a fear is to face it, and to do so as frequently as possible.
So decide to meet a certain number of people for so many minutes each day, and gradually increase this over six months.
You don't have to be witty or attractive or intelligent, you just have to be there with people for the time you've stipulated.
Remember that most people are probably far more concerned with themselves and are not thinking about you.
Focus your thoughts on the other person's feelings — for example, does she look happy, tired or worried?
See if you can try and make them feel better — you'll soon forget about your own problems.
It is an excellent way of curing shyness.
‘HOW CAN I HELP PEOPLE?’
I would very much like to become a counsellor, helping people with problems.
Although I have no formal training, my experience is drawn from ‘the school of life’, having come through divorce, and the death of my son and partner.
How would I go about it?
Dr Cozens replies: Having experience of life's traumas and tragedies may well make you better able to understand what others are going through.
However, some people believe it can prevent you from taking a more distanced and helpful approach.
Generally, I think such experiences can help, but only when you've worked through the unhappiness you've faced, and I would be surprised if you could do this fully without outside help.
Otherwise, you may offer advice based on what you did in a similar situation, reliving your own unhappiness.
This would not be good for you or your client.
Relate and Samaritans both have good processes of assessing whether people are ready to begin counsellor training or whether they need more help themselves first.
There are also university and polytechnic courses, but these presume you've had some prior training or a degree.
Finally, there are private courses, but I would enquire extremely carefully into their credentials.
The British Association for Counselling (0788–578328) should be able to help.
‘I SEE SPOTS AND THREADS’
I'm 50 years old.
A year ago I experienced a sensation of flashing lights and couldn't see for about 20 minutes.
I was then left with a black spot and threads in my vision.
I had my eyes tested, but new glasses haven't helped this problem.
I was referred to a hospital specialist who said there was debris on the jelly of the eye.
Can you give me any more information?
Dr Morris writes: Spots and threads in our visual field are very common after the age of 30, the result from ageing of the vitreous gel — the ‘jelly’ which fills nearly all of the eyeball.
Most of us have these harmless ‘floaters’ and are able to put them out of our minds.
However, when they come on suddenly — particularly when there are some other symptoms, as there have been in your case — it's vital to seek medical help as soon as possible.
The sensation of flashing lights can be an indication that the layers of the retina, at the back of the eye, are starting to peel apart.
It's essential for good vision that they stay together, particularly over the central area.
However, as we grow older, they are more likely to deteriorate and to separate.
When parts of the retina have actually separated, the flashing sensation stops and there is a blind spot in the affected area.
A shower of debris including tiny amounts of blood from torn retinal vessels causes floaters.
It's important that an eye surgeon should assess retinal detachment.
There are various operations offered, which have a high rate of success in minimising damage: the layers of the retina are sealed together by freezing or other techniques and the volume of the eye is decreased to reduce the chances of the retina being pulled open again.
Are you suffering from flu?
To hear Dr Cathy Morris's advice on how to cope, ring 0839–666875.
Calls are charged at 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute at all other times.
FAMILY matters
A Channel 4 report recommends a three-tier education system; encouraging 18-year-olds to vote; and how to find an NHS dentist
There have been so many changes in education that even teachers find it hard to keep up — so professionals as well as parents will welcome the Parents' Information Checklist , £4.50 from the Advisory Centre for Education, 1b Aberdeen Studios, 22/24 Highbury Grove, N5 2EA.
It helps you to understand the system, covers controversial subjects, such as admissions and exclusions, and gives a clear guide to parents' (and children's) rights.
Forget Bart Simpson:send children to school with bags, lunch boxes and stationery decorated with NSPCC's Happy Kids design.
Royalties (7–10% of the purchase price) go to the Charity, rather than to a commercial firm.
The Symphony bags shown here are (from left): rucksack with compartments (£3.99), a satchel with reflectors (£3.99), and a kitbag (£2.99).
For stockists, phone Symphony International (0533–763171).
THE EDUCATION DEBATE CONTINUES…
British education produces a highly qualified elite, but fails 80% of its pupils, say the five academics assembled by Channel 4 in response to increasing concern about standards in education.
Their answer (published in a report) is to propose giving pupils an academic, technical or ‘vocational’ course at the age of 14.
The commission also wants a return to hands-on technology, plus tests to ensure that children progress by ability, not age.
All pupils would take a core of academic subjects, but there's no suggestion that academic children should learn technical skills.
The commission favours comprehensive education, making it easier for children to transfer between groups.
But is there not a danger that, at 14, their choice would perpetuate class divisions —‘I am a professional, you're good with your hands, she should work in a shop’?
Professor Ted Wragg, GH's Education Consultant, regrets this backward-looking view, although he thinks the report contains useful information.
He's also concerned about its enthusiasm for making children repeat a year, if necessary.
‘That could mean having children of vastly different ages in the same class,’ he says.
For the Channel 4 commission's report, send an sae, with 41p in stamps, to Every Child In Britain , PO Box 4000, W3 6XJ.
Watch out for Channel 4's new, investigative education series,Class Action , at 8pm from 28 January.
For information on the Government's plans, send for The Parent's Charter , Freepost (BS528/81), Bristol BS3 3YY (0800- 444242).
WELCOMING YOUNG VOTERS
Over 500,000 18-year-olds will be eligible to vote this year.
But how many teenagers know how democracy works?
Here's how to help:
Ask schools if they have planned any special lessons in citizenship.
BBC Schools TV will show a special programme to explain the electoral process when the date is announced.
(Check your paper.)
The Citizenship Foundation is currently organising a Youth Parliament competition and publishes Buzz , a termly magazine on social and political issues for ages 14-plus.
Send an sae to the Foundation at 63 Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6HJ.
Ask your MP for a permit to tour the House of Commons.
If your MP provides a guide, the cost is £16 (maximum 16 people).
To see Parliament in action, you'll need to ask your MP for a permit for the Stranger's Gallery.
And you should allow at least eight weeks for this, especially if you want to attend Prime Minister's Question Time (Tuesday and Thursday between 3.15 and 3.30pm).
Contact the House of Commons Education Unit (071–219 4750).
HOW TO FIND AN NHS DENTIST
NHS dentists are now a rarity in parts of London and the Home Counties — this is one effect of the new dental contract introduced at the end of 1990.
Many restrict NHS treatment to children only, but it's vital that children should be registered with an NHS dentist so they can receive free orthodontic treatment, if necessary.
To find an NHS dentist, contact your local Family Health Services Authority.
Ring the Association of Community Health Councils for England and Wales (071–609 8405) and ask for a copy of Dentists: A Guide To Patients' Rights .
(It also applies to Scotland and Northern Ireland.)
Send an sae for A Patient's Guide to NHS Dental Charges to the British Dental Association, 64 Wimpole St W1M 8AL.
Treat for teeth:Bausch & Lomb's Interplak plaque remover, £65 (below), has rotating tufts to clean teeth and gums.
We have 10 to give away to readers who send a postcard to (FM/PR), 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP by 28 Feb.
good HEALTH
New, gentler surgery, relief for migraines and a Pill update
NIKKI BRADFORD is a health and medical journalist specialising in women's health and complementary medicine.
Married with a son, she is the author of The Well Woman's Self Help Directory
A KINDER CUT
Thanks to Minimally Invasive Therapy (MIT), what were once major operations are now ‘more like visiting the dentist’, says Consultant Urologist John Wickham, founder of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy.
Advances include:
using ultrasound to break up kidney stones
angioplasty (clearing furred-up blood vessels)
keyhole surgery, where surgeons operate through small punctures in the skin instead of making a large cut, viewing their patients' organs via an endoscope and watching the process on a screen
removing the womb lining instead of doing a hysterectomy.
MIT reduces the trauma of an operation and avoids long hospital stays and recovery periods.
Though it's not suitable for all emergency operations, look out for more techniques in routine surgery.
TROUBLE DOWN BELOW
Each year, one woman in 15 will go to her GP because of an uncomfortable itchy vaginal infection.
Half will have a condition called bacterial vaginitis, but many GPs (and patients) assume it's thrush, which needs a quite different treatment, says Dr Peter Winterburn, of Cardiff University's Biochemistry Department.
That's very important because vaginitis isn't just uncomfortable — it can be associated with premature labour and pelvic infections leading to infertility.
Luckily, new while-you-wait swab tests being developed at Cardiff and Cambridge could improve the situation.
They work by detecting the by-products of the vaginitis bacteria that cause its characteristic fishy smell, and can be carried out in the surgery in two minutes, thus avoiding the usual five to 10-day wait for lab test results — and prolonged discomfort.
PILL UPDATE
The most recent major study of the link between breast cancer and the Pill concluded that younger women ran a greater risk if they had taken it for four years or more.
But now it seems that far from causing cancer, an ingredient in some Pills may possibly help to treat it.
Gestodene is a progestogen in the contraceptive pill Femodene, but work at the King's College and Royal Marsden Hospitals, London shows that — in a test-tube situation — it inhibits growth of cancer cells.
Trials on women suffering from advanced breast cancer start soon, but it'll be at least five years before scientists know whether gestodene can help treat the disease and 15 before it's known if it can help prevent it.
MIGRAINE RELIEF
There's a rosier future in store for migraine sufferers whose attacks are triggered by fluorescent lights, because rose-tinted glasses may help to combat the problem.
Developed by Dr Arnold Wilkins at the Medical Research Council's Applied Psychology Unit and Cambridge Optical, spectacles fitted with special lenses were tested on 20 schoolchildren who suffered from migraines, and 60 volunteer office staff working on VDUs under fluorescent lighting.
The children's migraines were reduced by about 74% and the adults reported a 38% drop in headaches and eyestrain.
Dr Wilkins also advises migraine sufferers to swap conventional fluorescent lights for the newer ‘nonflicker’ varieties that oscillate more than 30,000 times per second — too fast for the brain to register, or to provoke a migraine.
If a migraine does begin, it can now be relieved in 80% of cases by Imigram, an injectable drug available on prescription only, which should be available in tablet form soon.
Comfort 41 rose-tinted lenses cost about £20 on order from most opticians — add £10 for prescription lenses.
It's essential to try them before buying, because if you find the colour difficult to tolerate you're unlikely to benefit.
HEALTH ROUNDUP
At last— a self-help group for acne sufferers.
For details, send a covering letter together with an sae to The Acne Support Group, 52–54 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
Good news for diaphragm users fed up with slippery spermicidal gel.
A study of 269 Scottish women shows that C-film spermicidal film is as effective as gel when used with a diaphragm (£2.04 for 10 from chemists, or free from some family planning clinics).
Cleaning your teeth can help to prevent ulcers — the duodenal kind.
Recent work by Edinburgh's Western General Hospital suggests that Helicobacter pylori bacteria are often present in the plaque on ulcer sufferers' teeth and may reinfect the gut.
STEPPING OUT
Designers Jeff Banks and David Emanuel are both eager to put their signatures on new collections that offer flexibility, wearability and style
JEFF BANKS
One thing fashion designer Jeff Banks (above) could never be accused of is sitting still.
From his first venture as Kings Road boutique owner in the 1960s, he started the fashion chain Warehouse, launched the stylish mail-order catalogue Bymail, and went on to present the extremely successful Clothes Show programme on TV.
His latest brainchild is a collection he describes as ‘contemporary clothes — grown-up and sophisticated, but not horrendously expensive.’
‘It means simple shapes, good cutting, fit and fabrics which stand the test of time,’ he says.
‘People like me, who were in their 20s in the 1960s, want to look good, but aren't obsessed by fashion and certainly don't want to be made uncomfortable by it.’
In collaboration with the House of Fraser, his aim was to bypass many of the costs traditionally associated with designer fashion.
The fanfare of catwalk shows, exhibitions, and the production of designs that may never be worn, take up a great deal of most designers' time and money.
And that is passed on to the consumer in the price tag.
One of Jeff's greatest talents, according to GH Fashion Editor Caroline Baker, is his skill in picking out the highlights of every current look: he really knows what themes from the collections in Paris or Milan will ultimately be winners.
And as well as the expertise of House of Fraser's fashion buyers Ann Millsom, Sally Baggott and Simon Thomas, he gets an enormous amount of input from the public because of the very popular Clothes Show 
‘I'll be standing at a bus stop and people will come up to me and tell me what they do and don't like about fashion today’, he says.
‘And I think of my wife, Sue, who's 36, and very fashion conscious, yet she lives in leggings.
She'll have to dash around all day, collect the children from different parties and then get ready to go out in less than an hour.
She loves fashion, she loves colour — but she doesn't want anything restrictive.
If she likes something, like large swirly skirts, she'll wear them whether they're in fashion or not.
She doesn't want anything to do with boring clothes.’
Jeff's years in the fashion business have paid off in his relationship with fabric manufacturers too.
His suppliers are old friends, like John McNutt in Donegal, who supplies him with soft lambswool tweeds.
‘John came out of Galashiels virtually into the arms of top designers Kenzo and Issey Miyake in the 70s,’ says Jeff.
Other tweeds come from the Linton Mill, one of Coco Chanel's favourites.
And Jeff aims to use Green cotton, made without the vast amount of pesticides and fertilisers that make ‘the clothing industry one of the biggest single polluters on this planet’.
It all gives the collection its distinctive personality.
If you had to buy just three items to update your wardrobe this spring Jeff's advice would be a new jacket:
‘It should be soft, with a touch of humour — perhaps unusual lapels.’
Then a pair of Audrey Hepburn Roman Holiday , 50s- style pants, and a silk T-shirt which you can wear with several things in your wardrobe.
‘I always challenge the clothes I design with ‘what else could you wear this with?’
You should do the same when shopping.
If you buy a suit for a friend's wedding, could you wear the jacket with jeans or plain twill pants?
What will you wear it with in a year's time?
It should always be much more than just another suit.’
Buy some splashes of colour, too, he advises: ‘We're all more prepared to wear colour now.
If you're unsure, keep your basic wardrobe neutral and buy one bright thing.
Personally, I tend to wear all-black or all-navy, but sometimes I'll add a red or yellow jacket.’
Fit is more important today, he believes, and the sizes in his new collection range from 10–16, although he is anxious to point out that it is a generously cut 16, and ‘not just a bigger version of the size 10.
We fit the clothes on maturer bodies.
When people go out and buy a Jeff Banks, I want them to know that we have really bothered.’
DAVID EMANUEL
David Emanuel (above) is best known for his role in creating Princess Diana's fairy tale wedding dress, and he is still a high-society favourite for his Ascot suits and Royal haute couture .
His latest foray reveals what Fashion Editor Caroline Baker defines as ‘the unexpected side of David Emanuel’ and is what he calls ‘affordable chic’: a ready-to-wear label under his own name.
It, too, is the result of a collaboration — with the manufacturing company Designer Originals.
‘The designs come from the same drawing pads as the haute couture I create — it's what I would call ‘my handwriting’,’ he explains, ‘but with clever fabric buying, we are keeping the prices down.
It's accessible — not just in price, but also in size as we go up to 18, and the clothes are available all over the country.’
David's fashion advice this season is to buy a few good, interchangeable basics with a strong silhouette: ‘A shift dress, and a flared jacket or a blazer will be the classics.
You can change the mood with accessories: jewellery, a stunning hat or coloured shoes and a bag.’
David's collection is primarily made up of one colour, cream, which you can mix with whatever you like.
‘It's easy, simple and elegant and it goes right across the age range.’
THE MOST EXCLUSIVE CLUB IN THE WORLD
There's no point in applying for membership and, although there's a waiting list, all the places are taken.
They number just 11, and are undoubtedly the most select group of women in the world.
They are, of course, all reigning queens and this year the best-known — and many would argue the best-loved — will be celebrating 40 years on the throne.
It was on 6 February 1952 that Princess Elizabeth became Queen Elizabeth II.
Although not the longest reigning (Belgium's King Baudouin has been on the throne for 41 years), she is undoubtedly the most widely recognised monarch in the world (there are currently over a billion bank notes and 16 billion coins in circulation bearing her portrait).
Those who predicted that her reign would see the end of the British monarchy have been proved stoutly wrong.
Quite the opposite, in fact, has happened, as seasoned Royal-watcher James Whittaker points out: ‘The Queen has been phenomenal during these 40 years.
She hasn't put a foot wrong.
I don't think a president would do any better and certainly wouldn't be any cheaper.’
Most of the other 10 queens are on European thrones, but the thin blue-blooded line reaches as far as Queen Aishwarya of Nepal, and Queen Mata-aho of Tonga.
Recent changes in Eastern Europe have raised the possibility — in some cases more likely than others — of three more joining this exclusive band: Queen Margarita of Bulgaria, Queen Anne of Romania, and Queen Susan of Albania (who was actually born in Australia and currently lives in Africa with her King Leka).
So who's the most royal of all the queens?
James Whittaker has no doubts.
‘When you look at what Queen Elizabeth reigns over, the UK and all her dominions, well, there's really no comparison, is there?’
Plain talking: Great great-granddaughter of Queen Victoria, Spain's Queen Sofia, although Greek, speaks English to husband Juan Carlos
The highest reigning monarch: Queen Aishwarya of Nepal's realm includes Mount Everest and is the world's only Hindu kingdom
Cue for a queen: Spanish-born Fabiola of Belgium likes nothing better than a quiet game of billiards at home
A commoner who married a king: Queen Silvia of Sweden was a career girl before she married King Carl XVI Gustaf
In full plume: 40 years on the throne, 66 next month, Queen Elizabeth II has reigned through two wars, seven prime ministers and Britain joining the EC, and has steered her family —‘The Firm’ as she calls them — through a period of unprecedented social change
Ahead of the rest: A descendant of George II, Queen Beatrix of The Netherlands is known for her hats
A vision in pink: Queen Margrethe of Denmark, another great great-granddaughter of Queen Victoria, enjoys judo and rifle practice
Snow Queen: Winter-sports fan Queen Sirikit of Thailand is said to have modelled herself on our own Elizabeth II
Private life: Sonja of Norway, who was also a commoner before she married Harald V, is a quiet, home-loving Royal
All-American girl made good: Elizabeth Halaby became Queen Noor of Jordan when she married King Hussein
The fight to be a father
Men tend to be the forgotten figures in any infertility story.
We know of the anguish and sadness women feel at being told they may never have children, but what of the man — bluntly told he is unlikely to father a child?
Recent British medical breakthroughs have brought new hope, but the harsh reality for the 5% of men who have fertility problems is still a long, undignified and often unsuccessful series of treatments, a roller coaster of optimism and despair.
The majority of infertile men face an emotional struggle against guilt and uncertainty.
RICHARD BARBER talks to two of them and their wives
Lindsay and Matthew Fort, both 45, married when they were 35, and live in West London.
Matthew writes for The Guardian .
Lindsay works part-time in property management.
‘Like most married couples,’ says Matthew, ‘we imagined we'd have children.
In fact, in September 1982, shortly before we married, Lindsay got pregnant.’
Seven weeks later, she miscarried.
When she hadn't conceived again by the following autumn, Lindsay went to see a specialist.
Nothing was amiss so Matthew was asked for a semen sample.
It is not an experience he'll forget.
‘The whole process couldn't have been more undignified.
For a start the receptacle into which I was supposed to ejaculate was a minute plastic container — which would have been tricky enough.
Unfortunately, what I'd failed to notice was a small plastic shard on the lip of the container on which I nicked myself, causing severe pain and not a little bleeding.’
He laughs cheerfully now.
As it turned out, his sperm count appeared normal but his wife continued to fail to conceive.
The Forts decided to move to another specialist.
This is a common pattern, says Matthew, triggered more by mounting anxiety than by deep-seated dissatisfaction with the existing specialist.
Again, a semen sample was required, this time with different results.
‘They're looking for two vital elements,’ explains Matthew.
‘First is the number of sperm, second is their motility.
What is needed are lots of lively wrigglers.’
His count, apparently, was sufficiently high but the motility in this, and subsequent samples, was disappointingly low.
For all that, and two years after she first conceived, Lindsay Fort found herself pregnant again.
Again she miscarried.
In July 1986, two more specialists and numerous samples later, it was recommended that the Forts consider a mixture of Artificial Insemination by Husband (AIH) and Donor (AID).
This was an opportunity to enrich Matthew's semen or, in his own colourful phrase, ‘produce a sperm cocktail’.
They also investigated In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF — test tube babies) but, ‘at £1500 a time, it was too expensive,’ says Matthew.
He found himself becoming the emotional prop of the marriage.
‘Traditionally, the wife provides the bulk of the emotional support.
Childlessness changes all that.
The woman is much more emotionally exposed to the disappointments and false dawns.
The reminder of her ‘failure’ occurs once a month.
‘I don't think anyone, who either has children or who doesn't want them, can understand the state of mind of people who do want them.
The pain is there for the man, too, but it doesn't affect him physically.’
It does affect his sex life, though.
‘There's making love to order on the one hand,’ says Matthew, ‘and there's not having sex when you fancy it because you know you must conserve your sperm for the optimum moment in the month.’
His sense of the ridiculous helped him through the myriad indignities which he and Lindsay underwent.
‘I remember when I was in the middle of a presentation in the advertising agency where I was working and the phone went.
My secretary said that Lindsay had just rung to say I should send over the goods (our agreed coded message) as soon as possible.
This meant that she was in the clinic, she'd had the scan, she was ovulating, her feet were up in stirrups — they needed my sample there and then.’
Matthew made his excuses, nipped to the loo, produced the goods, packaged the container and summoned a bike messenger to deliver it to the clinic —‘at which point, I returned to my presentation, looking more than slightly flushed.
He roars with laughter — although he doesn't wish, he says, to appear flippant.
‘The main text is essentially tragic.
It's melancholy and difficult and it can be stressful but that doesn't stop the sub- text from sometimes being extremely funny.’
Broodiness is not confined to women.
‘Men want to be included in the great club of families.
There's a terrible sense of exclusion that the childless feel.
You see people having a relationship with their children that they can't have any other way.
There is something magical and unique about the pure exchange of love between parent and child.
I needed — we both did — to have a child,’ says Matthew.
Simultaneously with the AID and AIH, the Forts were trying to adopt, but with no great success, and eventually they turned to the US, which has a more relaxed attitude to age.
In September 1989, Matthew and Lindsay Fort adopted a 3-week- old baby girl in America.
‘Adopting Lois removed much of the pressure,’ he says.
‘Neither of us imagined she could have been so wonderful.’
Since then, they have abandoned treatment and the sense of relief is incalculable.
Matthew smiles, ‘It all fades beside one overwhelming source of joy.’
Her name is Lois.
Matthew, Lindsay and Lois — the daughter they adopted from America — the sense of relief is incalculable
Wendy and Mark Stafford live in a large, detached home in Kent.
Wendy, 40, is a secretary/receptionist in a local doctors' surgery.
Mark is 46 and self-employed.
They have been married for six years and despite years of tests and trying, have no children.
Instead they share their home with Sophie, their treasured Cairn terrier.
‘I'd hoped we'd have to get married,’ says Wendy.
‘We weren't using any precautions.
We very much wanted a family and both assumed that, within a few months, I'd be pregnant.’
When Wendy initially failed to conceive, neither she nor Mark was unduly concerned.
‘All the books tell you to give it a year.
But I'd never had any problems with my periods, so when I finally decided to see a specialist, I was more curious than anything else.’
Having established she was ovulating normally, the specialist turned to Mark.
‘I had to provide two or three semen samples,’ he recalls, ‘and all of them were decidedly dodgy.
I was staggered, but I can't say it made me feel wretched.
I regard myself as a bit of a fatalist.
Left to my own devices I think I might have shrugged my shoulders and accepted it.
But it wasn't down to me.
I had Wendy to think of, too.’
The specialist didn't mince words.
They could consider adoption — or Wendy could undergo AID.
‘And I remember thinking, says Wendy, ‘that no way would Mark go along with that because it would be casting aspersions on his masculinity.
I knew I'd be willing to have AID.
I wanted a child so much that, if AID was the only route, I'd be prepared to take it.’
In the event, Mark surprised his wife by taking the view that a baby 50% genetically created by Wendy was better than no baby at all.
‘Having let the side down already by not being able to give Wendy a baby myself, I didn't feel I could let it down further by refusing to let her try AID.
I was over 40.
I feel sorry for the chaps who discover the same problem in their 20s.’
Having made their decision, Wendy and Mark were referred to an infertility clinic.
Initially, Wendy received six-monthly inseminations, but she felt ill-at-ease: ‘They were always done so impersonally and I was going through such an emotional, personal experience.’
Having had no success, Wendy then went through lengthy hospital tests, including a laparoscopy and a mucus hostility test with donor sperm.
She was told that, unless insemination occurred at exactly the right time each month, her acid levels would kill off the donor sperm.
Armed with this new information, Wendy and Mark tried another clinic which used an ovulation kit to pinpoint optimum insemination time.
But, for over a year, nothing happened.
Then, in September 1990, the unbelievable occurred: Wendy woke up and knew she was pregnant.
‘I just felt different.
My period was late for the first time ever.
But it was more than that.
I felt like I'd never felt before.’
A few weeks later, she miscarried.
‘The feeling was indescribable but, in a funny way, it gave us hope: the treatment had worked; it could happen again.’
In fact it did — five months ago Wendy conceived, but she miscarried after five weeks.
Mark says, ‘I'd given my consent to AID but I couldn't have told you how I might feel if Wendy did conceive.
But in those few weeks of her being pregnant, it immediately became our child.
All those feelings of who had fathered it evaporated.’
If anything, their so-far unsuccessful crusade has brought them closer together.
A year ago, they joined Child, a registered self-help charity set up to assist couples in coming to terms with infertility.
‘I discovered lots of people as desperate as me,’ says Wendy.
‘You've been told one in 10 couples is infertile but they can't be in your street, can they?
Well, they can.
That's comforting.’
Now she's started a local group.
Wendy feels the failure to conceive more keenly than Mark.
‘I'd suddenly start weeping if I saw a pregnant woman.
I felt angry, bitter and very emotional.
I remember being in a supermarket once and seeing a pregnant woman struggling with the door.
It sounds awful, but I didn't want to help her open it — I wanted to smash it in her face.
‘Childlessness brings feelings of such terrible grief, too.
That may sound strange but, if you lose a loved one, you have the memory of that person to focus your grief on.
Grieving for something you've never had is so intangible.’
She still has mood swings.
‘Every month, on my fertile day, I get the feeling that I could grab any man and try to get pregnant — I know it's a fantasy.’
Mark says, ‘I don't think I've ever cried about it.
I'm not one for showing my emotions but that doesn't mean I don't feel things.’
For now, Wendy continues with the monthly insemination.
‘I was getting to the point of putting it behind me, but when I conceived everything changed.
I will probably continue to have the biological urge to reproduce right up until my menopause.’
Trying to be positive about her inability so far to have a child, Wendy says she tells herself that the whole experience has made her a stronger person.
‘And then I think: ‘To hell with it!’
I don't want to be stronger.
I just want to have a child of my own.’
You can contact Child c/o PO Box 154, Hounslow TW5 0EZ (081–571 4367).
‘Having let the side down by not being able to give Wendy a baby, I just couldn't refuse to let her try AID’
Mark and Wendy: ‘Our ordeal has brought us closer together’
HOW YOU BOTH CAN COPE WITH YOUR FEELINGS
Medical science has made great strides in tackling infertility.
What it has still largely ignored are the psychological repercussions, both of the realisation that a couple cannot conceive — the guilt, the anger, the envy of others — and of the effects of keeping hope alive by a long series of treatments.
I have known couples choose to have no children and be very happy with their choice; but the moment they have changed their minds, only to discover finally that one or other of them is infertile, life instantly fills with despair coupled with a single-minded commitment to prove that they can do it.
This suggests to me that it may not always be the lack of children that causes the distress — I'd watched them childless, enjoying life enormously — rather, it is the realisation that biologically, they will not now be parents.
Much of the psychological pain caused by infertility of either partner comes from the idea that you are not a real man or a real woman if, for any reason, some small part of your reproductive system works inadequately.
A man can cope with having a straggly beard or his head being bald, but his definition of himself as male belongs primarily to his sexual functioning.
It's hard for him to accept that everyone is different in every aspect of their biology — men have different sperm counts just as they have different numbers of hairs on their head or different eye colours.
Rather than acknowledge this, if he is infertile, he'll often feel no longer a man, and it is this feeling that needs addressing by both of you.
You both have to realise that sexuality has many parts to it, of which the production of sperm is almost incidental except for normal conception.
It is particularly important that this message comes from the woman: your partner is still a real man and you have to let him know that loud and clear.
In order to do this, you may find that first you need to look at your feelings of anger and resentment at your partner for denying you the ordinary experience of conception and pregnancy.
If you don't acknowledge this resentment, you will inevitably let it seep out and it's all too easy to punish him by hinting at inadequacies, and burden him with guilt at your loss.
It isn't wrong to feel angry, but if you let it out in ways like this, the distress will increase for both of you, and you risk losing more than the chance to be a mother.
Dealing with the feelings you have, about not having the child you wanted, is not easy but your distress will be less if you approach the situation as a loving couple.
At some point it might be that you have to accept that things are not going to be as you'd hoped.
This acceptance of ‘for better or for worse’ was rather easier before medical science made hope glow eternally, even if the flame is often little more than a flicker.
Then you could decide more promptly to do the necessary work of grieving for what you've never had, recognising how much you still have, and get on with your life in other useful and enjoyable ways.
If you decide to accept infertility or childlessness, then this is the process you will need to go through; it's difficult, but we all have to leave dreams behind at some time in our lives.
Most importantly, you have to get in touch once more with the very real couple who laughed together and made love just for the pleasure of it.
You are still that couple and that's what you have to capture once again.
Dr Jenny Cozens, GH Consultant Psychologist  
HOLLYWOOD WIFE
The house, the grounds, the cars, the beautiful children, the expensive clothes, the dashing husband — it's enough to make you spit…but read on.
You may find your exasperation turns to inspiration
Did you read the novel about the beautiful blonde from the East End?
The one whose mother owned jellied-eel stalls and whose father was a boxer?
Who left school at 15 and became a famous model, and jetted around with people like Nureyev and Patrick Lichfield?
And then she opened some very successful boutiques, and married this very posh, good-looking English psychiatrist?
And then she started writing books and they all became bestsellers, and she, and the psychiatrist, moved to America, and had amazing houses, first in Palm Beach and then in Malibu, California.
Oh, they had a fantastic apartment in New York as well, and two beautiful children.
And after 23 years, they are still married, still really happy.
Oh, you didn't?
You thought it was just too ridiculous to be true?
Well, actually you could be forgiven for thinking that, and actually you'd be wrong.
Because that glitzy little bit of apparent nonsense is not a novel at all; but a condensed version of the Real Life Story of Miss Pat Booth, who at 45 still looks as good as she did 20 years ago, and has found fame, fortune and happiness, all wrapped up in a very glossy package indeed.
She sits curled up on the couch in the sitting room of her house high above the ocean in Malibu, and gets just slightly dewy-eyed as she talks about her family and the early days.
Her father, Tom Booth, was a professional boxer; very charismatic, very handsome, and her family was important in the East End.
‘It was almost a Mafia situation,’ says our heroine.
‘My mother used to phone people up, people where I was working, and say: ‘Now, you be very careful of my daughter.’
I was actually brought up by my Aunt Queen, along with her five children, because my mother was working all day and most of the night running the eel shops.
It was a big, close, warm Catholic family.
I grew up wanting not so much money as glamour, and when I left school at 15 I went to work in the department store, Bourne & Hollingsworth.
They asked me to help dress the models who wandered around showing clothes to the ladies having afternoon tea in the restaurant, and after a bit I did some modelling myself.
That seemed to me a very glamorous job.’
After a while, Pat decided to be a real model, a photographic one.
‘I went round the modelling agencies, and they all turned me down.’
She was not deterred; she went back, day after day, not just to the agencies, but to photographers and fashion editors.
It paid off —‘I actually got a job, then another, and within two years I was working every day.’
She is a great believer in persistence: ‘I believe anyone can do anything if they really want to enough.
I don't think I was any more beautiful than the next teenager.
I just took opportunities and worked at them.’
And thus it was that glamour had arrived for our heroine.
She spent weekends with names you would hardly believe.
One of the names was Nigel Dempster, he of the gossip column, who shared a house in London with Anthony Rufus Isaacs, the film producers, and Garth Wood, the psychiatrist.
In those days Garth was a merchant banker, and she took him home to meet her parents, who thought he was wonderful.
‘I'd taken someone else home, and my mother had said: ‘What on earth do you see in him?’
I said, ‘I don't know, he has a title, I'd be a lady,’ and she said: ‘Darling, nothing could make you a lady.’
But she absolutely idolised Garth, which was a big factor in my deciding to marry him.’
Mrs Booth showed good sense.
Garth is good-looking, charming, clever and witty.
I asked Pat if it had been love at first sight.
‘Absolutely not.
I don't believe in love at first sight, and I think it's a dangerous philosophy.
We've been together for 23 years.
Marriage is about respect, admiration, stimulation and commitment.
Things that last, not some instant romantic ideal.
I don't believe in romance.’
Stern words from a lady novelist.
Modelling led her into retailing.
With James Wedge (then a designer, now a top photographer), she ran a chain of boutiques called Countdown and Top Gear.
‘They were very successful, but in the end I got bored with them.
I went behind the camera and started taking photographs.
I loved it.’
The success story continued.
She had a couple of books published,Self Portrait , and Making Faces .
She took portraits for The Sunday Times .
Her subjects included the Queen Mother, Edward Heath, Bianca Jagger; and then she teamed up with Tina Brown (now Editor-in-Chief of Vanity Fair .
They were nicknamed the Urban Gorillas, producing witty, hard-hitting features on subjects like the Playboy Bunny Mansion.
‘I decided to try writing fiction.
I have always maintained you should do the things in life that are most difficult.
I could see writing would be difficult, but I could also see I would possibly be good at it.
I wrote two novels,Big Apple and Sparklers (Futura, £3.99 and £3.50, respectively).
To my surprise they did very well.’
By this time they were living in America, in Palm Beach, ‘really because Garth wanted to’.
I asked Garth, quintessentially English, what could have possibly drawn him to America.
Well, he said, he didn't like doing ‘all those English country things like shooting and fishing and riding.
So then it's London.
I drink too much there and don't keep fit.
I wanted to write books about psychiatry and the English don't like that.
So America seemed like a good place to come.’
Pat and Garth move between Malibu and a glitzy apartment in New York.
When they come to London, there's a house here too.
Orlando was born 10 years ago.
‘For a long time I didn't want children, and then I wanted them.
All of a sudden, just like that.
They changed me completely and utterly.’
Orlando is in no way the archetypal American brat; Pat is briskly doting about him.
‘I'm a great disciplinarian, I'm tough on politeness and all that, but at the end of the day he's done a good job on himself.
He's funny, sensible, wonderful company, he's a great travelling companion, and he's my friend, first and foremost.’
Then there is Camellia, who is 5 and adopted.
Her mother was young, 12 to be precise, living in a Catholic home for unmarried mothers, supported in part, both financially and emotionally, by Pat.
(Pat has a good strong Catholic conscience, a desire to pass on some of her good fortune.)
The 12-year-old's mother was going to take them both home with her; after Camellia was born she changed her mind.
She would only take her own daughter home.
‘It was dreadful; the girl was beside herself.
I listened to her and the sisters and then I went and picked up Orlando from school.
I said quite out of the blue, ‘How would you like a baby?’
He said, ‘That'd be fun.
A girl would be good.’
I said, ‘OK, we'll have a girl.’
And we went back to the home and got Camellia.’
Camellia is bright, tough and spunky.
She dresses for the most part in a pink frilly fairy costume in which she walks down to the beach, paints, dances and collects snails.
‘She can make Garth smile when nobody else can,’ says Pat.
They seem to lead a totally charmed life, the family: ‘I do inspire envy,’ says Pat, with resignation.
‘It isn't easy, any of it, but I tend to make it appear so.
People don't like that.
They feel you have to endure great anxiety and suffer a lot and of course while you're doing that, you don't get the work done.’
She is careless about her possessions, even though she enjoys them — the houses, the cars, the money.
She says she could walk away from it all tomorrow; ‘I could just let it go and start all over again.
The only big buzz I get is from my work and, of course, my children.
Nobody believes me, but I'm really not interested in money.
I'm interested in winning.
Winning on my terms.’
She has won at modelling, at running boutiques, at photography, she is winning at writing.
Her latest sexy novel,Miami , about the advertising industry as it has not often been portrayed before, is published this month.
Now she is taking up a fifth career — painting.
She will probably win at that one as well.
And yet she claims that she is not a very gifted person, adhering to her philosophy that you can do anything if you want to enough.
‘I have simply made the most of my abilities.’
She also has a reputation, which I would endorse, of being a loyal and generous friend.
She gave a lunch party the day I was there: just a modest little affair, a few media stars, a Hollywood lawyer, a chat-show host.
The talk turned to people she admired.
Madonna is her heroine.
‘I think she's wonderful.
She is such a tough businesswoman.’
No mention of the singing, the dancing, the style, the sexuality, please note, just the toughness, the talent for business.
I can't wait for the mini series.
Penny Vincenzi
Miami,by Pat Booth, is published by Century on 13 February at £14.99.
Other titles by Pat Booth available in Arrow paperback are Palm Beach, The Sisters, Beverly Hills and Malibu at £4.99 each .
Top left: Pat at work in her study
Main picture: Pat with Orlando, 10, and Camellia, 5, in her favourite fairy outfit
Right: The family in the living room at their home in Malibu — a far cry from London's East End where Pat was born
Far right: The Malibu house is just one of the family's three homes worldwide
Top left: Pat's bedroom features two television sets, and a huge picture window
Top centre: The patio overlooking the beach is perfect for alfresco lunch parties
Right: Camellia proudly displays her collection of snails
‘I do inspire envy.
It isn't easy, any of it, but I tend to make it appear so.
People don't like that’
THE LITTLE THINGS THAT MAKE A HOME
A cluster of vases, an unusual rug, or a pile of cushions — it's the finishing touches that hold the key to today's interiors.
There are new twists for traditional styles: classic shapes in startling shades; bold checks and stripes for the country-house look, and sophisticated naturals.
These are new directions for the New Year
FASHION BRIGHTS
Blocks of strong colour in striking combinations create the newest and most daring of today's looks.
It first appeared on fashion catwalks last year and is now influencing interiors.
Familiar objects — pine shelves, flowerpots and upholstered chairs — regain their zest when covered or painted in turquoise, chartreuse or magenta.
CHECKS & STRIPES
Stripes and tartans have replaced floral chintzes in the latest country-house look.
It's a more restrained style, but is still rich and bold.
Different colours and patterns are mixed — without matching — and floral plates, rugs and prints prevent the overall effect from being too harshly geometric.
NEW NATURALS
Classic rustic materials — wrought iron, wood, and terracotta — have acquired a new elegance.
Look for subtle colours, such as those found in The National Trust's paint collection, created to match colours originally used in their finest properties.
This style is easy to create and live with, and combines well with traditional antiques and furnishings.
GH people
CLEESE ENCOUNTERS
What makes John Cleese so funny?
Ask the man himself and it's serious, ask his friends and it's much more amusing
Hailed as the troubled comic genius who gave us the manic hotel-keeper Basil Fawlty and the Ministry of Silly Walks, he's also the kingpin of the enduring Pythons and a multi-millionaire businessman.
The very sight of John Cleese makes you smile, but he seems to have difficulty loving himself and others.
There has been much comment by Cleese, as well as others, about how being 6ft at the age of 12 (he's now 6ft 5in), and not being made a prefect at his public school, and being the only child of older, lower middle-class parents, set for a career as a solicitor, began the problems and embarrassments that inspire his comedy.
When Cleese split up with his co-writer and wife, the American actress Connie Booth, there was uproar — not because of the havoc it caused in his private life, but because the Great British Public was not to get any more episodes of Fawlty Towers !
He promptly dated, and later married, another American actress, Connie Booth lookalike, Barbara Trentham.
But while his emotional life was troubled, Cleese the businessman was finding success in an unexpected quarter — training videos.
He and a few friends discovered that there was big money to be made by injecting humour into an area traditionally ignored by the British — teaching staff how to be more effective.
Cleese has since sold his share of Video Arts for a reputed £7 million, but he still makes films for them.
Now 51, Cleese is reputedly as hair conscious as Elton John, does fierce work-outs three times a week and has a new love — American psychotherapist Alyce-Faye Eichelberger (who looks remarkably like his two ex-wives).
He is writing a second book with his mind guru, Dr Robin Skynner, and is the subject of a major biography about to be published.
But it's no use just asking the man himself what makes him so special, it's his friends and colleagues who have all the answers.
NOT A BIT LIKE BASIL
Actor Andrew Sachs played down-trodden waiter Manuel in Fawlty Towers .
‘I love John.
He has many geniuses — that's not too strong a word to use.
He is a very loving, open man and not at all defensive about his talent.
There was no competition when we were filming, never any of that ‘that laugh is mine’ sort of thing.
‘John was always in charge, but never arrogant.
He's mostly calm, perceptive and spiritual — not a bit like Basil.
He does erupt occasionally, but it's forgotten in a moment.
He didn't often take advice from me, thank goodness, but I did have one little triumph.
Do you remember Mrs Richards, the deaf woman, played by Joan Sanderson?
In one scene John bawled so loudly into her deaf aid that her head jerked back and hit a clock.
John bent to the floor, picked something up and said: ‘Excuse me, is that a bit of your brain?’
John wanted to drop that line, but I persuaded him to leave it in.
‘He was very dependent on Connie in those days.
He's refused many times to do another Fawlty Towers .’
HIGHLY SENSITIVE
Kevin Kline was awarded an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in A Fish Called Wanda .
‘Of all the actors, directors and writers that I have ever worked with, John is the most sensitive to the psychological and emotional state of his fellow performers at any given moment.
I think the world of him.’
AN INCREDIBLE WORKAHOLIC
Terry Gilliam, ex-Python and film director: ‘John has a tendency to go off in fits and starts.
He seems to view life as more complicated and difficult than it really is, and he has the problem of unending frustration, and trying to control his life, and the Government (look at that SDP broadcast), which he clearly never does.
He uses a lot of energy garnering approval.
That all takes far too much time.
He has an analyst to advise him on life.
I don't know why he wastes time on analysis when he cleans his system out so well on film.
‘I remember once he took a house in Mallorca and, away from London, we had a very enjoyable time.
We spent most of it giggling.
He is an incredible workaholic and has amazing energy.’
THE KINDEST, NICEST MAN
Maggie Tree, joint Managing Director of the Video Arts training company set up with John Cleese and others in the early 70s, explains the Cleese technique.
‘John went behind the counter at Selfridges for a couple of days so that he would understand what assistants have to cope with.
His attention to detail is staggering.
He is a meticulous writer and turns up for filming knowing his lines perfectly.
‘After a day he will know the names of everyone on the set and he goes to great lengths to make sure we all enjoy ourselves, organising lunches and so on.
He is the kindest, nicest man, but he is very intolerant of people who do not do their homework.’
Top: John with Jamie Lee Curtis, his co-star in A Fish Called Wanda.
He was ‘absolutely besotted’ by her
Above: Although best known for his portrayal of the manic Basil Fawlty, John is described by colleagues as sensitive, thoughtful and serious
EXCEPTIONAL TALENT
Satirist Clive James broke off from filming the BBC TV series Clive Live to say enigmatically: ‘Cleese copes as well as a man can with the problems raised by exceptional talent, organisational ability and wealth.’
SERIOUS AND THOUGHTFUL
Former SDP leader Dr David Owen on Cleese's award-winning party political broadcasts: ‘John is serious and thoughtful.
He was very keen on the SDP/Liberal Alliance and wanted to get everything factually correct.
I would discuss the script, say, on proportional representation, and then give him free rein.
He regards PR as a crucial issue and when told that one of its main criticisms is that it produces indecisive government, he came out with that wonderfully ironic comment —‘like the weak old government in Switzerland and in Germany and nearly the whole of Europe’.
He managed to put over a fairly complex argument in a brilliantly simple way.’
A LONER
Novelist Jeffrey Archer: ‘Not many people know this, but his mother sold my mother their house in Weston-super-Mare.
We both come from those middle-income, middle-class families.
I admire him greatly, although I wouldn't say we were great friends.
He's not an easy man to know.
He's a loner.
We're Vice Presidents of Somerset Cricket Club, and the one thing that John is most proud of is that he once slow-bowled Dennis Compton during a match against the MCC.’
NATURALLY GOOD-HUMOURED
Dr Robin Skynner is co-author (with Cleese) of the bestseller,Families And How To Survive Them (Mandarin, £5.99), now used by Relate.
(John turned to Dr Skynner when he was asked to act in a frank nude scene with Jamie Lee Curtis in A Fish Called Wanda .
‘Without therapy,’ John said, ‘I could never have appeared nude.
I was far too inhibited.’)
‘So many people have tried to explain John's comedy.
Where does it come from?
It's brought about by confusing situations, conflicts and problems.
He is an extremely flexible thinker, a brilliant man and would be successful at anything he did.’
Skynner says the question he is most frequently asked is whether therapy has not dampened Cleese's power of comic invention: is a happier Cleese not a duller one?
‘John is naturally a very good-humoured, high-spirited person to be with.
I don't know anybody else who has so many tremendous friends.’
THE REPRESSED BRIT
Actress Maureen Lipman: ‘John's work is unique.
It's very hard to be an actor in comedy.
Unlike many other actors he doesn't comment on his performance in front of the camera.
When he's in a rage he's in a genuine rage.
He doesn't wink at the camera, saying ‘Aren't I funny?’
‘That speech in A Fish Called Wanda , about Americans being so free and the Brits so repressed is fundamental to John's philosophy of life.
His repression is caused by his stiff-necked, stifled upbringing.
He doesn't really want to be like that — he'd rather like to be a baseball star or a Sumo wrestler.
But psychology makes him happy.
Analysis is very important to him.
It must fuel his work like it does for Woody Allen.’
CLEESE ON CLEESE
‘Some of the things said about me give the impression that I am quite mad.
Well, all of us are probably a bit mad.
I first went into therapy because my doctor couldn't explain my constant flu symptoms, and because I carried so much tension.
The symptoms disappeared quite rapidly and never returned.
The tension level dropped steadily but quite slowly.
I think it took about three years to get to a normal level.
When I first came to the group, I was very much in the Tarzan role.
I saw myself as ‘strong’, not needing support and affection.
How very difficult it was to accept that I did need it and to show that I needed it.
‘Being a good public-school chap, I saw myself as jolly independent and quite tough and, above all, supremely normal.
I certainly didn't need any affection — namby-pamby nonsense — and I developed a pretty healthy contempt for anyone who looked as though he needed mothering.
‘After nearly 30 years in show business, I have a great need of privacy for a while.
I'm tired of being in the public eye.
If you're never still or quiet enough, then the deepest part of you never emerges.
As you get older, I think you learn that an afternoon playing with your daughter (he has one by each marriage), or three hours reading, feeds the soul in a more real way than being on TV.’
GH charity of the year
WILL LIFE EVER THE SAME AGAIN?
Anyone could become the victim of a crime.
For those whose lives have been torn apart, Victim Support offers a lifeline.
This worthwhile cause has been chosen as Good Housekeeping's Charity of the Year 1992
When 10-year-old Robert left his school gates, a man approached him saying that he was a family friend and that his mother had asked him to pick Robert up from school.
As they approached Robert's home, the man said: ‘I'm going to let you into a secret.
I'm not taking you home.
I'm taking you somewhere else to deal with you.’
He then threatened him with a shotgun.
Almost unbelievably, a passer-by overhead the man's approach to Robert outside the school, became suspicious, and telephoned the local police with the number of the car.
The police had realised how serious the incident could be, and managed to find Robert before he was physically harmed.
Robert's mother Ann, 39, was devastated when her son returned, accompanied by the police, and she realised not only what had happened, but what could have happened.
Her husband Bob was beside himself with anger.
Now they are both desperately trying not to overprotect Robert, and are almost overwhelmed by feelings of rage.
They keep asking themselves why anyone should want to do this to their little boy.
Robert's character changed completely — he went from being an outward- going, fun-loving boy, to suffering from recurrent nightmares and being unable to discuss anything with his family.
When one of his two brothers, romping and teasing, as boys do, thoughtlessly said, ‘I've got a gun, I'm going to kill you,’ he withdrew into his shell and screamed, ‘Don't talk about that.’
Help at hand
Tensions in the family could have become unbearable without the help of Theresa, a volunteer from their local Victim Support scheme.
Victim Support, our Charity of the Year 1992 (patron, HRH The Princess Royal), is an independent charity that offers victims of crime everything from practical advice to a shoulder to cry on.
In the case of Robert, Theresa was able to talk to him and his family, and restore the links of communication between them.
The whole family dreaded going to court, so Theresa took them to an empty courtroom, showed them where everyone sat and explained what would happen.
She was able to talk to his teacher, and when the teasing and probing of insensitive schoolfriends became hard to handle, Robert was able to talk about this with Theresa — he didn't want to burden his parents with it.
The experience of Victim Support shows that Robert will recover his old, cheerful, resilient self in time, so it is important that his relationship with his family is not irrevocably damaged in the process.
With Theresa's help that is possible:
‘When I come out of a house having heard a victim laugh for the first time since it all happened — I know that's why I do it,’ she says.
Post-traumatic stress
Those whose main contact with violence has been through television or the cinema may think that in real life, just as in films, the hero or heroine's story ends when their ordeal is over.
Final shots inevitably show a relaxed, happy, secure ending.
In reality, another story is just beginning for the victims of survivors, and until recently it was often a lonely or difficult one.
Policeman Christopher Larkin was honoured as a hero in the Hungerford Massacre, and last year, he was back in the news again.
This time, the Daily Mail was reporting his conviction for armed robbery.
His trauma after witnessing the effects of the massacre had  led progressively to the loss of his job, a slide into alcoholism and then to crime:
‘If I had spoken to anyone properly about how I felt after Hungerford,’ he says, ‘I'm sure I would not have turned my problems over to the bottle.’
After the Aberfan disaster, 25 years ago, when 116 children and 28 adults were buried under a sliding slag heap, no counselling services were available.
Now, the local doctor says: ‘By every statistic, I can prove that this is a village of excessive sickness.
The cause is obvious.’
These are extreme cases — yet, if you've been involved in a disaster or have been a victim of crime (Victim Support's specialist area) you may find yourself suffering from what has now been identified as Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Many people even find themselves losing concentration or sleep after a bag-snatching incident.
But these cases do highlight the cost to individuals and society of ignoring the very real after- effects of crime, shock and trauma.
Talking about the experience cannot take away the grief and fear, but it can chart a path through it.
It is reassuring for someone to know that if they jump at shadows or cannot sleep after an accident or a crime, it is part of a natural process and that they will get over it.
When people think that life will never be the same again, it is a comfort to realise that it may be different, but it does get better.
Equally, although a volunteer cannot give out money, they know what the local social services and charities have available.
A bewildered and shocked survivor can be guided through red tape, and practical alternatives can be found, as in the case of Liz and Tom who were burgled while on Income Support.
As well as the children's Christmas presents, they had the TV, furniture, clothing and bedding stolen.
An application for a loan from the Social Fund to replace essential items was turned down because they were already repaying one.
So Victim Support contacted local charities on their behalf and obtained donations and furniture.
Volunteers also help with claims for Criminal Injuries Compensation — a Government scheme which provides moderate cash payments for people injured through violent crimes.
Most awards tend to be hundreds of pounds rather than the tens of thousands in private compensation you read about in the papers — but as Victim Support director Helen Reeves (pictured above) points out: ‘Compensation is an important way of acknowledging that such crime is not acceptable.
The gesture is as important as the money involved.’
Victims have said that it is a way of acknowledging that they are worth something — a common psychological problem after being a victim of a serious crime, is a feeling of worthlessness.
GOVERNMENT SUPPORT
The Right Hon John Patten MP, Minister of State for the Home Office (right), comments that, ‘Victim Support has deservedly grown fast because it meets a long-standing and deep need that had been neglected for far too long.
‘It has grown from local roots, with local volunteers and funding which makes it responsive and resilient.
One measure of our regard for the charity, has been the increase in Home Office funding.
Our grant is set to rise from £5.7 million to £7.3 million in 1992.
‘The Home Office has funded various research projects, one of which looked at the effect of murder on the victims’ families; this has enabled local schemes to help victims of the most serious crime.
Victim Support can continue to count on the full- hearted support of this Government.’
HOW YOU CAN HELP
with a donation.
Home Office funding doesn't cover all costs and the charity is expected to raise funds independently.
Although most of the work is carried out by volunteers, funds are needed for training, daily activities and research projects.
with your time: ‘Volunteers come from all walks of life,’ says Victim Support's Helen Peggs.
‘Many are newly retired professional women, or women taking a career break to look after a family.
Having said that, we have a very wide range of people, male and female.’
Training and expenses are provided.
become a Friend of Victim Support.
It enables those who don't have time to be volunteers to get involved.
A regular donation entitles you to a newsletter and invitations to events.
Send an sae to Victim Support, 39 Brixton Rd, SW9 6DZ (071–735 9166).
HOW GH WILL HELP
As our Charity of the Year, Victim Support will receive 25p from every one of our offers sold.
We've sponsored a video showing the work of Victim Support to help with fund raising, recruitment and to make people aware of the effects of crime.
We'll bring you news of our activities with Victim Support and research results.
We'll be running fund-raising events with Club GH, our exclusive club for our subscribers.
Victim Support Patron HRH The Princess Royal has called for more help to be offered to victims of crime.
As she says: ‘There seems to be so little appreciation of the potentially devastating emotional effect of finding yourself a victim’
SLIM PLAN HOW TO WIN AT DIETING
You will have read, by , acres of New Year newsprint on dieting, and come to the conclusion that you simply can't win.You will have been told that 93% — or whatever — of British women are on a diet at any one time, but that, as a nation, we are still getting fatter.
You will have heard that if you do stick to a diet and lose weight, then your metabolism will drop so dramatically that the weight piles on all the more easily in the future.
You will have read enough apparently contradictory facts about what you can and can't eat to drive you to drink (or chocolates, cakes, cheese sandwiches or whatever constitutes your particular downfall).
Where the Good Housekeeping diet is different is that it is more than just a diet.
It has some delicious and satisfying recipes that you will want to go on cooking.
We will also show you how to win at dieting by exposing some of the easiest traps to fall into.
We'll stick with you for the next three months, with fresh advice on the latest findings in psychology and exercise, and more glorious recipes.
If you are already a diet winner — and, contrary to what the average survey would have us believe, there are lots of you about — then we can make you even more successful.
Let's start by debunking a few myths.
‘Most women constantly diet, yet many stay fat’
By the time they have reached their 40s, many former fatties have found a pattern of eating that suits them and keeps them slim.
Professor John Garrow of the Department of Nutrition at St Bartholomew's hospital in London, and Britain's foremost authority on weight loss, estimates that around half the slim adult population weren't born with a magic inability to gain weight.
They gained weight, and may have stayed at that weight for some time.
Then they decided to lose it and did.
Every so often they'll need to diet again, but you wouldn't call them fat, and you certainly wouldn't call them losers.
They're proof that dieting really does work.
‘If you lose weight, then your metabolism drops, and it all quickly piles back on again’
This is not the case.
Professor Garrow's studies show that a 10-stone woman who has just lost 20lb can eat the same amount — without gaining weight — as a 10-stone woman who has always weighed that amount.
Weight loss does lower the metabolism in that every time you lose one pound, you will need to eat about 18 calories a day less to stay at a stable weight.
(That's about two peanuts, or half an orange.)
Take, say, Ann, who weighs 12 stone.
She will be able to keep her weight stable while eating around 200cals a day more than Mary, who weighs 10 stone.
Some diet books imply that if Ann diets, so that she too weighs 10 stone, she will have to eat less than Mary.
In fact, she'll have to eat the same amount of calories as Mary — rather than what she ate before — or she'll eventually regain the lost weight.
So if the two eat very much the same, but, for example, Ann had always had a small packet of peanuts with her evening drink, then she will have to give up those peanuts permanently to stay slim for ever .
The one exception, says Professor Garrow, is if you lose weight quickly on a crash diet, because you will lose more lean tissue than with gradual weight loss, and that does make the metabolism less efficient.
So, to stay slim for ever, avoid all those ‘Lose 10lb in 10 days’ diets.
GH's Slim Plan diet will give a weight loss of 1–2lb per week, which experts agree is the ideal level.
DO YOU NEED TO LOSE WEIGHT?
Underweight — Are you eating enough?
Acceptable — This is the desirable weight range for health
Overweight — Not likely to have much effect on your health but don't get any fatter
Fat — Your health could suffer if you don't lose weight
Very fat — This is severe and treatment is urgently required
‘I get to within about 5lb of my goal and get stuck.
Then I get discouraged and gain weight’
If this is your problem, ask yourself who defined your goal.
If you have been told to aim for a very precise figure, or have been following conventional height-to-weight charts, then you are almost definitely trying for an unrealistic weight.
For health — as opposed to fashion — reasons, there is a 2-stone range of ideal weight for your height.
According to Dr Margaret Ashwell, Science Director of the British Nutrition Foundation, one in eight women between 40 and 64 is obese, ie dangerously fat.
However, she also points out that perfectly healthy pear-shaped women are pressurised to lose weight because their bottom and thighs are unfashionably large in comparison with the rest of their body.
This is not only extremely difficult to do, she says, but unnecessary, as fat which is concentrated around these areas is less of a health risk than fat which tends to concentrate around the middle.
And if pear-shaped women diet, they are still unlikely to change shape.
So beware of any promises to the contrary.
Our chart shows if you are in the right weight range for health.
After that, it's up to your own common sense and the weight at which you feel comfortable and energetic.
Try the Terry Wogan Test: jump up and down and if anything wobbles that shouldn't, it's fat, and you should think about a diet.
But don't be bullied by precise, conventional height-to-weight charts that say you should be 9st 6lb.
Watchpoint:If you are in the right category, but your weight has been creeping up over the years, then it would be wise to reassess your eating habits.
‘Can you burn off fat with exercise?’
Yes, within sensible guidelines.
As Bernice Weston, Founder of Weight Watchers in Britain, and herself a successful slimmer, would ask: how far would you walk for a Mars Bar?
Her new diet, The Bank Balance Diet, introduced in her biography,A Weight Off My Mind (Macdonald, £14.95), asks you to treat your body as a bank, ‘earning credit’ through exercise and ‘writing cheques’with the food you eat.
Our hypothetical Ann could eat her packet of peanuts, for example, if she added three half-hour swims to her weekly routine.
Exercise not only burns off calories, it also has an energising effect and assists the breakdown of stored fat into its component fatty acids, encouraging the body to use these as fuel.
Toned muscles can also act as a natural corset, improving the body's shape and contours.
Look out for our exercise programme in next month's Slim Plan .
‘What about the magic ingredients you hear of?’
The only magic ingredient you really need is motivation.
Therapist Julia Blackburn's heart sinks when someone visits her at The Maidenhead Natural Therapy Clinic and says, ‘I've tried a grapefruit diet, a pineapple diet, a very low-calorie diet, and now I've come to see whether hypnotherapy might work.’
‘People don't seem to understand that a hypnotherapist can't do it for them, and neither can any other magic ingredient.
Hypnotherapy can be a valuable aid to slimming, but it can't provide the answer.
However, people do often need more than just a diet, as there may be psychological reasons why they can't manage to stay slim.’
She now treats overweight clients with a combined programme of exercise and hypnotherapy or psychotherapy to overcome those psychological pitfalls that can cause slimmers to backslide.
Ask yourself if there is any pattern to your past dieting failures, to see if there is any underlying psychological problem that you may also need to tackle.
For example, Julia Blackburn identifies one common worry about losing weight: the fear that you won't be as sexy or attractive as you expected.
Conversely, there may be a deep-rooted fear that you won't be able to handle the extra attention and competition that a new figure may bring.
The third part of Slim Plan (April GH) will examine psychological hurdles in greater detail, so that you can keep your new slim figure for life.
THE DIET THAT REALLY WORKS
No fads, no fuss — just straightforward meal plans and deliciously simple, slimming recipes
There are essentially two types of diet: one based on a specific meal plan, and ones which totally exclude certain kinds of foods.
Both, in the end, restrict calories, but each suits different lifestyles.
The GH diet has the best qualities of both.
You can try our fabulous recipes, originated and double-tested in the GHI, and you can still use some of your own favourites, provided that the ingredients correlate to the diet.
The GH diet is a safe, effective plan specially designed by our Nutritionist, Fiona Hunter.
It's based on an allowance of 1200cals a day, which should produce a good, steady rate of weight loss for most moderately overweight women (men should allow an extra 300cals a day).
There are two ways of using the plan.
You can either follow the weekly menu given on pages 83–86,or use the unit system.
In order to have a balanced diet, it's important to have a set number of units from each group each day.
As alcohol is so high in calories (1 glass of dry white wine equals 75cals), you should keep your intake to a minimum.
We're not going to forbid it, but remember that the extra calories are going to slow down your weight loss.
Which plate would you pick?
The pasta shown on the right of the plate represents a standard portion
FOODS ALLOWED FREELY
Some of these recipes contain, fat, sugar or flour — often forbidden in other diets — but they have been reduced to a minimum to provide tasty food that's also low in calories.
good LOOKS
Beauty ideas and best buys to keep you looking great
EYE-TECH
Elizabeth Arden's new Ceramide Eyes Time Complex Capsules (£27.50 for two months' supply, on sale 3 February) contain a clear, liquid complex of vitamins E and K, botanical extracts and Ceramide 1 to soothe and smooth the eye area.
After three weeks' use, our 10 testers all felt there was an improvement — eyes less puffy, or slightly less wrinkled.
All also said they would prefer it if it came in a pot, rather than in the single-application, fiddly pea-sized plastic spheres.
So that you can try them yourself, Elizabeth Arden is giving away a week's supply to the first 750 readers whose names are picked on 28 February.
Simply send your name and address on a postcard to Ceramide/GH Beauty, 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP.
SPRING IS IN THE AIR
The best way to shake off winter lethargy is with a good, long, top-to-toe stretch.
You'll find every possible winter antidote — from how to stop huddling indoors to how to get over depression — in Stretch & Relax by Maxine Tobias and Mary Stewart (Dorling Kindersley, £8.99).
MIRROR, MIRROR
It seems that we cannot be the fairest of them all.
According to a new report by Euromonitor, the Great British Beauty spends less than almost anyone else on looking after her skin.
The national spend per person on skincare products is (in US dollars): France, $32.18; Italy, $21.58; Germany, $70.19 and, in the UK, just $11.39.
WATCH OUT FOR…
Vichy's latest: Temporalia Anti-Time Day Care Cream (£12.75), a light moisturiser with sun filters.
Nail Magic (£7.95) nail strengthener, which our tester claimed gave her better fingernails after only 14 days.
Yves Saint Laurent's Eye Make-up Remover — not cheap at £9.50, but highly recommended.
Best BEAUTY BUY
We asked five GH staff what their best beauty buys of all time were, and they came up with some interesting products.
We'd love to know what yours is: write and tell us, and we'll pick the best for a future issue (send to GH Beauty/Best Buy, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP).
St Ives Swiss Formula Keratin Extra Body Shampoo (£2.45).
‘It really does thicken my hair.’
Boots Natural Collection Coconut Conditioner For Dry Hair (£1.15).
‘It's good value and a good product.’
Rimmel's Hide The Blemish (4 shades, £1.18).
‘I've used it for about three years.
It will cover anything and is excellent value for money.’
Clinique's Superpowder — Double Face Powder (£13).
‘I don't like the feel of foundation on my skin, but this is wonderful: it gives a smooth, light, natural-looking coverage.’
Clarins Alpine Cleansing Milk (£8.20).
‘I wouldn't use anything else — I really believe in it.’
LIP SERVICE
There's a shade for every woman in Bourjois' new Le Classique range of lipsticks.
In 21 colours — naturals or brights, cream or pearl finish, they cost an affordable £3.01 each.
Make-up MADE TO MEASURE
If you've ever come home with newly bought make-up only to find that the colours don't really suit you, take heart.
Now, says PENNY RICH, unique products can be specially created just for you
You can learn more about make-up from a quick snoop in a friend's bathroom than you can from any other source.
And the first thing you learn is that all women make the same mistakes.
Look no further than the row of foundations — most of them have been used for about a week, which is as long as it takes to realise that they are wrong for your skin.
Then there are the eyeshadow compacts with squares of immaculate, untouched shades — except for one per tray, which has been brushed bare.
And if you open the right drawer, you'll find all the wrong lipsticks — perfect, pointed and pristine.
But any that have been worn flat or dug out of the applicator base are obviously such favourites that you should write down the names immediately.
We all make these kinds of  mistakes with our make- up because of the way we get to choose it.
Usually it is a smudge of product rubbed on the back of the hand, a lot of agonising, and some advice from the consultant to speed up the sale.
However, since this is a bit like buying a hat by trying it on your foot, it's no wonder there is so much unused make-up in most bathrooms across the country.
COSMETICS MADE EASY
But suddenly, the major preoccupation of the cosmetic industry is to come up with original ways of making it easier for you to choose and use the right products.
And for this you may thank the current recession.
During a boom we can afford to ignore our little mistakes, but when money is tight we only buy make-up that we know we will use.
Otherwise, it seems, we don't buy it at all.
You may also thank the French company, Clarins.
When it launched a complete make-up range last autumn, it introduced ‘Mirror Image Consultation’, a new way of selling which is so simple that all the other companies were left wondering why they hadn't thought of it first.
During a ‘mirroring’ session, the customer sits next to the Clarins' consultant, in front of all the make-up testers and a huge mirror.
After discussing colour and product preferences, the consultant applies the make-up step-by-step to her own face and the customer copies, so that she learns how to use the products herself and can instantly see if she likes them or not.
And Estée Lauder recently launched its Perfect Make-up Centre, as a way of letting customers play with products before purchasing.
It is a tester display unit on the counter, where you may sit, flick through a Personal Shade Selector book, and try any products yourself.
There is a mirror and packs of hygienic, disposable applicators, too.
And you are left alone, unless you ask for help.
According to Sarah Griffiths, UK Public Relations Manager, ‘It has been creating a storm of interest at department stores all over the country.’
Meanwhile, the race is on among the other cosmetic companies to come up with even more original ways of helping you to make the right make-up choices.
And over the next six months you'll see everything from computers to paint-by-number books appearing on a beauty counter near you.
The funny thing is that, although all these changes are for the better, many of them will seem like gimmicks when compared to the personal service a handful of cosmetic companies have always offered.
THE PERSONAL TOUCH
If you begin by believing that everyone's looks are individual and accepting that there are some colours or product formulations that people just don't like, then you have to start from a completely different selling point than the traditional cosmetic houses.
You have to offer customised make-up, which is mixed or matched to the client's personal needs.
The companies that follow this principle often don't shout about it, but they are easy to recognise.
They don't produce collections of spring and autumn colours offering a set ‘look’.
They might sell single eyeshadow colours, or compacts that you fill yourself.
And they will adjust their foundations or powders until they match your skin exactly.
Prescriptives, an American range that has been available here for 10 years, offers a unique collection of very wearable, natural colours.
This includes 58 lipsticks, 48 eyeshadows, 24 blushers, 12 face powders and 123 foundations (the largest selection in the UK).
Also, since 1989, it has offered Custom Blend — a service whereby its consultants create a foundation or powder to exactly match your skin while you wait.
John Gustafson, Prescriptives' National Custom Blend Specialist, has the individual ‘recipes’ of more than 10,000 clients at his fingertips.
‘Not only can we match any skin, from lightest to darkest,’ he says, ‘but we can give any woman the exact combination of texture, weight and coverage that she wants in a foundation or powder.
We can also adjust Custom Blend formulations for dryness or oiliness, or correct too much natural redness or yellow in skin.’
Gustafson admits that he now finds it hard to sell a pre- mixed foundation.
‘Prescriptives pre-mixed foundations are the best foundations you can buy.
But a Custom Blend, something that is made for you in every aspect of the product, is obviously going to be better.
It also gives us the chance to talk to the clients and to get to know exactly what they want.’
2000, the British brand launched by Boots in 1988, also offers customised foundations and powders in a choice of 92 shades.
There are 20 eyeshadows and eight blushers in the range, which is based on the understanding that your skin and natural colouring are as unique as your fingerprints.
And when it comes to lipsticks, it now offers more shades than any other company in the world.
Individual Refined Lip Colour, a unique new made-to-measure lipstick service, offers a choice of over 28,000 shades.
Although currently available in Manchester only, by this summer it will be at Boots 2000 counters in all major cities.
Basically, there are lipstick testers in six different colours and each contains 40 shades within that colour spectrum.
So from a total of 240 lipsticks, a customer can choose one, or combine any two to create almost unlimited variations.
Then the Consultant Analyst will put the appropriate colour pellets into a beaker with an oil blend, heat it in a microwave oven, pour it into a split mould, cool it down to harden it, and slip it into a lipstick case.
It takes about 15 minutes, from start to finish.
According to Rebecca Barnett, 2000 Brand Manager, this made-to-measure lipstick service has already revealed some interesting insights into customer choice.
‘We're finding that women have a very clear idea of what suits them,’ she says.
‘It seems that a lot of women only wear one colour of lipstick or have two alternatives.
This new process gives them the confidence to experiment with the 240 test shades available.
‘We wondered if this new service would take away from our standard lipsticks, but actually what it has done is increase overall lipstick sales within the store.
Women are now coming back with the end of an old, discontinued lipstick, or a favourite dress, and asking us to match it.’
Claire Attenborough, Creative Adviser to Boots Own-Brand Cosmetics, has been the driving force behind the made-to-measure lipsticks and the rest of the 2000 range.
‘In under a year, the Boots’ laboratories have done a most amazing job,’she says.
‘From the initial idea which sounded crazy, they have created a huge range of lipsticks which don't compromise on the quality of formula or packaging.
And they've included this amazing, personalised colour choice.’
When pressed about future plans for the range, Attenborough confirms her belief that women should be entitled to have exactly the shade they want in any product.
‘We've done personalised foundations, powders and lipsticks.
Eyeshadows are a tricky one to be able to do in store — there must be 100 different browns alone, they'd need to be mixed as a loose powder and sold pressed…’
After a pause, she adds, ‘But we're looking at the technology.’
PICK AND MIX PRODUCTS
Shu Uemura, the Japanese make-up artist, started his own- label cosmetic range 28 years ago.
His first UK outlet is impossible to miss on the ground floor of Harvey Nichols in London — it is a large, open space stacked with make-up shades in clear Perspex packaging.
Not only can you see the colours, but you can play with the products as much as you like.
And the staff will leave you to it, unless you want advice — since they're trained make-up artists, most customers do.
London Division Manager Millicent Kendall says Shu Uemura has the largest choice of colour cosmetics in the country.
‘But we don't sell the little set of four eye colours that were designed by somebody who doesn't even know what you look like,’ she adds.
‘Shu Uemura is all about choice.
We encourage people to play with the cosmetics, feel what they're like on their skin, and we don't try to sell them anything.
So far we have had a tremendous response which has a lot to do with the product — it's brilliant and people can't go wrong with it.’
Molton Brown, the British company based in London, may not have the quantity (48 eyeshadows and lipsticks, a dozen foundations, plus blushers and powders) but it offers outstanding quality.
Director and founder Caroline Collins says she doesn't bother stocking shades that look pretty but don't sell.
‘If a colour is rejected by the public, we weed it out.
If make-up is not wearable, who needs it?
Although we only have 48 eyeshadows, any woman will find colours that are just right for her.
And we match that with excellent service.
We help women choose and use make- up.
Our aim is to help and advise.’
Cosmetics à la Carte was started in 1973 by Christina Stewart and Lynne Sanders.
They now offer 100 eyeshadows, 75 lip colours, and foundations and powders matched to every skin, from pure white to dark black — all made in their own factory, and none of them tested on animals.
‘Right from the beginning we wanted our company to give more help and better service to women buying cosmetics,’ says Christina Stewart.
‘We now have a couturier cosmetic service, as we will mix any colour of any product for a customer if they can't find what they want in our standard range.’
Finally, there is one point which all of the customised companies made: personalised cosmetics may cost a little more than standard products, but they save you money because they do away with make-up mistakes.
And if this is true, the sooner the mainstream cosmetic houses make changes to the way they sell make-up, the better off we'll all be.
WHERE TO FIND MADE-TO-MEASURE MAKE-UP
‘A smudge of make-up rubbed on the back of the hand, a lot of agonising…it's like buying a hat by trying it on your foot’
‘We can match any skin, and give any woman the exact combination of texture, weight and coverage that she wants’
‘We don't sell the little set of four eye colours designed by someone who doesn't even know what you look like’
‘We encourage people to play with the cosmetics, feel what they're like on their skin, and we don't try to sell them anything’
GH competition
SEW SENSATIONAL
10 great ‘New Home’ sewing machines to be won
Whether you're a complete beginner or a well-practised expert, you can have bewitching stitching at your fingertips with our superb prizes
EIGHT FIRST PRIZES of New Home Memory Craft 8000 CE computerised sewing machines, each worth over £1700
TWO RUNNERS-UP PRIZES of New Home MyStyle computerised sewing machines, each worth £700
TODAY'S REVIVAL IN CRAFTS means that sewing is back in fashion.
Everyone wants to be able to design and create something with an individual touch, whether it's an outfit to wear or soft furnishings for the home.
And now, even if you've never so much as threaded a needle before, you can create beautiful items with the help of the new generation of computerised sewing machines from New Home.
The most sophisticated machine in the range is the New Home Memory Craft 8000 CE (pictured right), which can handle all types of materials and fabric thicknesses, and is equipped to carry out any sewing task, basic or advanced.
The machine has a large, touch-sensitive, digital screen that displays clear instructions — and, should you make a mistake in a procedure, it will show you the correct step, so you really can't go wrong.
Press the ‘Message’ key, and thread tension, foot pressure, needle size and appropriate thread are displayed.
The computer regulates thread tension (it's also possible to make adjustments manually), and there's an automatic sensor to help you sew perfect buttonholes.
The machine operates by a Start/Stop button, so constant use of a foot controller is not necessary.
But what makes this machine really special is that it offers you the chance to create an unlimited range of embroidery designs.
You simply slot in a preprogrammed ‘memory card’ and select the design you want.
You can also create beautiful designs in outline, which are then filled in with full satin-stitch embroidery in up to five different colours.
The MyStyle is an ideal first-step to computerised sewing, it's very simple to use, and includes 100 stitch patterns to help you create really professional results.
To help you get started and really make the most of your machine, the Memory Craft 8000 CE comes with a free instructional video and a one-day training course.
If you would like to see the New Home range in action, send for a list of stockists and visit one to collect a free sample of embroidery.
WHAT YOU HAVE TO DO
Imagine that you're a complete beginner looking for a versatile sewing machine for dressmaking, soft furnishings and embroidery.
In our coupon opposite, we list a number of points that make the New Home Memory Craft 8000 CE a revolutionary sewing machine and an ideal choice.
We'd like you to put them in order of priority to agree with our judges' decision.
Finally, complete the tiebreaker, saying in up to 20 words why you'd like to win first prize.
Create beautiful results at the touch of a button: the New Home Memory Craft 8000 CE (right) is a computerised sewing machine that enables you to both sew and embroider
Good Housekeeping Advertisement Promotion
Dairy delight
A tempting trio of authentic French cheeses with a formidable reputation for quality and flavour
Slice through the snow-white coat of a fresh Ideval Brie or Camembert and you will find a tantalising combination of taste and texture.
The process of creating such quality cheeses begins with milk from the finest dairy cows in the world followed by the skills of French master cheesemakers.
It is their inherited knowledge and personal style, coupled with traditional labour-intensive production methods, new technology and strict rules guarding quality, that contribute to the final distinctive result.
Compare the delicate creamy taste and springy texture of a Charme de France Brie with the softer but more traditional flavour of St Benoit Brie, both have a floury edible rind.
Then try Camembert Le Rustique's creamy texture and richer taste.
Whether you prefer to eat soft cheeses when they begin to be runny or at a slightly earlier stage when they are chalkier is simply a matter of personal taste.
Test all three types of soft cheese before you buy, by just pressing the surface: the cheese should bulge and be springy to the touch.
Store soft cheese for a short while in the least cool part of the refrigerator — the salad try is ideal and allow them to come to room temperature for at least 30 minutes before serving.
Celebrate cheese with this trio of fine-flavoured traditional soft cheeses.
Front right: Charme de France Brie will delight the connoisseur with its creamy taste and springy texture.
Far left: St Benoit Brie is softer and mildly less creamy with a slightly runny centre.
Both are sold in pre-packed wedges or from the cutting counter.
Back: Camembert Le Rustique in its distinctive wooden box lined with a red and white checked napkin, has the traditional taste and aroma of a well-loved true Normandy Camembert.
good TRAVEL
Bargain breaks, destinations with a difference and a new luxury train for Spain
FOR SOMETHING COMPLETELY DIFFERENT
For those seeking an unusual holiday, Iceland is one of the newest tourist destinations.
Geologically, parts of the country are still evolving, like the island of Surtsey, which appeared overnight in 1973.
At the Great Geysir field in Haukadalur, you can feel the pressure of geysers building up under your feet and watch boiling-hot mud bubble.
In midsummer, the sun shines 24 hours a day and you can swim outdoors in a thermally-heated pool, such as the Blue Lagoon near Reykjavik, with snow-capped mountains and glaciers visible in the distance.
The wildlife is varied, beautiful — and some of it is likely to arrive on your plate.
Puffin, gull, pony and, of course, fish are all on offer in Reykjavik's superb, if expensive, restaurants.
Three-night breaks, May to September from £395; contact Thomson Tour Operations (071–387 9321).
Julie Bignell
BARGAIN SHORT BREAKS IN TURKEY
New this winter from Just Turkey (0293–599977): short breaks to Istanbul.
It's a good time for sightseeing in a city that, as well as the famous St Sophia's Church and the Blue Mosque, is rich with remnants of the Byzantine and Ottoman Empires.
It's warm enough to eat outdoors (the upper 60°Fs), and food is cheap and delicious.
Visit the covered bazaar (above)— a great place to buy carpets, kelims and brass.
Bargaining is often carried out over a period of days, so it's fortunate that a four- night B&B break at a three-star hotel near the market, is £219 in February and March.
The same deal in the swanky Old Istanbul Ramada Hotel with all comforts and casino is £326.
EUROPEAN GOLFING WEEKENDS
Also good value at this time of year are golfing breaks to France, Belgium and Holland, from Sally Holidays (071–355 2266).
They're self-drive, one to four nights; accommodation ranges from self-catering apartments to top châteaux hotels.
Two nights in Le Touquet with access to seven courses cost from £49 per person (ferry fares included).
Green fees (£8–£48) are not included, but tee reservations can be made through Sally.
TO RUSSIA WITH LOVE
The reforms in the Soviet Union have enticed the curious in their droves.
Now you can choose from a range of excursions or wander freely, but you must have accommodation booked for each night of your stay.
While most people still visit in groups, opportunities for independent travel are increasing, and more and better hotels are springing up in the major cities.
Architectural treasures, such as the Trinity Monastery of St Sergius (right) at Sergiyev Posad, outside Moscow, are not to be missed.
Prices are still reasonable — some are even cheaper than last year, with Intourist's Moscow/St Petersburg seven-night tour (071–538 8600), starting at £459 (£399 in January).
THE TRAIN IN SPAIN
Now that Spain is emerging as a more exciting holiday destination, it has acquired its own version of the Orient Express — the Al Andalus.
The restored 1920s train has every luxury, including live music, a dance floor, plus first-class food.
It makes several journeys through Spain: for example, there's a four-day break, available May to October, taking a new high-speed train from Madrid to Seville, visiting Expo 92, before making tracks on the Al Andalus through the Andalusian hills (above) for Cordoba and Granada.
Prices start at £1028 (excluding flights from the UK).
In April, a four-day break, including Sevillian Easter festivities costs from £667.
Excalibur (0202- 751844).
SUSAN MARLING presents Radio 4's Punters series and is a reporter on Channel 4's Travelog.
She also writes for The Sunday Times
GH travel
Will Disney World work in Europe?
Step out of reality — and into a wonderful world of fantasy.
SUSAN MARLING reports on Disney's latest theme park — a magical land of adventure just across the Channel
ALONG WITH THE NEWS that Marilyn Monroe is alive and working in a pizza restaurant in Wisconsin, a US tabloid paper recently ran the headline: ‘Disney Theme Park Found On Mars’.
Having just enjoyed a week of Walt Disney World entertainment and corporate culture in Orlando, Florida, this second story no longer seems entirely incredible.
With Euro Disney set to open on its 5000- acre site outside Paris on 12 April (at 9.01am precisely) and with plans to nearly double the number of Disney attractions and hotels in the USA and Japan, the Disney big cheeses are calling this the ‘Disney Decade’.
Despite a world recession and a double-figure percentage decline in visitors to the American Disney parks, the company's spending, maintenance of standards and rolling out of new projects that ‘give folks good reasons to come back’, is prodigious.
This, and the sheer scale of the parks, is what strikes the first-time visitor.
Magical Mickey
Disneyland in California, was opened by Walt in 1955 on the back of his popular cartoons.
The original Disneyland was about a fantasy castle, a few rides and a cast of cute, costumed characters that children adored.
Even when Disney World opened in Florida, the main attraction was the Magic Kingdom, and Mickey Mouse reigned supreme.
But now the Florida Disney is 20 years old, and so are a good many of its guests.
Their increasingly sophisticated tastes have been met in what has become the world's most popular man-made destination.
Disney World isn't just one theme park, but three.
The Magic Kingdom, with spires and turreted castle at its heart, now shares as many as 150,000 visitors a day with the Epcot Centre (seven futuristic theme pavilions and an 11-nation world showcase, built around a massive silver geosphere) and the Disney MGM Studio theme park.
The 43-square-mile site also includes two water parks with enough rapids, tidal waves, water chutes and body slides to occupy several sunny days, five golf courses, and 10 resort hotels, plus a collection of nightclubs, cinemas and comedy theatres gathered together as Pleasure Island.
Linking Disney World together is a network of monorail trains, buses, river steamers and launches.
All this is exquisitely landscaped, spotlessly clean and gives the impression of being the work of an inspired, efficient dictator.
Not to be eclipsed by the opening of Euro Disney, which is seen as a short-break destination, Disney World is celebrating its 20th birthday throughout 1992 with new parades and attractions, thereby redoubling its efforts to attract thousands of transatlantic guests for a two-week ‘holiday of a lifetime’.
Many of the new attractions at the MGM theme park, such as the 3D Muppet vision show, the Ninja Turtle live show and the sensational Honey, I Shrunk The Kids adventure playground, take their inspiration from film and television.
Others are witty or deliberately kitsch.
I especially liked the Sci-Fi Drive-In Diner at MGM: a 250-seater restaurant where each ‘table’ is in a 1950s open-top car and the big-screen entertainment is provided by clips from black-and-white, B-movie classics like The Day The Earth Stood Still .
Across the lot is a restaurant, the Prime Time Café, that pastiches 1950s American suburbia — have good ol' apple pie in a gingham kitchenette.
High-tech fun
Over at Epcot, simulators at the cutting edge of new technology enable a ‘mission’ of 40 people to take a turbulent ride through the human body — reaching breakneck speeds through arteries, lungs and heart, before narrowly escaping dangers lurking in the brain.
But the real touch of magic at Disney World is in the new parades and firework fantasies.
Spectromagic is the new nightly parade at the Magic Kingdom (the old show, the Main Street Electrical Parade, is being shipped to Euro Disney).
It's an event which cannot fail to impress even the most cynical Cruella de Vil.
For 25 minutes, fabulous figures and floats that owe a great deal to fibre optics and underlit, liquid-nitrogen smoke glide past in a dazzle of light and changing colour.
Life-like animatronic characters (moving, speaking dummies), as well as live figures, are synchronised to music in a spectacle that, for a time, really lifts the spirits.
Indeed the whole Disney philosophy, especially evident in the Epcot Centre, is about optimism and faith in the future.
This is a world where, in Walt's own words, ‘If you can dream it, you can do it,’ and where, as we are told by the audio-animatronic family which takes us through history in the Carousel Of Progress pavilion, ‘These are the best days of your life.’
But nowhere, not even in the potentially ‘educational’ rides and attractions based at The Land or The Universe Of Energy pavilions, is there any reference to the world's problems nor, except as fantasy, to any world at all outside a US focus.
Charm school
There is also a sense of the unreal about Disney staff, or ‘cast members’ as they are called.
They are uniformly polite, chatty and cheerful with visitors.
All of which makes me wonder how well this very American, sugar-pie world will translate to Europe.
We do, after all, sneer rather more than our US cousins and somehow ‘Have a nice day’ and exhortations to visit the Château De La Belle Au Bois Dormant won't have quite the same flavour in French.
As Mr and Mrs Atkin from Newcastle, on their third Disney World visit, told me: ‘Coming to Disney is about being in America.
We love the way everyone joins in the spirit of the thing.
It's sunny and somehow it just won't be the same kind of fun in France.’
Mickey Spielberg, Disney's chief imagineer, told me that some adjustments have been made for the European park, especially in the type of catering provided.
‘Americans tend to eat all the time.
At Euro Disney there will be more sit-down cafés and fewer fast-food outlets.’
Certainly, at the Florida Disney, the one major blot on the landscape is the vast army of seriously obese men, women and children who swig at litre containers of cola and blob out on ribs, chicken, fries, pizza and ice-cream sundaes all day.
Euro Disney will be a much smaller enterprise all round than its American counterparts.
Hotel rooms will be smaller than their US equivalents, the park itself is on a smaller scale and, although plans are already being drawn up for Phase Two, incorporating a European MGM Studio theme park, the initial range of attractions won't rival Disney World in Florida.
Nevertheless, in the restless whirl of Disney expansion that is itself something akin to a rollercoaster ride, the six Euro Disney hotels, 4500 cast members, golf course and 30 separate attractions are all on schedule for the opening in April and 11 million visitors are expected in the first year alone.
For Disney, the parks are never complete.
Disney World and Disneyland will be unrecognisable by the end of the decade…then there's the Disney TV channel, timeshare holidays, publishing, a cruise line and…as Walt said, ‘We've only just begun.’
TRAVEL TIPS
Unless you plan to tour other parts of Florida, it's probably easiest to stay at a Disney World resort or at one of the seven affiliated hotels very close by.
Be sure that the holiday price includes not only free use of the transport system, but also a pass to all parks (a five-day Super Pass will otherwise cost $145 for adults and $116 for children aged between 3 and 8).
For example, Virgin Holidays (0293–617181) offers a seven-night holiday at Disney's Port Orleans Resort, which opened last year close to the Epcot Centre, at £679 per person for one week, or £899 for two weeks, including passes and nonstop flight to Orlando.
The transport provided by Disney is excellent and most visitors wouldn't need a car.
Planning the trip is made easier with Steve Birnbaum's very thorough Walt Disney World — The Official Guide (Avon, $10.95), which you can buy when you get there.
He's worked out how to avoid too many queues and crowds and how to get the most for your money.
Among the most cost-effective holidays to Euro Disney are those run by Eurocamp (0565–633844) which sells accommodation in a 130-acre ‘wilderness retreat’ where guests stay in log-cabin- style trailers which sleep up to six people.
The price structure is complicated, but, for example, a two-night break for two people and a car in April would be £344, including ferry, accommodation and Euro Disney passes, but excluding food.
For children aged between 3 and 9, it is £41 extra, and £54 for 10–13s (children under 3 free).
Each extra night costs between £90 and £119 for the whole party.
Wallace Arnold (0532–311055) is the accredited coach-tour operator from the UK — a three-day stay at the Hotel Cheyenne for two adults sharing a room ranges from around £130–£150 per person (additional child £65–£81).
At the other end of the spectrum, Concorde is doing a Euro Disney link with a Concorde flight London–Paris, two nights' accommodation at a four-star hotel, and a two-day pass to Euro Disney, for £695 per person (contact Goodwood Travel on 0227–763336).
Above: The latest Disney venture: Euro Disney opens outside Paris in April
Right: Fireworks over the Magic Kingdom at Disney World in Florida
Below: Spectromagic with Mickey
Above: The Euro Disney President and Vice-President get ready for the grand opening
Below: Florida Disney celebrates its 20th anniversary in 1992 with new parades and attractions
The Spectromagic parade in Walt Disney World, Florida is an amazing display of fabulous, moving ‘animatronic’ characters
GH offers
Bargain Bazaar…
Great New Year treats for you.
To order, turn to page 148
Lounge around in style in this fabulous tunic top with matching leggings.
With a soft, luxurious feel, they are wonderfully comfortable for wearing around the home, but could just as easily be dressed up for a smarter occasion.
Made from black stretch velvet (75% cotton/25% polyester), the top is long and loose (30in from nape of neck to hem) and the leggings (39in from waistband to hem) have an elasticated waistband and are fashionably tapered.
Machine-washable on a low setting, they come in sizes 12–18 to fit bust sizes 36–42in.
The special-offer price to GH readers is just £29.99.
Inspired by the patterns of the Fair Isles, our beautiful sweater will make a fine addition to your wardrobe.
It has a flattering tunic shape with a round neck and long sleeves, and comes in two colourways: soft blue, mustard, honey, deep peach and taupe or a mix of dark grey, tan, white, burnt sienna, olive and brown.
It's made of easy-care 100% acrylic that you can machine wash (40°C cycle).
Available in one size only, it measures 30in from nape of neck to hem and fits up to 42in bust.
A classic for only £25.95.
Set a splendid table with our 24-piece, stainless-steel cutlery set from Viners.
Comprising six each of knives, forks, dessert spoons and teaspoons, it's smart enough for special occasions, yet suitable for everyday use.
The classic Harley design features a simple rim around the handles and neat square ends.
Buff with a stainless-steel polish from time to time to keep the cutlery pristine.
The set comes with a 25-year guarantee and is attractively gift boxed.
What's more, it's unbeatable value at just £31.95.
Brighten up your day with these Brixton Pottery lamps.
They're decorated with blue leaves on a white base, or blue and white flowers on a blue background, and each has a cream fabric shade.
The lamp (12½ × 10½in) is fitted with brass electrical parts, tested to DLA specifications.
Switch on to our offer now at just £26.99.
25p from each item sold will be donated to Victim Support, GH Charity of the Year 1992
Holiday brochure COLLECTION
While away these bleak winter evenings with our vista of enticing holiday locations.
Whether you yearn for the fresh beauty and tranquillity of the countryside in Spring, or prefer the lure of the exotic East, the discerning traveller's journey starts here
1.
Take a short break to beautiful Bruges or the subtropical SunParks, where it's always 84°F.
For a Belgium Travel Service brochure phone 0920 461131.
2.
Discover Romantic Hideaways in the real Spain.
Selected small hotels of charm plus villas with pool.
Tailor-made service.
FREE colour brochure: -81–748 4569 (24 hrs).
3.
Swan Hellenic Discovery Cruises — Cruise with just 250 fellow passengers to the ancient lands of the Mediterranean and Aegean to seek out and learn more about the past in company with guest lecturers.
All tips and numerous excursions are included in the fare.
Call Swan Hellenic on 071–831 1515.
4.
You're always welcome in Lancashire's Hill Country, its ever-changing countryside and bustling market towns where Cotton was King.
Enjoy a short break in friendly farmhouses, cottages, country hostelries or luxury hotels.
Brochure 0254 53277.
5.
Summer in Switzerland is out of this world.
Come with Swiss Travel Service to over 30 Alpine and lakeside resorts.
Phone 0920 461221 for a brochure.
6.
You'll find a warm welcome on the beautiful, historic island of Guernsey.
A glorious coastline; safe, clean sandy beaches; miles of scenic cliff-top paths to explore; excellent accommodation.
Send for Holiday Guernsey brochure or ring 0481 723557 (24 hours).
7.
Rochester — 2000 years of history in Dickens' favourite city.
The Norman Heritage, Maritime Adventure and Dickensian link make days out, short breaks or longer stays fun and fascinating.
Send for details.
Tel:(0634) 732716.
8.
The Best of Barbados — Discover the very best hotels and villas in Barbados from £732 pp with Caribbean Connection, the UK's premier Caribbean specialist.
Take advantage of their expert tailor-made service.
For the holiday you've always promised yourself, ring 0244 329556.
9.
Unwind in pure style with Alpine Gold.
Choose from lakeside, mountain and short break holidays to Austria, Italy and Switzerland.
For a brochure phone 0920 461221.
10.
Venice Simplon-Orient-Express is the centrepiece for a wide range of splendid European holidays.
For further details, telephone (071) 928 6000 or see your local travel agent.
London–Paris–Venice–Vienna–Budapest.
11.
Exciting summer holidays to Norway's magnificent Fjord Country including Chalet, Touring and Farmhouse Holidays, Fjord Cruises, Escorted Tours and the famous Coastal Voyage.
12.
CADOGAN TRAVEL FLIGHT ONLY 1992 We offer unbeatable value and Scheduled Services to 8 destinations with their renowned Club Class option; plus Charters to 5 other resorts.
TELEPHONE: 0703 332661.
13.
CADOGAN TRAVEL 1992 The latest Summer sun Brochure from Cadogan has it all.
Luxury accommodation, exciting destinations, quality, service and flexibility.
84-pages of exceptional value in idyllic surroundings.
TELEPHONE: 0703 332661 .
14.
A superb range of value-for-money, quality holiday homes in France.
We even offer a Money Back Guarantee!
Take your pick from châteaux to villas and more…
Request your brochure now by ticking box 14 or calling 0282 445657 quoting ref GH657.
15.
Our superb cottages, many sharing peaceful coves and dramatic sunsets with seals, choughs and peregrines, are available throughout the year.
Exclusive yacht charter to bird isles.
For free brochure, tick the coupon or call (0348) 837742.
16.
Carefree holidays amid breathtaking scenery in the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park.
Action packed or plain leisurely — the choice is yours.
For brochure and accommodation list, tick coupon or call Tourism Unit (GH) on (0437) 766774 (24 hrs).
17.
Enjoy the food, wine and freedom of the lovelier parts of Italy.
Selected villas with pool and small hotels of charm and character.
FREE colour brochure: 081–741 1349 (24 hrs).
18.
Select a holiday or a short break from the established specialists in French hotels and châteaux off the beaten track.
They have all been chosen for their comfort, good food and fine wines.
The French Selection, Chester Close, London SW1X 7BQ. 071–235 0634 ABTA ATOL AITO.
19.
Self-catering holidays in rural France continue to attract more and more converts.
The 1992 Gîtes de France brochure contains more than 2500 properties and a choice of 22 ferry routes.
20.
The complete holiday brochure for the independent traveller exploring France by car.
A comprehensive programme of Villas and Cottages of comfort and tradition throughout 17 regions.
21.
Six to fourteen day cruises with eight ships in the Caribbean and Mediterranean.
Prices from £545 with 10% reduction if you book more than 26 weeks before departure.
Call Costa Cruises on 071–436 9431.
22.
Aero Destinations — The Cayman Islands the exotic and peaceful British Crown Colony in the Caribbean.
Ideal for relaxation, diving and watersports.
Virgin Atlantic flights from Gatwick to Miami and then on by Cayman Airways 737 service to Grand Cayman.
Telephone 071–581 9960.
23.
As a family holiday destination, Bournemouth is without equal.
Seven miles of golden sand.
A rich diversity of accommodation.
Spectacular festivals and major events.
Exciting nightlife.
For free brochure ring (0202) 314411.
24.
Not so much a brochure — more a way of life!
Over 120 of the finest rental villas on the Cote d'Azur, from £900–£19,000/week.
25.
Enjoy a luxurious and carefree ‘Heart of the City’ weekend at one of Europe's leading hotels in 28 fascinating cities — and in Cairo.
Time Off, Chester Close, London SW1X 7BQ. 071–235 8070.
ABTA ATOL AITO.
26.
A wide choice of expertly planned Latin American tours with guaranteed departures allow the traveller to explore either in small groups or independently the mysteries of this largely unexplored continent.
Cox and Kings Brochure Service 051 355 7175 quote ref XL0601.
27.
The finest range of tours for the discerning traveller.
A la carte group tours and tailor made independent tours reveal India at its most diverse with the support of local offices and over 230 years of experience.
Cox and Kings Brochure Service 051 355 7175 quote ref XI0601.
28.
A selection of tours to many of the natural wonders of the world.
The programme includes wildlife, botany and natural history tours, with guaranteed departures and the support of expert leaders and managers.
Cox and Kings Brochure Service 051 355 7175 quote ref XE0601.
29.
Enjoy a breath of fresh air in beautiful Yorkshire and Humberside.
With stunning scenery, delightful seaside resorts and much more besides, the region truly offers a world of exciting holiday ideas for the whole family.
30.
History and beauty go hand in hand in the Ironbridge Gorge.
Birthplace of the Industrial Revolution it boasts award-winning museums, heritage sites and first-class accommodation in beautiful Shropshire countryside.
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING INSTITUTE
The Food & Consumer Research department of Good Housekeeping
TRIED AND TESTED
GHI reviews a kit to assess the power of your microwave, a child's car seat with a difference, a citrus press/grater and a vaporiser
TEST YOUR MICROWAVE
SINCE THE SCARES about food safety and microwaves in 1990, measures have been taken to improve standards.
Following agreement between food manufacturers and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food, we'll see new labelling on microwave ovens — and on food packaging.
Microwave ovens are to be given a heating category from A (515–620W) to E (741–880W).
These categories will also appear on food-packaging instructions.
So if, say, your oven is a C, you follow the appropriate heating instructions on the packaging.
This should give more accurate results, particularly with convenience food.
The power output (wattage) of new microwaves will continue to be based on the IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission) 705 system, adopted as industry standard since August 1990.
But what about the 11½ million people who bought microwave ovens before the new test came into force?
Then, inconsistent test methods meant that the same cooker could be rated as 800W by one manufacturer, and 650W by another — little help when trying to follow instructions for heating convenience foods.
In August 1991, GHI advised owners of those older models to contact the manufacturer to ask for specific instructions.
Now, to make life easier Tesco has produced a Microwave Power Test Kit (£3.99) to help you to check both the new heating category and the power rating.
It consists of a plastic container and a liquid-crystal indicator strip.
After refrigerating both overnight, you heat some water in your microwave for one minute, put the strip into the water, then read the rating.
Tests must be carried out eight hours after the microwave's last use.
GHI verdict:Clear instructions and the indicator strip is easy to read.
It's a good buy, particularly if you frequently heat convenience foods.
COMPACT CUISINE
You'll find a new slant on two old favourites — the grater and lemon squeezer — in the Pyrex Cuisine set (£9.99) from department stores.
It consists of a grater and a citrus press which clip on to the rim of a 1-litre measuring jug, plus a 2-litre bowl and stand (not shown).
Both the jug and bowl come with lids, and they can be used in the microwave, freezer and dishwasher.
GHI verdict:The clip-on grater and citrus press allow food to drop straight into the jug, avoiding spills and waste, and the jug and bowl can be taken directly from freezer to microwave for reheating.
A good idea at a reasonable price.
A SAFER CAR SEAT
Strapping a toddler into a car safety seat can be a struggle.
The Britax Freeway (£89.99) has a harness that adjusts to the correct fit at the touch of a button.
It can be fitted to front or rear seat belts; there's a fitting kit (£10.99) for cars without rear belts.
Suitable from 6 months to 4½ years.
GHI verdict:The harness can be effortlessly adjusted, which is good — an ill-fitting restraint is almost as bad as none at all.
It's a high seat, so a small child is able to see out of the window, and the ‘recline’ control is easily reached.
Clear instructions; washable cover with padded headrest.
RELIEF FOR COLDS
Clear a blocked-up nose with the Mountain Breeze electric vaporiser (£17.99).
Designed to sit on a table or beside your bed, it contains a pad impregnated with natural oils that are warmed and released into the air; three heat settings control the rate of vaporisation.
Five pads are supplied, each one lasting for eight hours.
Replacement packs cost £2.99 for five.
GHI verdict:Our testers, heavy with cold, found that the vaporiser gave them a good night's sleep; even their husbands/partners slept better.
During the day, the vaporiser freshened the air without being too overpowering.
GHI, the first consumer protection organisation in this country, has given expert advice since its formation in 1924.
The Institute's famous ‘double-tested’ policy ensures readers are given an unbiased evaluation of food and consumer products
(See Zest Appeal, page 118)
GHI consumer report
SHOULD YOU PAY FOR CLEAN AIR?
Air may be 10 times more polluted indoors than outside.
Can high tech help?
GHI takes a look
YOUR HOME MAY LOOK IMMACULATE, but is the air it contains as clean as it could be?
A new report from the Department of the Environment says that potentially toxic chemicals (such as formaldehyde and benzene) are released from building materials, heating and cooking appliances and furnishing fabrics.
And, says The Building Research Establishment, with dust, bacteria and tobacco smoke tainting your home as well, the air inside could be 10 times more polluted than air outside — bad for the British family which spends 90% of its time indoors.
Some people are affected by air pollution more than others, but the immediate effects may include allergies, sinus congestion, coughing, sore throat, fatigue, dizziness, headaches, tension, eye irritation and asthma.
The National Asthma Campaign says that asthma is on the increase — one in 10 primary school children suffers from it.
And the DoE is investigating the levels of pollutants in the home.
Can air cleaners help?
There are two artificial ways to clean the air — with an air purifier or an ioniser.
Dr Lesley Hawkins, Director of Services at Surrey University's Occupational Health Department, has tested ionisers and believes that they can help to relieve asthma and allergies, but there's no evidence that they can cure diseases such as arthritis and rheumatism.
Reactions vary, and an air cleaner that has a dramatic effect on one person's health may make no difference to another.
But many find they help to maintain alertness and reduce headaches and eye strain from close work.
But if you think polluted air is affecting your health, consult your doctor first.
What air cleaners do
Most air cleaners remove pollen, dust, fibres, feathers and down, soot and cigarette smoke from the air, making it feel fresher.
If there's a specific source of pollutants, the unit should be placed nearby.
If not, place it facing out into the living space.
Ionisers negatively charge the air to refresh it.
They don't actually remove pollutants; they cause the particles to settle on walls, floors, table tops and fabrics.
As the ioniser may soil surfaces, put it where you can easily reach it.
The ‘needles’ that send out the negative ions clog up in time, reducing efficiency, so they also need regular cleaning (use a cotton bud).
Air purifiers actually remove odours and particles from the air through a series of filters.
After the air has been filtered, it is usually freshened by a built-in ioniser.
Filters vary:
Mechanical filters draw air through flat, coarse fibres to remove any large particles such as airborne dust and pollen, or through pleated, fine filters to remove small ones like bacteria.
Electrostatic filters charge the incoming air so that the particles stick to an oppositely charged screen.
Chemical filters are the only ones that will remove gases such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides from tobacco smoke and unvented gas cookers, formaldehyde and benzene.
Buying guide
Don't be impressed by high-powered, large-capacity air cleaners — they're not necessarily the most efficient.
Check that units conform to British Standard 3456 for safety.
When buying an ioniser , look for a model with a range of 4–5 metres and a minimum, even output of around 1000 ions per cubic centimetre.
It only works in the direction in which it's throwing the ions.
When buying, ask to see the manufacturer's certificate from an independent test house that guarantees the effectiveness of the model in question.
When buying an air purifier , measure the room and ask how many air changes the model would achieve.
(The ones shown below are suitable for a sitting room or main bedroom.)
Make sure the model you choose will take out the pollutants that concern you and check that replacement filters are readily available.
Regular filter changes are essential because efficiency can drop from 80% to 20% after a few weeks, if you forget to clean your unit.
CLEAN AIR ACTION
Dr Malcolm Green, Chairman of the British Lung Foundation, points out there's no point in buying an air purifier unless you use a vacuum cleaner twice a week and ban pets from sleeping on your bed.
You can also help to improve the air quality by:
forbidding people from smoking in the house
dealing with damp
choosing natural fabrics/furnishings
improving ventilation.
In older houses, fresh air replaces stale air about once an hour, but the process can take five to six hours in draught-free modern homes.
Try and make sure the air is changed and refreshed by opening windows regularly.
HELP WITH ASTHMA
National Asthma Campaign (071–226 2260)
GHI Advice:If you'd like a copy of Practical Guide for Asthmatics , send a cheque for £1.75 made out to the Good Housekeeping Institute (Asthma), 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP.
GHI solves your problems
HANDY HINTS
The right cooker hood for you; the best winter food for wildlife
FIT TO DRINK
Filtered water should be stored in the fridge, but circular jugs may take up too much space.
Boots' Aquacool water filter (£11.99) has a jug that fits inside the fridge door and GHI has 100 to give away to readers.
Send a postcard to GHI (Filter), 72 Broadwick St, W1V 2BP by 28 February.
DON'T BE HOODWINKED!
Cooker hoods keep the kitchen smelling sweet, but they can be expensive — up to £1000 — so it's important to buy the right one.
Ducted hoods are best, because they vent steam, smells, heat and grease outside the house, but you'll need to knock a hole in the wall.
Recirculation units filter steam, grease and smells and circulate clean air back into the room — but they do not remove heat.
Grease filters are found in both types of cooker hood.
They're made from paper (£5 for three; replace every eight weeks), metal gauze (washable, but wears out) or plastic (dishwasher proof — lasts longest).
Charcoal filters (about £12 each; replace every four months) are found only in recirculation units.
They remove steam and smells.
(It's essential to change filters regularly.)
Telescopic-action hoods pull out when in use.
A canopy fills space between kitchen units.
A chimney fascia fits over an island unit or covers an existing chimney.
PUTTING THE BOOT IN
Recycle your worn-out Wellingtons at a ‘Welly Circus’.
Look out for the posters and the bright yellow ‘banks’ touring the country, or call 0606–592 041 for details.
WINTER WISDOM
Hedgehogs should be given baby or pet food — not bread and milk.
Send an sae to the British Hedgehog Preservation Society, Knowbury House, Nr Ludlow SY8 3LQ.
Bird food should have the Birdfoods Standard Association's Seal of Approval, showing that it is free from aflotoxins.
Contact BSA, 14 Brook Willow Road, Halesowen, West Midlands B65 1BS.
When designing your garden, plan to include shrubs like pyracantha and Berberis darwinii that give flowers all year round and thereby provide food for wildlife.
Create a garden for butterflies by joining Butterfly Conservation, Freepost, Dedham, Essex CO7 6BR.
Q&A
Tap into the expertise of the Good Housekeeping Institute
Q
I'd like to try stir-fry cooking, but I'm not sure if I can use a wok on a ceramic hob.
Can you advise?
A
The traditional wok can't be used on a ceramic hob because there's not enough contact between the rounded base and hob to produce the high temperatures needed to stir-fry.
But ceramic-hob owners can enjoy home-cooked Chinese food, because a number of cookware manufacturers have developed woks with flat surfaces to overcome the problem.
Look for Boots nonstick, seven-piece wok set (£16.99) or William Levene's Healthwatchers nonstick, stir- fry pan (£14.50), which is based on the wok design.
Q
I'd like to make a rug during this winter.
Where can I find an inexpensive rug-making kit?
A
Mail-order kits from Atlascraft (0602–452202) and Readicut (0924–278027) are not particularly cheap — they cost from £100–£165 for a medium-size (91cm×1.5m) rug.
They provide everything you need.
This includes the pre-printed canvas, yarns and latchett hook.
You can buy plain canvas to create your own design and there's a choice of wool or mixed fibres.
But if you don't mind cutting the yarn to length and creating your own design, you can order the raw materials by post from the Wilton Royal carpet factory (0722–744268)— a similar size rug costs approximately £46.
Q
I wore my new boots in the snow when I was abroad this Christmas and now a white mark has spoiled the leather.
Is there any way I can remove it?
A
This happens when water leaches out the salt used to preserve the leather or when leather comes into contact with sea water or salt used to grit the roads.
Moistening the stain and rubbing dry with a soft cloth may help, or try Punch Salt Stain Remover (£1.59) from Tesco.
Apply on stained areas, dry and reapply a few times.
After treatment, spray your boots with a  water-repellent spray to prevent further stains.
WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
Readers often ask GHI where they can buy rubber seals for traditional screw-top preserving jars.
Ravenhead and Leifheit supply accessories for Kilner-type jars (left).
Ravenhead rubber rings, £1.99/12; Leifheit sealing lids, £3.60/12, jars from £1.45.
From Boots cookshop.
SUZANNE WILKINSON is Consumer Research Editor.
As a home economist with 10 years' experience in consumer products, and mother of three young boys, she has first-hand experience of tackling practical problems.
The GHI welcomes your letters about any consumer queries.
Or phone one of GHI's Help Lines; turn to page 8 for details
YOU AND YOUR PET
My dog is often ‘caught short’, how can I keep my lively cat amused indoors?
GH Vet MARK EVANS answers your queries
Q
Our 6-year-old bitch, JoJo, has started to wet around the house.
We belong to a dog club and someone there has suggested that this may be due to the fact that she is spayed.
So is it something we have to live with?
A
Not necessarily.
There are lots of possible reasons for this problem.
The most common is the all-too-familiar cystitis — the bladder could be inflamed and JoJo may think it needs emptying even when it is only partly full, with the result that she could be effectively ‘caught short’.
This is not true in the case of urinary incontinence (when the sufferer has no idea of what's happening and no control over it).
The possible causes are numerous, ranging from nerve problems in the spine to the physical shape of the bladder itself.
So where does spaying fit in?
Think of the bladder as a balloon.
The main part of the balloon is the bladder itself, and the part you blow into is the neck.
You can keep a balloon inflated at great pressure by squeezing the neck.
In dogs, female and male hormones help to ensure that the bladder neck muscles work properly.
When a bitch is spayed, some of the influence on the bladder neck by female hormones is removed.
As the pressure builds up in the bladder, the bladder neck muscles can't contain it and urine is passed.
But most spayed bitches don't suffer from urinary incontinence.
The most important thing is establishing what is wrong.
JoJo will need to be examined thoroughly.
And as well as a physical examination, your vet will want to check urine and blood samples.
The results may indicate that further tests are required.
Treatments may vary from diet changes through medical management to surgery, in some cases.
So, neither you, nor your dog need suffer in silence.
Q
I have two crazy cats.
The male is called Gin and the female is Lemon.
There was a Tonic, but sadly, he was run over.
I have recently moved into a house on a main road, and I am concerned about the cats playing outside.
Can I give them a more entertaining life indoors to stop them from going out so much?
A
In my practice, I don't see many injuries affecting cats living near busy roads.
And I'm sure that the most dangerous roads for cats are in fact quiet lanes with irregular traffic flow.
I live on such a road and my neighbour's cats have chosen the Tarmac as their favourite spot for sleeping.
It stays warm longer during the day and they are rarely disturbed.
But, it only takes one car!
Indoors, there are many ways in which you can adapt your environment to suit the needs of your pets.
Cats sleep a lot, so let them choose their own spots — instead of a cosy fireside, your two might prefer an old box on top of the filing cabinet.
When awake, cats are active and inquisitive.
And you can now buy well-designed cat aerobics centres made by Canac Pet Products (sold by vets and in pet shops; £10.99–£179.99).
The Savuti (shown here) costs £49.99.
Phone Canac (0373–864775), for mail order and stockists.
Q
My children think the world of their gerbil.
He has a small ‘spot’ on the side of his nose, which has now grown to the size of a sesame seed.
I fear it might be a tumour.
Do vets treat gerbils?
A
Yes they do.
Some vets (including myself) are particularly interested in the problems of the pet minorities.
They are fascinating in themselves, but they also offer us humans many of the benefits of pet ownership more commonly attributed to dogs and cats.
Despite their independent nature, they quickly become a pleasant distraction from an otherwise plastic world.
As far as your gerbil's nose is concerned, it could well be a tumour, but it may not be serious.
See if you can find a vet who shares your enthusiasm.
The gerbil does need to be examined properly and there are ways and means of doing it with the minimum amount of stress.
He may need to have the lump removed.
It is possible to operate on gerbils with great success, but there are risks.
Your vet can advise.
MEDICAL RISKS EXPLAINED
Toxocariasis (not to be confused with toxoplasmosis) is a disease caused when eggs of the toxocara worm (found in the intestines of dogs and cats) are accidentally swallowed by people.
Symptoms can include stomach upsets, headaches, sore throats, asthma and tiredness.
Sight can be affected.
It is serious, and children are most at risk, but there are only about two cases per million people each year.
Almost all puppies are born with toxocara, picked up from mother's milk.
To prevent the disease from spreading to your family, try:
regularly worming all dogs and cats — at least every three months.
Monthly is better.
More often for young puppies and kittens, pregnant and nursing mothers and bitches in season.
See your vet about it.
training your dog to relieve itself where you want it to.
Clear up afterwards.
Toxocara eggs have to lie on the ground for two weeks before they are dangerous.
Fresh motions are not infectious.
ensuring children wash their hands after playing with pets.
covering prepared food to prevent contamination by flies.
burning pet waste, or placing it in a sealed bag in a suitable container.
MARK EVANS is a practising vet and regular broadcaster.
He and his wife Sarah, also a vet, have a ginger tom cat called Gorbachev and a dog called Katie.
Mark's particular interests are animal nutrition, preventive medicine and human-pet bonding
GHI tried & tested
VACUUM CLEANERS: WHAT'S NEW?
Today's vacuum cleaners have a confusing array of features, so GHI tested a range of models to find the best buys
THE LATEST VACUUM CLEANERS reflect the needs of the 90s.
They have variable suction for cleaning delicate curtains, as well as thick carpet, and filters that take out allergens as well as dust.
Uprights are traditional British favourites and are even more popular now that storage for all the extras has been integrated into their design.
Features to look for
Power Wattage equals power, but the cleaner with the highest wattage isn't necessarily the most efficient: it's the combination of power, suction and airflow, plus the design of the hosing, filters and fan, which makes the difference.
Cylinders rely primarily on suction, so they tend to be more powerful than uprights.
Variable power means that you can adjust the wattage to control the amount of suction — useful when cleaning delicate items such as upholstery and curtains.
Many cleaners have a manual control, but in some cases the suction adjusts automatically to suit the surface.
Filters Sophisticated filtration systems are of special interest to allergy sufferers, as they help to remove pollen and mites from the air.
Some models have electrostatically-charged filters that attract the dust particles, and the Bosch Alpha 33 has an antibacterial filter which inhibits mould growth, another cause of allergy.
The dustbag itself forms part of the filtration system, so if high filtration is important to you, be sure to look out for cleaners that have dust indicators to tell you the amount the bag contains.
Most vacuum cleaners contain three filters — the dustbag, a motor filter and an exhaust filter.
Cylinder cleaners may have a fourth, and their filters are often more substantial.
Extras All cylinder cleaners we tested have automatic flex rewind.
Both types usually have a crevice tool, for delving into nooks and crannies; an upholstery or multi-purpose tool; and a small circular dusting brush.
Other optional extras include specialist (polished) floor cleaners and air  fresheners .
HOW GHI TESTED
The tests were based on European Standards, adapted to conditions in the home, and were carried out on Maples' 100% nylon twist-pile carpet and on tiled flooring.
Threads were scattered on the surface and flour and sand trodden in to simulate dust and grit (a major cause of wear) and the cleaner's overall efficiency was recorded.
Other factors considered were how close to the skirting board and how far under beds the cleaners would go.
Weights given (for uprights) include hose and standard cleaning head.
Most awkward edge cleaning had to be done using the crevice tool.
PERFORMANCE RATINGS
Percentage of dust picked up: 95–100% — excellent 90–94% — very good 84–89% — good Below 84% — satisfactory
HOW THEY WORK
Upright cleaners have a motorised head which beats the carpet to loosen the dirt, while the brushes remove fluff and animal hair.
Most suck dirt into the dustbag via an inlet pipe.
Most uprights (and all those tested here) will lie flat for cleaning beneath furniture.
Cylinders rely on suction, which is why they often have a higher wattage than uprights.
Since cylinder cleaners don't beat the surface, they are recommended for hard floors and short-pile carpets.
Motorised (turbo) attachments, that agitate the carpet pile in the same way as an upright, are available as extras.
If you'd like to know more about carpet care, send for our information sheet Facts On Carpets (£1.75).
Send your cheque, payable to Good Housekeeping Institute, quoting the title and including an sae, to GHI Advice, 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP.
GHI craft
BEAUTIFUL CUSHIONS in three hours
Turn your hand to the Victorian art of ribbon weaving.
It's surprisingly quick and easy, with delightful results
RIBBON WEAVING IS A SIMPLE, fun way to add colour and style to soft furnishings and accessories.
By combining a variety of ribbons of different colours and widths, you can create spectacular 3-D designs (see far right).
But start with a simple, basketweave design that's straightforward to make.
It's quick, too — making a cushion cover only takes an afternoon.
What you'll need
Colourfast polyester-satin ribbon — see stage 1 for instructions on how to estimate the length you need.
For a 30×30cm cushion cover, we used about 7.5m of 15mm-wide ribbon in each of two colours (15m in total).
Iron-on interfacing (eg Vilene, available from department stores and haberdashery stores) cut to the size of the finished cushion, plus 1.5cm seam allowance all round.
Traditionally, the ribbon weave was left loose, but it's easier to use interfacing to keep it in place.
Glass-headed pins.
A cork board or hessian-backed carpet square to work on.
This should be slightly bigger than the piece to be worked.
Fabric for the back of the cushion, cut to the same size as the interfacing.
Acetate lining is ideal, and comes in a wide range of colours.
Zip, about 3cm shorter than the length of one side (excluding seam allowance).
Cushion pad.
Optional trimmings
For a gathered frill: lace or double-sided satin ribbon, measuring twice the perimeter of the cushion.
For piping: piping cord, measuring the perimeter of the cushion, plus 3cm, and the same length of ribbon (at least 4cm wide) for the casing.
Make a contrasting edging by plaiting lengths of ribbon.
Attach to the perimeter of the cushion cover.
Method
1
To work out the lengths of ribbon needed, draw diagrams of the cushion to show the vertical and horizontal ribbons.
Decide which widths and colours of ribbon to use, and mark on the diagrams.
Count the number of strips you'll need, and then multiply by the length of the cushion, adding a 1.5cm seam allowance top and bottom and on each side of the cushion.
NOTE: Our diagrams were simple because our design featured a single width of ribbon, in only two colours.
When more widths and colours are used, the diagrams — and calculations — become more complicated.
If you want to include a diagonal design, along with vertical and horizontal ribbons, you will need to draw more than one diagram.
2
Cut the ribbon into required lengths.
To cut the horizontal and vertical strips quickly, wind the ribbon round a piece of cardboard of the correct length and cut through all thicknesses.
(Diagonal ribbons would need to be cut individually.)
Then place the interfacing on the board, adhesive side up, and pin the vertical ribbons to it.
3.
Weave the horizontal ribbons under and over the vertical ones.
Be sure to push the ribbons together, so there are no spaces between them — we used a fork for this.
Secure ribbons with pins.
4.
Cover with a damp cloth and iron gently, fusing the woven ribbon to the interfacing.
Remove the pins and iron again on the wrong side, then tack round the perimeter to secure the ribbon ends.
To make the cushion cover
Place the right sides of the back and front pieces together, pin, and tack along one side.
Machine stitch 3cm in from the corner at each end.
Open the seam and press flat.
Place the zip, face down, over the tacked part of the seam, on the wrong side.
Pin, tack and stitch.
Open zip.
Add piping or frill, if desired.
Pin, tack and stitch along the remaining three sides, including frill or piping, if using.
Clip the corners.
Turn the cover right side out and insert the cushion pad.
New dimensions
Adding diagonal ribbons creates a new dimension.
You can also have fun with 3-D effects.
At first it will be a matter of trial and error, but an advantage of ribbon weaving is that it is so easy to undo and start again.
If you'd like to start the easy way, cushion kits, priced from £8.50 plus £1.50 p&p, are available from Ribbon Designs (081–958 4966).
GHI cookery
Zest Appeal
Liven up your cooking with the tang of fresh lemons — versatile and inexpensive at this time of year, they'll add a zingy touch of magic to all sorts of dishes
Vibrant and refreshingly tangy with a lovely fresh zest, lemons are amazingly versatile.
Slices, wedges or twists of peel add both flavour and colour to garnishes, and the juice adds zing to drinks, soufflés and sorbets.
As a flavour enhancer, lemon is unbeatable.
There's no more perfect strawberry than one soaked in a mix of lemon juice and a little sugar.
Lemon juice is an excellent tenderiser, too.
Any cut of meat, chicken or fish will benefit from this marinade — so simple and useful.
And this resourceful fruit has more to offer: it stops fruit and vegetables, such as apples, avocados and artichokes, from discolouring; it sets reluctant jams and jellies made with low- pectin fruits.
And if you rub a lemon slice around a bowl before whisking egg whites, you'll get a better result.
Finally, used lemon halves are perfect for wiping away smells from chopping boards.
BUYING AND STORING
A lemon should feel heavy and have a fairly smooth, brightly coloured skin.
Store in a vegetable rack in a cool, dry place.
Don't leave a damaged lemon in a batch of good fruit, as it will soon affect the rest.
And don't store lemons in the fridge — chilling reduces the amount of juice a lemon will yield by up to half.
But pop a lemon into the microwave on HIGH for 30sec and you'll be able to extract more juice.
PREPARING
Always scrub lemons well before use and dry with kitchen paper before grating or squeezing.
When grating, take off the thin outer layer of zest, being careful not to remove any white pith, which can be bitter.
Alternatively, pare off the rind using a swivel-type peeler.
Always cover rind once grated, as it soon dries up.
Cut lemons must also be covered tightly or the juice will evaporate.
FREEZING
Grate the rind and squeeze the juice before freezing them together in ice-cube trays.
Once set, pop out of the trays and transfer to a polythene bag.
(Do remember one ice cube won't necessarily equal one lemon.)
The cubes can be added to soups and sauces or thawed for use in puddings and cakes.
Or grate the rind onto small pieces of freezer film; wrap tightly, then place in a polythene bag.
Freeze the juice separately.
Cut whole lemons into slices, open-freeze on trays, then pack into polythene bags.
Use frozen to drop into drinks.
DRYING
Pare the rind from the lemons, removing as much white pith as possible.
Place on a baking sheet and bake in a very low oven until crisp.
When cold, pack into an airtight container and store in a cool, dry place.
Use in soups or stews or add to a storage jar of sugar.
Or grind down to a powder if you want to add it to smooth sauces.
Refreshingly different:(from left) Mushroom & Parmesan Risotto; Pork With Lemon & Celeriac Stuffing and Dieter's Devilled Poussin
the ultimate BRANDY SNAP GHI's series of recipes for the ultimate temptation
Crisp, golden brandy snaps filled with a soft gooseberry fool, served with delicious brandy cream
MAKING BRANDY SNAPS is much easier than it looks.
Once you've mastered the technique, trays of brandy snaps can be baked in quick rotation.
A useful tip is to make sure that no more than two brandy snaps are baked on each tray.
If you have too many coming out of the oven at the same time, some will set too hard while the others are being rolled up.
If this does happen, put one tray back in the oven to keep warm.
This should help to soften them, but they won't be as easy to roll up.
Unless your oven temperature is very even, it's a good idea to swap the trays around; the brandy snaps nearer the heat will spread better and become more lacy than those cooking at a lower temperature.
The brandy scrolls will keep in an airtight container for up to two weeks, but shouldn't be filled more than 30min before serving as the gooseberry fool makes them go soft.
We've lightly set the fool with gelatine so that it's not too runny.
The fool is quite tart to offset the sweetness of the brandy scrolls and cream.
Frozen gooseberries are available all year round in most major supermarkets.
Alternatively, use cans of gooseberries.
You'll need to drain, liquidise and sieve the contents of four 425g (15oz) cans for the purée.
If serving the gooseberry fool on its own, add a little extra sugar to taste.
GHI entertaining
ALL RIGHT ON THE NIGHT
If there are friends coming to dinner, but you're going to be busy during the day, don't panic!
These wonderful, exotic recipes can be prepared ahead and then frozen — so you only have a few finishing touches to add
The most frequent plea we hear from readers is for a no-fuss dinner-party menu.
We all know that the best dishes for entertaining are those that require little last-minute attention, and they're better still if they can be prepared in advance and frozen.
So here is the ideal menu.
The pastries are very simple, using ready-made hummus, and can be stored in the fridge or freezer, ready to cook.
The casserole is a delicious mix of lamb, subtly flavoured with honey and spices.
It also freezes well, or it will keep in the fridge for a day or two.
Lightly spiced prunes and pears are stirred in just before serving.
The dessert is a variation on a classic recipe that coconut lovers will adore.
Again, it's made ahead and chilled or frozen.
good WINES
The pick of the half bottles, wines with food and Spar stores come of age
PERFECT PARTNERS
GHI knows all about the tricky business of matching wine to food — sometimes at tastings we line up as many as 12 wines alongside three courses, and the results can be surprising.
One person who spends much of his time doing the same thing is Master of Wine Tim Hanni from the Beringer Vineyards School for American Chefs.
Hanni's wine and food discoveries range from the obvious — for example, blue cheese makes tannic Cabernet Sauvignon wines taste softer; some highly flavoured dishes work better with a less flavoursome wine — to the more unusual: pepper Brie makes almost any wine served with it more flavoursome.
Hanni also knows, as does GH, that recipes with lemon (see page 118), need high-acidity whites, or reds.
BETTER BY HALF
If you prefer to keep your wine consumption to one or two good glasses, or like to try a different wine with each course when dining à deux , think about half bottles.
Sainsbury's has a good range — try the pleasant, grassy ‘90 Chablis (£3.75), the elegant '90 Sancerre, Les Beaux Regards (£3.75), or the damson-charged '90 Beaujolais Villages, Château des Vergers (£2.65).
The sweet toothed should buy the excellent, floral Muscat de Saint Jean de Minervois, a snip at £2.65.
Visit Waitrose too, for a half bottle of delicious plum and cherry- layered beaujolais, the ‘89 Saint-Amour, Les Poulets, which is given away at £2.99.
BEATING WINE ALLERGY
Do you turn red after a glass of vin rouge?
Are you seasick after a sip of white wine?
If so, you may be one of the unfortunate few with a wine allergy.
A reaction to red is usually due to the pigment.
One solution is to drink only paler reds from Northern Europe — the Loire or Burgundy — rather than darker, southern wines.
Cheap, sweet white wine with an overload of sulphur is the main cause of white wine allergy, so trade up to better, drier whites (£3.50–£4 plus).
Watch alcohol content too — drinkers sometimes react unfavourably to high-alcohol wines from California and Australia.
Northern European wines have low- alcohol levels — whites such as Portugal's Vinho Verde and Germany's Mosel, are the lowest of all at 7 or 8% alcohol.
THAT'S THE SPIRIT
It is not often that the MacQuitty tastebuds are stumped by a GH recipe.
But, I am afraid to say that this month's Ultimate Brandy Snap , filled with gooseberry fool (page 124), is best served either on its own, or with a small tot of brandy.
Mixing spirits and wine can work surprisingly well, but not with this dish — pudding wines just could not cope with its intense brandy flavour.
Instead, serve a fine, fiery, velvety Cognac such as Martell's VS (Oddbins, £15.49).
Or, if you're watching the budget, try Bobadilla's fruity, vanilla-nosed ‘103’ Spanish brandy (Oddbins, £9.49).
These brandies also make great February warmers and digestifs .
FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE
Capable Master of Wine Philippa Carr is the wine buyer for Spar, once a corner-shop group, now a spruced-up convenience- store empire.
With over 2000 licensed stores to cater for, it's the second largest wine outlet in the country after the Co-op.
Almost everyone has a branch locally, and one of its great strengths is its opening hours: 8am–10pm, seven days a week, 364 days a year.
Spar's wine selection has been steadily upgraded since Philippa Carr's arrival, and although not in the same league as the major supermarkets, it is still a very handy outlet.
Try its lively, grassy, gooseberry-like '90 Sauvignon, Vin de Pays du Jardin de la France from Guy Saget (£3.55) that would go down a treat with the Mushroom & Parmesan Risotto (page 120), or the Lemon & Mustard Mackerel (page 122).
A 1986 Château Plagnac (£6.89), a plummy, cinnamon-scented claret is another Spar find, as is the rich, inky, violet redolent '90 Barbera d'Asti from Viticoltori dell'Acquese (£3.75).
JANE MACQUITTY has been writing about wine since 1975 and is wine correspondent for The Times.
The latest of her four books on wine, Jane MacQuitty's Pocket Guide To Australian Wines, is published by Mitchell Beazley, price £5.95