

GH making things happen
1991 has been a marvellous year for Good Housekeeping and it's largely thanks to you.
Your letters, on every subject under the sun from houses to hypnosis, dogs to duchesses, soufflés to suburbia have kept us all informed and entertained, and your support has been fantastic .
The circulation of Good Housekeeping keeps going up and up, which gives us all a great buzz.
Meeting so many of you at our super readers' events is also a terrific plus and 1991 has been hectic from beginning to end, thanks to Frances Barnes and her team, who, together with the hard-working Good Housekeeping Institute, arrange all our special reader occasions.
We've had health seminars, confidence courses, cookery demonstrations, fashion shows, gourmet lunches, brides' days and what I know will be our hugely successful evening at Harrods.
We've already got a fabulous programme lined up for 1992 and we all look forward to seeing lots of you then.
It's marvellous to have such an enthusiastic audience, and I know from your response to competitions, offers and reader treats how much you like to join in.
It's always good, too, to hear how much being a winner has meant to you.
Vanessa Stedman, one of the winners of the GH/NatWest Bank Enterprising Women Awards 1991, wrote to tell us that since appearing in our November issue, the postman has been staggering under the weight of all the orders for her fashionable appliqué T-shirts.
That's the power of Good Housekeeping for you.
I know this is a very foodie (and fattening!) time of year, but Moyra Fraser, our Cookery Editor, and the rest of the GHI team have taken enormous care to see that you have a marvellous variety of recipes for festive entertaining at your fingertips.
And under the guidance of Nutritionist Fiona Hunter, we're launching a special slimline eating plan next month, guaranteed to deal with any of those excess Christmas inches.
We've all fallen in love with our cover picture this month, and hope you will too — it's got such a happy, festive feel.
Photographer Sandra Lousada, who produces lots of our favourite pictures, took so many gorgeous shots that we were spoilt for choice.
Sandra and Fashion Editor Caroline Baker had lots of fun making sure the pictures were perfect — and that Alex and her furry friend looked at the camera at just the right moment!
So it only remains for me to say from all of us, have a wonderful Christmas and an even happier New Year.
1992 is Good Housekeeping's 70th Birthday Year, so make merry with us.
Sally O'Sullivan, EDITOR-IN-CHIEF
PS As I know you love to peep behind the scenes at GH, I thought you'd like to see a rather different shot of the cosmetic bosses featured in Feels Good!last month.
This time, as you can see, there's Joan Barrell, our Publishing Director (centre back), Beauty Editor Penny Rich (foreground), and myself (left), all sticking our noses in!
It's always such fun to see the faces behind the brand names — I bet you never thought the faces behind your face looked like this!
The faces behind your pages: Public Affairs Director Frances Barnes, Cookery Editor Moyra Fraser, Nutritionist Fiona Hunter and Fashion Editor Caroline Baker
The faces behind your face: having fun — with a little help from GH 
Inside GHI
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING INSTITUTE TRIED.TESTED.TRUSTED
SUZANNE WILKINSON, Consumer Research Editor, reviews the subjects — hot and cold — that you wanted us to investigate this year.
Another year over, and without doubt the subject that brought the most response was water: jug filters, built-in water filters, water scares.
These have all featured in GH and we'll be keeping you informed of any new developments.
Rigorous testing of all consumer products was, as always, the main focus of our work — and some of the tests were more enjoyable than others!
Recently, for instance, the GHI Taste Panel tucked in to ready-made Christmas cakes (see page 107), while two more GHI researchers literally went into cold storage (-18°C) to test out the thermal properties of the vests featured on page 105.Emma was wired up with probes, so that her skin temperature could be monitored by Jane, and left in cold storage for a specified time.
We always said that the Good Housekeeping Institute was unique, and the job requirements are too!
Our thanks to Iceland for providing the venue and the hot coffee afterwards.
We also teamed up with our Beauty Department to analyse and assess skincare products.
Whether they're tanning creams or moisturisers, they can be expensive items which you want tried and tested.
We enjoyed meeting lots of you at our reader events.
The GHI/Panasonic Roadshow travelled from Glasgow to Southampton, and a large number of you came to our GHI/Liberty Sewing Day.
And our Brides' Day was a sellout, so we'll be running another one soon.
We know that you want the GHI to guide you in choosing and using appliances, so we'll be reviewing one product every month, starting with vacuum cleaners in February.
Fridges, cordless phones and irons will follow.
Do write in about issues you'd like investigated; we love to hear from you.
The Institute is made up of three departments:Cookery , which devises, develops and double-tests every recipe featured;Consumer Research , where experienced researchers investigate whether domestic goods live up to the claims made by manufacturers; and the Consumer Advice Service , which answers your questions and produces GHI Information Sheets.
If you have a query, why not phone one of the GHI's help lines?
0839–141414 Practical advice on choosing and using products for the home.
0839–141415 Food, cookery and nutritional advice
0839–141416 Household advice, including stain removal, cleaning and specialist services.
All calls are charged 48p/minute (9.30am-5pm).
GH first thoughts
Everything knowingly oversold
PENNY VINCENZI
I'm not sure if there's a name for what I suffer from.
I looked it up in my handbook of psychiatry and the nearest I could get was ‘spendthrift behaviour’, an expression of hypomania, a serious problem requiring urgent treatment — usually, so it says in my handbook, in a hospital setting, which seems a little extreme — but there you are.
The way it takes me, my mania, is a compulsion to spend money.
Not a lot of money, but the most I can pay for any given commodity.
I am phobic about bargains.
I hurry past windows labelled ‘everything must go’, even when they are fronting the most respectable shops.
A bargain makes me feel threatened and seriously in need of urgent hospital treatment: depressed and unsure of myself.
The other day, for instance, I was out trying to buy a coat for daughter number three: a nice, plain, narrow, navy coat, such as people of her age (16) like to wear.
We saw one, very nice indeed: pushing £200.
Not quite right, not quite plain enough or narrow enough, but getting there.
Walking along, we passed through the market; there, on the rails, we saw rows and rows of navy coats; wool and cashmere, nice and plain and long and narrow, exactly what she wanted.
‘Try one on darling,’ said the rail owner.
‘There, lovely, fits her beautifully.’
Only problem was the price.
‘Now that is a true, a genuine, bargain — £65 for a coat like that is really giving it away,’ he said.
‘Bankrupt stock it is, shops can't afford to take delivery — it's the recession, you see.’
He saw me hesitate and misread the body language.
‘I'll tell you what,’ he said, ‘you can have it for £60 as that's the last size 10 I've got, and I've got to pack up in a minute and it's raining.
OK, I'll take a cheque, Access, anything.’
‘Well,’ I said, panic setting seriously in (where was the nearest hospital?).
‘Well I don't know, we might look a bit further…
’ The daughter cut in, she'd seen me like this before.
‘We'll take it,’ she said firmly, taking out my credit cards, my pen, easing me towards the Mercury phone booth which doubled as his office.
I signed and we left.
‘Don't tell me,’ she said, soothingly, as one does to the deranged.
‘I know it was awfully cheap: it'll probably fall to bits, it can't really be cashmere.
It's all right, you'll be fine, just keep calm and we'll go and get you a nice cup of tea.’
My mania is familiar to my family.
And this is a bad time of year for us hypomaniacs.
Bargains everywhere.
Very difficult to avoid them and pay the full price for anything.
Friends keep ringing up to share their good fortune.
‘I just bought a Jasper Conran suit for less than half price.
Why don't you go, there are still a few left.
I make feeble excuses about having to write a column.
‘Well, but,’ they say, ‘you'll save so much money, you won't have to write a column at all.’
I dare say you are finding this all a little hard to believe.
I so myself, a lot of the time.
Take the microwave.
We decided we needed a microwave.
Down to the local microwave store; there they all were, not a lot to choose between them really.
With unerring instinct I found the most expensive.
Well, you could see it was worth it.
It worked out electronically that it took a fish finger less time to defrost than a leg of lamb, and when your designer-label, calorie-counted tagliatelle was ready for eating, it told you so with five bleeps rather than the paltry three offered by the cheaper models.
We were just having it put into its box when the Manager suddenly remembered that he had an almost identical model out the back, £25 cheaper.
The only difference, he assured me, was that it was cream rather than white.
‘It can't be the only difference,’ I said.
Oh, but it was, he said.
Well, but, I said, it probably wouldn't give the five bleeps.
Three wouldn't be enough.
It would be a false economy, I wouldn't realise the tagliatelle was done, it would be ruined, ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘five bleeps, just the same.’
The only difference was the colour.
Well the thing was my kitchen was all white.
It just wouldn't go.
It would look awful.
This was an aesthetic home.
The nice young man couldn't argue with that; I paid the £25 extra and hurried out of the shop before he found a cheap white one.
Then there was the restaurant.
I was in New York researching my new novel.
I saw this nice-looking Italian job — lots of classy pasta dishes.
I was just going in when I saw the sign.
‘Pre-theatre offer,’ it said.
(They don't know how to spell over there.)
‘Order before 6.45, and get a full three-course dinner for $20.’
I looked at my watch: 6.30.
Did I want a three-course dinner?
Not really.
And if it was pre-theatre the diners would be all edgy and watching their watches.
I walked around the block, checked in at 6.50, and ordered.
‘That's too bad.
You just missed our offer,’ said the waiter.
I smiled at him happily.
It was a great two-course $45 dinner.
I expect you're all thinking I'm rich, I'm not.
My handbook of psychiatry blames it all on my childhood — well it would, wouldn't it?
Certainly my childhood was thrifty and it seemed dreary.
My mother saved bits of string and fed the dogs on scraps.
Of course you did then; it was a different age.
Its inhabitants mistrusted conspicuous consumption.
That lady who won the pools and said she was going to spend, spend, spend, might have been saying she was going to You Know What, You Know What, You Know What, for the disapproval she found heaped on her.
I grew up resolving to eschew bargains, to consume conspicuously; to feed my dogs free-range steak, to change my car when the ashtrays were full.
That seemed to me to epitomise if not happiness, then certainly style.
In fact, my dogs eat the supermarket's own brand and I seldom change my car; paying double for my dinner is the nearest I get to it, to being Imelda, or Ivana, but it makes me feel good.
My family humours me, but daughter number four gives me problems.
She saves wrapping paper from her birthday and reuses envelopes.
Last Saturday, she dragged me around some warehousetype place selling leggings for £2.99.
I remember that warehouse, it used to be nice department store, everything knowingly oversold.
I think, however, I may have discovered a cure.
I managed to persuade my husband that we should send daughter number three to what is reliably known as the most expensive school in Britain.
Writing the cheque for the first term's fees was wonderful therapy.
Penny Vincenzi is a journalist, author of best-selling novel Old Sins , and mother of four daughters
you WRITE to us
We pay £25 for our star letter and £15 for all others.
Keep writing!
STAR LETTER: OUR CHILDREN ARE OUR FUTURE
I read your Education Report: Home Help (October GH) with interest.
One of my main concerns is nursery-school education, and I wonder if we've progressed at all from Margaret Thatcher's quote in 1972: ‘Within the next 10 years nursery education should become available without charge…‘
On becoming a parent, one of my main concerns was the availability of pre-school education for my daughter.
I am fortunate that she adores books, enthuses over learning at home and has settle happily into a private nursery school.
‘To push or not to push one's children’ is the question.
I am trying to lay the building blocks at 3–4 years old, or even earlier.
My daughter finds everyday learning fun because it involves doing things together, but what of the working mother, or the one who has other children demanding all her attention, or the low-income family — don't they have a right to pre-school education too?
The children of today are the adults of tomorrow and it's their world, but will they be ready for it?
Mrs Rosie Dunford, Truro 
HEAVENLY NATURE
I smiled at Mrs Pat Horsley's advice to consider the pleasures of gardening in Heaven On Earth (YWTU,September GH).
We are inundated with rabbits, so we fenced off a rabbit-proof area for vegetables and netted the top — the pigeons, caterpillars and slugs ate the lot.
I decided to specialise in patio pot plants but nothing thrived, and I've just discovered that woodlice have invaded the pots and even eaten away the linings of wall baskets.
Next door's dog jumps our fence and has dug under our sheds, chewing the wood away in her effort to rid us of rabbits (no complaints, we love the dog).
Everyday I walk in the field behind our home, and apart from the rabbits, I see owls, partridges and pheasants, deer, baby foxes playing, hares boxing, carpets of bluebells and wild orchids — an ever-changing scene and my own heaven on earth.
Mrs Christine Hills, Romsey 
STEPMOTHER'S TRIANGLE
As a stepmother I should like to say how much I identified and sympathised with the writer of ‘I Love Him But Not His Daughter’(October GH).
I found it a very compassionate account of the unrewarding role filled by many in today's ever-divorcing society.
It is not as though we don't want to love these innocent victims or that they do not want to be loved, but guilt and bitterness prevent it — the guilt of all parties.
Many take on this role, unaware of its myriad problems.
If more magazines published such articles we could learn from others' experiences and take steps to help all victims of this eternal triangle.
Mrs Frances Fortescue, Bransgore 
MORE PET HATES
How comforting to read Gill Rowley's Pet-Hate List (YWTU,October GH) about the check-out trolley pushers — I always thought I was the only person in the world who wanted to reverse, screaming hysterically, ‘Get back!’
I just cannot stand lack of consideration for others: shown by people who park their cars so close that you have to slide in sideways — cleaning both cars with your clothes as you squeeze through the 2in space left for opening the door.
Mrs Joan Fabbri, Walton-on-Thames 
CHILDREN'S PARTY MAGIC
Do you remember birthday parties when you were a child?
They were happy affairs — we dressed in our best, played a few games like Farmer In His Den, Blind Man's Bluff Or Musical Chairs , we enjoyed a tea of sandwiches, chocolate biscuits, ice cream and jelly, sang ‘Happy Birthday’ and went home with a slice of cake.
Children's parties these days are somewhat more sophisticated, with at least a disco, if not a magician and a film show.
No longer is a slice of cake sufficient, party bags are a necessity and children weigh the success of failure of the occasion by what they take home.
A child's birthday seems to have lost its magic and has just become another consumer oriented status symbol.
Mrs Brenda Bebb, Nottingham 
AN EXCESS OF HEALTH
Nikki Bradford's Does Your Man Need An M.O.T ?
(October GH) promised valuable insight to anyone fighting the onset of middle age.
However, medical matters arouse potent and sometimes irrational emotions, and I'm sure your readers will have reacted very differently.
Males will have found themselves reassessing minor ailments.
In my teens, similar doubts lured me into the darker recesses of the family's medical encyclopedia, there to discover I was Britain's first recorded case of Futtock's Syndrome.
Females will have felt an urge to tackle their partner's worst excesses.
May I, in the interest of domestic bliss, remind us of an old joke: a man tells his doctor that he is giving up drinking, smoking and sex and asks if he will live longer.
The doctor replies, ‘No, but it's certainly going to seem like it’.
Chris Booth, Poole 
GH TO THE RESCUE
I agree wholeheartedly with Gillian Loader, chair of the Institute of Home Economics, in Whatever Happened to Music, Languages, Drama ?
(October GH).
Home Economics should not lose its status as a subject, because the knowledge attained by pupils prepares them for life.
Two years ago I decided to study the subject and healthy eating became a major household experience as we tried and tested GH recipes.
Conservation and pollution were important topics as I learnt about saving energy in the home and the environment.
We looked at labels and washing powders with more interest and at new washing machines with economy programmes — another exam question.
Your features on insulation, saving heat in the home and hypothermia in the elderly, became a springboard for an assignment.
We are familiar with food labels, safety, allergies, diets and counting calories.
Money matters and mortgages were researched.
I understood exam stress thanks to you — my daughter took me to the exams to help keep me calm.
Thank you GH for being so much part of the syllabus.
Mrs Celia Humphreys, Carterton 
GH Fashion and Beauty
a look for a LIFESTYLE
Clarissa Baldwin needs a flexible wardrobe — one that suits both family life and smart work events, as well as her very practical day-to-day duties as Chief Executive of a dog-rescue charity.
Modern styling is all about being able to get the maximum possible mileage out of one outfit, and Clarissa Baldwin's style needs to be equally appropriate for dealing with mistreated dogs and misguided MPs.
At 42, she is Chief Executive of the National Canine Defence League, and is married to property executive Roger Baldwin, with an 11-year-old son, Jamie.
As the woman who dreamed up the slogan ‘A Dog Is For Life, Not Just For Christmas’, she needs to have a high profile for campaigning, while still being able to turn her hand to clearing the odd blocked drain that might occur at the kennels.
GH Fashion Editor Caroline Baker compiled a go-anywhere wardrobe for Clarissa, based around two essentials: a polo-neck black body leotard and slimming black ski pants (Clarissa is a size 14).
From there she can have fun layering fashion clothes on top, such as comfortable stylish tunics, and her favourite box jackets.
Add an overshirt and skirts of varying styles and she has a complete wardrobe.
The jacket can be mixed and matched with trousers and short, pleated skirts, and the skirt with tunic shapes, shirts or jackets of different lengths.
Caroline picked a theme of red and black, because Clarissa enjoys smart colours:
‘I hate earthy browns and my wardrobe is full of bright things,’ she says.
‘I'll spend quite a lot on, say, a Mondi jacket, but will wear it with cheaper skirts from Marks & Spencer and Principles.
I tend to buy something new once a month, and inevitably end up getting various items for both Roger and Jamie as well, so I have to try to keep my spending under strict control.
I do prefer to wear smart clothes for work; it's still not easy for women in business to be taken seriously — I like to look the part.
With this in mind, Caroline picked out the dog's-tooth check suit by Principles, shown here in red (also available in black), which is excellent value for money and extremely versatile.
Though based in London, Clarissa drives 40,000 miles a year attending dog shows, funding events and keeping the dog-rescue operations ticking over.
(There are 13 dog-rescue centres nationwide.)
The NCDL has a nondestruction policy, which makes it different from other animal-rescue services: it always tries to find good homes for all dogs, and as such is the beneficiary of many legacies.
Clarissa, who started as the NCDL's Public Relations Officer before her talents were put to wider use as Chief Executive, is currently promoting the Neutering Roadshow, where people who can't afford to have their dogs neutered pay just £10 for a voucher, redeemable at their local vet.
The charity then pays for the operation in an effort to control dog numbers.
‘We believe in educating people about how to look after dogs.
During recent reporting of The Dangerous Dogs Act, I often spoke up on behalf of dogs that many people might otherwise have had put down — I think the owners are at fault for not acting responsibly.
‘Our kennel staff talk to all family members before handing over a dog, and give important advice on training.
And something has to be done about the over-breeding of pedigree dogs: I've met Home Office Minister Angela Rumbold to discuss important changes I would like to see made to The Dog Breeding Act.’
An inevitable part of fund-raising is the charity ball: Clarissa recently hosted A Night At The Dogs at The Park Lane Hotel.
These glittering occasions can obviously put a strain on any wardrobe, and the clear answer these days is to hire, rather than buy, a ballgown.
Clarissa chose hers from Putting On The Glitz.
Looking at the relaxed poses in our photographs, it will come as no surprise to learn that Clarissa modelled for a few years back in the 60s.
‘Most of my work was in Denmark and Sweden, then when I came back to England, Twiggy's skinny figure was in vogue and mine didn't match up!’ she says.
She married Roger, and they now  live in leafy north-west London so that he can be near the cricket at Lord's.
Cricket is a family passion.
Jamie is a budding cricketer, and he plays with his father every Saturday during the season.
Other weekends may be taken up with Clarissa's dog shows or fund-raising flag days and jumble sales.
Christmas is the one time completely free of cricket — and Clarissa loves the theatricality of dressing the tree and laying the table with the best silver.
Roger starts off the celebrations with spaghetti Bolognaise on Christmas Eve.
The stockings on Christmas morning are always full of useful things (Clarissa's includes Pond's Cold Cream and tights), then after church the family goes for a long walk to work up a hearty appetite for dinner.
Roger revealed that Clarissa had been buying Christmas presents since the summer; little bundles would be secreted in cupboards.
It's this sort of efficiency that, translated into business terms, has made the NCDL such a successful charity.
CLARISSA'S BEAUTY CARE
‘Being 40 just crept up on me,’ says Clarissa.
‘And it came as a bit of a shock when Roger bought me some anti-wrinkle cream and volunteered to pay for a face-lift if I ever wanted one!
He wasn't being unkind, just generous!
But I don't think I would.
Ferrying Jamie to his sporting activities has made me more conscious of the need to exercise, and I work out at a gym once or twice a week.’
Because she wars brightly coloured clothes, Clarissa sticks to blue eyeliner and heavy, fibrous mascara — a look that we suggested updating with less clogging, but lashthickening mascaras.
Using Estée Lauder's Destination range, which features plums and smoky greys, we showed how good her eyes can look with quite strong colours.
For the evening, a coat of Rich Plum mascara by Yves Saint Laurent on top of black added drama, especially with soft eyeliner above top lashes.
Clarissa's long blonde hair is her strongest feature — she maintains it with Clairol's Loving Care to hold back the grey.
‘I decided I was spending a fortune at the hairdressers to no great effect and I find the home treatment better she says.
She also cuts it with the kitchen scissors!
However, as it tends to be dry at the ends, we trimmed off an inch and tamed the frizz with heated rollers.
And as Clarissa usually ties back her hair, we showed her a sophisticated style that takes only seconds, but looks professional.
If you'd like to make a donation write to The National Canine Defence League, 1 Pratt Mews, NW1 0AD ()
Above: Clarissa's ballgown is from Putting On The Glitz; hire prices from £45-£95.
Roger's suit and bow tie by Daks at Simpsons of Piccadilly; Principles for Men white embroidered shirt £34.99
Below: Wrapped up for winter walks along the canal, Clarissa wears a Gloverall duffel coat, £147.50; N+L ribbed polo-neck sweater, £47.99; Oasis wool-mix stirrup pants, £39.99; Russell & Bromley slip-on shoes, £89.50.
Jamies wears Marks & Spencer cord trousers, £19.99 and hooded jacket, £47.50
Above: Casual clothes are called for when Clarissa visits kennels.
Here she is with Noddy, a white German Shepherd crossbreed, found tied to a park bench, Lenny the lurcher and Porky the mongrel (now with a new owner).
She wears Oasis chenille cowl-neck sweater, £34.99; Harvey Nichols wool polo-neck body, £79; Principles cotton ski-pants, £22.99; Butler & Wilson gilt earrings, £42
Far left: ‘I learnt flower arranging from my mother.
I'm no expert, but I love to have huge displays whenever I can afford them,’ says Clarissa.
She wears Marks & Spencer lambswool red tunic top, £25; Principles skirt (part of the suit), £39.99; Butler & Wilson double pearly earrings, £28
Left: In the NCDL's office, beneath the gaze of its patron The Queen, Clarissa wears Principles pure-wool tweed suit: jacket, £85 and skirt, £39.99; Harvey Nichols black wool poloneck body, £79; Marks & Spencer Velvet opaque tights, £7.99; Butler & Wilson gilt earrings, £42 and pearl and gold rope necklace, £98
Below: Time for opening the presents at home with Roger, Jamie and Kirsty the dog: Clarissa wears Principles black, sequinned T-shirt, £39.99; Next Directory pleated chiffon skirt, £64.99.
Roger wears Principles For Men white embroidered shirt, £34.99; trousers and waistcoat, Daks at Simpsons of Piccadilly.
Jamie wears Marks & Spencer shirt, £16.99, trousers, £19.99 and cardigan, £22.50
Right: Clarissa wears her own make-up, which Judith updated to give a softer look (far right).
Face: Dual Powder Foundation in Spice 652 by Dior (£20.50).
Eyes: Automatic Eyelid Foundation (£10) and Signature Eyeshadow in Horizon (£9.50) by Estée Lauder; Dessin Khôl Eyeliner No. 2 Pearly Black (£6.50) by Yves Saint Laurent.
Cheeks: Signature Powder Blush in Sepia (£15.50) by Estée Lauder.
Lips: Re-Nutriv All-Day Lipstick in All-Day Rosa Rosa (£9.50) by Estée Lauder.
Jigsaw blouse, £56; Harvey Nichols body £79; Butler & Wilson earrings, £42
Right: Pull hair into a loose pony tail and secure with a covered elastic band.
Twist pony tail round and make a gap in the middle of the hair above band.
Pull ends through the gap — this twists the sides into an elegant roll.
Leave ends, or curl under.
Mulberry gown, £49.95
Your chance to be LIFESTYLE STAR! win a 500 outfit from Jaeger
Here's the third token to collect in our Look For A Lifestyle competition.
The winner will be photographed for a future GH Lifestyle and wins a £500 outfit from Jaeger.
To enter the draw cut out token 3 (above), and send it, together with token 1 (from Nov GH) and token 2 (from Dec GH) to GH Lifestyle, 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP.
On 15 January 1992, Sally O'Sullivan, Editor-in-Chief of Good Housekeeping , will draw the winning entry.
RULES OF ENTRY: Applicants should be 18 years old or over and may submit only one entry.
The decision of the Editor is final and no correspondence may be entered into.
Employees of National Magazine Company and Jaeger, and their relatives, are not eligible to enter.
The contest is open to those in the UK, including Northern Ireland, and closes on 15 January 1992.
(No cash alternative will be offered.)
JANUARY
The Gardener's Year
In the first part of our monthly cut-out-and-keep guide, HAZEL EVANS outlines some novel ideas and timely tips for January
PLANNING
Order seeds — the most interesting selections are from Chiltern Seeds (mail order only) and Thompson & Morgan (also from garden centres).
See Address Book , page 22.
If your garden looks especially bare, plant container-grown shrubs, or note what to plant in September.
Hilliers and Notcutts are good shrub stockists.
Try Lonicera fragrantissima , a bushy honeysuckle (6ft high/6ft spread);Viburnum fragrans with pale pink scented flowers (9–12ft high); or winter sweet (Chimonanthus praecox ) with its violet perfume (10ft tall/8ft spread).
Start a Gardener's Diary , with a page for each month.
Draw a plan on each page to show where the colour is each month, and add comments about future planting.
FRUIT & VEG
There's still time to sow broad beans and peas for an early crop.
Beans should be about 6in apart and 2in deep, and benefit from being sown in blocks.
Round-seeded peas like ‘Meteor’, ‘Feltham First’ and ‘Little Marvel’can go in.
You need a trench the width of a spade and about 1½in deep.
Plant the peas, zigzag fashion, 2in apart.
Early potatoes should be sprouted indoors now to go out in spring.
The tubers shouldn't touch each other— sit them in the hollows of egg boxes, ‘eyes’ upwards in a cool, frost-free place with some light.
Cover rhubarb with a bucket for young shoots to use in winter puddings.
Use a bucket, too, to force chicory indoors; sit the roots vertically in moist compost, cover with 1.5cm (1in) of soil, then cover the bucket with black plastic to exclude all light.
The roots must not touch.
Leave in a minimum of 10°C (50°F).
By mid-February, you should have fat, white chicons (hearts) for salads.
Autumn raspberries need cutting back to just above ground level, and fruit trees should be sprayed against pests.
An organic alternative to proprietary sprays is a strong solution of soap or washing-up liquid in warm water.
Container-grown fruit bushes and trees can be planted if the weather is right.
Highfield Nurseries has a large selection.
INDOOR PLANTS
Don't discard plants given as presents just because they've finished flowering; just follow these tips:
Plant forced bulbs outside; they may flower next year.
Poinsettias should be cut back to within 4in of the roots, and left to rest until new shoots appear.
Cyclamens should be rested in a cool place indoors until they show signs of new life.
Both poinsettias and cyclamens benefit from a summer outdoors.
Indoor azaleas can go into the garden in spring.
But be warned: they may grow tall and leggy — plants are treated to make them short and bushy for one season.
PLANTING
Plant lilies in the garden, or in pots that can be moved into the limelight when buds appear.
White lilies are the most stunning — try the fragrant Easter Lily (Lilium longiflorum ), Madonna Lily (L. candidum ) or (L. regale (above) with its yellow throat.
Walter Blom & Son is a well-known lily specialist.
If bulbs look shrivelled when unpacked, immerse in trays of damp peat until plumped out.
Rose bushes can go in between now and March.
But if you have a heavy clay soil, wait for warmer weather.
Don't tread around bushes to firm them, this will cut off the oxygen supply to the roots.
Trees and shrubs can be planted on warm, dry days.
START OFF SEEDS
Planting seeds is cheaper than buying bedding plants to liven up your borders, and the best way to get unusual varieties:
For ultra-easy seed culture, plant seeds in cellulose pots like those made by Erin, or cubes of soil in honeycomb-shaped polystyrene trays like Propapack (both from garden centres).
That way you avoid the hazards of pricking out seedlings and keep root disturbance to a minimum.
Flowers need a minimum temperature of about 15°C (59°F) to germinate.
Remove seedlings from windowsills at night, as even centrally heated houses can become icy near the windows.
If you're not sure you can maintain the temperature, wait until next month.
Experiment with newcomers: ‘Avanti’, a very early flowering geranium, and ‘Picotee Swirl’, the first busy Lizzie in soft pink with frilled, deep rose edges.
From Thompson & Morgan.
Start off, indoors or under cover, half-hardy annuals that need a long growing season, such as Begonia semperflorens, gloxinias, trailing lobelias for hanging baskets, and pelargoniums.
JOBS TO DO
Dig over flowerbeds — the longer lumps of soil are exposed to frost, the easier it'll be to get a fine tilth in spring.
Spike frost-compacted lawns.
Dig in home-made compost to improve texture and richness.
But don't add commercial fertiliser yet — homemade compost breaks down more slowly, so the nutrients won't be washed away.
Protect the roots of half-hardy evergreens in tubs from the cold by wrapping newspaper, straw or old clothes around the tubs.
Check newly-planted shrubs and trees after each frost.
Tidy up borders, but wait until spring before taking dead foliage off herbaceous plants, as it protects new shoots.
Have the mower serviced if necessary.
Don't miss our handy Gardener's Year binder, designed to store your monthly cut-out-and-keep guide, for easy reference.
More details next month.
NEW IDEAS Colour coordinated borders Buy your colour off-the-peg for coordinated borders (above).
Following the appearance of Mr Fothergill's packets of different seeds in single colours last year, other firms are following suit.
Among them is Johnson's Seeds, which offers a Shades &’ Patches Collection of herbaceous plants for the border in yellow, blue, white or pink.
They are dry-cell plants (sprouted and packed in peat).
Lonicera fragrantissima,a fragrant honeysuckle 
SPECIAL GH OFFER Send for our really delightful, obeliskshaped, climbing-rose frame (above).
Made from ¾in nylon-coated steel tubing, it stands 5ft 6in high, with 13in sunk into the ground.
Winter is the ideal time to install it, as plants are dormant.
Don't miss it at our special price of £59.85.
To order, turn to page 158 .
THE HERB GARDEN
To enjoy out-of-season greenery, pot up small root pieces of mint, put them on a warm windowsill and they'll soon romp away.
If you're planning a formal herb patch, don't edge it with conventional box — use edible plants instead (above).
Woody herbs, like thyme, marjoram and winter savory stay green in all but the hardest winters and clip into tiny hedging.
They need a sunny site to ripen their wood.
For herb plants, go to Hollington Nurseries, or order seeds from Suffolk Herbs.
The Regal Lily (L. regale)with deep yellow throat 
Raise your own annuals for colourful borders
GH talking point
40 Things you need to know about 1992
Wine, water, salad cream, husbands, air fares, divorce…
It's almost 1992 — Euro-Year.
But what, apart from a hangover, will Britain share with its neighbours?
Will the single European market affect relationships between countries as well as trade?
And what changes can we expect to see during the coming year?
There's one short answer: 1992 will indeed see the removal of trade barriers between the 12 EC states and the seven in the European Trade Association (EFTA), but nothing happens until 31 December.
You'll have to wait until 1993 to see German, French and Italian shops crowding into the high street.
Don't expect a Big Bang.
The EC's wheels grind exceedingly slowly and nothing will happen overnight, even on 31 December 1992.
But here's a collection of invaluable 1992-isms to keep you ahead of the game.
EURO-QUEST 10 questions for your MEP
What will happen to food?
Background
France can keep its baguette and Britain its sliced white, because the EC has largely abandoned attempts to regulate the contents of food.
Fine, but though countries may eat what they like, they cannot exclude foods they think are inferior to their own.
Staples (such as cream) may be defined, and named foods may be protected, in which case Cornish pasties may have to come from Cornwall.
What about labelling?
At present, ingredients must be listed on packaged food, but not on food sold loose, and precise quantities need not be given.
Labels contain information on additives, but definitions of terms like ‘low-fat’ and ‘natural’are urgently needed.
Will goods from Europe be safe?
Background
Although the EC has reached agreement on product safety, there's some concern that dangerous goods banned here, like flammable foam furniture, may be sold in Britain.
The UK 
Consumer Protection Act says that all goods must be safe, but the EC might interpret this as an unfair barrier to trade.
If so, Britain would be in the position of forbidding its own manufacturers from making unsafe goods while allowing them to be imported.
There are also problems with the CE mark, which shows that goods meet European standards.
Some countries monitor its use more strictly than others, which is why jaundiced Trading Standards Officers sometimes call it the ‘Cover Everything’ mark.
How will the EC deal with complaints about goods bought abroad?
Background
There are no proposals to safeguard consumers who shop in another EC country.
If you want to buy expensive goods, the best advice must be to buy from stores in Britain (because here, your complaint is with the retailer, not the manufacturer) and to campaign for EC consumer protection laws.
Would a single currency or an EC-run economy make it easier to buy goods and financial services abroad?
Background
Consumers still have to compare prices in 12  currencies, because squabbles about whether the ecu is to be Europe's sole currency or an additional one are limiting its use.
Additionally, the stalemate over economic union makes it difficult to assess the costs of insurance or mortgages arranged abroad.
A central European bank could regulate the money supply of all EC countries, but that would be unacceptable to many members.
Will VAT go up?
Background
Britain, Ireland and Portugal are the only EC countries to zero-rate necessities like food, fuel, and children's clothing.
The EC has now agreed on a minimum of 15% VAT for most goods, but reduced rates (minimum 5%) will be applied to some categories, such as books and transport.
Zerorating has been reprieved until 1997, and as a unanimous vote is needed to enforce any change, Britain hopes to hang on to its zero rate.
Will it be easier to work abroad?
Background
In theory, you already can; in practice, it's not so easy.
The civil service, for example, doesn't have to consider employing foreign nationals, for security reasons — though this has been challenged.
In France, the civil service includes nurses; in Germany, it includes train drivers.
Not all qualifications are recognised throughout the EC; three-year degrees should be accepted, but there's no agreement yet on school-leaving exams.
Will European air fares be cheaper in 1993?
Background
Fare-fixing (two or more airlines fixing a price for a route) has always been forbidden by the EC, but that hasn't stopped it.
Will deregulation in 1993 make a difference?
The Consumers In The European Community Group is sceptical that prices will drop significantly.
Will I have to pay tax on goods bought abroad?
Background
Duty-free allowances will be phased out eventually, but they've been reprieved until 1999.
But to compensate, the amount of goods ‘personal shoppers’ can buy in shops abroad will increase from its present £420 to several thousand pounds.
More important is the effect that dropping dutyfrees may have on air and ferry fares.
The allowances have traditionally subsidised landing charges — so there's a risk that the cost will be passed to the consumer.
What about plans for a carbon tax?
Background
A tax on carbon-producing fuels such as coal, gas and oil has been proposed to help counter the greenhouse effect.
In the short term, it might have serious effects for consumers' budgets; in the long term, it might encourage a switch to nuclear or solar power.
The subject is still under debate but action may be taken soon.
Will all parents be allowed paid leave?
Background
Parental leave — which would allow either parent to take time off when a child is born — has been blocked by Britain for several years.
Britain also objected to the new directive on maternity leave.
The EC wants all women to have the right to return to work after 14 weeks' paid leave, but it looks as though British women will receive sick pay, rather than full pay.
At least that's some improvement for the 50% or women in Britain who currently fail to qualify for maternity leave at all.
COMMUNITY CHEST
10 things you didn't know about the EC
Spain is the EC country that's most enthusiastic about working wives — more men and women want to share work and family responsibilities than in any other member state.
British women are the most adulterous (or the most honest) in Europe — but British men are said to make love the least frequently.
Not surprisingly, the UK has the highest divorce rate in the Community.
80% of Italians have never doubted the existence of God.
British women spend more on clothes than women in any other EC country.
Germans want their children to become scientists or engineers; the French want theirs to be teachers; the British, lawyers; the Italians, clerks.
Britain, Portugal and Ireland have more people who want to emigrate than any other member state.
It can take an Italian bank 27 days to clear a cheque issued in another town.
The European Commission has created a red ceramic tile to regulate the colour of tomato paste.
In France, some food imitations are forbidden — there's mayonnaise but no salad cream.
The British are the least likely to bother their doctor when ill — and also the least likely to read the instructions on medicines thoroughly.
EUROFAX
10 things you need to know about the EC
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and the UK are members.
The European Commission initiates policy.
It has 17 Commissioners and is based in Brussels.
The European Parliament votes on policy.
There are some 518 members (81 from the UK).
It is based in Strasbourg.
Ask at your local library for the name of your MEP.
The next election is scheduled for 1994.
The Council of Ministers (one from each country) decides what is to become law.
The Community Presidency changes every six months.
The UK's turn comes around again in July.
The European Court of Justice deals with breaches of European law.
The European Court of Human Rights has no link with the EC.
Regulations are laws.
Directives are binding instructions to member countries.
Decisions are rulings aimed at individuals.
Recommendations can safely be ignored.
The EC does not concern itself with national health or education policies.
The Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) aims to stabilise currencies by keeping them within an agreed band.
The ecu is the EC's own currency.
President of the Europe Commission, Jacques Delors, would like to see it as the only EC currency, but John Majors wants it to circulate alongside other currencies.
The Single Market comes in on 1 January 1993.
After that date, goods produced or imported by any member state can be sold throughout the community.
EURO-PLUS
10 good things about the EC
Cleaner water.
Countries must maintain water quality and limit the amounts of nitrates that leach into rivers.
Approved additives.
Food additives are identified by E numbers and all new ones must be tested.
Cheaper wine.
We paid £1.30 (now equivalent to 13) for a bottle of sparkling wine in 1972.
It is less than £5 today.
Help for married women.
Jackie Drake was denied Invalid Care Allowance because it had been assumed that married women didn't need to work.
The EC decided she had the same right to benefits as a man or a single woman.
Fair pensions.
Sex discrimination in private pension plans is illegal — but at present state pensions are exempt.
Equal retirement age for men and women.
NHS dietician Helen Marshall didn't see why she should have to retire at 60.
Neither did the EC.
Better beaches.
Countries must limit bacteria and viruses in bathing water.
Building constraints.
The environmental impact of a development must be assessed before work begins.
Job protection in pregnancy.
The EC has ruled against unfair dismissal of pregnant women — they no longer have to claim that they were treated more harshly than a sick man.
Tastier foods.
Did your mother put cambozola, brioches or prosciutto on her weekly shopping list?
Thanks to the EC you can.
DO YOU RECOGNISE ANYONE HERE?
They're all MEPs and they could soon be more powerful than your MP.
Do you know who yours is?
Gordon Adam (Northumbria, Lab) Janey Buchan (Glasgow, Lab) Margaret Daly (Somerset & Dorset West, Cons) Winifred Ewing Highlands & Islands, SNP) Sir James Scott-Hopkins (Hereford & Worcester, Cons) Dr Caroline Jackson (Wiltshire, Cons) Anne McIntosh (Essex North East, Cons) David Morris (Mid & West Wales, Lab) Christine Oddy (Midlands Central, Lab) Ben Patterson (Kent West, Cons) Anita Pollack (London South West, Lab) Carole Tongue (London East, Lab) Michael Welsh (Lancashire Central, Cons) Joe Wilson (North Wales, Lab)
GH homes
THE MORE THE MERRIER
Christmas is wonderfully hectic with boisterous quads in the house.
But John and Veronica Saunders still make time to decorate their home from top to toe.
When John and Veronica Saunders decorate their living rooms for Christmas, they make sure the doors stay firmly locked until Christmas morning.
Forty tiny fingers could wreak havoc if let loose, for they know from experience that their 4-year-old quads have a habit of hiding the prettiest ribbons and baubles.
‘We had left it late to try for children, and then I had a miscarriage,’ says Veronica.
‘After a while, we felt we had to seek help.
We went to the Humana Hospital in London where we were one of the earliest trials of GIFT (Gamate Intrafallopian Tube Transfer, a form of assisted conception).
I was very worried when I found it was quads, because I assumed that there would just be more complications and we'd end up with nothing again.
We  didn't tell anyone, and I took things very quietly, doing exactly what was advised and taking it one day at a time.
Eventually I had them by Caesarean at 30 weeks.
It sounds corny, but it's wonderful to have them — I never thought I'd have any children.
The arrival of Charlie, Louise, Timothy and Alexandra put an end to what used to be called ‘normal life’, including quiet, civilised Christmas gatherings with friends over drinks.
But their parents have no regrets.
Christmas may now be more hectic than in most families, but John and Veronica wouldn't have it any other way.
‘Individually, they are very nice children,’ says John, ‘but put them together and they bring out the worse in each other— like football supporters.’
They have totally taken over their parents' lives in the three-storey Victorian  terraced house at Heaton Moor near Manchester, but John and Veronica have managed to keep the most formal of their elegant living rooms relatively child-free.
It's a lovely house, the kind you'd admire if you were driving past, with a countrified cottage garden at the front and a white picket fence.
The Saunders fell in love with the outside before they even crossed the threshold.
Once installed, back in 1976, they began the long and laborious process of renovating it themselves, without any professional help, which partly explains why it took them the best part of 10 years.
The other reason is that they were extraordinarily fussy about their likes and dislikes.
‘In those days we were pretty precious about everything,’ admits Veronica with a grin.
‘And just a bit pretentious.’
They also had very little money and very high standards.
Veronica is a restorer of Chinese lacquerware and paintings, so the finest, most beautiful, old things pass through her skilful hands.
When John hung a cupboard on small metal brackets, she insisted on climbing up to paint a trompe l'oeil over the brackets as camouflage.
Now she laughs at the recollection.
‘Of course, that was before the children arrived.’
It's a good job, she says, that they managed to complete most of the house before the birth, for they didn't anticipate the extent to which their lives would be turned upside down.
‘Once the quads were born, everything stopped, except we had to get the top floor converted into a nursery,’ John said.
Previously the attic had been a splendidly light studio for Veronica's work, now it has become an all-white, easy-to-clean room on the lines of a special-care baby unit.
It was a place where nappies could be changed, bottles heated and babies fed, without the necessity of running up and down stairs to the kitchen.
Fortunately John had learned many skills in the process of renovating the house.
In fact, so accomplished had he become that he changed his career from lorry driver to architectural joiner, and kitchens became a part of his stock in trade.
So for the nursery, he was able to make white laminate units, ideal for storing clothes and toys.
As the children have grown, the nursery has survived very well its transition into indestructible playroom.
This is now where the Saunders family spend most of their time, for the elegant period living rooms they created  in pre-quads days are hardly the ideal environment for the boisterous rough and tumble of four 4-year-olds.
But Christmas is an exception.
Christmas dinner around the dining table will be rare treat and John says: ‘Now the children are growing up, we hope they'll be a bit more sensible and a bit less like unguided missiles.’
The dining room is a splendid backdrop for Christmas.
With elegant blue toile wallpaper, rich gilt mirrors, a Victorianstyle fireplace, and furniture made by John, all it needs is a tree, candles and trails of ivy from the garden to transform it into a very festive scene.
The sitting room, at the front of the house, has a more summery feel.
The walls are painted a pale, clear Christmas green mixed by Veronica in tones of a colour she copied from Chinese lacquerware.
A pair of simple sofas and a campaign chair (used by army officers on the move) provide the seating; curtains are a fresh, flowery print.
Chinese-style coffee and side tables were made by John.
With a pink carpet and green walls, the room lends itself to a Christmas colour theme of red and green.
They have softened the room with cushions and tartan throws, to make it a cosy base for the family over Christmas.
The kitchen is the only room on the ground floor that gets regular use these days (except, of course, for the round-the-clock activity in the laundry room).
In the 16 years they have lived here, the kitchen has had three transformations, all carried out by John.
Its current incarnation is an unusual combination of painted units and the same toile wallpaper as the one used in the dining room, but this time it's in a pink colourway.
‘We looked through all the books and this was still the one we liked best,’ they explain.
Though perhaps an unusual choice for a kitchen, it works very well.
The only problem with the kitchen, the operational centre of the house, is that it is separated from the children's attic playroom by two long flights of stairs.
So John and Veronica have reluctantly decided that, although they love the house, it's time to leave.
Veronica's ideal would be a small period house, perhaps a cottage in a country area.
‘It will be much more of a knock-about place, irregularly decorated and very easy to live with,’ she says.
Veronica is planning to take up her paintbrush again and hopes to do some portrait painting, as well as her trompe l'oeil and restoration work.
John will have more time to concentrate on his architectural interior design business.
The quads will undoubtedly settle anywhere, as long as they're together.
And the new home will be sure to provide a durable playground for their antics.
Above: The 4-year-old quads,(from left) Charlie, Alexandra, Louis and Timothy, cannot resist the sparkling tree ornaments Top: A precious, quiet, pre-dinner drink for John and Veronica
Above: John and Veronica relax in the Chinese-green sitting room, which lends itself to a Christmas colour scheme of red and green Left: Tree lights and softly lit rooms give a festive glow to the Saunders' Victorian terraced house in Heaton Moor, near Manchester
Above: The Saunders' kitchen has had three different looks in the 16 years they have lived here, each created by John, an architectural interior engineer.
The children are hard at work making Christmas goodies, under Veronica's supervision Right: The quads open presents after Christmas dinner Main picture: Charlie (top), Alexandra, Timothy and Louis (below right) await Santa Claus with mounting excitement; John joins in the fun
Above: The attic, once Veronica's studio, was converted by John into a nursery when the quads arrived four years ago.
Equipped with television and cooker, it is fitted with hygienic white laminate units
Above: The elegant dining room was completed just before the quads were born.
The wallpaper is a toile design.
This room is kept firmly locked until Christmas Day dawns, so mischievous fingers can't hide the baubles.
The Saunders chose gold as the theme for festive decorations — gold scrolls adorn the mirror and shiny gilt ribbon bows sparkle against the dark fireplace, made by John Left: Soft candlelight is reflected in sun-shaped candleholders and a charming golden lantern
close-ups
If you are inspired by John and Veronica Saunders' style on the previous pages, here are some appealing alternatives and ideas to create a similar look
The traditional red and greens of Christmas are perfect against the soft Chinese-green walls of the Saunders' sitting rooms.
On mantelpiece: glass vases from Heal's, from about £18.50; painted candlesticks, £32.70 (green) and £42.50 (red), with holly shades, £17.90 each, all from The General Trading Company.
Cocoa-leaf basket (filled with large pine cones), £19.95, from Global Village; ‘Flowers and Tapestry’ throw (on chair), £180, and matching cushion, £33.95, from Liberty; light metal holly wreath (right), £17.95, from Paper Safari.
Add sparkle to your table setting with gold and rich lustreware.
Blue and gold tree baubles, £1.99 each, from Paper Safari; blue glass bowl, £43.50, Scof green-handled cutlery, from £6.50 a piece, star plate, £36, gold plates, £33 each, silver plates, £38 each, laurel napkin ring, from £6.50, all from Thomas Goode; baroque jug, £42.75 and lustre wine glasses, £8.50 each, from Heal's; and green and gold cachepot, £165, from The General Trading Company.
Beeswax candles and brass lanterns bring a glowing warmth to a dark Christmas evening.
Storm lantern, £6.99, from The Reject Shop; sun candleholder, £24.95, from The Front Room; and pure beeswax candle, from £5.80 for a pack of four, from the Shaker Shop.
These Christmas stockings will delight the younger generation: Santa, Cat, Elf and Moose, about £15 each, from James Winchester.
Father Christmas garland, £1.99, from Paper Safari.
All that glitters may not be gold, but these decorations would add elegance and sparkle to any Christmas tree.
The simple white angel is hollow, and fits neatly on top of a tiny fairy light.
Angel, about £4, from James Winchester; gold bauble, £1.25, and gilt sun, £1.75, both from Paper Safari.
Have a good time!
The GH guide to the best in film, TV, video, arts, theatre and books
TELEVISION
Starring Patsy Kensit, Julia McKenzie, Susannah Harker, Iain Glen and James Wilby ,Adam Bede , adapted from George Eliot's classic pastoral novel, is a tale of desertion and just deserts.
Local squire meets beautiful country girl and, true to form, seduces her — with eventual far-reaching consequences in the small, shocked community of Hayslope.
A treat planned for Christmas week on BBC1.
Over on Channel 4 , the team responsible for The Snowman presents another Raymond Briggs classic,Father Christmas .
Soundtrack by Mel Smith.
Christmas Eve, 5.10pm.
Two's company…three's more than just a coincidence.
Don't miss Fay Weldon's complex, clever story The Cloning Of Joanna May , which centres on a woman who discovers she has unwittingly participated in a genetic experiment.
Patricia Hodge stars with fellow redheads Emma Hardy, Laura Eddy and Helen Adie, alongside Billie Whitelaw, Brian Cox and Jean Boht.
The two-part ITV series starts on 26 January.
Beloved of children — and parents — everywhere , Roald Dahl's The Big Friendly Giant , fills the small screen in an animated version of the late, great author's charming story,The BFG , on ITV in the Christmas week.
Have a criminal Christmas…
Robert Hardy joins successful double-act Jeremy Brett and Edward Hardwicke in Granada's Christmas sleuth special The Master Blackmailer .
Holmes and Watson are in pursuit of a Mr Charles Augustus Milverton, who uses a stash of indiscreet love letters to blackmail some of London society's most influential figures.
For Agatha Christie fans .
BBC1, vying for ratings, is planning a Miss Marple Special.
Joss Ackland, Faith Brook and Jean Simmons join Joan Hickson on the trail of murder most mysterious in They Do It With Mirrors .
MUSIC & DANCE
At midnight on 31 December .
Sounds Like Birmingham — the city's church bells ring out in an ambitious music festival, to mark Birmingham's year as UK City of Music (021–235 1992).
At the Barbican…carols, Handel's Messiah ,The Snowman narrated by Bernard Cribbins and James Galway's Christmas Collection (071–638 8891).
At Sadler's Wells, the London City Ballet performs Romeo & Juliet and Swan Lake .
17 Dec-4 Jan; UK tour (071–837 3133).
VIDEO
Thelma & Louise — driven to distraction by their oh-so-ordinary lives, Geena Davis and Susan Sarandon hit the road with a vengeance.
Close My Eyes Chancer star Clive Owen and his sister (played b Saskia Reeves) get a little too close for comfort.
Danton Depardieu as the colourful and charismatic French Revolution leader.
Classic BBC comedy released for Christmas viewing:Only Fools And Horses, Smith And Jones , and A Bit Of Fry And Laurie (from £10.99).
FILM
Sure to be a scream:America's most famous fiends,The Addams Family , are coming to the monster screen, Anjelica Huston is perfectly cast as the deliciously decadent Morticia, and Raul Julia no less so as her ghoulish soul mate Gomez.
Certificate PG,The Addams Family opens — appropriately enough — on Friday 13 December.
Victorian England , and a beautiful young woman on holiday in rural Suffolk with her children (but not with her husband, however) meets and falls in love with visiting artist Philip Wilson Steer.
This is the setting for The Bridge , inspired by a real Steer painting.
The film is one of those beautifully crafted gems — featuring wonderful Suffolk landscapes, pale lighting and controlled acting from Saskia Reeves as Isobel, the wife, and David O'Hara as Steer.
Lots of meaningful glances and repressed passion as only the Victorians knew how.
Excellent support in the shape of Joss Ackland and Rosemary Harris, while Geraldine James, in the role of a tragic wife of a local fisherman, adds a touch of harrowing reality to the much more comfortable, privileged, middle-class existence of the main characters.
Certificate 12,The Bridge opens on 10 January.
ART
Designed to entice thousands of turn-of-the-century tourists to run away to sea, the P&O Poster Collection will be at London's Chelsea Harbour, 16 Dec-12 Jan (071–839 8533)— the perfect escape to faraway places with strange-sounding names if you're visiting the Boat Show, 1–12 January.
The art of making money…
Over 150 paintings from Britain's most important corporate collections will be on show in The New Patrons , organised by the National Art Collections Fund, at Christie's, 3–24 January (071–821 0404).
THEATRE
PANTOS
Christmas Carol Sadler's Wells (071 278 8916)
Jack And The Beanstalk , Theatre Royal, Bury St Edmunds (0284- 769505)
Hiawatha , Sheffield's Crucible (0742–769922)
Snow White & The Seven Dwarfs , Bath's Theatre Royal (0225–448844)
The Singing Ringing Tree , at Contact Theatre, Manchester (061–274 4400)
The Snow Queen at Dundee Rep Theatre (0382–23530)
Funny peculiar…
Dame Judi Dench in Edward Bond's comedy,The Sea , at the Royal National Theatre.
Opens 12 Dec (071–928 2252).
RADIO
Easy-listening Christmas presents are to be found in the BBC Radio Collection:The Forsyte Saga , medieval crime classic The Monk's Hood and The Woman's Hour Jane Austen Collection , read by actresses Maria Aitken, Juliet Stevenson, Penelope Keith, Janet Suzman, Annette Crosbie and Patricia Hodge.
We have 10 sets worth £45 each, send a postcard with name and address to GH (JA), 72 Broadwick Street, W1V 2BP by 31 January.
BOOKS
Books reviewed by Gillian Fairchild
Some (mostly non-fiction) thoughts for presents .
From the sublime to the ridiculous: John Barton's What Is The Bible?
(Triangle, £4.99) is a user-friendly guide to the greatest book of all, discussing background to the scriptures, morality, and even the vexed question of sexism; and a re-issue of Sandra Boynton's Christmastime (Mandarin, £5.99), the ‘somewhat eccentric illustrated guide to the heart of the holiday season’, provides a less reverent approach to the time of year.
Interesting high-profile autobiographies that drop names like confetti: in Well, I Forget The Rest (Hutchinson, £17.99), Quentin Crewe, thrice-married, confesses: ‘It has never taken me longer than a week-end to fall in love, usually less.’
As a journalist who lives life in a wheelchair because of muscular dystrophy, he juggles the likes of Princess Margaret and George Melly on his guest list and emerges the eternal, acerbic optimist.
Katharine Hepburn spills the beans about Hollywood in Me (Viking, £16.99), and talks engagingly about her 30-year affair with Spencer Tracy: ‘I thought you were a rumour,’ said his wife to her on his death.
Two good biographies:The Life Of Graham Green (Penguin, £7.99), and Darwin , by Adrian Desmond & James Moore (Michael Joseph, £20).
Lord Gnome's Complete Fib and Lie Diet (Corgi, £4.99) serves up the best of Private Eye's recent offerings, and Ned Sherrin's Loose nEds (Coronet, £3.99), provides sparkling ‘jottings from a fractured life’ in his own inimitable, witty style.
Sue Townsend's Adrian Mole From Major To Minor (Methuen, £7.99) retraces the growing pains of the boy, adding a topical update to embrace our new Prime Minister.
‘I wish John Major would do something about his hair’, confides Adrian to his diary — he should talk.
Lastly, two in the ‘helpful-humorous’ category: Laurie Graham's The British Abroad, A Survival Guide (Chatto & Windus, £8.99 (with pithy observations on how badly we travel and how much better we could; and Table Talk (Coronet, £3.99) Derek Nimmo's soufflé of after-dinner stories for winers and diners: pass the port, enjoy the anecdotes — and have a very happy Christmas.
SPORTO The Duck Shoe The new Boom Chucka from SPORTO.
Fun, fashionable and full of life…
Waterproof shoes to brighten the dullest days.
Patsy Kensit and James Wilby star in Adam Bede 
Three's a crowd for Patricia Hodge in Fay Weldon's The Cloning Of Joanna May 
Ballet classics at Sadler's Wells
Victorian passion set against the Suffolk landscape in The Bridge 
Fiendish fun with The Addams Family 
NEW FASHION IDEAS
New fashion ideas Transform a simple daytime look into stunning evening elegance with just a touch of gold
Gold adds instant glamour: Above: Russell & Bromley slingbacks, £79.
Far left Betty Jackson square necklace, £50, matching bracelet, £35, spiral bracelet, £35, bead necklace, £45, matching bracelets, £35 each.
Middle Wolford Versailles tights, £9.25; Marion Foale hand knit, £290; Gucci loafers from a selection; Pellini earrings, £45.
Left Liz Claibourne T-shirt, £66; Pellini earrings, £30; YSL gold cuffs, £110.
Step straight from a working day into the party mode.
Slip a gold-Lurex sweater over a plain white shirt, and add bold gold jewellery and shoes; Right Freemans deep V-neck sweater, £29.00 (KU 8212); Pellini earrings, £30.
Left Betty Jackson matt gold and leather jewellery as before; Russell & Bromley gold leather loafers, £59.99 
good health
Sex headaches, soothing smells and the dangers of air pollution
SNIFF AWAY STRESS
Feeling under pressure this Christmas?
Then try a sniff of ‘nature's tranquilliser’— the smell of clean human skin, or ‘essence of mum’, as Dr George Dodd, head of the Smell Research Group at Warwick University's Chemistry Department, calls it.
Osmone (to give it its official name) soothes because it is the first thing a newborn baby smells, he says.
It has been tested on over 1000 people with anxiety problems, and will be further assessed in a mass trial on Warwick University students when they sit their exams next summer.
Though osmone may take a few days, if not weeks, to work, and not everyone can detect the smell, its action is gentle but effective, claims Dr Todd.
Trials of 400 volunteers at a stress-management centre found that, in most cases, mood improved, and some people who took tranquillisers were able to reduce their dose.
Osmone I is available as a small impregnated cassette which lasts for six months.
The price, however, is not to be sniffed at: £17.50!
If you'd like to try it, call Osmotherapy (0203–712014).
THE HEART OF THE MATTER
Every year, 80,000 people suffer their first heart attack.
Those who recover often live in fear of a second, potentially fatal, attack, but a new test, pioneered in Australia by Dr John Bourke and funded by the British Heart Foundation, may identify those at risk.
An electrical wire is inserted into the heart, which is then stimulated electronically and the reaction is studied.
Anyone found to be susceptible to another serious heart attack can then be treated with drugs or with an electrical implant to regularise the heartbeat.
A SENSITIVE TIME
Fluctuating hormone levels can affect skin sensitivity.
Tests on women with dermatitis found that the condition worsens just before a period, and those sensitive to base metals are most likely to develop a reaction at that time too.
If you're affected, cover watch backs with hypoallergenic sticking plaster and use rubber guards on earrings.
SEXUAL HEADACHES
‘Not tonight, I have a headache’ may be an old joke, but it's no laughing matter for those who suffer from what neurologists call ‘benign sex headaches’.
Caused by an excessive contraction of the head and neck muscles experienced as orgasm approaches, or by the accompanying rise in blood pressure, they're more common in men than women, and may also occur during other sorts of physical exertion.
The problem can be controlled by betablocking drugs, so if you or your partner suffer, see your GP.
CLEAN AIR FOR CHILDREN
Air pollution from traffic fumes is a major threat to children's health, declares Greenpeace.
Its latest report finds that car-exhaust fumes are the greatest single source of the pollutants that contribute to children's chest infections, breathing problems and asthma.
Greenpeace is not the only organisation to be concerned; the National Asthma Campaign is also funding research into allergy and air pollution.
One in seven primary-school children now suffers from asthma — but the Government's response is simply that children who are at risk should be kept indoors when air quality is poor.
So what can you do?
Write to your MP, council, newspaper and the Minister for more public transport and cleaner air.
Fit your car with a catalytic converter, if possible, or trade it in for a new model — cars made after 1993 must have them.
Buy British Lung Foundation cycle masks designed to screen out pollutants.
They last for 50 hours and cost £9.99 for two (plus £1.75 p&p) from the BLF, 8 Peterborough Mews, SW6 3LB.
BEATING CANCER
Would Love Story have a different ending if it were written today?
Leukaemia (which killed the heroine) is one of the cancers we are closest to curing, and 76% of children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia — the most common childhood cancer — now survive.
Admittedly, only 25% of adults survive the most common form of adult leukaemia, acute myeloid, but it is a great improvement on 30 years ago, when nearly every sufferer died.
The different survival rates reflect the diverse types of leukaemia and their resistance to treatment.
The most progress has been made in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, where potent drugs and bone-marrow transplants have radically improved the survival rate.
Though the cause of leukaemia is still unknown, Imperial Cancer Research Fund scientists have found that leukaemia clusters occur near old nuclear establishments, not new ones, and are investigating the link between childhood leukaemia and parents' employment in the nuclear industry.
NIKKI BRADFORD is a health and medical journalist specialising in women's health and complementary medicine.
Married with a son, she is the author of The Well Woman's Self Help Directory
FAMILY matters
HAPPY FAMILIES
Here's news for parents who find that bringing up children is more tricky than they thought.
Parent Network believes that parenting can be learned, and that improved communication can do wonders for family harmony.
It has set up a chain of Parent-Link groups across the country, where, with guidance, parents can sort out their problems.
Some groups are running sessions specifically tailored to the parents of teenagers.
Parents are advised to get in touch before the situation gets out of hand: ‘We're not a crisis-intervention centre,’ they say.
Obviously success is more likely if both parents support each other, but Parent-Link also helps many lone parents and parents in conflict.
‘Each parent has an individual relationship with their child, and that is always worth improving,’ they say.
For further information and details of local groups, contact Parent Network on 071–485 8535.
CROSSING SAFELY
A typical road accident involving children takes place on a Friday in winter — and boys are more vulnerable than girls.
More than 9000 children were seriously injured last year and research shows that young children do not understand the dangers of traffic, or how to avoid them.
They cross roads diagonally, walk in front of parked cars and forget to look in more than one direction at junctions.
Now psychologists at Edinburgh University have found that even young children can be taught to cope with traffic.
‘But it's not enough to memorise the Green Cross Code — that's like learning to drive without getting inside a car,’ warns Professor Robert Grieve.
He recommends training children by asking them to tell you where they think its safe to cross, or when there's a safe gap in traffic.
And it might be wise to keep a particular eye on your son.
It seems that, while girls lack confidence, boys overestimate their ability — and in this case, it's safer to be cautious.
On dark winter days, dress children in reflective clothing.
Another idea is to decorate their school bags (see above left) using Glitzers — glitter pens from Tomy, which include one that glows in the dark.
They are priced £6.99 for six (for stocklists, ring 0703–872267), but we have 25 sets to give away.
Send your details to FM/Glow, GH, 72 Broadwick St, W1V 2BP, by 31 Jan.
FESTIVE MESSAGE
The official message may be ‘Merry Christmas’ but you can read more into Christmas cards, as GH Psychology Consultant Jenny Cozens discovered when she and psychologist colleagues analysed seasonal greetings.
‘I took along a card showing a Victorian photograph of male athletes.
The group said the sender was a woman, perhaps an artist, and interested in physique.
They were right — the friend  who'd sent the card was a painter, separated from her handicapped husband.
Another card showed a blacksmith at work.
‘A man must have sent that,’ said one of the group.
‘I bet he's a workaholic.’
Spot on.
A scruffy card showed a rowing boat floating towards a bank.
Colleagues said the sender felt insignificant and frightened, but saw the recipient as a haven.
It had, in fact, been sent to a counsellor by a client who'd moved away before finishing therapy.
So beware: if we were able to read between the lines that easily, so too can your family and friends!
According to Hallmark, the well known card manufacturer:
The most popular ‘family’ cards are from mums to sons.
Least popular are cards for wives.
There's a religious revival in card designs, but most people opt out for holly and robins.
New messages include ‘To My Secretary’ and ‘From Our Pet’.
Cards from cats are more popular than cards from dogs.
PRESENTS FOR CHILDREN (THAT WILL LAST MORE THAN 48 HOURS!)
You may feel pressured to buy what ‘everybody else is getting this year, Mum,’ but there are alternatives to please you both — and that won't be broken by Boxing Day.
All items are available from good toy shops, unless stated otherwise.
For junior doctors…
Know Your Body boy and girl puzzles from Michael Stanfield.
Remove the top pieces to reveal the organs beneath the skin; lift those to see the skeleton.
Age 5 to 7; about £3.99.
For everyone's ears…
My First Walkman from Sony has a switch to restrict volume, preventing damage to hearing.
Age 5 and up; £24.99.
For country life…
Britains, the famous farmtoy manufacturer, has added buildings to its range of animals and vehicles.
The Farm Set comes complete with tractor and animals.
Age 4 and up; £40.
For setting the pace…
foot-friendly trainers with room for growing feet are recommended by chiropodists.
Fila's Trailblazers (081–900 0257) come in blue/purple, black and brown.
Adult sizes.
For creative play…
Get Set!
Colour Candles from Waddingtons has everything for candle making: wax, dye, wick and moulds.
Age 10 and up; £22.
For early learning…
GeoSafari (above) from Educational Insights is an electronic geography game that extends a child's knowledge of the world.
The 34 maps, supplemented by make-your-own-cards, can be used by one child as a test of skill, or by several competitively.
Age 8 and up; £69.99.
For stage-struck young people…
a Stage Pass card gives up to 50% off performances at theatres in major cities.
The discount applies to two tickets, so the card holder can take a friend.
A monthly magazine details theatres giving discounts, plus reviews.
For ages 14 to 30; £14 in London and the Home Counties, £7.50 elsewhere (phone 071–379 1033).
For car-mad tots…
Big Fun Little R/C Buggy (below) from Tomy, your child's first radio-controlled car.
Designed for indoor use, its soft bumpers protect your walls and furniture.
Age 3 and up; £28.99.
For the eco-aware…
Ocean Toy (right) from Anne Wilkinson Designs (0242–578666) is printed with hints on caring for the ocean, and has creatures to attach by Velcro or pop into its pockets — for small children, or an ornament for older ones.
Age 18 months and up; £23.
If you would like to give a child an investment present that will increase in value, phone 0898–666629 for advice.
Calls are charged at 36p per min cheap rate, 48p per min at all other times.
LAST YEAR'S TOP 10 TOYS
1
Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles
2
Barbie
3
Fisher Price preschool toys
4
Scalextric
5
Sindy
6
Sylvanian Families
7
Tomytime preschool toys
8
Lego Technic
9
Legoland Town
10
Matchbox vehicles
Did you buy any of these toys last Christmas?
Are they still played with?
Write and let us know (FM/Toys, GH, 72 Broadwick St, W1V 2BP).
With reflective school bags, children will be seen, not hurt
Proof of the present: will the appeal outlast the novelty value?
Colour candles to create
Fun on wheels: Little R/C Buggy
Ocean Toy will appeal to budding environmentalists
GH open line
Our panel of experts helps solve your problems
‘IS THE SCHOOL RIGHT?
Q Our son is 11 years old and attends a prep school as a boarder.
On a school outing he, and some other pupils, were involved in shoplifting.
It was a disgraceful act which I do not condone, but I am almost certain my son had done nothing of the kind before.
One of the punishments that the school decided on worries me.
The boys involved were not allowed to collect any end-of-term prizes.
As my son had won one, this meant he suffered a great deal of embarrassment.
The other boys concerned, who had won nothing, did not suffer the same public shame.
Should we move him to another school?
He now feels that he will never be liked or respected by anyone in this school again.
Professor Wragg replies:
If you do not like what happens at a school, you should discuss it with the headmaster, but bear in mind that teachers at a boarding school are acting much more in loco parentis than at a day school and may feel that very firm action is essential.
If you really feel unhappy, you could always consider sending your son to another school.
However, I would suggest you wait a little while before making your final decision.
If he learns from this episode that he must be more independent in his judgment and not be swept along by others, there need be no long-lasting harm.
‘ARE MY PAINS RHEUMATIC?’
Q I'm 34 and have suffered for several years from intermittent burning pains in my knees, which often keep me awake.
This is getting worse and I'm also developing the same pains in my fingers, wrists, ankles and toes, as well as in my hips.
I'm tired and depressed and afraid to take up a good job offer.
I haven't been referred to a rheumatologist, as I've been told that I'm very young and prone to worrying too much about becoming disabled.
Dr Morris replies:
There are various tests to diagnose rheumatic and arthritic disorders, and it would be impossible to offer an opinion on the basis of a letter.
However, you might find it reassuring to know that even if rheumatoid arthritis were diagnosed, it seems unlikely that you would become severely physically disabled.
Only 5–10% of rheumatoid-arthritis sufferers do, and they usually have visibly deformed joints in the first year of illness.
You should return to your GP for a reassessment of the problem.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) are helpful against several different types of pain, and if one form of treatment does not suit you, your doctor may be able to prescribe a more suitable one.
I would encourage you to accept the job offer, even if you cannot now imagine how you would cope.
It's likely that your awareness of the challenge you face increases your sensitivity to the pain, feeding into a vicious circle.
If you turn down the job you may feel even more upset — if you eventually have to resign, at least you'll have tested out your resources.
‘I'M TERRIFIED OF DYING’
Q I am in my 50s and enjoy very good health, but I am terrified of dying.
Since it is inevitable, I wish I could come to terms with it, but I find the only way I can cope at present is to avoid thinking about it.
Dr Cozens replies:
Don't feel you are unusual in your fear.
We all know that, however much we may try to deter it, death is the only certainty.
The important thing is not to get caught up in having clinical tests, or in constantly visiting your doctor: such reassurance only makes things worse.
Rather than running away, try and challenge the problem to work out which aspects scare you most.
Then you can decide to live your life fully — getting as much out as you put in.
Two helpful books are Love's Executioner by psychotherapist Irvin Yalom (Penguin, £6.99), and An Experiment In Leisure by Joanna Field (Virago, £6.50).
‘MY HUSBAND NEEDS HELP’
Q I have a husband who is very unhappy with himself.
He takes it out on the children and myself (not physically), has almost become an isolationist and is very difficult to live with.
I've tried talking — but he just won't open up.
I wonder whether therapy or counselling would help him and/or us.
Please could you tell me how to get some help?
Dr Cozens replies:
I'm glad you realise that the root of the problem lies with your husband not with you, and I'm sure you're right in thinking that he might need outside help.
Is there someone he would listen to, such as a close friend or relative?
It would be a good idea to explain the problem to his doctor, or you could phone the psychiatric department of the local teaching hospital for their recommendations of counsellors.
The British Association for Counselling (0788–578328) may also be able to help.
Then you have to start looking after yourself and your children.
Explain to them as much as you can about what's going on and emphasise that they are in no way to blame.
And as for yourself, you too should try talking to a friend or relative whom you trust — the chances are that they may already have realised that things are going badly.
You could also go to Relate (formerly Marriage Guidance), which sees individuals as well as couples.
Dr Morris welcomes your letters on medical topics, but in accordance with GMC guidelines, she's now only able to give advice in these columns.
Any readers' letters that panellists are unable to reply to here will be answered by GH Family Matters staff and our consultants.
Are you considering taking a Hormone Replacement Therapy course?
If you would like to hear Dr Cathy Morris's advice on whether HRT is suitable for you, phone 0839–666 875.
Calls are charged at 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute at all other times.
DR CATHY MORRIS MEDICINE Cathy Morris works part time in hospital medicine.
She has two children
DR JENNY COZENS PSYCHOLOGY Jenny Cozens is Honorary Research Fellow at Leeds University.
She is a writer and broadcaster and has two children
PROF TED WRAGG EDUCATION Ted Wragg is Professor of Education at Exeter University.
He frequently broadcasts on radio and TV and has three children
GH CHRISTMAS GUIDE
50 Fabulous gifts for under £20
If you're hunting for original last-minute Christmas gifts but don't want to start the New Year in debt, take a look at these perfect present ideas      
For stocklists see GH Christmas Shopping Guide on page 166
Cowbells wall decoration, £6.50, from The General Trading Company
Glass cologne bottle with cork and chrome stopper, £14.75, from Floris outlets
Gold-coloured candlestick, £19.99, from Debenhans
Aromatherapy Kit by Cristina Of London containing five essential oils, two carrier oils, two mixer bottles and a comprehensive instruction book, £16.99, from Littlewoods Home Shopping Catalogue
Small gold mirror, £11.95, from Harvey Nichols
Fragranced body powder in glass-domed pot with white puff and matching soap, £14.99, from Next
Black glazed-cotton lipstick case with mirror, £2.99, from Marks & Spencer
Monogram For Men leather wash bag: black with brown trim, with an inside pocket and a zipped one on the outside, £19.99, from selected branches of Boots
Manicure set in a black leather case with mock tortoiseshell handles.
Contains: two pairs of angled scissors, tweezers, large and small angled cuticle pushers, nail file and cleaner.
About £15, from The Burleigh Range by L&D
Black Kelly bag, £12, from Salisburys; tied with a richly coloured classic scarf, £9.95, from Fenwick
Damask Rose cologne in a pretty glass bottle, £12.50/100ml, from Crabtree & Evelyn
Wire basket with carrying handle, £10.25, from a selection at Heal's.
Full with fruit or other festive goodies
Roger & Gallet's newly formulated and packaged colognes in four fragrances: Extra Vieille, Lavande Royale, Vetyver, Bouquet Impérial; £13.25/100ml, from major chemists
Tin candle lanterns, £16 and £7 from Heal's
Embroidered suede slipper pump, available in sizes 3–8, black only, £17.99, from George at Asda
Tiny salt and pepper pots for individual place settings (or picnics), 67p each, from John Lewis stores
Star candle sconce, £12.95, from the Shaker Shop
Patterned gloves, £7.99 per pair, from Selfridges
The perfect stocking fillers: fudge sticks, £1.99 each, from Heal's
Leather pouch bag, £19.95, from Dickins & Jones
Bottles of La Baignoire foam bath: square red bottle (thyme), £19.95, triangular yellow bottle (wild grass), £11.95, from Heal's
Rose-patterned silky underwear: underwired bra, £12.99, and knickers, £7.99, from Knickerbox
Keep within your Christmas budget with this gemstone calculator, £12.99, from Paperchase
Plain or patterned silk boxer shorts, from £15.99 each, from Knickerbox For Men
Jewel and gold-twist bangle, £16.95, from Fenwick
Seahorse and starfish dish by Kaz Lever, £19.95, from Harvey Nichols
Jewel-coloured evening gloves, £5.99 per pair, from Debenhams
French-style breakfast cup, £12.50, from Liberty, with Heal's Breakfast Coffee, £2.65/227g
Novelty bow ties, £16.95 each (to tie or ready-made), from Bowmonde
Goblet, £7.95, and wine glass, £6.50, from Heal's
Hand-painted wooden buttons in 24 different designs, £4.25 for four, from The MacDonald Trading Company
Pleated, scented sachet, £15.50, from L'Artisan Parfumeur
Allegri bowl, £7.99, dinner plate, £3.99, and side plate, £2.99, from Debenhams
Festive tartan napkin rings, £1.50 each, form Habitat
Fresh herbs repotted into traditional flowerpots.
Herbs and flowerpots available from garden centres
Man's detailed leather belt, £19.99, from Riverview
Fortuny pleated underwear: bra, £14.99, cami-top, £14.99 and French knickers, £12.99, from Marks & Spencer
Monogram For Men shaving set: wood-handled shaving brush, razor, shaving bowl and soap, in a wooden box, £14.99, from Boots
Celestial potpourri in a small oval box trimmed with golden ribbon, £5.95, from Heal's
Flowerpot-shaped sponge — to bathe with or store your soaps in, £12.50, from Heal's
For the traditional cook: whisks in willow, £1.35, and birch, £2.95, and an Elizabethan-style lemon squeezer, £3.95, from Hampton Court Palace Tudor Kitchen Shop
Good Housekeeping Complete Book Of Preserving (Ebury Press, £16.99) and Good Housekeeping Complete Step-By-Step Guide To Entertaining (Ebury Press, £19.99)
RainForest Roasted and Unsalted Cashew Nuts, £8.50/10oz, and Tropical Forest Fruit Mix, £6.95/12oz, from The Natural History Museum Catalogue
Tiny chocolate mince pies and chocolate logs, 59p each, from Thorntons
Cardamom pomander, and coffee and cardamom pomander, £9.95 each, from Heal's
Blickling Hall blotter, £12.95, and stationery box, £15.50, from The National Trust Catalogue
Large beeswax candle, £8.95, from the Shaker Shop, and crown and cushion candles, £3.95-£5.99, from Harvey Nichols
Sophisticated Café Tasse chocolates, £11.95, from The Belgian Trading Company
Milk chocolate initials from Droste, about 87p each, from good confectioners
Finally, treat yourself or a friend to a year's subscription to GH — the magazine which has everything for you and your home.
Details on page 167
Getting on famously
Well known, well loved and the best of friends.
Can this be real?
Don't people at the top of the same tree try to knock each other down?
Only in soaps, says SUE THOMAS — in reality, they're often the closest allies
‘I know exactly what you mean,’ are among the most comforting words any friend can utter.
But surely, when you're in the same profession, ‘knowing exactly’ can mean knowing too much, and feelings of rivalry, jealousy, even over-familiarity, must get in the way?
Definitely not, say the actors, writers and sportsmen, gossip columnists and MPs we talked to.
Instead a special sort of empathy grows.
There's nothing like sharing the highs (and lows) of success to build bonds: a camaraderie develops that's hard to match, a shorthand — no need to explain fears and feelings, the other person knows already.
Even a good marriage may not be able to deliver quite the cocktail of intuition, sympathy, honesty, and insight.
Here's what five pairs of famous friends had to say:
JULIA MCKENZIE and MAUREEN LIPMAN, both actresses
Julia McKenzie, 50, is married to actor/director Jerry Harte:
‘Our very first meeting was at one of those Variety Club lunches.
I went into the Ladies and there was Maureen, and you know how it is, ‘Oh hello.
What are you doing at this moment?’ we said and, still in mid-conversation, both went into our separate loos.
And Maureen said, ‘I'm doing a play,Outside Edge — and I'm playing Miriam.’
I said, ‘Oh.
So am I…
‘Silence.
And if two actresses can survive having been cast in the same part and still go on to be friends, they can survive anything.
In fact, I played Miriam, and Mo, being so versatile, played another role.
But that's been the pattern of our lives, we often get offered the same part and I can honestly say there's been no professional jealousy or rivalry at all.
‘I do think it helps that we're in the same profession.
I'm rather ashamed to say that almost all of my friends are in the business.
Sometimes you get hung up on people wanting to know you just because they've seen you on the telly, and of course that isn't there with other actors.
‘What do I like about her?
Well she's absolutely honest and that's the trait that both my best friends — Maureen and Millicent Martin — have in common.
And she makes me laugh all the time — laughter is tremendously bonding, it's the greatest thing.
I'd tell her everything — I can't think of anything I couldn't share with her.
And I admire her, as well as like her.
‘We do have similar backgrounds — both small-town girls, the products of happy marriages — and that may help.
We talk on the phone very week.
Last Sunday we went round to their house for one of their famous Sunday breakfasts — bagels, cream cheese, smoked salmon.
‘But friendship is the most elusive thing, isn't it?
Who knows why you're thick with someone?
It's some animal instinct, I suppose, like the fact that you like the way some people smell and you don't like others.
All I know is that friendship with a woman is quite, quite different from any relationship you may have with a man.
It has a purity about it.
‘But why those few friendships become extra special, I don't know.
There are so many people who one's tremendously fond of, yet one or two settle with you more than others.
Definitely one of life's mysteries.’
Maureen Lipman, 45, is married to playwright Jack Rosenthal.
They have two children, Adam, 15 and Amy, 17:
‘I don't think you have to be similar to share friendship.
One of the things I like most about Julia is the fact that she's very different from me; I like our dissimilarities more than our similarities, although we do share a lot.
‘We're both very ordinary girls, from very ordinary backgrounds, who basically never quite believe we can do it.
We're full of doubts and we try to prop each other up.
We share a vast depth of vulnerability which we cover up in different ways.
‘For me, Julia is supertalented, very together, very domesticated, very centred, very loving.
Some of the things I don't think I am.
I respect her, look up to her.
And she looks up to me for what she sees as my drive, my opinionated wit.
But her assessment of my ability to stand up and shout in a crisis is pretty much a front.
I don't actually think either of us has an image of the other — or ourselves — that's quite true.
‘Julia sees herself as vaguely uneducated and slightly scatty, but in fact she's the one who went and did the directing and had a hit with her first show.
I'm the one who'll have a row with the carpark attendant, but when it comes to a real crisis, she's very tough.
‘We do have fun together.
She rang me the other day and said, ‘I've found this marvellous place for clothes — get in the car and we'll go.’
So she shows me the outfit: silk, black and white checks, turquoise squiggles, all gold and silver and apricot with matching trousers.
And I said, ‘Jules, I'm a 45-year-old mother of two, I'm putting cream on my neck at night…
’ But she bought it for me and it's brilliant.
‘I don't think our friendship has much to do with being in the same business.
That's what brought us together, but it's not what keeps us together.
The way we work is similar and it could have been nasty when we wanted the same part.
In fact, the work we have done together has always been very harmonious — although I imagine if we were in a sit-com at the same time we could get a bit waspish —‘She's got more lines than me…but it's never happened so far.
‘At the end of the day, my husband is my best friend, but I couldn't get through the day without talking to another woman — men don't seem to need to air their hopes and fears like we do.
A friend is the person you can run to and say, ‘I feel dreadful, I hate myself, I'm not going to be funny.’
You can count that sort of person on one hand.’
PETER SCUDAMORE and STEVE SMITH ECCLES, both National Hunt jockeys
Peter Scudamore MBE, 33, is married to Marilyn, who works for Peter and Steve's company, which is called Chasing Promotions.
They have two sons, Michael, 7, and Thomas, 9:
‘Basically we're as different as chalk and cheese, and we have completely different life styles — for a start I'm a family man, and he's not.
But something clicked  between us.
He's a few years older than I am and was already one of the most respected members of the Weighing Room when we became friends.
When you're a jockey, you really are thrown together.
You find yourselves together every day of the week, all over the world, all through the winters, getting changed to go out riding…and you do become close.
Steve and I may see each other six times a week if we're racing.
If he's in Cheltenham, he'll always stay with me.
If I'm in Newmarket, I'll stay with him.
‘I like the way Steve says what he thinks, he's very good at getting things done.
Like the time we were riding in Australia and the conditions we were living in were awful.
So Steve marches us off to find decent accommodation.
‘Three years ago, he said, ‘How about starting a promotions company — jockeys aren't promoted properly.’
I said, ‘Yeah, you're right,’ so we set up Chasing Promotions.
We didn't think about the fact that the ups and downs of running a business could mean an end to a friendship — in fact, we're probably better friends for it.’
Stephen Smith Eccles, 36, single:
‘The Weighing Room has a real pecking order — when you first come in, you sit next to the old draughty door, and one by one you all move up.
I sat next to John Francome for 10 years and when he retired, I got his spot and Peter sat next to me.
And you tend to become the best of friends with the guy next to you.
‘It is a dangerous sport, every time you go out there, you put your neck on the line, and working together in that kind of atmosphere does make you closer.
I do have friends who are footballers or whatever, but it's not the same as being close to other jockeys.
I know that if I broke down in my car, wherever I was in the country, whatever time of night it was, Pete would come to the rescue.
If I was injured, he'd be the first to come to my aid.
And I'd do the same for him.
‘Peter and I do talk about personal things.
I'm basically a very private person, but I'd probably tell Pete things that I wouldn't tell anyone else.
‘When I had the idea of setting up a promotions business, I immediately thought of Pete because I knew I could work with him.
We talked about it and the following day, we registered the company.
That's how easy it was.’
JO RICHARDSON Labour MP for Barking (Shadow Cabinet Minister for Women) and CLARE SHORT Labour MP for Birmingham Ladywood
Jo Richardson, 68, single:
‘We had our first real meeting in the early 80s.
We were talking about the National Executive Committee and she was thinking of standing for the women's section.
And I just found that I could talk to her, and I think she to me.
There was an immediate rapport, as if we'd been friends for years, and that happens only rarely.
But we're not in each other 's pockets the whole time.
I rarely go to her house and I don't think she's ever been to my flat, but our friendship is very much part of our working lives.
We confide in one another, and talk on the phone a great deal .
‘Clare is someone I can — and do — go to with personal problems.
She's very wise and kind, and she listens.
Having said that, there are still probably large chunks of each other 's lives that we don't know about.
‘Whenever I see Clare, she always gives me a big kiss on the cheek and gives my back a little rub and says, ‘How are you?’
She knows that I have arthritis and if I do need a bit of support, Clare's always there, unobtrusively, to give me a hand.
She is, in the best possible sense, a real sister.
‘I think a real friend is someone you don't have to see the whole time.
You can pick up where you left off.
I value Clare and I'm not being patronising when I say that.
She's a woman without fear, with a mind of her own, who says what she thinks.
She's so honest.
Although we don't agree with each other on every dot and comma, we do have very many common beliefs.
We share the same kind of sense of humour.
Our views on people, too, are uncannily similar.
I know if I said I wasn't keen on someone, I could be 90% sure that Clare would agree.
I often wish I could be more like her.’
Clare Short, 45, is married to former MP, Alexander Lyon:
‘The first time I really took Jo on board was before I'd ever met her.
She'd been elected to the National Executive Committee and she stood up, said how pleased she was, and then said, ‘But now I have to take the bucket round for a collection because that's what I always do…’ and I just thought, ‘How wonderful’.
We instantly gravitated towards one another.
I loved her, liked her.
She has an indomitable will.
‘Friendship is enormously important to me.
It keeps you going in life, especially with all the brickbats you get in politics.
People get all sorts of images of you, but the truth is, they don't know you.
A friend is someone who'll be there for you.
‘Jo and I see each other every day from Monday to Thursday when the House is in session.
We often have lunch, although we don't spend a lot of time socialising.
Politics gives us a common view of life, but I think we would be friends whatever we did.
She's a warm, funny, slightly irreverent friend.
Women's friendships are straightforward.
The trouble with men and women is that sex gets in the way — nice, but it can complicate things.’
NIGEL DEMPSTER,Daily Mail diarist, and PETER MCKAY, writer for the Evening Standard 
Nigel Dempster, 50, is married to Lady Camilla Dempster, and they have a daughter, Louisa, 12:
‘I think that friendship can be defined by its longevity and Peter McKay and I go back 25 years.
Not that we haven't had arguments.
We've had our spats which have lasted a few months, but if anything, I think that sort of thing strengthens a friendship.
You just get back together and think how silly you've both been.
‘He has all the great attributes of a Scotsman, and he's never forsworn his native accent.
He's erudite, enormously warm and most of all, a golfer.
We met in 1963 when I was working on the Daily Express's William Hickey column, and Peter was writing on the Sunday Express .
That meant we worked in the same building on different floors.
‘I just took an instant shine to him.
We have Scottish ancestry in common and much more.
A love of wine, a love of women — Peter loves women.
Old, young, crones, beauties, whatever.
I put it down to his upbringing.
He was brought up by a gaggle of ladies, and the result is that has enormous affection for them.
‘We've shared a lot over the years.
We've been drunk together, sober together, caroused together, been abroad together.
And we have a lot in common.
We've both been married twice, although he has more children than I do and I'm very jealous of that.
I can't think of anything we couldn't talk about — money, our jobs, our antipathy towards our enemies.
We don't discuss sex, but that's about the only thing.
‘We're almost exactly the same age — his birthday is six months after mine — and we see each other at least once a week for lunch.
We used to play golf, but went by the board when he moved.
We still work in the same building, so we'll often pop into each other 's offices or talk on the phone, although Peter often blips me on my computer.
I suppose we've been rivals in the past, when I had my column on the Daily Mail and he had his on the Daily Express , but we've been rivals in the friendliest of terms.
We'd rubbish each other in the columns but they ring each other up and scream with laughter.
Peter McKay, 49, is married to journalist Carla.
He has five children: Isobel, 4, Gordon, 6, Amber, 16, Rory, 18 and Sinclair, aged 24:
‘I do think that men and women have different sorts of friendship and I'm not sure that wives can ever understand male friendships.
Women tend to talk about real things, whereas Nigel and I like to sit in a restaurant retelling old stories.
‘A friend is someone you just enjoy seeing, someone you never get bored with.
I don't think it means you have to be completely loyal to them, because I do believe you can sometimes take enjoyment in a friend's small difficulties.
We've both become victims of Private Eye and I know that he would laugh at some of the things they've said about me, and I'd do the same to him.
But I'd also back him to the hilt in the face of larger difficulties.
‘If I were on holiday, Nigel would be the first person I'd contact when I got back.
He's very funny, terribly generous and heightens any occasion.
We're also very good at sulking when we fall out.
This happened when I fell foul of former Tatler Editor Tina Brown.
She was having a party and struck my name off the guest list and Carla, who was my girlfriend then, was working on Londoner's Diary .
Anyway, it ran a filthily rude piece about the party and Tina rang up Nigel in tears —‘Why would they do this?’
So Nigel thought, ‘Oh yes, he's got Carla to write it,’ although in fact she had nothing to do with it.
So then Nigel wrote a piece saying how marvellous the party was, despite reports to the contrary written by ‘a woman whose present companion…’ and so on.
Carla sent him a lawyer's letter, demanded that he pay her £500 and write a grovelling letter, which she now has framed.
But we have to move it when he comes round, or he'd steal it!
‘We actually argue about when we first met.
I think it was 1964, he thinks it was 1963, but I know that we met in El Vino and hit it off immediately.
We're just on the same wavelength.
‘Even when we were rivals, we could attack each other 's proprietors in print, but it didn't hurt our relationship, it was a bit of fun.
But we both understand the pressures we're under and we share a lot of assumptions.
We used to play golf together, but it's particularly daft playing golf with him because — how shall I say this?
He hasn't got the best temperament for it.
He gets terribly bad tempered if he plays a bad shot.
I remember once Nigel  picked up his bag of clubs and flung the lot into the woods.
We had to go scrabbling around trying to find them —‘I've got a five-iron here’— and people playing behind had caught up with us.
They couldn't quite work out what we were doing looking for golf clubs in the wood — balls yes, clubs no.
It was very, very silly!’
TESSA DAHL, once an actress, now a writer, and GERALDINE JAMES, actress
Tessa Dahl, 34, is divorced, and has three children — Luke, 5, Clover, 7, Sophie, 14:
‘With friends, you don't introduce yourself, there's no need to ring and say ‘It's Tessa here’, you just pick up the phone and wail: ‘I threw up last night,’ or ‘I can't stand it, he hasn't called.’
That's how it is between Geraldine and me.
The fact that we've both done the same thing — I was an actress although I'm a writer now — is totally unimportant.
The only time it comes in useful is when we're talking about acting and then we have a kind of shorthand.
‘I think other things are more important than sharing the same profession.
For example, 99.9% of my friends have come from homes where they had major childhood traumas.
We're all as nutty as each other, all survivors.
We know each other 's pain and that can forge a friendship.
‘I first met Geraldine when I was 11.
We went to the same school — Geraldine was Head Girl and just about to leave and I was just beginning.
My parents and I saw her in the school play and they thought she was so wonderful that they invited her to lunch — to make me see what I could be if I did it right.
She came wearing an enormous hat and I was totally in awe of her.
And then I didn't see her again until about nine years ago, when I was living in America and we were introduced again.
‘We just fell completely in love with each other.
All we did was laugh.
We can share anything.
The other day I was telling her about something that had happened, crying as I told the story, and she started crying too.
A girl needs to talk to her girlfriends two, three, four times a day.
To talk about everything from the fact that you don't fancy coffee that week to things which are deeply personal.
When Daddy [Roald Dahl]was dying, for example, Geraldine and a friend had arranged to take me for lunch.
He died at noon, and it meant so much to me that my friends were there.
I got in the car and the three of us went to register the death.
Then they drove me home and stayed with me.
Geraldine had lost both her parents the year before, so we've been through a lot of the same feelings.
I can't begin to say how supportive she was at that time.’
Geraldine James, 40, is married to actor Joe Blatchley, and they have one daughter, Eleanor, 6:
‘Our first meeting isn't very clear in my mind because I'm older than Tessa, and when you're a teenager, you don't really consider someone that much younger.
And anyway, I was so overwhelmed by her mother, who was so sweet to me, that I wanted to be her friend.
So I didn't really meet Tessa until I went on holiday to America and we were introduced by a mutual friend.
She just opened her house to us — totally generous.
And soon after, when we got together in New York, it was simply like two pieces of a jigsaw slotting in tightly together.
‘One of Tessa's greatest qualities is that she's brilliant at making a home, not a pretty home, although they usually are, but a real home.
We both know that we can — and have done — ring each other up at any hour of the day or night.
I know that if I ask Tessa to do anything for me, she will — and the same is true in reverse.
And it doesn't feel like we ought to do it, it feels like we want to.
‘We talk all the time, real chats, not about huge events, just the littlest things in life, which are usually the funniest and most interesting.
Even though we're completely different people, and our lives are very different, we support each other totally.
When I had my baby, Tessa, was fabulous.
When her father died, I tried to be there for her.
When your parents die, it's a bit like having a baby — there's the element of wondering why people who've been through it didn't tell you what it was really like.
It's at times like that you need your friends.’
FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES
There is a psychiatric test for depression which asks you how many friends you have: no friends at all gives you the highest symptom score: an infinite number shows you're perfectly cheerful.
While I agree with the importance that this test places on friendship, I've never agreed with the idea that the more friends the merrier.
I suspect that two or three really close friends are all that we can manage if we are to give and receive all the important things that friendship offers.
One important function of friendship is to provide stability.
You may not always do just what friends tell you, but they are the sounding boards who let you know how far to go.
Friends who are very dissimilar may not give the same thing to each other, but what each gives can sometimes be even richer for this: it can make up for the other's deficits.
If you are close, you can appreciate the other's character without having to go through the anxiety of behaving that way yourself.
So Peter Scudamore and Steve Smith Eccles may benefit from the one being a family man and the other not.
What you do need to share, however, is a similarity of beliefs and experiences to underlie the more superficial aspects of personality.
For this reason, it's not surprising that in some careers friendship blossoms between people taking the same path.
The friends interviewed all have to face the public and be judged.
Small wonder then, that real friendship for them comes from someone who deep down understands what this involves.
For Clare Short and Jo Richardson, this is undoubtedly accentuated by the support they can give each other in a world where all the benchmarks are male, where rivalry is high and trust low.
Of course, being in the same profession may increase a sense of rivalry between you — but what's good about friendship is that we can take a little of this.
We can accept the less than perfect aspects of a friend — it's their lack of perfection which makes them endearing, because it lets us have a fault or two ourselves.
We shouldn't be aspiring to a multitude of acquaintances, one good friend is enough.
JENNY COZENS, GH CONSULTANT PSYCHOLOGIST 
Above: ‘We try to prop each other up,’ says Maureen Lipman (right) of fellow actress Julia McKenzie
Below: Jockeys Steve Smith Eccles (left) and Peter Scudamore are close friends and business partners, despite doing battle on the turf
Labour MPs Jo Richardson (left) and Clare Short.
‘Clare's a sold mate,’ says Jo; ‘she makes me laugh,’says Clare
In the past, gossip writers Peter McKay (left) and Nigel Dempster have rubbished each other in the press, but roared with laughter later
‘We can share anything,’ says writer Tessa Dahl (right) of actress Geraldine James.
‘We met at school — I was totally in awe of her’
GH fashion
GLITTERING PRIZES
Just imagine a single garment that can be mixed and matched a million times to look different and devastating every time.
CAROLINE BAKER chooses today's extravagances that will last a lifetime of parties.
PERFECT PINK Left: Nicola Formby wears Frank Usher fuchsia sequined cardigan, about £200, chiffon skirt with camisole, £188; Pretty Polly 12-denier Velvet Sheer tights with Lycra, £2.55
GOLD STAR Right: Harriet Close wears L'Ultima cardigan with gold bugle beading, £145; Elaine Closs yellow chiffon circle skirt, £225; Dolcis suede sandals with gold trim, £24.99; Charnos Matt Satin Opaque tights, £5.10
MILITARY MAGIC Colette Barnes wears Jaeger military-style velvet jacket with gold-braid trim, £235 and red silk T-shirt, £75; Oleg Cassini Black Tie collection at Harrods sequin and bead tartan skirt, £360; Couture Chamois Opaque tights, £6.25
SHINING EXAMPLE Therèse Sorrell wears The Collection at Principles sequined crochet sweater, £199; Next Directory long pleated chiffon skirt, £64.99; Wolford Satin Opaque tights, £9.99; Russell & Bromley suede slippers, £79.99
A REAL GEM Principles jewelled cardigan, £70; Frank Usher purple chiffon circle skirt, £125; Aristoc black opaque tights, £1.89
JET SET The Collection at Principles sleeveless shift dress, £140 and smoking jacket, £119; both with jet bead embroidery; Boots Glossy Opaque tights, £6.99
RAZZLE DAZZLE Frank Usher black chiffon T-shirt with silver sequin flowers, £90 and full-circle chiffon skirt, £125; Boots Glossy Opaque tights, £6.99
SLEEK CHIC Principles georgette shirt with beaded embroidery, £39.99; Knickerbox camisole (worn underneath), £16.99; Bernshaw sequined crochet long skirt, about £150; Miss Selfridge, kitten-heeled slingbacks with elastic front, £29.99; Charnos Matt Satin Opaque tights, £5.10
ALL YOU NEED IS LOVE…
…and patience, determination, resilience, courage and a whole lot more — that's the truth about adopting a Romanian child.
Many families thought that getting their baby home would be the hardest part, but that is just the beginning.
ROSE SHEPHERD reports.
Anna wants me to know about the birthday party she had in July.
‘They sang ‘Happy birthday to you’,’(she sings it)‘and I had a cake with Mickey Mouse.
And they made a fire on it.’
Not bad for a little girl of 4 who, just over a year ago, couldn't speak a word of English (could barely speak, indeed, a word of anything).
Anna has come a long way from the Romanian orphanage where she spent the first two years of her life, a malnourished, incontinent infant with a shaven head.
Today she is blonde and bonny, constantly chatty, a joy to her adoptive parents, Christine, 49, and Tony Golder, 64.
‘Her speech isn't perfect,’ says Christine.
No, but it's perfectly charming.
‘I've got a big lion,’ Anna announces.
Then she insists on showing me a toy that ‘goes off pop!’
For Christine, a nursery school teacher living near Manchester, now that most the ‘teething troubles’ with Anna are over, there is only one sadness: that she did not bring back a second child.
‘When I look at Anna, I am reminded that, in just that one orphanage, there are still all those beautiful children with so much wasted potential.’
But to bring back even one infant was struggle enough.
‘And it's not easy when you get home, either,’ she warns.
‘You've got to know what you're taking on, especially if, like us, you choose a child of 2 or older.
It's no good thinking you'll bring home this gorgeous kid and everything will be fine, because it isn't.’
At least five couples have found this out at high cost.
One Romanian child was put into care because temper tantrums, and another 2-year-old was rejected because she didn't need love.
‘She never called me Mummy,’ the adoptive mother is reported to have said.
‘Anna had tantrums,’ Christine recalls.
‘We just didn't know what to do with her.
She would bite herself, bite anybody, and tear her clothes off.
The sweat ran off her.
I think the longest one lasted more than half an hour.
The slightest thing would set her off, usually when she was feeling insecure and wanted attention.
She loves the telephone, and she threw a wobbly when I wouldn't let her play with it.
There were moments when I did get upset by it, but I never let her see it.
I just held her quietly until she calmed down.
Christine has been a nursery school teacher for 27 years, which undoubtedly helped.
For Tony, Anna's rages were more distressing.
‘He did once say to me that we didn't know what we'd got a hold of.
He was upset because she was upset, not because he didn't like her.
But we were able to work through it and come out the other side.
And when she wasn't having tantrums, she was fantastic.
Christine has two grown-up daughters and seven grandchildren.
She married Tony 11 years ago, after the death of her first husband.
They would have liked to have had a baby together, but she lost triplets, was very ill, and it seemed a family was not to be.
Conventional adoption was out of the question.
They knew they were too old.
‘Then, in February 1990, we saw the horrific pictures of the orphanage children on the television.
And we looked at each other and said, ‘We'll go and get one.’’
Thus, in March 1990, Christine set out for Heathrow with a stack of documents required by the Romanian authorities, and little idea of what awaited her.
In Bucharest she sat for 48 hours in her hotel, waiting for word from her Romanian solicitor.
The solicitor sent his assistant, Danielle.
She said she knew an orphanage two hours from Bucharest.
They would go there.
‘When I arrived, I was shaking.
But I had made up my mind that I must not get emotional, so I hid all my feelings.
I kept everything inside for months.
In fact it wasn't until Anna was here, and we were watching a programme about Romania, that I burst into tears and cried for hours and hours.
‘The orphanage was apparently, by Romanian standards, very good, and the doctor was a really caring person.
But what could she do?
She had no money, she had nothing.
We went into a room where all these children were sitting at long rows of tables.
They were tatty and smelly and lethargic.
Their heads were shaved.
They had no nappies, and a lot of them had Aids.
My feeling was one of horror, mingled with a desire to take them all.’
Christine and Tony had decided to look for a girl of about 2, since they felt a baby would be too much to cope with and a 2- year-old could accompany Christine to nursery school.
‘They brought Anna out, and she just stood there.
She could hardly walk, she was undersized, and was very solemn.
I think she could say about five words.
She looked so pathetic.
Then a dog barked outside, and straight away she was alive, she knew what was going on.
I thought, ‘There's something there, it just wants bringing out.’
Christine watched, dismayed, as the children ate their lunch — hunks of bread thrown on the table, and tin mugs of gruel.
‘I couldn't stop myself.
I started helping to feed them.’
This spontaneous gesture impressed the doctor.
She was on Christine's side.
She would sign the papers.
But a second signature was needed: that of Anna's mother.
‘We eventually tracked her down at this dreadful apartment block.
Danielle hammered at the door until a face peeped out of the window.
It seemed that she was the mother, but her sister, a prostitute, had locked her in to look after her children while she was out ‘on the game’.
‘Danielle managed to prise open the  French windows, and the mother and her sister's children climbed out.
We all set off in the car to see a lawyer.
As she signed the papers at the lawyer's office, Anna's mother was crying.
‘Oh, take no notice,’ said Danielle, ‘she's never once bothered to visit her.’
Maybe not.
She did, however, ask that Christine send her a photograph.
And it must have been some comfort to her, a few months later, to receive a picture of Anna, healthy, happy, as she could never have been in the orphanage.
‘People argue that you are depriving children of their culture,’ says Christine.
‘Well, I say, ‘What culture?’
They lie there in cots, sometimes tied down, not crying because there's nothing to cry for.
Anna had lived in two rooms all her life.
She didn't even have the language.
She might not be alive now if we'd left her there.’
Next, Anna had to be tested for Aids.
‘They took the blood from her jugular vein.
When I saw her crying, with her neck all swollen, I wanted to lash out at the doctor who'd done this to her.
At that moment I began to feel that she was mine, that I didn't want to lose her.’
Whether Anna sensed this, nobody can know.
She herself will probably not remember.
But as Christine was leaving the orphanage to take the blood sample to Bucharest, she heard a child screaming.
‘We looked round, and there was Anna, crawling as fast as she could to me.
I couldn't believe it.
I picked her up.
The doctor told me that it was the first time she had made an advance to anybody.
They held her up to the window, and she was crying and banging on the glass as we drove away.’
Getting Anna to England involved much heartache and effort.
But after a fruitless second visit to Romania, a desperate letter to Mrs Thatcher, social services' reports, and third dash to Romania, Anna finally boarded a plane for Heathrow on 15 July 1990.
‘She was so good,’ remembers Christine.
‘I were good,’ confirms Anna.
‘She wasn't frightened of flying, but she was very frightened of the seat belt, so I think she'd been tied down at one time.
‘When I arrived home with her, I don't think that anyone said anything.
It took ages to believe that she was actually here.
She had put on a bit of weight.
They'd been feeding her up (according to Danielle, they would have taken extra food from the other children).
But she was still so little.’
Anna walked around the house, looked into every room and, having inspected her new home, apparently satisfied, settled on Christine's lap and went to sleep, exhausted after the journey.
Apart from the tantrums, there were other unexpected problems in the early days, like persuading Anna to sleep in a bed.
‘She would often get out in the night and sleep on the floor, usually next to us.
We keep an extra cover at the end of the bed, and she would pull that off and wrap herself in it.
If you got up to go to the loo, you'd trip over this bundle.’
But Christine was relaxed and didn't make an issue of it.
‘I suppose some people might have found it worrying, but it didn't trouble me unduly.
I knew that Anna had a lot of adjusting to do, and that in the orphanage many children hadn't had beds.’
There were also understandable signs of insecurity.
‘Everything she got, she clung to.
One morning she put all her clothes on — 14 T-shirts, socks, a hat — the sweat was pouring off her.’
When Tony bought her a sunhat, she wouldn't take it off.
And, more touching, ‘We'd find that, while we'd been asleep, she'd piled all the ornaments on top of our bed.
It was as though she needed to give us something.’
Anna had arrived a week before the end of term, and so Christine had to go back to school, to her job, leaving Tony (who had been granted paternity leave) to cope on his own.
‘Anna cried after me.
She was very clingy.
I couldn't even go to the toilet without her.
Tony found that the best thing to do was to put her in the buggy and push her round the town, or take her to the park.
She loved it.
She was great with him so long as he kept her  occupied.
Thankfully it was a red-hot summer, and they could be out every minute.
At the end of that week they took Anna to the doctor and he was worried that she might be scared of being examined, but she wasn't.
She couldn't have cared less.
She's really tough.
Now that school had broken up, Christine was able to devote six whole weeks to Anna.
This time spent together, and the opportunity to give Anna her undivided attention, could well have been decisive.
Parents of young children, with so many other calls on their time and affections, might find it harder to cope with a difficult infant, to integrate her or him into the family — while resentful siblings could cause additional strain.
‘I took her to Anglesey,’ says Christine, ‘where we have a house, and where I could concentrate on her completely.
Then I explained every single thing we did, or used, or saw, to her.
I didn't know, until I began to get feedback, if she was understanding, but she was.
And her speech increased rapidly.
Within about 10 days she knew that when the phone rang at night it would be Tony, despite never having seen a phone before.
‘She still clung to me, but the social worker was thrilled about it, she said it meant she'd bonded well.
I did everything I could think of with Anna.
I introduced her to the sand and the sea.
She hated the sand, but loved the sea.
At first she was frightened of the bath, but she adores it now.
And she loves swimming.
You do have to be careful, though, because she has no fear.
She just splashes out, and she's gone.’
There must be a temptation, when a child has been so dreadfully deprived, to overcompensate, to lavish ‘kindnesses’ upon her and to be lax about discipline.
But in Christine's view, disaster lies that way.
‘I found I had to be very firm with her, or she'd have run rings around me, and how would she learn?
Your word has to be law.
These kids have to have a structure, and to know that you mean what you say.’
It was tricky to have to toilet-train a 3-year-old.
‘It wasn't like teaching a baby.
If she had an accident, she'd go mad, yet she didn't seem to want to try.
Then, after about five weeks, in desperation, I sat her on the toilet, and from then on she was clean.
It was the potty she hadn't liked.’
All the time, Anna was putting on weight.
‘She had extra vitamins.
And she ate and ate.
She's certainly not a faddy eater!
But she eats nicely.
We take her to restaurants now.’
After those six weeks, the social worker told Christine, ‘You know, I was against all this.
But now that I look at her, I've changed my mind.’
When they returned from Anglesey, Christine took Anna to school with her, where she started to learn ‘in leaps and bounds’.
It was good for Anna to be with other children, yet to have Christine there too.
‘But I felt that everybody around her knew.
Not that I was trying to hide where she came from, but I didn't want her to be singled out.
I wanted Anna to be liked for Anna, and not to be treated as if she were different.
She really has had an awful lot of attention.
At Christmas you couldn't move for toys in this house.
Too many, really.
I put some away.
She still gets overexcited if we have visitors, or if we go anywhere.
She has gone from having no attention whatsoever, to having lots of it, and she just doesn't know how to cope with it.
She doesn't scream or cry, but she gets very high.’
A year after she arrived, Anna moved from  Christine's school, and took the new one ‘like a duck to water’.
She is among pupils of many different races, and will, hopes Christine, just become one of the crowd.
It is hard to know what three lost years have cost Anna.
‘She shows no signs of being institutionalised.
She's a complete individual.
But then, maybe that's just Anna.
Some children become institutionalised more quickly than others, and she still had a bit of fire left in her when I went to the orphanage for her.
I know when she's feeling insecure.
There are little signals now and again.
And if she has a fight with another child, she always bites, there are things like that.
But she loves to be with children.
She feels particularly happy and safe with them.’
Anna is slightly at a disadvantage at school, due mainly to misunderstanding the language, but she's catching up fast.
When the health visitor came, she effortlessly passed her 3-plus assessment.
But it is as though she has had to start from square one.
And there just aren't any short cuts.
‘For instance, though she can hold a pencil, she has no idea how to colour a picture, she just scribbles all over it.
All children have to go through the scribbling stage.
They can't just miss it out.’
And Anna has had to learn how to play.
‘When we first gave her toys, she hadn't a clue what to do with them.
She just sat there.
Even now she doesn't play on her own very often.’
Nobody is pushing Anna, but Christine and Tony do hope that by the time she moves into mainstream education, she will have caught up.
‘She's lost three years of her life, and that's a lot of losing.
She's getting better at speech now, and hold a conversation, but she doesn't understand some things.
I'm fortunate in that I'm trained to help.
‘She's got these gaps and they have to be worked at.
I buy her lots of tapes, and she plays and plays them.
She loves all kinds of music — in fact she's very musical.’
There would not have been much music, one is suddenly reminded or much singing and dancing where Anna came from.
In a year, Anna grew 3½in, and gained a stone.
‘The doctor was thrilled with her.
But because she's so tough, you don't know if there's something wrong with her.
She had an ear infection and she told the doctor, but it was the first I'd heard of it.
And she had scarlet fever, but she never complained.
She fell down at school today and grazed her knees, but she didn't bat an eyelid.’
Some people, Christine says, may have gone through agonies with their Romanian babies.
But although Christine was exhausted after the first six weeks, Anna has brought great joy into their lives.
‘You ask me if it's been tough.
Well, I've had tougher times.
And Tony is over the moon about her.
Even now she takes such pleasure in the simplest things.’
A picture emerges of a courageous, determined, resilient little individual, not so badly damaged by her early experiences, after all.
We go through the dozen or so photograph albums that Christine has made up for her, and Anna points out her grown-up ‘sisters’, Christine and Sarah-Jane; she also names her nieces and nephews for me.
But this is not sanitised personal history: among the pictures is one of Anna, a sad little waif, at the orphanage.
They wanted her, says Christine, to have a record of her past.
When anyone suggests, as people will, that they have done a great thing for Anna, Tony and Christine are quick to reply that it has been a great thing, also, for them.
Home Office approval for Anna to stay in the UK as the adopted child of the Golders has now been obtained.
‘The day that our papers went before the panel and we heard that everything was OK, Anna walked into the room, and for the first time she said ‘I love you.’
Anna, pictured above with her adoptive mother Christine, today radiates health and happiness; but the photograph top left serves as a tragic reminder of her early years in a Romanian orphanage
‘Tony is over the moon about Anna.
She takes such pleasure in the simplest things’
GH homes
SET A FESTIVE TABLE
Opulent, rich and glamorous — that's the look of this year's table settings.
Lavish decorations and bold colours have taken over.
On these pages we show you two very different settings and ways to adapt them for your festivities at home.
For stocklists, see GH Christmas Shopping Guide on page 166
A TOUCH OF SILVER
This setting takes a simple theme of pressed and cut glass and white linen — and then embellishes it with flowers, fruit and candles.
Pressed glass may not have the sparkle of fine crystal — but by mixing cheap with expensive, it can look just as elegant, against a backdrop of white linen and silverware.
Tablecloth , 160x300cm, £42, by Le Jacquard Français from Liberty.
Overcloth made from cotton organdie, 114cm wide, £8.01/m, from Whaley's.
Napkins , £8.95 for 2, from Laura Ashley.
Cakeboards (12in) used as place mats, 85p each, from Divertimenti.
Ironbridge fork , £4, and dessertspoon , £3.50; both from Habitat.
Champagne flutes , £5.50 each,tall glass candlesticks , £10.50 each and small , £2.95,comport (with fruit), £11.95, and matching dish (with pink and white sweets), £4.50,large crackers , £26.95 for 6; all from Fenwick.
Pressed-glass plates, large , £5.10,small , £4.05,lidded pot , £5.65,decanter , £10.20; all from Harvey Nichols.
Dessert plate (with chocolates), £22.50, and matching jardinière (with silver sweets), £29.50; both by Paloma Picasso, from Villeroy & Boch at Liberty.
Small quiche dish (with white sweets), £4.45 for 6, from John Lewis.
Champagne bucket , £19.95, from The French Kitchen & Tableware Supply Co.
Tiny crackers , £3.50 for 10, from Heal's.
Fluted loaf tins (with flowers), £1.20 each, from Divertimenti.
Corfu chairs , £59 each, from Habitat, with loose covers made in ivory Aragon fabric , 140cm wide, £12.95/m, from Laura Ashley.
Background painted with F2–80,matt emulsion from Crown Expressions, £15.50/2.5 litres.
VICTORIAN OPULENCE
Recreate a splendid Victorian Christmas atmosphere with this table setting, which makes striking use of colour — adding purple to traditional reds and greens.
You have to be resourceful when catering for larger numbers.
Here, we used a throw of Indian cotton for the tablecloth, which covers the table right down to the ground, and an overcloth made from ticking provides fresh contrast for the coloured glasses.
Ivy, candles and fruit arranged in a wire basket make a sumptuous centrepiece.
Indian cotton throw , £22, from Habitat.
Overthrow made from ticking, 130cm wide, £13.50/m,wire basket with candleholders , £21; all from The Conran Shop; we painted the basket red, twined ivy around it and lined it with moss, before filling with fruit.
Spode Fleur De Lys cone china in red: 10in dinner plates , £28.60 each, 6in side plate , £13.28, and vegetable dish , £141.52; all from department stores.
Brettingham table knife , £4.99 dessertknife , £4.75,table fork , £3.25,dessertfork and spoon , £2.75 each,teaspoon , £1.29, and tablespoon , £3.25; all by Cosmo at DH Evans.
Napkins , £5.50 each, by Le Jacquard Français from Liberty.
Green goblets , £5.50 each, from Habitat.
Soare tumblers , £5.30 for 2, from Ikea.
Molin gold bowl (with figs), £45, from Thomas Goode.
Molin small gold bowl , £40.95, from Harvey Nichols.
Glass cruet-set , £14.50, from Thomas Goode.
Rachel jug , £25, and Chalice decanter , £40, both by Dartington,crackers , £12.50 for 6; all from Fenwick.
Thomas Messel serving mat , £94 for 4, from Liberty.
Corfu chairs , £59 each, from Habitat.
Background painted with 3030 B70G, Collector,matt emulsion from the Definitions range by Dulux, £15.49/2.5 litres.
STENCIL STARS
Stencilling is a clever way of creating an individual Christmas tablecloth.
Use a plain fabric, such as sheeting (from John Lewis, about £4.25/m), which comes in various widths.
Cut it to size, allowing extra for a hem all round.
You'll need a stencil, stencil paint and brushes.
Available from craft shops and at Pavilion, 6a Howe St, Edinburgh EH3 6TD (031–225 3590), where a Christmas star costs £2.25, Ivy (CA4), £5.10, stencil paints, £2.99 each and gold paint, £3.25; mail order available — add £1.50 p&p.
Hold the stencil flat to the surface of the fabric.
Apply the paint with a light stippling motion, using very little colour on an almost dry brush (rub the excess paint off the brush onto kitchen towel).
Build up deeper tones of colour in several layers.
When the stencilling is dry, press with a cool iron to set the design.
Finally, hem all round the cloth to give a neat finish.
FLORAL CENTREPIECES
In our silver and white table setting, the floral centrepieces were arranged in fluted loaf tins.
These shiny, silver-coloured tins may be an unusual choice, but they fitted the scheme perfectly.
To make something similar, you'll need: an oval tin or other watertight container, a block of florist's foam, waterproof tape, florist's scissors, foliage and flowers.
Keep foliage simple — we used only three kinds, with different leaf shapes including one with berries, and one kind of flower.
Cut the foam to fit the container and stand slightly taller than its sides.
Fix in place with strips of tape attached to the edge of the container.
Start with small sprigs of the foliage that will form the body of the arrangement and push them into the foam at random to make a fairly even shape, as seen from all sides.
Don't pack them together too densely, and leave gaps around them.
Next, push sprigs of the other kinds of foliage into the gaps to fill.
Finally dot the flowers around the arrangement, pushing the short stems into the foam.
Water the foam until it is soaked.
SPARKLING GLASS
Pressed glass became fashionable in the 19th century, and it's ideal for anyone who wants to start a collection as there are still some bargains to be found — look for it at junk shops and car-boot sales.
Even small bowls look great filled with sweets, fruit and nuts.
The Arabesque dinner plate (shown above), made by Baccarat, costs £65.50 — which may seem expensive, until you reflect that a cut-glass dinner plate would cost very much more.
Baccarat and a selection of fine cut glass is available from Thomas Goode, 19 South Audley St, London W1Y 6BN (071–499 2823).
INFORMAL SETTING (3 COURSES)
Cutlery for the first and main courses is placed on the outside, as for formal settings.
Dessert cutlery is set above the place mat; butter knife is on the side plate.
ELEGANT NAPKIN
A pretty napkin fold is easier to make than it looks.
Just follow these simple instructions.
First, fold the napkin in half diagonally, then bring the left and right-hand corners up to meet at the apex (pic 1).
Turn the napkin over, and fold the lower corner up slightly (pic 2).
Fold the left and right-hand corners underneath the napkin on a slight diagonal, pressing folds lightly in place (pic 3).
The napkin is ready to lay on a plate (pic 4).
GH COMPETITION
WIN A SUPER NEW KITCHEN
£150,000 WORTH OF PRIZES TO BE WON from Magnet and Neff
Two lucky winner will be able to choose a brand-new,fully-fitted, state-of-the-art kitchen from Magnet's extensive range (not necessarily the two shown here), planned and fitted to their own requirements and equipped with the Neff appliances of their choice.
Magnet's wide choice of kitchen units includes traditional and modern styles, and prices to fit any budget.
Traditionalists will appreciate the Old English design in limed oak, or chestnut (far right), or the beautifully crafted Royal Oak or Cottage Oak ranges.
And pictured right is Magnet's stunning new Walnut kitchen — currently available in selected stores only.
Those who prefer sleek, modern looks will love the white Vienna units or the soft dove-grey Como.
If you're keeping to a tight budget, the textured melamine finish of Dakota or pale grey Tulsa combine practical style with contemporary good looks — and there are many other styles to choose from.
Magnet also has a computerised planning service, a specialised fitting service and nearly all units are delivered ready-assembled, so they are sturdy enough to cope with the most demanding family.
There's even a financialplanning service.
Neff has been steadily building up its reputation for fine cookers and electrical appliances since the company revolutionised cooking methods with the introduction of its ‘Circotherm’ oven in the 1970s.
Now Neff's range of clever products includes a combination circotherm/microwave oven, an integrated washer/drier, ceramic hobs and an electronic dishwasher.
Neff specialises in technological innovation, which makes living and cooking easier.
These qualities can be found in environment-friendly fridges and freezers, microwave or combination ovens, and energy saving washing machines.
WHAT YOU HAVE TO DO
Look at the kitchens shown on these pages.
In Section A , we describe two couples with different lifestyles and in Section B , we describe six qualities possessed by Magnet and six by Neff.
Pick three reasons why each of the couples would choose Magnet and three why they would pick Neff, using each point once.
Then write a short tie-breaker saying why you would like to win a Magnet kitchen, fully equipped with Neff appliances.
SECTION A
Couple 1 — A part-time teacher and a businessman who often need to entertain at home.
They live in a large house with children aged 10, 14 and 18.
Both enjoy cooking, appreciate good food and love entertaining.
Couple 2 — A married young couple who are decorating a small flat.
They need to budget carefully, neither is a diy expert, but they have saved enough to buy a new kitchen.
Quality of life, good food and informal entertaining are important to them.
SECTION B
Magnet
1
Wide range of kitchen styles
2
Robust quality — built to last
3
Free computer kitchen-planning service
4
Delivery from the factory to your door
5
Qualified fitters to install the kitchen
6
Finance-plan package
Neff
a
Appliances that respond to your lifestyle
b
Technological innovation on all appliances
c
Flexible designs
d
Visually attractive appliances
e
Energy-saving appliances
f
Good reputation for quality
I would like to win a Magnet kitchen equipped with Neff appliances because 
If you would like to know more about Magnet and Neff, please tick Magnet Neff
RULES OF ENTRY:Entrants must be 18 years or over and may submit only one entry.
Winners must be prepared to accept their prize in person or to nominate a representative on their behalf, be willing to have their names published, and be interviewed, if necessary.
No cash alternative will be offered and prices in the current Magnet catalogue apply.
The decision of the judges, including that of the Editor, is final and no correspondence can entered into.
Employees of National Magazine Co, Magnet and Neff, and their relatives are not eligible to enter.
The contest is open only to those in the UK, including Northern Ireland, and closes on 31 Jan 1992.
Post this coupon (or a copy on a separate sheet) to GH/Kitchen Competition, PO Box 15F.
Chessington KT9 1BG.
Results will be published in a future edition of GH, but this cannot be before four months .
GH relationships
Why rows can be good for you
At this time of year, tempers tend to ignite like the Christmas pudding — but, says DAPHNE METLAND, don't pack your bags — a row can help clear the air
A row is simply expressing your own point of view forcefully, so it's no wonder that most families row more than usual at Christmas, the season of peace, goodwill — and a considerable degree of stress.
People quarrel in different ways.
In some families, rows are tight-lipped affairs, with anger masked by a pretence that all is well.
In others, it's more spectacular.
My mother threw insults and then the crockery, while my father ignored the insults, caught the crockery, and produced endless cups of tea when they eventually decided to make up.
FLASHPOINTS
The most common reasons for rowing are money, sex and children, with annoying habits running a close fourth.
A recent survey showed that Good Housekeeping readers agreed, adding lack of communication and failure to share the chores to their reasons for discontent.
But rows can lead to greater understanding, as Margaret Court, a psychiatrist working in family therapy, points out.
‘It's frustration that moves the human race forward; it's what motivates babies to get up and walk.
Similarly, rows in relationships often indicate marital development.’
That's fine as long as the outcome is positive.
But it's when rows repeat themselves without being resolved, when you have minor spats for no obvious reason, or when rows leave you feeling tense, angry and sick, that alarm bells should ring.
WHY CHILDREN FIGHT
Children add an extra dimension to rows; you can argue about them, and, as they grow older, argue with them.
(As psychologist Betty Rathbone explains: ‘A family stuck with rules that fitted the needs of their children at 3, 4 or 5, is unlikely to be happy when their children are 13, 14 or 15.’)
Arguments between children can also cause friction.
Most of us try to stop fights, if only to protect the smaller child, but many experts suggest that we interfere too soon.
By arguing with a brother or sister, children learn to stay within acceptable behavioural limits and find out how to negotiate their demands.
Betty Rathbone points out that young children may need help to cope with their anger.
‘It's important to acknowledge what they feel, but to point out that it's not acceptable to inflict injury on other,’ she says.
Older children may find it helps to go away until they have coped with their feelings and can discuss them.
Sibling rows can be beneficial because they show that it's possible to be angry with someone you love, but there's a vital difference between that sort of infighting and the division that favouritism can cause.
In families where one child is the favourite, the balance of the relationships has gone — and where there is a favourite, there may also be a scapegoat.
Families in therapy often say that one of their children is particularly good while another is especially difficult.
As they work through their problems, the ‘naughty’ child behaves better and the ‘good’child grows more troublesome, a sign that balance is being restored.
Favouritism is equally bad for the favourite, who is often a sickly child, or the baby of the family.
He or she may be teased by the other children and remain alienated from them into adulthood.
CLASSIC REBELLION
Adolescence brings its own forms of conflict.
‘This is a stage of independence when parents are faced with the ‘my friends can stay out late/go to the disco/wear those clothes, so why can't I?’ arguments,’says psychologist Pat Petrie, author of The Adolescent Years* .
It's also a time of physical and emotional change.
While teenagers come to terms with adulthood, roles change and everyone has to adjust.
Pat Petrie suggests parents should decide what's worth disagreeing about.
‘Many things — like appearance — are not worth worrying about.
Others, like playing truant, disturb the whole family.
so it's necessary to talk about it and risk conflict.’
Compromise is essential: ‘If your daughter wants to go to a disco in a nearby town with friends, but you are worried about her safety, negotiate.
Agree that she can go with them but that you will bring her back.’
EXTENDED ROWS
Sometimes an unintended slight can create grudges, causing a rift between branches of a family that is almost impossible to mend.
Inter-generational rows are often about power: parents trying to retain their control even when their children are grown.
Rows  with in-laws are distressing because they cause divided loyalties and may indicate a battle between families to prove which is the most important.
GOING TOO FAR
We all row sometimes, but how much is too much?
If this is your only way to relate, then there are significant gaps in communication.
And as a spokeswoman from Relate points out, ‘If you are always rowing, you are using up time you could spend having fun together.’
On the other hand, it's certainly better to row than to use sarcasm, or to deny your feelings verbally, but express them in your body language.
Couples who thrive on conflict should remember that children may not understand the reason for their rows.
Children react to rows in different ways, according to their age.
Under-5s show stress by not eating or sleeping, while 5s to 11s may be reluctant to go to school because they are worried about what might happen while they are away.
They may also have nightmares, tummy aches or headaches.
Adolescents are likely to refuse to join in family life.
If you have reached this level, it's essential, at this stage, to make some changes.
Should you row in front of the children?
Half-heard rows may distress them more; the fantasy of what is going on downstairs may well be worse than the reality.
Divorce is common enough for even young children to be aware of it and to fear you may split up.
And if children hear the rows, but not the making up afterwards, their view of your relationship becomes unbalanced.
It's vital to acknowledge their worries and explain what has happened.
Negotiation and discussion will achieve more than a row, but if a clash is unavoidable, explain to them why you were shouting.
Telling them that yes, you were cross, but that you remain friends, will reassure them.
If children witness a quarrel, but then see that you still love each other, they will realise that a row is not the end of the world and will learn that it's all right to fight — as long as we make up later.
The Adolescent Years (Michael Joseph, £16)
THE GOOD ROW GUIDE
If you have to row, make sure there is a positive outcome:
Label your emotions: ‘I'm angry because I'm disappointed,’ or ‘I'm cross because I'm tired.’
Try using ‘I’ statements so that you don't blame your partner.
‘I feel unhappy visiting your parents/lonely when you work such long hours.’
Invite your partner to respond — and listen — so you can negotiate and agree on a solution.
Limit the time spent rowing.
If you haven't resolved the problem in an hour, you probably need time to think it over before tackling the subject again.
Don't nag.
No one should be subjected to verbal harassment, just as no one should be threatened with physical violence.
Remember that people can change their behaviour but not their personalities.
Complain early.
If you've coped with the housework and the family on your own for years, you'll be expected to keep on doing so.
Try to stick to the subject of the row rather than bringing up 25 years' worth of misdemeanours.
It sometimes helps to deal with problems one at a time, so the goals seem attainable.
If you row constantly, ask your GP to refer you to a counsellor, or make an appointment with Relate.
I don't like not having enough money and I don't like not having enough sex and I detest the way the children dress and I detest going to your mother's every week and I loathe the way you clench your teeth and I loathe the way you never help and I hate the way you never ask but I love you
LOOKS LIKE A MILLION FOR £13.49
Dark, smouldering eye tones and strong lip colours are the simplest way to make a big difference to your make-up — and it works for anyone, at any age.
PENNY RICH shows how, with products that are high on quality, easy on the pocket
1 The trick of making eyes smoulder is to apply solid colour sparingly, then smudge and spread it by softening the edges.
First, fill in the skeleton shape: using a fine brush, draw a V- shape of charcoal eyeshadow from the centre of the eye out to the corner and up into the socket line.
Balance this with a smudge of coppery gold shadow on the inner eye corner.
2 Define brows to frame the eyes using a dark khaki powder shadow on a brush — it's easier to correct, smooth and shape than a waxy brow pencil.
Then soften the charcoal and copper shadows using a cotton bud; start where the colour is deepest, and brush and roll it backwards and forwards onto the lighter areas.
Take your time and don't add more eyeshadow.
3 Brush mascara through top lashes only.
Apply a warm, skintoned blusher, so it doesn't detract from eyes and mouth.
Brush colour in the hollow below the cheekbone, then work it upwards onto the cheekbone itself, so the colour is softer there, heavier below.
4 How do you wear a bold lip colour without playing up fine lines around the mouth?
Use the tiniest amount of a matt, dry lip pencil — it lasts longer than lipstick and it won't run.
Draw an outline to the lips and without adding more, brush colour inwards until the tone is even.
You can also try:Eyes — Revlon Custom Eyes in Black Diamond (£3.95); Gilt Edges Eye Openers by Mary Quant (£1.90); Tempting Topaz Eye Spy by Rimmel (£1.19); No 7 Brown Superlash Mascara (£2.80); Cil Waterproof mascara in Brun Profond or Noir by Bourjois (£3.79 each); Cheeks — Sandy Beach Perfect Powder Blush by Sensiq (£3.29); Lips — Rich Red Lip Liner Pencil by Max Factor (£2.54).
FOR THE FINISHED LOOK WE USED:
Blackpool Kiss ‘n’ Make-up Eyeshadow by Miss Selfridge £2.25
Brass Eyeshadow Single by Classics at Marks & Spencer £1.75
Winterwood Colourise Powder Shadow Single by No 7 £2.95
Dark Brown Endless Lash Mascara by Rimmel £1.99
Taffeta Toffee Blushbaby by Mary Quant £2.40
Softly Plum Fine Line Lip Sharper by No 7 £ 2.15
Total: £13.49
LOOKS LIKE A MILLION FOR £9.45
The secret of wearing strong eye or lip colours is knowing how to apply them, how to blend them, and how much is too much.
So always start with the minimum amount and gradually build up the tones until you reach the strength that emphasises, rather than overpowers.
It's the easiest look to create and wear — high glamour, long-lasting and no fuss — which makes it perfect for those special occasions.
1 How do you wear eyeliner past the age of 20 without looking like Cleopatra on a bad day?
Cheat, of course.
Start with black powder eyeshadow on a fine brush, gently build up a fine line close to lashes and out as far as is flattering.
Once you've mapped in the shape, leave it soft, or wet the brush, dip it back into the powder and run it over again for a more liquid line.
2 The trick is to soften it even further — use the tiniest dab of dark aubergine or amethyst shadow and brush it over the lid, up into the crease and lightly over the eyeliner, to blur the edges.
Then run the brush under the lower, outer eye corner to give it the slightest definition.
This draws attention to the eyes and leaves liner looking dark, without being hard and unflattering.
3 Balance the liner with a generous amount of black mascara.
The make-up artist's tip for applying it is to look down, place wand to the base of lashes and roll them back as you run the wand from root to tip.
If you prefer a natural look, use a cake mascara mixed with water to colour lashes without clumping them, or only colour the ends of lashes for the lightest look of all.
4 Think pink for a powerful lip colour that is easier to wear and less likely to run than dark colours.
Choose matt lipsticks for staying power; apply with a brush, working colour from outer to inner lip.
Blot with a tissue, then reapply lipstick again for long-lasting lips.
Pink-browns or lightly frosted tones are flattering for older women or anyone with a lined mouth.
You can also try:Eyes — No 7 Liquid Line in Black Patent (£3.10); Outdoor Girl Black Kohl Pencil (£1.48); Deepglow Amethyst Custom Eyes by Revlon (£3.95); Jet Black 2000 Calorie Mascara by Max Factor (£3.57); Lips — Gerona Grape Lasting Colour Lipstick by Cutex (£2.99); Damson Brocade Lipstick, Rimmel Silks (£2.49); Damson Moisturising Lipstick by Classics at Marks & Spencer (£1.99).
FOR THE FINISHED LOOK WE USED:
Blackpool Kiss ‘n’ Make-up Eyeshadow by Selfridge £2.25
Amethyst Shadow Single by Rimmel Silks £1.95
Black Waterproof Mascara by Classics at Marks & Spencer £2.50
Precious Pink Super Lasting Lip colour by No 7 £2.75
Total: £9.45
good LOOKS
Up-to-the-minute ways to revitalise your hair, plus a great bathtime treat
HAIR LINES
Lots of new developments on the hair-care front this month, so after lots of intensive washing, spraying, spritzing, tweaking, curling and crimping to try them out, here's our pick of the best:
The Personal Biopoint Advanced Professional Treatment Programme — four new products for damaged hair.
Our tester loved the Revitalising Shampoo (£2.75 from Boots).
Four intensive treatments from the Poly Kur Intensive Hair-Repair Treatment range — our tester said the one for dry hair worked so well that her hair went from sow's ear to silk purse, and felt in much better condition immediately (£3.45 each, from major Boots' branches).
Tisserand's first range of Aromatherapy Shampoos, Conditioners and a Hot Oil Pre-Wash Treatment — all contain pure essential oils and smell heavenly.
From £3.90 for a shampoo, available from health-food shops and independent chemists.
Of all the new super-conditioners, our testers chose Vitapointe Cold Oil Treatment (£1.79) and St Ives Hair Repair Hot Oil Treatment (£1.75 for three).
Both from chemists and supermarkets.
NATURAL BEAUTY
The juice of a raw potato contains anti-inflammatory properties which will soften, tighten and slightly whiten skin.
As a treat for puffy eyes and dark shadows, grate half a raw, peeled potato, then leave it on a saucer until the juice collects.
Drain it off, pressing the flesh to squeeze out as much juice as you can; chill the juice before patting it gently around eyes.
Leave it to dry, then rinse off.
A slice of raw potato placed over a bruise helps to take the blue-blackness out.
RED NOSE REIGNS DEAR!
Zing cream (the thick, white paste surfers use to protect their noses from sunburn) has gone high fashion — and coloured.
Watch out for it on the ski slopes — if red is the choice, at least you'll see it coming!
Piz Buin has the smartest selection — the Ski Pack contains sun cream, clear sunblock and five coloured zincs for £9.99.
GOOD SCENTS
Cornubia, the latest from Penhaligon's, combines the freshness of flowers with exotic spices (from £25).
Society, the soft floral scent from Burberry, is sure to be worn in high places (from £31).
Yves Saint Laurent's Opium, now in Secret de Parfum, lighter than perfume, stronger than eau de toilette (£52).
Escada's body and bath collection is soft and sweet (from £19).
Gucci's best-kept secret — Gucci No 3, a floral bouquet with a touch of the East (from £37.80).
SOAK OPERA
Winter is the time to lie back and sink into the great British bath.
To celebrate the season of long soaking we have 500 fullsize bottles (worth £2.99 each) of Fenjal's Classic Luxury Moisturising Creme Bath to give away.
If you would like one, please send your name and address on a postcard to Fenjal/GH Beauty, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP.
We'll pick the winners on 31 January.
Best BEAUTY BUY
Applying eyeliner can be a tricky business (see page 82), but if you really love that 50s look, Lenthéric's Eye-Definer is the best liquid liner we could find.
With powdered silk for a smooth, even flow, using it is as easy as blinking.
Available in black only, with a felt-tip pen style applicator, £2.99.
Good Housekeeping Advertisement Promotion
Professional BRUSHWORK
Plaque is the hidden destroyer of healthy teeth and gums, and today's leading cause of tooth, decay.
Braun and Oral-B fight back with their effective Plaque Remover
Brushing your teeth is so much a part of daily routine that it is sometimes easy to forget the importance of doing it properly.
The immediate effect is to remove food particles and freshen your breath, but the crucial function is the daily removal of plaque.
Plaque is an invisible film that forms on your teeth, converting the sugar you eat to acid and generating an attack on teeth and gums.
It starts when tiny food particles cling to your teeth and are surrounded by bacteria — this triggers the chemical process, which dissolves the tooth crystal and culminates in the destruction of the enamel.
If plaque is not removed regularly it builds up, much as the scale does on a kettle.
You are likely to find that you need more fillings when you visit the dentist.
More seriously, gum disease may take hold.
This is also due to the action of plaque but it takes longer and is harder to spot.
If you do not brush your teeth thoroughly enough, there will be tiny residues of plaque left — especially between the teeth and closest to the gums, or in those hard-to-reach areas at the back of the mouth.
The first sign you will notice is your gums bleeding, when you brush your teeth.
Many people ignore this sign, comforting themselves that they probably brushed too hard.
You should not ignore plaque, as ultimately you gums may recede and you will find yourself more likely to lose a tooth.
Sounds terrifying?
In fact, it's easy to do something about it.
You can't stop plaque forming but you can prevent it taking a hold by removing it every day.
Regular brushing is the lynchpin of all good dental hygiene.
This is why Braun has developed a highly advanced health appliance to remove plaque effectively and easily.
The new Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover features important breakthroughs: Its round, oscillating brush head functions much like a dentist's instrument.
It has a very effective brushing action — rotating back and forth 2800 times per minute.
Clinical tests have shown this frequency gives the best balance between thorough cleaning and personal comfort.
The head of the brush itself is small (only 13mm diameter) so that it can reach into narrow spaces between the teeth and all those awkward corners.
It is effective even in children's tiny mouths.
The bristles are carefully sculptured to form a cup shape.
Longer outer bristles reach around the teeth, while the shorter ones polish the surface.
An independent clinical test revealed that two minutes of brushing with a Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover removed more plaque than three minutes using a conventional electric toothbrush, or six minutes with a manual toothbrush.
The Plaque Remover has been designed with a special brushing time indicator which flashes when two minutes are up.
The brush head and handle are easy to clean, and made to the highest safety standards (both the handle and the recharger unit are completely sealed).
You can recharge it overnight, and then travel, secure in the knowledge that you have 40 minutes of brushing time available.
Just one Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover can be used by the whole family, as up to fourcolour coded heads are stored hygienically in the ventilated container.
Replacement brushes are widely available.
The Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover does all the work for you.
Just guide it gently along — no need to press hard — slowly following the shape of each tooth.
Each one should be cleaned, inside and out — it is just as effective for those hard-to-reach molars as it is for front teeth.
You need to replace the brush heads as often as you would a conventional toothbrush.
Ask your dentist or hygienist about the Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover.
Braun and Oral-B have always worked closely with the dental profession to develop the best products for your teeth — this new toothbrush represents a real advance towards keeping your teeth clean and healthy.
GHI TIPS FOR HEALTHY TEETH AND GUMS
1 Visit your dentist or hygienist regularly and clean your teeth properly after meals for maximum protection.
2 Encourage children to clean their teeth with a favouriteflavoured fluoride toothpaste to help strengthen the enamel.
3 Don't scrub your teeth — glide the Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover smoothly along each tooth, moving it around slowly and continuously.
4 Children will enjoy the ‘brushing time left’ indicator which keeps them brushing until their two minutes are up.
5 You can take the Braun Plaque Remover on holiday — one night of recharging gives you a good 10 days of power if you brush your teeth twice a day for two minutes.
6 To prevent splashing, switch the brush on when it is in your mouth.
7 Remember to replace your brush roughly every three months, as you would a manual toothbrush.
The Braun Oral-B Plaque Remover has tiny round-ended bristles that clean every awkward angle of your teeth.
Its effective action has been proved to remove more plaque in two minutes than conventional brushing does in six
GH offers
Bargain Bazaar…
Choose a great GH offer for you or your home.
Order on page 158
This pretty wall clock has timeless good looks.
In a traditional design, with up-to-the-minute quartz movement, it measures 15–½×11in.
It's just £19.95 (excluding 1.5v battery.
Le Creuset enamelled cast-iron dishes are famous for their hardwearing good looks.
This shallow casserole dish is 10in wide and 4in high, and is perfect for lots of dishes, from risotto to ratatouille.
In white, volcanic or blue, it's an ideal investment for any cook at just £36.36.
You'll be floored by these oriental-style rugs — they're such great value!
Made from tough viscose and cotton, with a luxurious velour finish, they come in three sizes: 68x110cm (£10.75); 138x200cm (£35.85); and a 68x210cm runner (£20.95).
The classic designs are available in two colourways: deep red, blue and pearl grey with a silvery fringe; or rust red, deep blue and gold with a honey-coloured fringe.
Our classic off-white blouse is elegant and practical.
With its pretty round neck, softly padded shoulders and front-pocket detail, it looks great worn with a skirt or trousers.
It's made from 100% easy-care polyester and measures 24in from nape of neck to hem.
In sizes 10–18, the special price is £24.50.
25p from each item sold will be donated to Help the Aged, the GH Charity of the Year 1991.
IS TELLING TALL TALES THE HEIGHT OF INSECURITY?
…or is it just another of those little habits (much favoured by men) that seem to flourish at this time of year.
COLIN DUNNE confesses all
Go on, ask me then.
Ask me how tall I am, and, without prevarication or hesitation, I will tell you.
Right?
I am 5ft mumble-mumble.
Oh, all right then, 5ft 8in.
Whew, that took some doing, I can tell you.
At this time of year, when everyone is pledging themselves to improve the sorry lot we call our lives, I have decided to give up lying.
I don't mean lying lying, the real heavy-duty, professional stuff, like politics or selling timeshares, I mean those little, easy lies that we slip into over the years.
You start off with the truth, embellish it slightly, then gradually add to it, until you finish up with a fully-fledged whopper.
I've been sifting through my daily routine and I've turned up quite a handsome collection of finely-wrought deceits cultivated over the years.
Like height.
The truth, since that seems to be the painful area we are now entering, is that when I was last measured, which was in the fifth form at school, I entered the official records at 5ft 8½in, thanks largely to a tempestuous hairstyle, and by the cunning device of raising myself onto my toes as the sports master lowered the wooden measure.
Later, I rounded it up.
‘Fivenine, I'd say.’
Then I fell victim to a sort of personal inflation.
The half inch I'd added to the 5ft 8in, somehow became attached to the 5ft 9in.
In no time at all, I was saying ‘Around 5ft 10in’ and, if I don't put a halt to it, by Easter I'll be topping 6ft and playing basketball.
I am also going to stop telling people that I'm a ‘pretty good driver’.
I am, in fact, a pretty awful driver, which is a peculiarly difficult confession for a man to make.
Even now I feel I must modify this by saying that technically I am a brilliant driver, handicapped only by having a 100mph temperament coupled with 5mph eyesight.
In other words, I can't see properly.
I once ran into a 10-wheel timber-hauling lorry which, being only about 3 miles long, had momentarily escaped my notice.
On another occasion, failing to observe the line of the road, I shot straight into a farmyard and buried myself in a haystack.
I decided I must face the truth about this the other night when I swerved fiercely on country road to avoid a scuba diver riding a moped.
When I eventually reversed out of the hedge, I discovered that it was a bin-liner dancing in the breeze.
You may possibly have heard talk to the effect that I was a damned good scrum half.
If you haven't, it isn't through any failure on my part to spread this particular story.
Heaven knows, I've been telling people for years, and, strangely, it isn't entirely untrue.
It is a case of distance-lending enchantment.
I was a damned good half for about six minutes, at which point some lumbering Neanderthal would drop his 17-stone frame on my more delicate structure, and I would view the rest of the game from the sideline, where I lay whimpering and counting broken bones.
If rugby was played each way, I'd probably be a household name by now.
When people discuss the £ (symbol indicates serious economics, as opposed to that stuff we throw around in shops), I shall in future boldly proclaim: ‘I don't understand economics.’
I don't either.
Yet for years I have made free with opinions about floating the pound, shadowing the mark, sinking the dollar, and effect on the £ of entering Europe, devaluation, and the various devices that are wheeled out every year for the Budget.
I don't understand any of them.
What's more, I don't even know a man who does.
I feel no shame about this.
After all, from the same set of statistics, half the politicians in the country will instruct you to break open the champagne and dance in the streets, while the other half will suggest an honourable stroll onto the balcony with a pistol to the temple.
If the finest brains, with the best advice, don't know, why should I pretend any more?
The next time a wine waiter pours a thimbleful of ‘67 Brainfuddler into a glass for my opinion, I shall simply ask him if it works, and then tell him to splash it around.
For years, I have sniffed, eyed, sipped and swirled wine before giving an authoritative nod of approval.
Sham, all sham.
In a good light, I can just about tell white from red.
My friends, mostly similarly ignorant, all keep up this absurd pretence, and all beneath the eyes of an expert.
They know, these wine waiters.
One day, one is going to say: ‘Excuse me, sir, am I correct in thinking that you would be equally happy with a well-chilled, château-bottled paint thinner?’
He'd be right.
No more will you hear me say that I am thinking of rejoining the gym.
This particular lie is engineered to create the impression of a finely-honed athlete who has temporarily lost his edge, which is a little less than the complete truth.
I have joined gyms in the past.
I go twice.
I go the first time, when that Scandinavian girl in the high-cut leotard (won't it damage something vital, wearing those things?) shows me around, while gasping with incredulity at my age and wonderment at my physique.
The second time, she's expressing the same two sentiments over some other shambling case of physical dereliction, while I'm left panting on an immobile bicycle and I never go back.
I hereby abandon that pretence.
A small one, but let's chuck it in with the rest.
On holiday, when people look at my freckles and fair hair and warn me to keep out of the sun, I give a deep confident laugh and assure them that I turn mahogany brown.
Lies, all lies.
I go shrimp pink, which occasionally turns to lobster red, and one of these days this dangerous pretence will seem me taken straight from the beach to the burns unit.
From now on, it's pass me the Factor 2 Million and a sunhat, please.
Likewise, I shall no longer go around promising to have a good talk with the kids.
People who say this, like me, always use the word ‘kids’ in the belief that it sounds open and democratic and leaps generation gaps at a bound.
I see myself sprawled in a chair, setting them at ease in a trice, and passing on the acquired wisdom of my life.
Whenever I try this, the only reaction I get is: ‘Yeah, great, Dad, can I borrow a fiver?’
Then I notice that this creature in front of me, allegedly my loin fruit, but dressed more like a senior member of Hezbollah, is wearing earphones and tapping a toe to some unheard tune.
Lastly, and most obviously, I know, I am going to stop lying about age.
Actually, about my sister's age.
Search the records and you will find she came into this world two years before me.
That was where she stayed, right through childhood.
Then, to my bafflement, I found I was catching up.
For several years, we were twins, which must have come as a surprise to my mother, then slowly she fell behind as I pulled ahead, year after year.
When a policeman told her it was an offence to deface her driving licence by stabbing a nailfile through her date of birth, she said she'd rather go to prison.
When her doctor was surprised to find three different birth dates in his records, she smiled and said: ‘I'll take the youngest.’
By now I must be five years clear of her, and she said she'd kill me if I ever told anyone her age.
Well, this is truth time, and even though she warned me I'd never get away with it, I cannot live a lie.
Or, more to the point,she can't.
So here goes.
My sister is
%.
Gosh, she wasn't lying.
She got a friend at the printer's after all.
GOOD TRAVEL
A night on the town, Cyprus this winter and bus rides in Brazil
THEATRE WEEKENDS
If you've been meaning to see a few West End shows, why not try a theatre package from a company like Forte Hotels (0345–543555)?
The Night on the Town programme couples a ticket to a show such as Les Misérables or The Phantom Of The Opera with two nights' accommodation and breakfast at a classy hotel with prices from £119 per person.
The Edwardian Hotel group (071–383 0038) runs a similar scheme with champagne trimmings and first-class seats from £135 for a weekend.
Out of town, tickets for the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon are included in a two-day package organised by the Seymour House hotel in Chipping Campden (0386- 840429); prices from £115.45.
Tickets to popular exhibitions can also be difficult to buy.
The Rembrandt exhibition at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam is on until 1 March 1992.
The Hotel Dikker & This offers tickets and accommodation from £91.
Call Freefone 0800–289330.
BARGAIN HOTELS
Seven years ago the first Hôtel Formule 1 opened in France.
The chain now has 200 budget hotels in Europe, and two have just opened in Britain (in Doncaster and Stockton-on-Tees).
Formule 1 hotels in Ellesmere Port, Peterborough, Scunthorpe and Plymouth should open later this year.
Guests pay for functional but comfortable three-bedded room with TV, hot and cold water and a separate shower and loo.
The fixed rate is £17.
There's no dining room or lounge, but guests can have a self-service breakfast for £2.50.
When the reception closes at 10pm, guests can buy a room by using a credit card in an automatic machine.
For details phone 081–741 1001.
SERIOUSLY ADVENTUROUS
Interested in seeing South America on a bus?
Then look at what Journey Latin America (081–747 8315) has to offer:
A 24-day trip through Brazil from Rio to the remote Amazon — where you'll see the Iguaçu Falls (top right) en route— is priced from £1723-£1785.
A 24-day trip to the Galapagos Islands costs under £2200 where you can view sea lions underwater (above).
RETURN TO CYPRUS
This winter, hoteliers in Cyprus are keen to restore the island to its pre-Gulf War popularity.
Prices, therefore, are very competitive.
Paphos — the Roman capital of Cyprus — has a harbour, basilica, castle and the Tombs of the Kings (left) to distinguish it from purpose-built resorts.
The Annabelle Hotel is arguably the most luxurious on the island with a heated outdoor pool, health club and 24-hour room service.
In February, Cadogan Travel (0703–3326611) offers a 14-day holiday for around £578, including scheduled flights and three days' free car hire.
Temperatures in Cyprus in February are around 65°F.
SUSAN MARLING presents Radio 4's Punters series and is a reporter on Channel 4's Travelog.
She also writes for The Sunday Times
GH travel
SKIING WITH A DIFFERENCE
For an easier, friendlier, less-expensive form of skiing than the downhill sport, simply follow the cross-country trails with CINDY SELBY.
LAST FEBRUARY I WENT FOR A WALK in the snow on Wimbledon Common.
Within an hour 20 cross-country skiers swished past me.
A decade ago there would scarcely have been a single one.
Crosscountry, or langlauf skiing is definitely becoming more popular all over Europe — and with very good reason.
Langlauf skiing is healthy, clean and Green.
A cross between downhill skiing and walking, the steps are easy to learn and anyone of any age can happily master them.
Unlike the downhill sport, this is cheap and environmentally sound.
Downhill skiing requires ski lifts that frighten the chamois and clutter the mountains with pylons and cables.
Lightweight langlauf skis have a waxed tread underneath resembling fish scales — the scales enable you to slip downhill and grip uphill.
Thus you are selfsufficient.
You don't rely on lifts, or pay or queue for them.
You are, however, dependent on snow and there is seldom enough of it in Britain — hence the preference for skiing abroad and the development of package cross-country skiing holidays.
I sampled three of them — first in Finland, then in France and finally in Switzerland.
Scandinavia is where skiing began.
Doubtless even the Vikings (after sailing, raping and pillaging all summer) got about their own snowy land on useful planks of wood.
For many Norwegians, Swedes and Finns, Nordic skiing (as they justifiably call it) is as natural as walking.
It's a way of getting from A to B in winter — and autumn and spring, too — in the far North where the snow lasts from November to late April/May.
Nonetheless, Scandinavian people have always found skiing fun as well as functional, and they have created resorts with prepared ski tracks to ease the way for cross-country skiers.
I went to Rovaniemi, capital of Lapland and a remote town on the Arctic Circle.
The place is freezing and has five hours of daily sunlight in December — thought you can still ski and enjoy the kaleidoscope spectacular of Northern Lights.
I, however, went to Rovaniemi in April when the days are long and sunny, and my face got very brown.
Rovaniemi edges a river which is frozen most of the year making a thoroughfare for sledges, jeeps and  skiers.
From our comfortable hotel we strolled to the river on the first morning for a lesson with an English-speaking guide.
He explained how to clip the boots — like trainers with three holes under the rubber toe — onto three prongs on the narrow ski binding.
Then, with ski sticks in our hands, we poled along learning how to push and glide forwards.
Beginners invariably fall over but snow softens the blow.
By midday we were making giant strides, so we headed for the hills and learnt how to herringbone up them and swoosh down them.
We never went as fast as downhill skiers might with their heavy skis on steeper slopes, but our descents were exciting nevertheless.
And anyway,langlauf is not meant to be racy.
The point of the exercise is the exercise itself — and the pleasure of exploring at one's own pace the wild, white countryside.
Further attractions at Rovaniemi are husky sleigh rides, costumed Lapps and a visit to the post office of the real Father Christmas.
Our hotel had an indoor pool, a nightclub and good food — notably, reindeer stew with cranberry sauce.
The only hitch with any Finnish holiday is the expense.
One week's bed and breakfast (twin-bedded room) with Finlandia Travel, including flight, is £585; ski equipment can be hired locally.
The price of eating out is similar to London but alcohol is very expensive.
A cheaper option is to ski in the Jura — a mountain range straddling the Franco-Swiss border north of Geneva.
The Jura are the closest mountains across the Channel and it doesn't cost much to reach them.
I spent a week there in March 1990 — taking my car and two friends.
We went by overnight ferry from Portsmouth to Caen, arriving early next morning for the eight-hour drive southeast to the Jura's main resort, Les Rousses.
This large village is the hub of 140 miles of marked crosscountry trails, winding through forests, over meadows and alongside frozen lakes.
The area also offers sleigh rides, two discotheques, six museums, indoor tennis, bowling, swimming, skating and accommodation ranging from studios to three-star hotels.
Our package included a stay in a simple inn and we economised further with picnic lunches at about £5 a head.
Sometimes expert langlauf skiers in skintight Dayglo outfits would slide past us.
More often families (including toddlers and grandparents) would ski by, dressed in sloppy clothes like ours — tracksuits, breeches, anoraks — which are fine for langlauf skiing.
(Trendy downhill salopettes would be too hot to wear.)
Whoever we saw, they always said Bonjour in the friendly manner of cross-country skiers everywhere.
If you have never skied langlauf before and want to have a go, there are ‘Try it out weekends’ in the Swiss resort of Kandersteg — a lovely old village in the Bernese Oberland.
The hotel to stay in is the Victoria, a handsome pile run by the genial Platzer family; they send a minibus to fetch you from the little airport at Berne — one hour's drive away — and Herr Platzer then shows you where to hire ski equipment (roughly £24 a week) and organise lessons.
One lesson and the cost of ski hire are included in these weekends.
Three nights cost from £289, this includes air travel London/Berne.
I spent a week at Kandersteg and could happily have lingered on.
I usually skied on the 35 miles of groomed valley trails that meander over icy, mumbling streams and through clumps of pine trees whose branches sag under dollops of snow.
Twice I forked out for cable car rides up the Stock Mountain where there are more langlauf tracks and ample space to make your own.
Stock also has the perfect mountain restaurant — small, with a sunny wooden terrace, hearty food together with splendid views.
Kandersteg and the hotel Victoria combined are ideal for families with young children.
The village boasts skating, tobogganing, dinky shops and tearooms.
The hotel has a gorgeous pool, glassed all around so that bathers can watch the peaks turning pink in the evening sun.
Supper is served early for children — although the Continental ones who are used to later hours tend to dine together with their parents in the grand restaurant.
One evening we left behind the parquet floors and chandeliers of the Victoria and went on a jolly organised by Herr Platzer.
This comprised a moonlit cable car ride up the mountains to a creaky farmhouse for cheese fondue, heady wine and oompah-pah music — the perfect way to round off a day's skiing.
TRAVEL NOTES
For information on holidays in Rovaniemi and elsewhere in Finland, phone the Finnish Tourist Office on 071–839 4048.
Waymark Holidays (0753–516 477) specialises in cross-country skiing holidays in Europe and Canada.
Inntravel (0439–71111) organises the short breaks in Kandersteg and longer holidays there and in other resorts in Switzerland, Norway, Italy and France.
Nine nights in the Jura half board, self-drive, cost from £350-£400, or self-catering, self-drive, from £138-£340, depending on the numbers in your party.
A week at the Hotel Victoria in Kandersteg costs from about £420 including flights, transfers and half board.
Ski tracks start close to Kandersteg's Hotel Victoria in Switzerland
GH advice
YOU AND YOUR PET
A common cat problem, reviving a hamster and keeping pets healthy at Christmas.
MARK EVANS advises
Q I have four adorable Siamese cats, two female and two male.
One of the males, Ginseng, is spraying urine all over the house — on the doors, curtains, and even the loudspeakers and video recorder.
What can I do about it?
A If it's any consolation, this is one of the most common cat problems.
Oriental cats in general seem to be more likely to indulge — and Siamese cats in particular.
Most cats spray at some time, but usually away from home base.
To cats, the scent message of urine is a mine of information about sex, sexual condition, rank and even emotional state.
Cats usually begin spraying when something upsets the fine balance of their day-to-day life.
They are very sensitive and when their world seems to be falling apart, they want to put identity tags on anything they consider theirs.
Things that upset them could be an uninvited intruder through the cat flap, a row with another cat, even the arrival of a new three-piece suite.
The trouble is that once they begin, they sometimes continue out of habit.
There are a number of things worth trying.
If Ginseng isn't castrated, now is the time to do it.
Try to give him as laid-back a lifestyle as possible — don't punish him if you catch him spraying, or he'll feel even more insecure.
It's a good idea if you can organise a space for each cat to call its own.
Cats usually spray areas they've sprayed before, so clean up using biological washing powder followed by alcohol.
Or, there are specialist products such as Odour Eliminator, about £4 from your vet.
Cats tend to be attracted to electrical appliances, but a sprinkling of shredded orange or lemon peel around appliances acts as a  repellent .
If all this fails, then ask your vet to refer you to a pet behaviour therapist.
Q A few days ago, I found Womble, my son's hamster, completely lifeless in his nest.
I was sure he was dead, and because my son adores this little bundle of fluff, I ran next door to summon the skills of our neighbour, a biology teacher.
When we returned we found Womble grooming himself.
Is this normal?
A It's ‘sleeper disease’ and quite common.
You should always attempt to stimulate and revive an apparently dead hamster.
It occurs when the temperature drops to between 22–25°C.
The hamster appears lifeless if disturbed, but returns to normal in about five minutes.
If the temperature drops below 5°C, the hamster will hibernate and can be revived by placing on a thick towel wrapped around a hot-water bottle.
Q My 3-year-old mongrel has just been to the vet to have his teeth cleaned, as a checkup revealed that he had dental problems.
He seems very young for this — is there anything I can do to prevent it?
A A recent estimate indicates that more than three-quarters of dogs and cats over 3 years old have dental problems.
The most common condition is called periodontal disease, which is caused by a build-up of bacterial plaque.
This is very natural and, as the plaque is white, it often goes unnoticed.
But if it remains on the teeth, it begins to damage the gums and causes gingivitis.
Very rapidly and the plaque mixes with saliva and hardens to form a yellow deposit called calculus.
This you can easily see, and it's most obvious on the outer surfaces of the back teeth.
Daily brushing is the only solution.
There are special toothpastes which are not harmful if swallowed, and brushing your dog's teeth is actually very easy once it has been demonstrated by a vet.
For dogs who will not tolerate this, there are toys available to combat plaque.
Look out for the CET range of products, including an ingenious rubber bone called The Dental Kong, £10, and the Nylabone dental range, £2-£4, available from better pet shops and veterinary centres.
Finally, although it is not proved beyond reasonable doubt, most experts agree that dry foods are beneficial to the teeth.
Discuss your dog's diet with your vet.
HOW TO HAVE A VET — FREE CHRISTMAS
It's overindulgence that harms pets at Christmas.
Last year, my waiting room was full of cats and dogs with diarrhoea as a result of being fed too many ‘treats’.
Be sensible and try to see things from your pets' point of view:
Eat what you like, but only give us what we're used to.
Don't forget routines like walks, cleaning cages, and daily medication, if necessary.
Remember to keep decorations and lights out of reach.
If you must give us presents, make sure they're safe and sensible, and designed for pets.
Keep party nibbles out of reach.
Remember, a pet is for life, not just for Christmas.
MARK EVANS is a practising vet and regular broadcaster.
He and his wife Sarah, also a vet, have a ginger tom cat called Gorbachev and a dog called Katie.
Mark's particular interests are animal nutrition, preventive medicine and human-pet bonding 
Good Housekeeping Advertisement Promotion
SALMON a way to a healthier lifestyle
Doctors and nutritionists always seem to be telling us to eat less of the foods we enjoy.
Most experts agree we should all be eating more fish, especially oily fish like Alaska canned salmon
Fish is an excellent source of many important nutrients, including protein (needed for body-building and repair), vitamins (A, B and D) and minerals (calcium, iodine and fluorine).
In addition, oily fish is a rich source of the Omega-3 fatty acids and recent medical research suggests that there are a number of health benefits to be gained from eating a diet rich in these fatty acids.
Among other things, they have been shown to help lower blood cholesterol levels and make the blood less ‘sticky’, thereby helping to prevent coronary heart disease.
HEALTHY EATING
But health benefits are not the only reason for eating Alaska canned salmon.
It is full of flavour and is a convenient and extremely versatile food.
Because the salmon live in the icy waters of Alaska then migrate to the Pacific, where they live a wild and natural existence, many valuable nutrients are retained in the canning process to produce the perfect ingredient to include in a weight-reducing diet.
You can choose from either the Alaska pink or red salmon: both are equally nutritious, but the pink salmon is more economical than the red.
Dieting always seems to conjure up images of endless cottage cheese salads, calorie-counting and saying no to all your favourite foods but our five day diet plan proves that it doesn't have to be dull and boring.
With a little imagination and the help of Alaska canned salmon, there are many delicious lowcalorie meals you can create and enjoy.
Alaska canned salmon is sold under well-known brand names, as well as own-label supermarket brands.
It can be identified by the words USA Salmon on the lid or label of the tin.
The diet plan provides approximately 1,000 calories a day.
In addition to the menus given below you are allowed:
150ml (¼ pint) skimmed or semi-skimmed milk
7g (¼ oz) butter or margarine or 15g (½ oz) low-fat spread tea, coffee (with milk from allowance) and low-calorie drink in unlimited quantities.
EXERCISE
Although it is possible to lose weight by dieting alone, combining dieting with exercise will show results more quickly and improve your body shape.
The key is to find an exercise you enjoy and that suits your lifestyle.
Aim to exercise for 20 to 30 minutes, two or three times a week and make a habit of it.
Alternate your activities to give a good balance of suppleness, strength and stamina.
Always exercise gently to begin with, building up gradually over a period of time and remembering that there is never any need to strain yourself.
GHI GOOD HOUSEKEEPING INSTITUTE
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING INSTITUTE TRIED.TESTED.TRUSTED
The Food & Consumer Research department of Good Housekeeping
GHI, the first consumer protection organisation in this country, has given expert advice since its formation in 1924.
The Institute's famous ‘double-tested’ policy ensures readers are given an unbiased evaluation of food and consumer products 
105 Thermal Underwear Exposed!
106 Do Stain Removers Work?
107 Buy Your Cake And Eat It!
108 Stars Of The Small Screen
110 Handy Hints/Q&A
111 GHI Investigates Recycling Packaging
112 The Really Useful Gift List
113 Is There A Right Time To Buy A Car?
THERMAL UNDERWEAR EXPOSED!
Last year, sales of thermal underwear topped £28.5m, but do you know what you're buying?
GHI reveals all
Thermal underwear may be a multi-million pound industry, but did you know that any article of clothing can be called thermal?
There is no official definition or British Standard, and the description covers a multitude of different materials with different qualities.
The ideal thermal underwear enables the skin to retain body heat, but lets perspiration out so you feel comfortable.
No one fabric can do this in all situations.
The type that would be perfect for someone who was sedentary could leave you feeling sweaty on a skiing holiday.
Many manufacturers test to tog value (the warmth rating used for duvets), but don't give the information on the pack.
GHI suggests that you consult the catalogue, ring the company's customer-services department or ask the retailer to recommend the right weight for your needs.
HOW IT WORKS
Insulation : thermal underwear insulates, ie, keeps you warm by trapping a thin layer of air in its fibres, or between you and your clothes (which is why almost any vest or body can be described as ‘thermal’).
Wickability : as exercise causes perspiration, the fabric's wickability, ie, its ability to take moisture away from the skin is important too.
Manufacturers offer weights of fabric with varying weights of fabric with varying balances between insulation and wickability.
FABRIC FACTS
As ordinary synthetics don't ‘breathe’ as well as natural fibres, look out for advanced synthetics (polyester with viscose, polypropylene and Chlorofibre) with hollow fibres that wick well, and are also able to retain heat.
Another problem is that some synthetics smell, even when washed, so look for fibres coated with an antibacterial agent.
Natural fibres such as silk and wool don't retain perspiration smells, and are the best insulators, but they may not take the moisture away after exercise.
It's a good idea to restrict the number of layers you wear, as too many cause too much perspiration for the fibres to cope with.
THE VESTS GHI TESTED
We tested vest for insulation in a -18°C cold store, then to judge wickability, we stimulated winter sports by wearing the thermals while riding an exercise bike.
1 Berghaus ACL (Active Comfort Layer) Polarsystem, 100% etched polyester, medium-weight vest, £26.95; 091–232 3561 for catalogue Verdict : fine for sedentary wear in cold conditions.
2 Damart Thermolactyl, Chlorofibre, Double Force, maximumweight vest, £17.99; 0274–568234 for catalogue Verdict : the best we tested for normal, sedentary use.
3 Helly Hansen Lifa thermal, polypropylene, medium-weight vest, £24.95; 0234–266966 for catalogue Verdict : comfortable for light activity.
4 Littlewoods 100% polyester thermal vest, £4.99; from branches nationwide Verdict : adequate for low activity.
5 Marks & Spencer thermal, 100% polyester vest, £7.99; from branches nationwide Verdict : reasonable for everyday use.
6 Survival Aids 100% knitted silk vest, £10.95; 093–14444 for catalogue Verdict : performed particularly well in the insulation test and remained comfortable during light exertion.
DO STAIN REMOVERS WORK?
Claret, chocolate or turkey curry stains can wreak seasonal havoc.
The GHI tests stain removers
Most stains can be removed if treated at once, but dried-on stains can be hard to shift.
GHI tried 14 stain-removal products on stains, which, according to your letters, you find particularly hard to remove.
TEST TECHNIQUE
Stains : blood, Bolognese sauce, chocolate, coffee, cooking oil, orange squash, red wine and turmeric
Fabrics : cotton, polycotton, wool;results were positive if stains were removed from all three fabrics 
Method : Stains were left to dry for 24 hours (old stains are the most stubborn).
All were tested with each stain remover and machine washed afterwards.
Product performance was then compared with the effect of machine washing alone, using Persil Automatic Biological Action.
How they performed
The most successful results were obtained when stains were treated with a stain remover and machine washed.
This was also the case with products whose instructions didn't recommend machine washing.
Most stain removers performed better on polycotton than on cotton or wool — polyester doesn't absorb dyes on stains.
Wool is very absorbent so marks can be difficult to remove.
How to use
Small spillages : treatments that you apply direct onto the stain (bars, sticks, creams and liquids) are more convenient than powders.
Watch out…direct application can be messy; it's often recommended that the stained area is first wetted, then rinsed afterwards.
Use a cotton-wool ball to apply liquids to stains as they can be slimy.
Make sure your hands are dry when using a stain-remover bar and always store in container provided.
The Eezit spray was easiest to use and it also neutralised nasty smells.
Bio-tex Powder and some of the Stain Devils had to be dissolved in water — laborious for a small stain.
Follow washing instructions when using soluble products, to ensure recommended temperature is not exceeded when soaking the clothes.
Dry-clean-only and delicate fabrics need professional attention.
GOLDEN RULES
If you act quickly you may not need a specialist product.
If you can't launder at once, try interim measures: sprinkle talc on fresh, greasy stains; scatter salt on coffee, fruit, wine and beetroot, to absorb colour and moisture (not on carpets); rinse nongreasy stains with cold water.
Use stain-removal products with care and follow instructions.
Wear rubber gloves if you have very sensitive skin.
Check for colourfastness on the underside hem or seam allowance.
Work on the underside of stain, from outer edges, holding white absorbent cotton or kitchen paper on the top side.
Small repeated applications work best.
Blot up any excess, using white absorbent paper or scrape off with a palette knife.
Caroline Bloor (left) and Emma Burton get tough with a myriad household stains
BUY YOUR CAKE AND EAT IT!
What should you look for when choosing a ready-made Christmas cake?
The GHI taste panel takes off the wrapping and tucks in
CAKES WITH ROYAL ICING
You won't deceive your friends with these.
They all look shopmade and tend to have unimaginative decorations on top.
Asda Luxury French Brandy Christmas Cake
Comments : shallow cake overshadowed by thick marzipan and uneven, poor-quality icing which nonetheless tasted delicious.
Would probably be popular with children who prefer icing to cake.
Fortnum & Mason Traditional Christmas Cake 1-lb/£8.50; 3-lb/£14.75
Also available mail order (add.
£4.50 p&p), from Fortnum's at 181 Piccadilly, London W1A 7EA
Comments : a compact cake, moist with lots of fruit and peel.
Iced only on top, so looks a bit bare without its gold band.
Marzipan layer thin.
We loved the cake and icing, but thought it was bad value for money.
Safeway Luxury Christmas Cake 1-lb 12oz/£6.75; 3-lb/£9.49
Comments : packaging poor, so handle with care.
Good and rich with plenty of cherries and moist right to the edges.
Brandy undetectable.
Thickest marzipan we tried; icing uneven, but didn't look home-made.
Sainsbury Luxury Fully Iced Christmas Cake 3-lbs 4oz/£9.95
Comments smells of brandy, tastes of citrus fruit.
Contains lots of cherries.
Delicious, but thin marzipan and crumbly icing.
Tesco Luxury Rich Fruit Christmas Cake 1-lb 8oz/£6.69; 3-lb/£10.49
Comments moist, slightly bitter cake with thin marzipan and very hard icing that cracks as you cut it.
We liked the cake, but not the icing.
GHI's favourites
Fortnum & Mason's traditional version for cake and icing texture; Asda's cake with brandy for icing.
SOFT-ICED CAKES
These are easier to cut than royal-iced cakes and come with much more attractive decorations.
Marks & Spencer Luxury Christmas Cake 3-lb/£10.99
Comments : dark, rich, with lots of cherries and cuts well.
Has soft, sticky texture; tastes of brandy.
We liked the marzipan and icing.
Sainsbury Luxury Fully Iced Christmas Cake 3-lbs 4oz/£9.95
Comments : very sweet, with a good brandy flavour, lots of cherries.
Thin marzipan and icing.
Sainsbury Luxury Hand Decorated Christmas Cake 4-lb/£12.50
Comments a neat shape that cuts well and is attractively iced to the edge of its board.
Cake is moist in centre, dry at edges.
Panel couldn't taste the port and brandy it contains.
It has a citrussy flavour and is very sweet.
Waitrose Soft Iced Christmas Cake 2-lb/£6.95
Comments : pleasant cake, with good rum flavour and very sweet marzipan which tastes of almond essence.
Singularly unattractive decoration.
GHI's favourite
Marks & Spencer Luxury Christmas Cake
CAKES WITH NO ICING
Asda Luxury Rich Fruit Cake 2-lb 4oz/£4.99; 4-lb/£7.29
Comments : dark, dry, crumbly and tasted overcooked.
Brandy imparts bitter flavour.
Thumbs down from the taste panel.
Healthrite 1-lb 12oz/£4.99 from Holland & Barrett and good health-food shops around the country.
Comments : tastes more like a standard fruit cake than a rich one (it's a ‘healthy’ cake made with wholemeal flour and vegetable margarine).
Not too sweet or spicy.
Contains lots of currants, but testers found it a bit dry.
Marks & Spencer Uniced Luxury Christmas Cake 2-lb 4oz/£4.99
Comments : very dark, sticky and moist.
Cuts well.
Lots of cherries and other fruit and good boozy flavour — a cross between Christmas cake and pudding.
Safeway Luxury Christmas Cake 2-lb/£4.49
Comments : dark, rich, moist and cuts well.
Contains lots of fruit and nuts.
Tastes almost too rich with the spices and brandy.
Sainsbury Luxury Rich Fruit Cake 2-lb/£4.25
Comments : good colour, cuts well.
Contains lots of cherries and other fruit and has a strong citrus flavour.
A bit dry.
Tesco All Butter Luxury Fruit Cake 2-lb/£4.39; 4-lb/£7.29
Comments : fairly standard fruit cake, which is buttery and moist with some cherries.
You can taste the brandy.
Well liked.
GHI's favourites
First choice: Marks & Spencer Uniced Luxury Christmas Cake with its rich, fruity flavour; second choice: Tesco All Butter Luxury Fruit Cake — for those who prefer a less rich version.
The taste panel making their choice.
From left: Nutritionist, Fiona Hunter; Peter Cranfield; and Cookery Coordinator, Riley Stemp
GHI consumer report
STARS OF SMALL SCREEN
What makes one portable TV better than another?
GHI takes a close look and selects the best
If you yearn to watch the late-night movie in bed, or can't bear missing your favourite soap opera while cooking supper, then you might think about buying a portable TV.
We assessed eight 14in portable colour TVs to find out which are the best.
All the models tested had the following features in common:
an aerial socket and an audio/video socket for a video recorder, camcorder or for a satellite link
a sleep timer that programmes the TV to turn off automatically  a display on the screen, giving details of the channel, volume, contrast and brightness
at least presetable channel selectors (only useful to have so many if you have satellite TV)
remote control, with stand-by, mute and channel control.
(Most had a single control to change colour, contrast, and brightness which we found unnecessarily complicated)
Some TV's also had teletext; this may be available as an optional extra (it costs about £50).
What we looked for…
Ease of use We tested how quickly we had the sets up and running, how clear the instructions are to follow, and whether the remote control is well laid out.
Picture quality We used a pre-recorded video tape to compare the definition between the sets.
(Colour preference is very much an individual thing, so we suggest you compare screens at your local retailer to find out which one you like best.)
Reception We tuned in to all the broadcast channels with the loop aerial and found that some sets gave a far better picture than others.
if you do not have an external aerial socket in the room where you want the TV to be sited, check that the loop aerial gives an acceptable picture quality before you buy the set
if your set won't always have access to an external aerial, it may be worth buying a separate indoor aerial (about £10) to improve the picture
if you rely on the loop, it may be worth moving the set around to find the best location for receiving.
But bear in mind that without an external aerial, you may not be able to get a very good teletext reception.
GHI suggests:
GHI comment: The only sets that gave us a really good picture on the loop aerial were Philips and Sony.
Sound quality Don't expect to get brilliant sound quality from a small speaker.
If the TV has got to fit into a limited space, it's a good idea to choose a model that has a front-facing speaker, such as Ferguson or Hitachi.
GHI comment: In general, we found that the Alba and Ferguson models gave the clearest sound.
Portability Surprisingly, not all the sets had handles or finger tips to make carrying easier.
GHI solves your problems
HANDY HINTS
Advice on water filters, super storage and post-Christmas tips
WATER-FILTER WARNING
The cheap plumbed-in water filter could be an expensive mistake.
Alarmed by reports of sales of bargain-price filters at car-boot sales and Sunday markets, the British Effluent & Water Association (BEWA) has urged consumers to remember the importance of proper warranties, installation and servicing.
Filters vary in design and capacity, and proper advice is essential, says the BEWA.
You're unlikely to get this from a carboot salesman, and he will probably not have the replacement parts you'll need either.
Filter cartridges, for instance, need regular changing as they get clogged up after about six months.
So it's a good idea to buy domestic water-treatment devices only from reputable suppliers: to find out more, write to the BEWA Booklet Service, 73 Swinburne Road, London SW15 5EQ, enclosing a large sae.
Are you interested in a plumbed-in water filter or would a table-top model suit you better?
For advice, phone GHI expert Caroline Bloor on 0893–141414.
Calls will charged at 48p/minute.
SUPER STORAGE
Look at Click Clack plastic storage canisters and kitchen accessories, in white, black, red and green.
The canisters are available in six sizes (0.6 litre sizes costs £2.98) and have a special lid device which ensures a good seal.
We also liked the citrus juicer, below, and the cheese grater, complete with a collecting dish.
From John Lewis, or ring 081–847 2493 for local stocklists.
AFTER THE EVENT…
Burning a candle neutralises and dispels cigarette smoke.
Try scented candles, or Price's Smokers' Candle, £1.75, from John Lewis.
Wrap an old sheet around the Christmas tree when you remove it to stop it shedding needles in its wake.
Remove stubborn caramelised turkey grease from the roasting tray by filling it with a solution of biological washing powder.
FREEZER FACTS
Don't wait until Christmas Eve to defrost the turkey — it could take up to two days to thaw!
So says the Frozen Food Information Service (FFIS), which has published a new guide,Take A Fresh Look at Frozen Foods , that tells you all you need to know about storing and thawing frozen food and what you can and can't freeze.
The booklet is available free from FFIS/GH Booklet Offer, PO Box 39, London SE16 2BP.
Is your freezer cold enough?
To prevent bacteria from multiplying, Frozen Foods should be stored at -18°C and fridges should be kept between 0°C and 5°C.
Check the temperature with liquid-crystal fridge and freezer thermometers, price £2 (for one of each), inc p&p from the FFIS (as above).
Don't put hot food straight into the fridge — it raises the temperature and encourages mould to grow.
Q & A
Tap into the expertise of the Good Housekeeping Institute
Q
It seems such a waste to throw Christmas cards away after Twelfth Night.
Do any charities collect them?
A
We can't find a national scheme for re-using Christmas cards, but many local charities run appeals.
The obvious alternative is to take them along to your local ‘paper igloo’(a blue bin like a postbox, usually alongside bottle banks) for recycling.
Or give them to a nearby playgroup or primary school, which will welcome any old cards that the children can cut up for collages.
Q
I can't get rid of the lime-scale mark in my toilet.
Is there anything that will shift it?
A
You'll have to empty the toilet bowl first: you can do this by bailing out the water by hand, or tying up the ballcock and flushing the loo.
(This empties the bowl and stops the cistern from filling it again.)
Use Mangers' Stainex to clean the scale, following the instructions on the pack.
The cleaner is a nondrip gel descaler, so it stays put on the vertical surface, dissolving the scale.
Stainex is available from Homebase and Co-op stores and good hardware shops, price £2.54.
Q
I would like to fit a built-in dual-fuel hob in my kitchen so that I can cook with both gas and electricity.
Who makes these and what are the drawbacks, if any?
A
The choice is limited to a combination of gas and electric sealed hotplates, not radiant rings.
We know of only three companies that make these: Gaggenau (model KM132 514, £473.60); Neff (model 9114, £258.50) and Wisehart (model BT70, £156, or the larger 16.4/2 model, which has four gas burners and two electric rings, £250).
Or you could consider a modular or domino hob.
These are mini hobs which have only two heating areas, so you can put several together to combine gas, ceramic, halogen or sealed hotplates.
For details of brands call our Helpline on 0839–141414.
Calls are charged at 48p/minute.
Whichever you choose, use pans with heavy, smooth, flat bases.
Q
I have difficulty hearing the door bell when I'm upstairs or in the garden.
What can I do?
A
Friedland makes the only portable door-chime system that is battery operated and needs no wiring.
A transmitter connected to the door bell sends out radio signals to a portable receiver, which chimes when the bell is rung.
You can move the receiver from room to room, or even into the garden (as long as it is within a 50m radius of the transmitter), or fit one or more receivers around the house.
The system, called Courier, is available from department, diy and electrical stores, price £38.
SUZANNE WILKINSON is Consumer Research Editor.
As a home economist with 10 years' experience in consumer products, and mother of three young boys, she has first-hand experience of tackling practical problems.
The GHI welcomes your letters about any consumer queries 
GHI green issues
WHICH WOULD YOU CHOOSE?
Probably, your Green conscience would prompt you to buy the bottle with the recyclable label — yet both bottles can be recycled.
Are manufacturers playing fair?
CAROLINE BLOOR investigates
Although only one of these bottles is labelled ‘suitable for recycling’, both are, in fact, made from the same recyclable plastic.
No wonder six out of 10 consumers are confused by manufacturers' claims about the Greenness of their products.
Many of us are now sceptical of environmental marketing hype and highpriced ‘Green’ products.
And a glance at the supermarket shelves reveals that many manufacturers appear to be ignoring environmental concerns, especially about packaging.
We looked at five products that represent different kinds of packaging and are found in most supermarket trollies at Christmas, to see how easy it is to recycle packaging.
CHUTNEY JARS
Glass jars can be recycled through bottle banks, yet few people return them.
Clear glass is particularly valued.
Last year, only 21% of glass used in the UK was recycled.
PET-FOOD CANS
Most of the 2.2 billion pet-food cans sold each year are made from steel coated with tin.
About 9% of these are recycled.
Steel can be extracted magnetically from waste, but only one in 10 local authorities has the necessary equipment.
The Steel Can Recycling Information Bureau (071–351 5208) has details of Save-A-Can recycling skips around the country.
PLASTIC DRINK BOTTLES
As plastic is lighter than glass, fuel consumption in transport is reduced.
There is a small but growing number of recycling schemes nationwide.
One of the easiest types of plastic to recycle is polyethylene terephthalate, PET, which includes fizzydrinks bottles.
Collecting and cleaning some types of plastic for recycling uses more energy than making new plastic.
PACK OF MINCE PIES
For hygiene reasons, recycled material is only used in food packaging if the contents are plastic wrapped or the cardboard has a protective lining.
There are no nationwide facilities for recycling aluminium pie trays (although aluminium cans can be recycled).
CHRISTMAS CRACKERS
Crackers are an ideal product for recycled board.
Many companies, including John Lewis and Woolworths, use it for all their cracker cartons.
UNDERSTAND THE JARGON
Biodegradable:Materials will degrade if buried, but this can take a long time (plastics can take hundreds of years).
Recent excavations of landfill sites have unearthed newspapers that were readable and carrots that looked edible after 30 years.
When materials finally degrade, resources are lost for ever, so it is better to reuse them.
Minimal packs:Some packaging is designed to reduce waste during manufacture.
Thin foil wrappers, for example, contain so little material that it's not worth the cost of recycling.
Ozone friendly:Products do not contain ozone-depleting CFCs or use them in manufacture.
Photodegradable:Materials exposed to light will eventually degrade (within a year in the case of some bin liners).
Recyclable:This doesn't mean the pack will be recycled — only that it could be.
The determined recycler returns glass bottles, aluminium and steel cans to the appropriate banks, but schemes for paper, cartons and plastic bottles are scarce.
Currently, no one collect milk or fruit-juice cartons.
(In their favour, relatively little energy is needed for production and transport.)
Recycled:Packaging partially made from material which has been used before.
Some packaging, such as paper and steel cans, traditionally contains some recycled material.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Look for simple packs.
Minimal packaging need not indicate a poor-quality product.
Choose larger packs — these make better use of resources.
Use refill packs and concentrates — these are cheaper and help the environment.
Ring your local authority to find out about schemes.
Address complaints about badly/deceptively packaged or overpackaged products to The Packaging Complaints Council, 10 Greycoat Place, London SW1P 15B.
Don't forget to choose products, as well as packaging, that are environment-friendly.
GHI ADVICE
For up-to-date information sheets now include a selection of named manufacturers to help you make your choice — all the facts at your fingertips on the following:
INFORMATION SHEETS £1.75 each
Cookware Choice; Cookery Schools; Dealing With Summer Pests; Facts On Carpets; Facts On Hard And Natural Floor Coverings; Glass-topped Hobs (includes ceramic, halogen and induction ); Household And Wedding Present List; Practical Guide For Asthmatics; Shopping: Your Consumer Rights
GHI BOOKLET £1.50
Food Care At Home
GHI HELP LINES
If you have a domestic query, phone:
Advice on choosing and using products for your home
Food, cookery and nutritional advice
Household advice, including stain removal and specialist services.
(Calls are 48p/minute, 9.30am to 5pm.)
Checks for the above publications should be made out to the Good Housekeeping Institute.
Please quote the title you would like and send your cheque with an sae to:GHI Advice, 72 Broadwick Street, London W1V 2BP .
GHI home action
THE REALLY USEFUL GIFT
From nifty riveter to smart water-pipe detector…here are 10 of the best diy gifts selected by JACK SMITH
FAST WORK
A staple gun is often quicker and safer to use than a hammer and nails.
The Rawlplug Rapid 34 Staple Gun uses two-pronged staples and makes easy work of fixing upholstery, carpets, etc.
You use it with just one hand, leaving the other free.
Price: £25 from diy and hardware stores.
RIVETING TALE
Household and garden equipment is often difficult to repair with nuts and bolts, but a riveter can make a strong, neat repair to metal, leather and plastics.
Stanley Tools Riveter uses steel and aluminium rivets of various lengths for different materials.
Price: £9.14 (Model MR22) from diy stores.
DETECTION DEVICE
If you've ever drilled into a water pipe or found it difficult to get a good fixing on a wall, you need a Rapitest Wire, Pipe & Stud Detector .
This electronic device takes the danger out of drilling by locating cables and pipes; it also pinpoints joists and studs to give firm fixings.
Price: £19.95 from large diy stores.
MOBILE UNIT
How often have you moaned when there isn't a socket for your electric drill?
A cordless one offers a solution.
The Black & Decker Cordless Drill has hammer action, 10mm chuck capacity, its own charging unit (it takes about 3 hours to recharge) and weighs about 1.5kg.
Price: £66.95 (Model BD 602) from diy stores.
QUICK CHOP
Household scissors are often not very effective for cutting through home improvement materials.
Fiskars Craft Cutter is a multi-purpose tool, with a guillotine action for cutting wire, carpet, card or cable.
Price: £4.75 available from John Lewis and diy stores.
FLEX TIME
If you find it difficult to strip outer insulation and cut flex when changing a plug, try Strip & Fit — an all-in-one screwdriver and cutter.
It's safe but you need to have a firm grip to cut a 13-amp flex.
Price: £4.99 from supermarkets, electrical and dry outlets.
MAGIC MAGNET
There's no need to clench nails or screws between your teeth with GINI's Magic-Holder .
GHI found its strap fitted all wrists and the magnet held up to seven nails or screws.
Mailorder from GINI, Maxet House, Liverpool Rd, Luton LU1 1RS.
Price
2.99.
FIRM GRIP
You need to be a contortionist when using a traditional clamp to drill, saw or glue together timber.
But the Levermore Quick-Grip only needs one hand to operate, leaving the other free to adjust.
Price: from £19.89 (for a 6in model) from diy stores and hardware shops.
PUTTING THE SCREWS IN…
Endlessly driving in screws can be tedious.
The Bosch Cordless Screwdriver (electric) is easy to use; it has two screwdriver bits (flat blade and cross top) and is rechargeable, so can be wall-mounted in its charging unit.
The screwdriver has a reversing action to ease the removal of stubborn screws.
Price: £27.53 (Model PSR 24V) from diy stores.
GREAT WORKMATE
The Black & Decker Workmate is a must for diy-ers.
It's a workbench with lots of vices that will grip either straight or irregular shapes equally well.
It's easy to move about and folds away conveniently for storage.
Price: £59.95 (Model WM 536), available from diy stores.
JACK SMITH returns to the GHI as our Diy Consultant.
Formerly Associate Technical Director, he was with the Institute for 33 years until he retired four years ago
GHI motoring
IS THERE A RIGHT TIME TO BUY A CAR?
A new car is a major purchase and, by making the right choices when you buy, you should get the best deal when you sell later
It may be a romantic notion — a glossy new hatchback parked outside on Christmas morning, but in financial terms, December is not a good time to buy.
The same car registered just a week or two later in January will be worth several hundred pounds more when it's time to trade it in.
Thoughts of future depreciation are so often far from our minds in all the excitement of choosing a new car.
Yet the final equation of what you can afford to spend on a new car is likely to be influenced by what you get for the old one.
So it's sensible to buy with a view to maintaining a good second-hand value as the car ages.
BEST TIMES TO BUY
The first thing to work is when to buy.
Year of registration and the number-plate prefix both influence what the car will be worth when it's older, making November/December and June/July the least sensible times to buy.
Although there will be little difference between what they cost new,a car registered in January 1992 is going to be more attractive to buyers than one which went on the road in December 1991, so second-hand it will be worth about £200-£300 more.
Likewise, among cars bought next summer, a K-registered one on the road in August will have the eventual edge over a barely older J.
Which model you choose is also important.
Small hatchbacks of most makes are readily saleable second-hand, although some hold their value better than others.
More unusual makes, such as Eastern-bloc cars, tend to suffer a steeper decline in value, fuelled by fears about cost and availability of spare parts.
The more common smaller cars, such as Ford Escorts, Vauxhall Astras, Rover Metros and Volkswagen Golfs,all hold their value well — their popularity and ease of servicing means there are always potential buyers for second-hand models.
Larger, ‘executive’ cars are poorer value to buy new, because their value drops so sharply in the first few years.
It's worth shopping around for one a few years old, after the initial sharp depreciation (which can be as much as 70% over three years) has levelled.
Glamorous makes like the smaller models in the Mercedes and BMW ranges hang on to their value,because their image makes them highly desirable.
The same applies to convertibles, which depreciate less quickly than other models because of the lively demand for them.
Sporty cars similarly hold their value well.
DIESEL PAYS OFF
Opting for a diesel car can be a canny move if your annual mileage is around 10,000 a year or more.
Although diesels cost more initially than their petrol-engined equivalents, they are economical to run and hold their second-hand value relatively well.
If an estate car tempts you, it could pay to choose one with the option of an extra row of seats .
Estate cars capable of carrying seven or even eight people are always in demand second-hand — especially Volvos.
Colour is another important factor, and is not merely cosmetic.
Strong attractive colours always appeal, and a bright red hatchback will probably sell for £200-£300 more than a dull beige one.
Recently, car manufacturers have been offering big discounts in a bid to sell more in a depressed market.
However, a few years down the line, a heavily discounted car might not look quite such a good bargain.
When it comes to trade-in value, dealers tend to judge against the price a car costs new, rather than the list price before a heavily hyped discount.
The money you save on a hyped discount today will probably have to be passed on to the car's next buyer as well, although discounts you negotiate privately may not be.
Sometimes cars are discounted to clear ‘end-of-line’ models.
Buying a soon-to-be-obsolete car can be a saving in the short term, but not necessarily in the long term.
As soon as the new replacement model arrives, its predecessor tends to lose a little of its second-hand value.
There is, however, one little car which has been around for almost 33 years, is enjoying a revival in popularity and still holds it second-hand value well.
It's modestly priced, yet has something in common with a Mercedes, namely low depreciation.
Its name?…the Mini.
SUE BAKER,who is also Motoring Editor of The Observer and a television presenter, is married with two children and lives in Kent 
Popular, smaller cars always hold a good second-hand value.
Clockwise from top: Vauxhall Astra; Ford Escort; Volkswagen Golf; Rover Metro
The new Mini Cooper Special Edition
COUNTDOWN TO CHRISTMAS
Part Two This month the emphasis is on time-saving recipes that produce spectacular results and leave you free to enjoy yourself.
In A Sense Of Occasion,pages 118–124, a sumptuous spread is planned around everyday ingredients cleverly transformed into something really quite special.
The centrepiece — a precooked gammon — is given luxury treatment with a crunchy nut glaze, and the boned turkey is crammed with ready-made stuffing embellished with some tasty extras.
The Salmon & Prawn Rice In Filo Pastry is ideal for a Boxing Day buffet, and we've almost-instant desserts.
No one will be able to resist The Ultimate Chocolate Truffle,pages 128–132 — a splendid finale to any meal.
And when you feel like a change from rich, traditional fare,Anything But Turkey,pages 136–140, offers a temptingly light dinner-party menu.
And don't miss our Wine Editor Jane MacQuitty's selection of seasonal wines on page 146 — the real spirit of Christmas starts here…
A sense of occasion
Creating a sumptuous Christmas feast without spending hours in the kitchen is made easy with these delicious recipes.
The art is to take everyday ingredients and transform them into something magical
Clockwise from right: Gammon With Crunchy Nut Glaze; Vegetable Sauté; Spiced Cranberry & Apple Sauce; Salmon & Prawn Rice In Filo Pastry; Boned Turkey With Cranberry Stuffing; Five-Peppered Beef in a salad of broccoli with cherry tomatoes; Quick Potato Dauphinoise
This month, with time at a premium, we've taken a few short cuts to preparing delicious Christmas fare: we bought a cooked gammon to transform into a glorious centrepiece with a crunchy nut, honeyed glaze.
The butcher boned our turkey to make it easier to carve, and we made a stuffing with packet mix and a few clever extras.
We took ready-filleted salmon, some cooked prawns, a packet of mixed rice and mayonnaise, and wrapped them in filo pastry for a delicious seafood parcel, ideal as an alternative Christmas dinner or for a Boxing Day buffet.
A mix of peppercorns, mustard and ginger spiced up a fillet of beef — it's wonderful served hot, or cold mixed in a Christmas salad of broccoli and cherry tomatoes.
Desserts are also almost instant.
There's a delicious mousse of melted chocolate bars, a chocolate log made with bought Swiss rolls, soaked in Cointreau with raisins, and a speedy, frozen alternative to the traditional pud using a carton of fresh custard.
FIVE-PEPPERED BEEF
The crushed, coloured peppercorns give a wonderful festive coating.
Or blend your own mix of white, black, pink and green peppercorns.
900g (2-lb) fillet of beef
10ml (2 level tsp) Bart Spices Bristol Blend Five Peppers
45ml (tbsp) oil
20ml (4 level tsp) wholegrain mustard
5ml (1 level tsp) ground ginger
15ml (1 level tbsp) soft light brown sugar
1 clove garlic, crushed
10ml (2 level tsp) English mustard powder
broccoli and cherry tomatoes to accompany
vinaigrette to serve (optional)
1
Trim any excess fat off the meat; tie with fine string at 2.5cm (1in) intervals.
Place in a roasting tin.
2
Coarsely grind peppercorns using a pestle and mortar, or in a strong bowl with the end of a rolling pin.
Beat together with the remaining ingredients to form a paste.
Spread over beef to cover.
3
Roast the beef for 20min at 230°C (450°F) mark 8 to seal, basting occasionally.
Reduce the temperature to 200°C (400°F) mark 6 for about a further 20min for medium, 25min for well done.
4
Allow to stand for 10min before carving into thin slices.
Serve hot with sautéed broccoli and cherry tomatoes, or cold, thickly sliced, with blanched broccoli, cherry tomatoes and vinaigrette dressing.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 185kcals per serving; fat**; saturated fat***; fibre*; added sugar****
(See Star Guide , page 132)
BONED TURKEY WITH CRANBERRY STUFFING
Packet stuffings are quick to use, but it's a good idea to make them up drier than instructed to absorb some of the turkey juices.
Ask your butcher to bone the turkey for you — but give him plenty of warning.
two 142g (50z) packets stuffing mix, preferably chestnut
175g (6oz) fresh or frozen cranberries
175g(6oz) walnut pieces or pecan nuts
2 lemons
120ml (8 level tbsp) chopped fresh or frozen parsley
salt and pepper
4.5kg (10 lb) oven-ready turkey, boned
225g (8oz) rindless smoked back bacon
50g (2oz) butter, softened
mixed nuts and cranberry sauté to garnish (see Cook's Tip )
1
Prepare the stuffing mix as instructed, but use only about three-quarters of the quantity of water; cool.
Stir in cranberries, walnuts, grated lemon rind and parsley.
Season well.
2
Place turkey skin-side down and lay the bacon across the flesh; pile the stuffing in the centre.
3
Tuck the neck end over the filling, draw the long sides of the bird over the stuffing and sew up with fine string to encase completely.
Skewer into a neater shape if wished.
Don't roll up too tightly or you'll find that the bird will burst during cooking.
Weigh the bird.
4
Place turkey breast-side up on foil in a roasting tin.
Spread with butter; season.
Pour over juice of one lemon.
Wrap over foil to make a parcel.
5
Roast at 180°C (350°F) mark 4 for 15min per 450g (1lb).
Raise the oven temperature to 200°C (400°F) mark 6.
Unwrap the turkey and return to the oven for a further 30min to brown, basting occasionally.
Test with a fine skewer.
If the juices run clear the bird is cooked, if not, return to the oven for a little longer.
6
Leave to rest for at least 15min before carving.
Serve hot or cold.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 10–12
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 520kcals per serving for 12; fat*; saturated fat**; fibre*; added sugar****
COOK'S TIP
For a colourful accompaniment to the turkey, sauté 175g (6oz) mixed nuts, eg brazils, hazelnuts, walnuts, etc, with 50g (2oz) fresh or frozen cranberries in 50g (2oz) butter and 15ml (1 level tbsp) soft brown sugar until they turn golden brown.
Add a little grated fresh root ginger to the mixture, if you wish.
SALMON & PRAWN RICE IN FILO PASTRY
Most supermarkets now stock packets of mixed rice.
We used a blend of long-grain white with wild rice, but any combination can be used .
75g (3oz) long-grain white and wild rice, mixed
salt and black pepper
1 bunch spring onions
butter
125g (4oz) prawns
1 lemon
1 bunch watercress
30ml (2 level tbsp) chopped fresh dill or 5ml (1 level tsp) dried
dill weed
6 large sheets filo pastry, 28x45.5cm (11x18in)
two 450g (1 lb) salmon fillets, skinned
30ml (2 level tbsp) lemon mayonnaise
lemon mayonnaise to accompany
sliced cucumber to garnish
1
Cook the rice in boiling, salted water until tender; drain well.
Chop the spring onions and sauté in 25g (1oz) butter for 2–3 min or until just beginning to soften.
Stir into the rice with the prawns, grated lemon rind, roughly chopped watercress, fresh or dried dill and seasoning.
2
Melt 50g (2oz) butter.
Layer up three sheets of filo pastry, brushing with butter between each sheet.
Place one salmon fillet in the centre of the pastry.
Spoon over the rice mixture, top with the mayonnaise.
Place the other salmon fillet on top.
3
Fold up the sides of the pastry, then top with two of the remaining pastry sheets to enclose the salmon completely.
Brush with melted butter to seal well.
Cut the remaining sheet of pastry into diamond shapes and scatter over the top.
Brush with more melted butter and season with black pepper.
4
Bake at 200°C (400°F) mark 6 for 20min.
Cover loosely with foil and cook at 180°C (350°F) mark 4 for a further 20min or until crisp and cooked through.
Serve warm, accompanied by lemon mayonnaise, garnished with cucumber.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 360kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar****
GAMMON WITH CRUNCHY NUT GLAZE
If you want to serve a whole gammon on the bone, simple double the glaze ingredients.
60ml (4tbsp) runny honey
15ml (1 level tbsp) Dijon mustard
1.6–1.8kg (3½ — 4 lb) precooked corner gammon joint
about 10 cloves
30ml (2 level tbsp) sesame seeds
15ml (1 level tbsp) white mustard seeds
25g (1 oz) flaked almonds
pickled pears to garnish (see Cook's Tip )
1
Mix together the honey and Dijon mustard
2
With a sharp knife, carefully strip the rind from the cooked gammon joint and score the fat.
Place in a roasting tin.
Press the cloves into the scored fat and brush over half the honey and mustard glaze.
3
Add the remaining ingredients to the glaze and press onto the fat.
Cook at 200°C (400°F) mark 6 for about 15 min.
If necessary protect any fleshy surfaces with foil.
Serve the gammon warm or cold with pickled pears.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 400kcals per serving; fat***; saturated fat***; fibre*; added sugar***
COOK'S TIP
To pickle pears, poach 450g (1lb) peeled firm pears in 300ml (½ pint) water, with 60ml (4tbsp) honey and 15ml (1 level tbsp) white-wine vinegar until tender.
Alternatively, stir the honey and vinegar into a 400g (14oz) can of pear halves in natural juice.
If you would like to cook the gammon at home, place the joint in a roasting tin on a bed of bay leaves.
Season well with black pepper.
Add 300ml (½ pint) water, cover with foil and cook at 180°C (350°F) mark 4 for 20 min per 450g (1 lb).
Turn the gammon over once during cooking.
Glaze as directed.
QUICK POTATO DAUPHINOISE
two 400g (14.1oz) long-life  roast potatoes or 700g
(1½lb) old potatoes, coarsely grated
284ml (10fl oz) carton double cream
75g (3oz) Gruyère cheese, grated
2 cloves garlic, crushed
pinch nutmeg
salt and pepper
butter
1
Mix together all the ingredients except butter; season well.
Spoon into a 1.4 litre (3 pint) shallow ovenproof dish.
Dot with butter.
2
Bake at 200°C (400°F) mark 6 for 30 min.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 290kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre**; added sugar****
VEGETABLE SAUTE
700g (1½ lb) frozen Brussels sprouts
225g (8oz) frozen broad beans
salt and pepper
450g (1 lb) courgettes, sliced
50g (2oz) butter
1
Boil sprouts and beans in salted water until tender.
Drain
2
Sauté courgettes in butter for 2–3min.
Mix in the drained vegetables, season and serve straightaway.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 100kcals per serving; fat**; saturated fat*; fibre****; added sugar****
CREAMY BREAD SAUCE
30ml (2 level tbsp) dried onion flakes
568ml (1 pint) milk
125g (4oz) fresh white breadcrumbs
pinch ground mace
pinch ground cloves
25g (1oz) butter
45ml (3 tbsp) single cream
salt and pepper
1
Place first five ingredients in a medium pan.
Bring to the boil; simmer for 4–5min or until milk is absorbed and the mixture has thickened, stirring occasionally.
2
Mix in remaining ingredients; season.
Serve immediately.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8 AS AN ACCOMPANIMENT
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 140kcals per serving; fat**; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar****
SPICED CRANBERRY & APPLE SAUCE
383g (13½oz) can be unsweetened apple slices
two 190g (6½oz) jars cranberry sauce
1 orange
50g (2oz) fresh or frozen cranberries (optional)
small pinch ground cloves
1
Drain and chop apple slices.
Place in a pan with the cranberry sauce, grated orange rind, cranberries, if using, and cloves.
2
Bring to the boil; simmer for 5min, stirring occasionally until apple begins to soften.
Serve cold.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8 AS AN ACCOMPANIMENT
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 20kcals per serving; fat****; saturated fat****; fibre****; added sugar****
RICH CHOCOLATE LOG
For speed warm the raisins and the Cointreau together, take off the heat and leave them to soak for 5min only.
50g (2oz) seedless raisins
45ml (3tbsp) Cointreau
125gr (4oz) white chocolate
284ml (10fl oz) double cream
two 225g (8oz) chocolate Swiss rolls with chocolate butter cream
filling, about 16cm (6½in) long
caramelised hazelnuts (see Cook's Tip ) and plain-chocolate
leaves to decorate.
1
Place the raisins in a bowl with 30ml (2tbsp) Cointreau.
Cover and leave for about 3hr.
2
Break up the chocolate and put it in a bowl over a saucepan of simmering water.
Heat gently until melted and smooth.
Leave to cool for about 10min.
Whisk the cream until it just holds its shape and fold in the melted chocolate.
3
Meanwhile, halve each Swiss roll lengthways.
Sprinkle over the raisins and Cointreau and sandwich together again.
4
Cut one of the logs in half at an angle.
Use one half to extend the other log and place on a serving platter.
Place the other half at a right angle to the log to form a branch, securing it with a little of the chocolate mixture.
5
Prick the log all over with a fine skewer and drizzle over the remaining Cointreau.
6
Cover the log with the chocolate mixture.
Rough up the surface with a palette knife and decorate with caramelised hazelnuts and the chocolate leaves.
TO FREEZE: Open freeze, overwrap when firm.
TO USE: Unwrap and thaw overnight at cool room temperature.
SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 540kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
COOK'S TIP
To make caramelised hazelnuts, place about 59g (2oz) granulated sugar in a small saucepan.
When the sugar has completely dissolved, increase the heat until the liquid turns a pale caramel.
Shake the pan gently to distribute the melted sugar evenly, then remove from the heat.
Using two forks, dip in the skinned hazelnuts, and stir until coated.
Leave to set on foil.
ICED CARAMEL MOUSSE
A rich, easily made mousse, served straight from the freezer.
three 61.5g Mars Bars
15ml (1tbsp) milk
284ml (10fl oz) double cream
1 egg white
chocolate curls to decorate (see Cook's Tip )
1
Thinly slice the Mars Bars.
Place in a bowl with the milk and gently heat over a pan of simmering water, stirring occasionally until melted and almost smooth.
Cool for about 10min, stirring occasionally.
2
Whisk the cream until it just holds its shape, then gently stir a large spoonful into the caramel mixture.
Fold in the remaining cream with a large metal spoon.
3
Lightly whisk the egg white; fold into chocolate mixture.
Pour into a bowl, cover and freeze for at least 2–3hr before serving.
Decorate with chocolate curls.
SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 6
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 350kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
COOK'S TIP
To make chocolate curls, smooth about 30ml (2tbsp) melted chocolate at a time in a thin layer over a flat baking sheet.
Place in the freezer until firm but not hard (1–2min).
Allow to come to room temperature (about 20sec) then, using a stripping knife (used for decorating), push into and along the chocolate, moving the knife from left to right to form waves.
Place on a tray lined with nonstick baking parchment and leave to harden in the fridge.
CHRISTMAS FRUIT COMPOTE
Whisk a little caster sugar and ground cinnamon into double cream for a delicious sweet accompaniment.
Add a few fresh cranberries to the compote for colour and a festive touch.
300g (11oz) can rambutans or lychees in fruit juice
1 pineapple
50g (2oz) caster sugar
15ml (1tbsp) brandy
5cm (2in) piece cinnamon stick
pinch ground ginger
225g (8oz) seedless green grapes
a few fresh cranberries (optional)
sweet cinnamon cream to accompany
1
Strain the rambutans, reserving juice.
Cut fruit in half.
Peel, slice and roughly chop the pineapple.
2
Place the reserved juice in a large saucepan with the sugar, brandy and spices.
Heat gently until all the sugar has dissolved then bring to the boil.
3
Add the fruit to the saucepan.
Bring to the boil, simmer gently for 1–2min.
4
Serve warm or chilled, accompanied by sweet cinnamon cream.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 95kcals per serving; fat****; saturated fat****; fibre****; added sugar*
FROZEN CHRISTMAS PUDDING
This version is lighter than a traditional Christmas pudding but it has all the flavour.
50g (2oz) no-soak dried apricots
175g (6oz) mixed currants, raisins and sultanas
1 orange
1 lemon
60ml (4tbsp) rum or brandy
5ml (1 level tsp) ground mixed spice
284ml (10fl oz) carton double cream
500g (1-lb 2oz) carton or can ready-to-serve custard
75g (3oz) caster sugar
brandy to accompany (optional)
1
Snip the apricots into small pieces.
In a large bowl, mix with the remaining dried fruit.
Add the finely grated rind of the orange and lemon, the rum and mixed spice.
Cover and leave to soak for about 15min — longer if possible.
2
Whisk the cream until it just holds its shape and fold into the fruit with the custard and sugar.
3
Pour the mixture into an air-tight container, cover and freeze for about 2hr.
Stir gently to distribute the fruits and break down any ice crystals.
Re-cover, then freeze until firm, about 6hr.
4
To serve, remove, from the freezer and leave at room temperature for about 15min.
Serve in scoops with a little extra brandy poured over if wished.
SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 340kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
LEMON GINGER CHEESECAKE
This smooth, creamy cheesecake is best if refrigerated overnight.
125g (4oz) digestive biscuits
25g (1oz) stem ginger
50g (2oz) butter, melted
225g (8oz) full-fat soft cheese
397g (14oz) can condensed milk
175ml (6fl oz) lemon juice
whipped cream and caramel (see Cook's Tip to decorate)
1
Line base and sides of a 20.5cm (8in) spring-release cake tin with nonstick baking parchment.
2
Finely crush the biscuits.
Finely chop the ginger.
Mix with the melted butter.
Press into the cake tin.
Chill to set, about 30 min.
3
In a food processor, blend the cheese and the condensed milk until smooth.
Gradually drizzle in the lemon juice and continue blending for a further 2min.
4
Pour the mixture over the set base, cover and return to the fridge for at least 3hr to set.
5
Remove from tin and decorate with whipped cream and caramel shapes just before serving.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 8
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 445kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
COOK'S TIP
To make caramel shapes, place 75g (3oz) granulated sugar in a small saucepan.
Heat gently until sugar has dissolved.
Increase heat until it turns a golden caramel.
Drizzle caramel from the end of a fork into irregular shapes onto lightly oiled foil.
Leave the shapes to set at room temperature.
Glassware/Perfect Glass, 5 Park Walk, SW10 0AJ (071–351 5342).
Fabrics/Ravissant, 157–159 Fulham Rd, SW3 6SN (071–584 3319).
Next month : Zest Appeal —cooking with lemons 
Boned Turkey With Cranberry Stuffing; Spiced Cranberry & Apple Sauce
Gammon With Crunchy Nut Glaze, served with pickled pears
Clockwise from right: Christmas Fruit Compote; Lemon Ginger Cheesecake; Iced Caramel Mousse; Rich Chocolate Log; Frozen Christmas Pudding
An unusual fruit compote containing rambutans and lychees
Pretty caramel shapes decorate this Lemon Ginger Cheesecake
GHI Christmas countdown
the ultimate CHOCOLATE TRUFFLE
Rich, smooth and soaked in Grand Marnier, these delectable chocolate truffles provide the perfect Christmas treat
Smooth, creamy truffles are a delicious treat at Christmas — or at any time of the year.
They can be tricky to make, but by following our step-by-step guide, you'll have perfect truffles every time.
Why not make an extra batch for a delectable Christmas present?
Make sure you melt the chocolate slowly, especially white chocolate.
If overheated it will become granular, so spoiling the delicate texture of the truffles.
The mixture must be quite firm before you handle it, so don't rush.
Roll the truffles gently but firmly, using enough icing sugar on your hands to prevent the mixture from sticking.
When coating the truffles with dry ingredients, such as desiccated coconut, it's best to do it while they are still slightly soft.
But always briefly freeze the mixture before coating with chocolate.
These truffles will store for up to two weeks in the fridge.
To make them easier to serve, we've firmed up the mixture with a few fine cake crumbs so that they don't melt the moment they hit room temperature.
Keep the chocolate-coated varieties in the fridge until the last minute as the chocolate covering quickly softens.
We've flavoured our truffles with Grand Marnier, but for a change try rum, brandy or the almond liqueur Amaretto di Saronno and shape them into small logs or disc shapes.
CHOCOLATE TRUFFLES
For the truffles
200g (7oz) plain dark chocolate or white chocolate
75ml (5 level tbsp) double cream
25g (1oz) butter
45ml (3 tbsp) Grand Marnier liqueur
25g (1oz) Madeira cake crumbs
25g (1oz) ground almonds
For coating the truffles
about 25g (1oz) flaked almonds
about 25g (1oz) desiccated coconut
cocoa powder
milk chocolate-flavoured strands
icing sugar
125g (4oz) plain dark chocolate
75ml (5 level tbsp) double cream
about 25g (1oz) plain dark or white chocolate to decorate
edible gold leaf to decorate (optional)
1
To make the truffles, break up the chocolate into squares and place in a medium-sized deep bowl with the cream.
Stand the bowl over a pan of simmering water and heat very gently until the chocolate begins to melt.
Don't overheat or allow any water to come into contact with it or the chocolate will become granular.
Gently stir the chocolate and cream until quite smooth then remove from the heat; leave to cool slightly.
2
Cut the butter into small pieces and stir into the chocolate until evenly blended.
If using dark chocolate, beat the mixture for 1–2min with an electric or hand whisk, until it thickens slightly and lightens in texture (this is not necessary when using white chocolate).
Add the Grand Marnier, about 5ml (1tsp) at a time, whisking or beating between each addition.
3
Stir the cake crumbs and ground almonds into the chocolate mixture, stirring until well mixed.
Cover the bowl tightly and refrigerate for at least 4hr — longer if possible — until the mixture is firm enough to handle.
4
Meanwhile, grill the flaked almonds until golden; cool and roughly chop.
Grill the coconut until golden; cool.
Place these on separate plates.
Sift a little cocoa on to a sheet of nonstick baking parchment.
Spoon a few chocolate strands onto another sheet of nonstick baking parchment.
5
Line two baking sheets with nonstick baking parchment.
Rub your hands and fingers lightly with icing sugar then roll small balls of truffle mixture into neat rounds, about 2.5cm (1in) diameter.
Divide the truffles between the two baking sheets.
If the mixture becomes too soft to handle, chill again before completing the rolling.
6
Place one baking sheet of truffles in the freezer for about 30min.
Roll the remaining truffles in either the nuts, the coconut, the chocolate strands or the cocoa until evenly coated.
Return to the lined baking sheet.
The drier ingredients such as the nuts won't immediately stick to the truffles, but if you continue gently rolling them, they will gradually pick up an even coating.
Chill the truffles until firm then loosely cover.
7
Meanwhile, break up the remaining plain dark chocolate for coating and place in a small bowl with the cream.
(For instructions on covering truffles with white chocolate, see Cook's Tip below.)
Stand the bowl over a pan of simmering water and heat gently until the chocolate begins to melt.
Remove from the heat, stirring gently until smooth.
Leave the chocolate to stand until it cools and the mixture thickens slightly.
Place the frozen truffles on a wire rack over a baking sheet.
Carefully spoon the chocolate over the truffles or spear with a cocktail stick and quickly dip into the chocolate; shake off excess then carefully place on nonstick baking parchment.
Make sure the truffles are completely coated in chocolate.
Immediately refrigerate to allow the coating to firm up — about 30min.
8
Break up a little of the white or plain dark chocolate for decorating and melt over a pan of simmering water (see step 1).
Cool until beginning to thicken, then spoon into a small greaseproof-paper icing bag.
Pipe the chocolate into swirls over the chocolate-coated truffles.
Alternatively, drizzle the chocolate from the end of a teaspoon.
9
Once firm, place in small paper cases, * cover loosely and refrigerate.
About 20min before serving remove all but the chocolate-coated truffles from the fridge and pile onto a large platter.
Leave at cool room temperature to soften slightly just before serving.
Decorate the truffles with small pieces of edible gold leaf, ** if wished, and serve immediately.
TO FREEZE: All will freeze except those coated with chocolate.
Pack in a single layer, overwrap and freeze.
TO USE: Thaw in fridge for about 3hr.
MAKES ABOUT 24
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 140kcals per truffle; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
COOK'S TIP
To coat the truffles in white chocolate, allow about 225g (8oz) to coat half quantity of truffles.
Place the pieces of broken chocolate in a bowl over a pan of simmering water.
Remove from the heat and allow to melt very slowly, stirring occasionally.
Spoon the chocolate over the truffles, recoating until smooth and shiny.
Refrigerate as above.
* For gold paper sweet cases, phone Lakeland Plastics ()
** For edible gold leaf, phone SR Stevenson ()
Next month: The Ultimate Brandy Snap
STAR GUIDE
The more stars a recipe has, the healthier it is.
Those with three or four stars for each category are best.
**** High fibre, low fat, low saturated fat, low added sugar
*** Medium-high fibre, medium-low fat, medium-low saturated fat, medium-low added sugar
** Medium-low fibre, medium-high fat, medium-high saturated fat, medium-high added sugar
* Low fibre, high fat, high saturated fat, high added sugar 
Christmas countdown
ANYTHING BUT TURKEY!
This deliciously light and quick-to-prepare dinner party menu makes a welcome change from the richer, traditional fare of the season.
Serve at any time over the holiday
All the dishes in this simple menu are quick to prepare and are temptingly light — perfect before and after all the overindulgence at Christmas!
Our Pizzettas are quicker to make and have fewer calories than traditional pizzas, while the Rolled Plaice With Smoked Salmon really looks and tastes quite delicious.
The refreshing Glazed Lemon Puddings finish off this meal perfectly.
Please not that none of these dishes is suitable for freezing.
PIZZETAS
Look out for frozen, ready-rolled puff-pastry sheets in your supermarket.
You can also make this recipe using a 375g (13oz) block of puff pastry.
Roll it out to 5mm (¼in) thickness and cut out as directed.
three, 20.5cm (8in) sheets ready-rolled, frozen puff pastry, thawed
3 spring onions
25g (1oz) butter, melted
1 lemon
salt and pepper
350g (12oz) medium tomatoes
225g (8oz) courgettes
30ml (2 level tbsp) pesto sauce
fresh grated Parmesan to serve
1
Cut out six 11cm (4½in) rounds of pastry and place on an edged baking tray.
Prick all over with a fork.
Bake at 230°C (450°F) mark 8 for about 8min, or until lightly risen and golden.
2
Meanwhile, finely chop the spring onions and stir into the butter, together with the grated lemon rind and 15ml (1 tbsp) lemon juice.
Season well.
Cut the tomatoes and courgettes into thin slices.
3
Take out the pastry circles from the oven.
(They may have puffed up quite a bit.)
Spread each pastry circle with about 5ml (1 level tsp) pesto sauce.
Arrange slices of tomato and courgette overlapping on top of each circle and season well.
Brush with the melted butter mixture.
4
Return to the oven for 10–12min or until the tomatoes and courgettes have softened and the edges of the pastry are puffed and golden brown.
Serve immediately sprinkled with freshly grated Parmesan.
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 320kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
(See Star Guide , page 132)
ROLLED PLAICE WITH SMOKED SALMON
Ask the fishmonger to skin the plaice fillets for you.
Smoked salmon trout works just as well as salmon.
6 large plaice fillets, about 125g (4oz) each, skinned
125g (4oz) smoked salmon
juice of 1 lemon
black pepper
100ml (4fl oz) dry white wine
Light Leed Sauce to serve (see right)
1
Cut the plaice fillets in half lengthways.
Cut the smoked salmon into strips approximately the same size as the plaice.
2
Lay the plaice on a board skinned side up and place a strip of salmon on  top, patching with more salmon, if this becomes necessary.
Squeeze a little lemon juice over each portion and grind over plenty of black pepper.
Roll up each fillet carefully.
3
Pour the wine into a flameproof casserole and add the rolls of fish in an even layer, seam side down.
(The wine will just cover the base of the casserole.)
Cover with a lid or foil.
4
Bring to the boil and leave to simmer gently for about 10min.
5
Using a slotted spoon, carefully lift the fish rolls onto a warmed serving platter.
6
Carefully strain the cooking liquor into the Light Leek Sauce and spoon a little of the sauce over the fish.
Serve the remainder of it separately.
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 154kcals per serving; fat***; saturated fat****; fibre*; added sugar****
LIGHT LEEK SAUCE
450g (1lb) leeks
40g (1½oz) butter
1 bunch watercress
60ml (4tbsp) dry vermouth
284ml (10fl oz) single cream
450ml (¾ pint) fish stock
salt and pepper
1
Roughly chop the leeks.
Melt the butter, add the leeks.
Melt the butter, add the leeks.
Cover and cook for 5–6min until they are very soft but not brown.
Roughly chop the watercress and stir into the pan.
Cook for 3–4min.
Cool slightly.
2
Place in a processor with the vermouth, blend for 1min.
Add single cream and stock, season; blend again.
3
Place in a saucepan, strain in the reserved liquor; warm and serve.
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 175kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre***; added sugar****
CRISP VEGETABLE BAKE
900g (2lb) potatoes
salt and pepper
50g (2oz) butter
450g (1lb) cabbage
450g (1lb) carrots
1
Peel and chop the potatoes.
Cook in boiling, salted water until tender.
Drain well and mash, beating in 25g (1oz) butter.
2
Finely chop the cabbage and cook in boiling, salted water until just tender.
Drain well.
3
Peel and roughly grate the carrots.
Stir the cabbage and carrots into the potato.
Season to taste.
4
Brush an edged baking sheet with the remaining butter.
Spread on the vegetable mixture to a depth of about 1cm (½in).
5
Cook at 230°C (450°F) mark 8 for 40–45min, or until quite crisp on top.
If necessary, brown under a hot grill for a few min to crisp further before cutting into squares to serve.
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 225kcals per serving; fat***; saturated fat**; fibre****; added sugar****
GLAZED LEMON PUDDINGS WITH WARM CREAM SAUCE
There are quite a few ingredients in this recipe, but it is very easy to make.
For the puddings
3 eggs
165g (5½oz) caster sugar
65g (2½oz) butter, melted
75g (3oz) flaked almonds
25g (1oz) desiccated coconut
grated rind of 1 lemon
175ml (6fl oz) lemon juice
175ml (6fl oz) milk
50g (2oz) plain white flour
For the sauce
450ml (15fl oz) single cream
grated rind of 2 lemons
50g (2oz) caster sugar
sliced pears, starfruit and grapes to decorate
1
Grease the base-line six 150ml (¼ pint) ramekin dishes
2
Place all the pudding ingredients in a food processor and blend for 1 min.
Pour into the prepared dishes and bake at 180°C (350°F) mark 5 for 45min, or until a light golden colour and firm to the touch.
3
Meanwhile, place the sauce ingredients in a heavy-based saucepan and bring to the boil.
Boil for about 5min, or until the sauce has thickened slightly.
4
To serve, turn out the puddings onto individual, heatproof serving plates and add a few pieces of fruit to decorate.
Spoon over a little of the sauce.
Grill for 2–3min, or until lightly glazed.
Serve with the remaining sauce.
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 550kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar*
COUNTDOWN
The day before:
Make the Light Leek Sauce to the end of stage 2.
Cool, cover and refrigerate.
Prepare the potatoes, cabbage and  carrots for the Crisp Vegetable Bake to the end of stage 3.
Cool, pack in polythene bags and refrigerate.
Prepare the spring-onion and butter mixture for the Pizzettas, cover and refrigerate.
Slice the tomatoes and courgettes.
Place on a flat plate, cover and refrigerate.
Prepare the cauliflower, if using, and refrigerate.
On the day
In the morning: Cut out pastry circles for the Pizzettas, cover and refrigerate.
Prepare the plaice to the end of stage 2, cover and refrigerate.
Make the sauce for Glazed Lemon Puddings, cool, cover and refrigerate.
6pm:Preheat the oven to 180°C (350°F) mark 4.
Make the Glazed Lemon Puddings to the end of stage 2.
Set aside in a cool place.
6.45pm:Prepare the fruits for the Glazed Lemon Puddings, cover and refrigerate.
Raise oven temperature to 230°C (450°F) mark 8.
7.15pm:Cook the vegetable bake, cover loosely and keep warm, if necessary.
7.30pm:Complete and bake the batch of Pizzettas.
7.50pm:Cook the Rolled Plaice With Smoked Salmon.
Gently reheat the Light Leek Sauce with the cooking liquor.
Steam the cauliflower with artichoke hearts, if using, then stir in the black olives just before serving.
8pm:Serve the meal.
Gently warm the sauce for the Glazed Lemon Puddings and complete stage 4 just before serving.
WINES WITH THE FOOD
Chosen by GH Wine Editor Jane MacQuitty
This month's delicious dinner party is just right for fraught festive days — and as end-of-the-year budgets are likely to be tight, none of the wines the GH team chose is expensive.
The Pezzetta starter deserves a good, ordinary Italian white wine to go with it, that could also double up as an apéritif.
The GH team's best choice was the fresh, lively, apricot fruit of Tesco's '90 Sicilian Nuragus di Cagliari from Dolianova, priced at £3.19.
Waitrose stocks a similar wine under its ‘89 Nuragus di Cagliari label (£2.99).
One of these would also make an inexpensive house white for those looking for all-purpose festive bottles.
Plaice with smoked salmon, garnished with a fine, peppery leek and watercress sauce is a full-flavoured, main-course dish that went down especially well with Henry Lindeman's Sémillon-Chardonnay from south-east Australia (Spar, £3.99; Peter Dominic and Bottoms Up, £4.99).
This fine New World wine had all the ripe, buttery, bouncy flavours needed by the fish, and some of the GH team felt that Tesco's ‘89 Domaine de Collin Rozier Chardonnay with its more restrained appley style would also suit it (Tesco, £3.99).
You could, at a pinch, also serve either with the Pizzettas.
Glazed Lemon Puddings, spiked with coconut and almonds, and served with a strong lemon-zest sauce, merited an equally positive pudding wine.
Australia again provided the answer with Mitchelton's elegant and keenly-priced ‘89 Late Picked Muscat (Tesco, £4.19), whose rich, sweet flavours were just the ticket.
Next month: A complete freeze-ahead supper for six
If you would like to hear another Dinner Party Menu of the Month with a quick Countdown, phone 0839–666 254.
Calls are charged at 36p per min cheap rate; 48p per min at all other times.
Delicate portions of Rolled Plaice With Smoked Salmon make a marvellous main course, served with a peppery Light Leek Sauce and accompanied by Crisp Vegetable Bake (centre) and a dish of cauliflower with artichoke hearts and black olives (front)
Just one Pizzetta…this is a simple and attractive starter, made from ready-to-roll puff pastry spread with pesto sauce, and topped with slices of courgette and tomato
This would make a fabulous finale to any dinner party.
Glazed Lemon Puddings With Warm Cream Sauce look sophisticated, but are quick to make in the food processor
Simple & DELICIOUS
One of the best-loved cheeses on everyone's tables — for starters and salads, snacks and family favourite hot dishes — Dutch Edam is ready for anything
Dutch Edam is well known and much loved in Britain for its mild flavour and appeal on the cheeseboard — so much so that its versatility for use in cooking is sometimes forgotten.
For a cheese that is mild and firm, yet tasty with bread or biscuits, Dutch Edam is often the first choice.
It will be on the shopping list when there are young children in the family, because they find the cheerful red rind appealing.
And it is ideal for those who want to watch their weight without forgoing flavour as it is lower in calories than most popular hard cheeses.
However, now is the time to discover ways of creating simple and delicious dishes with Dutch Edam, such as our Carrot and Butter Bean Souffles — a stunning starter for a dinner party the Chicken and Edam Salad; a light and healthy lunch dish, and the Creamy Scrambled Eggs and Nut and Cheese Potatoes for warming winter snacks or suppers.
QUICK CHICKEN AND EDAM SALAD
125g (4oz) smoked chicken
2 sticks celery
125g (4oz) Dutch Edam
1 crisp red eating apple
60ml (4tbsp) oil
10ml (2tsp) white wine vinegar
30ml (2 level tbsp) soured cream
15ml (1 level tbsp) chopped fresh parsley
25g (1oz) toasted pecan nuts or walnuts
salt and pepper
mixed green salad to accompany
1
Skin the chicken if necessary, cut into bite-sized pieces.
2
Thickly slice the celery; coarsely grate the cheese; halve, core and roughly chop the apple.
3
Place the chicken, celery, cheese and apple in a large bowl.
Add all the other ingredients and toss well.
Adjust seasoning, cover and refrigerate for at least 10–15min before serving with a mixed green salad.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 4
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 600kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar****
CREAMY SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH EDAM
4 rashers smoked back bacon
4 eggs
30ml (2 tbsp) double cream
salt and pepper
butter
50g (2oz) Dutch Edam, grated
2 wholemeal muffins
1
Grill the bacon.
Meanwhile, whisk together the eggs and cream and season, remembering the bacon will be quite salty.
2
.
Heat 25g (1oz) butter in a small saucepan, pour in the egg mixture and cook, stirring continuously, over a low heat until the eggs are just setting.
Stir in the cheese and continue to cook until the eggs are lightly set.
3
Meanwhile, split and toast the muffins.
Spread with butter if wished.
4
To serve, place a rasher of bacon on each muffin half.
Top with the scrambled egg and serve immediately.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 2 TO 4
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 500kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre*; added sugar****
NUT AND CHEESE POTATOES
2 large baking potatoes
2 sticks celery
25g (1oz) salted peanuts
75g (3oz) Dutch Edam, grated
30ml (2 level tbsp) natural yoghurt
30ml (2 tbsp) milk
25g (1oz) butter
salt and pepper
1 egg, separated
1
Scrub the potatoes and bake until tender.
2
Roughly chop the celery and peanuts.
3
Halve the potatoes, scoop out the flesh and mash with the yogurt, milk, butter and seasoning.
Stir in the celery, peanuts, Edam and egg yolk.
4
Whisk the egg white until stiff but not dry and fold into the potato mixture.
Pile back into the potato shells, then bake in the oven at 220°C (450°F) Gas mark 7 for about 20min.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 2
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 580kcals per serving; fat*; saturated fat*; fibre**; added sugar****
CARROT AND BUTTER BEAN SOUFFLES
450g (1 lb) carrots, sliced
salt and pepper
30ml (2 tbsp) oil
15ml (1 level tbsp) plain flour
425g (15oz) can butter beans
75g (3oz) Dutch Edam, grated
3 eggs separated
30ml (2 level tbsp) chopped fresh coriander
1
Cook the carrots in boiling salted water for 10–20 min until very soft.
Drain, reserving 150ml (¼ pint) of the cooking water.
2
Heat the oil in a saucepan.
Add the flour and cook, stirring for 1 min.
Add the reserved liquor and bring to the boil, stirring.
Simmer for 2 min.
3
Place the carrots, sauce, butter beans, Edam and egg yolks in a food processor.
Blend and season well.
Turn into a bowl and fold in the whisked egg whites.
4
Spoon into four 450ml (15fl oz) greased ovenproof dishes.
Bake at 200°C (400°F) Gas mark 6 for 20–25 min or until golden and just firm to the touch.
NOT SUITABLE FOR FREEZING SERVES 4
NUTRITIONAL DATA: 318kcals per serving; fat**; saturated fat***; fibre****; added sugar****
GHI Debrett's
Questions of ETIQUETTE
Season's greetings from John and Jane or is it Jane and John?
Are fish knives passé?
Debrett's has the answers
Q
It usually falls to me to sign the Christmas cards from my husband and myself, so whose name should I put first — his or mine?
Also, when you are addressing an envelope to a man alone, would you use Mr or Esq?
A
It is still more usual for the husband's name to come first when signing Christmas cards, eg John and Jane rather than Jane and John, and the surname should be added if they are being sent to slight acquaintances.
However, if the cards are for the wife's relations or childhood friends, it would be more natural to put her name first.
Whether you use Mr or Esq is a matter of personal preference.
Older people still tend to use Esq, but it is becoming less widespread, and it's now hardly ever seen in America, Canada, Australia or New Zealand.
Q
I have often read that the use of fish knives is considered passé, and that they have never been used by the aristocracy.
However, since most exclusive restaurants seem to use them, what is the correct form?
A
Fish knives and forks were invented when electroplating became common in the last century, before the manufacture of stainless steel.
Plain steel cutlery was discoloured by fish, but as the upper classes always used solid-silver forks, this was no problem and they divided their fish with two silver forks.
Fish knives were therefore only used by the middle and lower classes, and in this way it was considered non-U.
The late Nancy Mitford blew it out of all proportion by her ‘snobbish’(often tongue-incheek) writings, which have been taken far too seriously by many.
So, if you have nice fish knives, or if they are provided in a private house or restaurant, use them!
Q
My wife and I divorced 12 years ago — and she has since remarried.
After some bitterness, we are all now on friendly terms.
Our daughter is soon to be married and I shall be giving her away, but she would like both her stepfather and myself to speak at the reception.
What would be the best way to do this?
A
You should speak first, as your daughter's natural father, and when you have finished, you could then say, ‘I will now pass you over to Ted, Mary's stepfather’.
Q
We have an active social life and often go out to dinners or parties given by couples like ourselves, in their 30s or 40s.
Now that we are a little more prosperous, the habit of bringing a bottle seems to have dropped off.
I know that some people look a bit surprised if you turn up with a bottle, but others are disappointed if you don't.
What would you recommend?
A
This is one to play by ear.
If you are visiting old friends, you should know what is acceptable, and can even ask ‘Shall I bring a bottle — white or red?’
When visiting new acquaintances, it is safer to take flowers or chocolates.
When my friends visit me I never feel insulted by what they bring, nor if they come empty-handed.
I'm just pleased to see them.
Q
It seems general practice to address a widow by her own Christian name and not her late husband's — viz Mrs Joan Smith, not Mrs Ronald Smith.
I thought I'd read in Debrett's Etiquette that the latter form was still correct and that Mrs Joan Smith denoted a divorcée.
I've told recently widowed friends that this is the position.
Please could you give a ruling.
I always find it so sad that a dearly loved husband's name should be discarded immediately.
A
It is correct to address widows by their late husband's names, although 50 or more years ago, it was customary to address them by their own Christian names.
However, the great increase in the number of divorces has now occasioned a stricter adherence to the correct usage, in order to avoid confusion between a widow and a divorcée.
DAVID WILLIAMSON,Senior Editor at Debrett's, has agreed to answer GH readers' questions on anything concerning etiquette, genealogy or correct form.
Send your letters marked ‘Debrett's’ to GH, 72 Broadwick St, London W1V 2BP 
GH fiction
Long live the Queen
By Ruth Rendell
When Anna accidentally ran over the cat, its strange owner had demanded compensation.
But when Anna refused, little did she realise the true price of revenge
PART 2
Although no note awaited her on the doorstep, no letter came and there were no phone calls, Anna knew the cat woman would come back on the following evening.
Richard had advised her to go to the police if any threats were made.
There would be no need to tell them she had been driving very fast.
Anna thought the whole idea of going to the police bizarre.
She rang up her friend Kate and told her all about it and Kate agreed that telling the police would be going too far.
The battered red car arrived at 7pm, Maria Yackle was dressed as she had been for her previous visit, but because it was rather cold, wore a jacket made of synthetic fur as well.
From its harsh too-shiny texture there was no doubt it was synthetic but from a distance it looked like a black cat's pelt.
She had brought an album of photographs of her cats for Anna to see.
Anna looked through it — what else could she do?
Some were recognisably of those she had seen through the windows.
Those that were not, she supposed might be of animals now at rest under the wooden crosses in Maria Yackle's back garden.
While she was looking at the pictures, Griselda, Anna's mother's cat, came in and jumped on to the cat woman's lap.
They're very nice, very interesting,’ Anna said.
‘I can see you're devoted to your cats.’
‘They're my life.’
A little humouring might be in order.
‘When is the funeral to be?’
‘I thought on Friday.
Two o'clock on Friday.
My sister will be there with her two cats.
Cats don't usually take to car travel, that's why I don't often take any of mine with me, and shutting them up in cages goes against the grain, but my sister's two Burmese love the car, they'll go and sit in the car when it parked.
My friend from the Animal Rescue will come if she can get away and I've asked our vet but I don't hold out much hope there.
He has his goat clinic on Fridays.
I hope you'll come along.’
‘I'm afraid I'll be at work.’
‘It's no flowers by request.
Donations to the Cats’ Protection League instead.
Any sum, no matter how small, gratefully received.
Which brings me to money.
You've got a check for me.’
‘No, I haven't, Mrs Yackle.’
‘Miss.
And it's Yacob.
J, A, K, O, B. You've got a cheque for me for £799.’
‘I'm not giving you any money, Miss Jakob.
I'm very sorry about your cat, about Melusina, I know how fond you were of her, but giving you compensation is out of the question.
I'm sorry.’
The tears had come once more into Maria Jakob's eyes, had spilled over.
Her face contorted with misery.
It was the mention of the wretched thing's name.
Anna thought.
That  was the trigger that started the weeping.
A tear splashed on to one of the coarse red hands.
Griselda opened her eyes and licked up the tear.
Maria Jakob pushed her other hand across her eyes.
She blinked.
‘We'll have to think of something else then,’ she said.
‘I beg your pardon?’
Anna wondered if she had really heard right.
Things couldn't be solved so simply.
‘We shall have to think of something else.
A way for you to make up to me for murder.’
‘Look, I will give a donation to the Cats’ Protection League.
I'm quite prepared to give them — say £20.’
Richard would be furious but perhaps she would not tell Richard.
‘I'll give it to you, shall I, and then you can pass it on to them?’
‘I certainly hope you will.
Especially if you can't come to the funeral.’
That was the end of it then.
Anna felt a great sense of relief.
It was only now that it was over that she realised quite how it had got to her.
It had actually kept her from sleeping properly.
She phoned Kate and told her about the funeral and the goat clinic and Kate laughed and said, poor old thing.
Anna slept so well that night that she did not notice the arrival of Griselda who, when she woke, was asleep on the pillow next to her face, but out of touching distance.
Richard phoned and she told him about it, omitting the part about her offer of a donation.
He told her that being firm, sticking to one's guns in situations of this kind, always paid off.
In the evening she wrote a cheque for £20, but instead of the Cats' Protection League, made it out to Maria Jakob.
If the cat woman quietly held on to it, no harm would be done.
Anna went down the road to post her letter, for she had written a letter to accompany the cheque, in which she reiterated her sorrow about the death of the cat and added that if there was anything she could do, Miss Jakob had only to let her know.
Richard would have been furious.
Unlike the Jakob cats, Griselda spent a good deal of time out of doors.
She was often out all evening and did not reappear until the small hours, so that it was not until the next day, not until the next evening, that Anna began to be alarmed at her absence.
As far as she knew, Griselda had never been away so long before.
For herself she was unconcerned, she had never liked the cat, did not particularly like any cats, and found this one obnoxiously self-centred and cold.
It was for her mother, who unaccountably loved the creature, that she worried.
She walked up and down the street, calling Griselda, though the cat had never been known to come when it was called.
It did not come now.
Anna walked up and down the next street, calling, and around the block and further afield.
She halfexpected to find Griselda's body, guessing that it might have met with the same fate as Melusina.
Hadn't she read somewhere that nearly 40,000 cats are killed on British roads annually?
On Saturday morning she wrote one of those melancholy lost cat notices and attached it to a lamp standard, wishing she had a photograph.
But her mother had taken no photographs of Griselda.
Richard took her to a friend's party and afterwards, when they were driving home, he said, ‘You know what's happened, don't you?
It's been killed by that old mad woman.
An eye for an eye.
A cat for a cat.’
‘Oh, no, she wouldn't do that.
She loves cats.’
‘Murderers love people.
They just don't love the people they murder.’
‘I'm sure your wrong,’ said Anna, but she remembered how Maria Jakob had said that if the money was not forthcoming she must think of something else, a way to make up to her for Melusina's death, and she had not meant a donation to the Cats' Protection League.
‘What shall I do?’
‘I don't see that you can do anything.
It's most unlikely you could prove it, she'll have seen to that.
You can look at it this way, she's had her pound of flesh…‘
‘Some pound of flesh,’ said Anna.
Griselda had been a large, heavy cat.
‘OK, 15 lb.
She's had that, she's had her revenge, it hasn't actually caused you any grief, you'll just have to make up some story for your mother.’
Anna's mother was upset but nowhere near as upset as Maria Jakob had been over the death of Melusina.
To avoid too much fuss, Anna had gone further than she intended, told her mother that she had seen Griselda's corpse and talked to the offending motorist who had been very distressed.
A month or so later Anna's mother got a kitten, a grey tabby tom kitten, who was very affectionate from the start, sat on her lap, purred loudly when stroked and snuggled up in her arms, though Anna was sure her mother had not stopped having baths or using perfume.
So much for the Jakob theories.
Nearly a year had gone by before she again drove down the road where Maria Jakob's house was.
She had not intended to go that way.
She had been given directions to a smallholding where they sold early strawberries on a roadside stall but she must have missed her way, taken a wrong turning and come out here.
If Maria Jakob's car had been parked in the front she would not have stopped.
There was no garage for it to be in, it was not outside, therefore the cat woman must be out.
Anna thought of the funeral she had not been to, she had often thought about it, the strange people and strange cats who attended it.
In each of the bay windows sat a cat, a tortoiseshell and a brown tabby.
The black cat was eyeing her from upstairs.
Anna did not go to the front door but round the back.
There, among the long grass, as she had expected, were four graves instead of three, four wooden crosses and on the fourth was printed in black gloss paint:Melusina, the Queen of the Cats, murdered in her sixth year.
RIP .
That ‘murdered’ did not please Anna.
It brought back all the resentment at unjust accusations of 11 months before.
She felt much older, she felt wiser.
One thing was certain, ethics or no ethics, if she ever ran over a cat again she'd drive on, the last thing she would do was go and confess.
She came round the side of the house and looked in at the bay window.
If the tortoiseshell had still been on the windowsill she probably would not have looked in, but the tortoiseshell had removed itself to the hearth rug.
A white cat and the marmalade and white lay curled up side by side in an armchair.
The portrait of Melusina hung above the fireplace and this year's cat calendar was up on the left-hand wall.
Light gleamed on the china cats' gilt whiskers and between them, in the empty space that was no longer vacant, sat Griselda.
Griselda was sitting in the queen's place in the middle of the mantlepiece.
She sat in the sphinx position, with her eyes closed.
Anna tapped on the glass and Griselda opened her eyes, stared with cold indifference and closed them again.
The queen is dead, long live the queen!
GH advertising index
FREE READER'S SERVICE
Please leave the other coupon for a friend
In the boxes provided write the codes of the advertisement in which you are interested (letters printed in bold to the left of the advertiser's name).
One code per box only.
Complete the coupon, cut out and send to Good Housekeeping , PO Box 50, FREEPOST, Bromley, Kent BR2 9TT .
This service is restricted to residents in the UK and is valid only for three months from the month of issue.
*Against name indicates that the advertisers are offering samples or booklets where money or stamps are required; please write direct to the advertiser.
For enquiries about editorial about editorial subjects please see page 4- do not use this coupon.
NAME MISS/MS/MRS/MR ADDRESS POSTCODE JANUARY — valid until 31 March 1992  
ON SALE 6 JANUARY
Next month in GOOD HOUSEKEEPING
HERE'S TO 1992, a very special year.
We celebrate 70 fabulous years of GH, congratulate The Queen on 40 glorious years and pledge with Princess Anne to make this a successful year for our charity, Victim Support
LOOK GREAT in wonderfully wearable designer fashions at affordable prices, make-up that's custom-made for you and underwear that really fits your shape.
Plus…don't miss the launch of our sensational Slim Plan — GH's tried and tested diet for the 90s
LOOK FORWARD to food with zest appeal, meals to make ahead and accessories to transform your home
LOOK OUT: why everyone's talking about John Cleese.
And spy on the life of a Hollywood wife 
your horoscope
CAPRICORN WOMAN
Uranus and Neptune are still very powerful influences for many of you.
You have, by nature, a great deal of common sense, and should life become unexpectedly eventful of confusing, the important thing is to meet things head on with Capricornian determination, and always with an eye to the long-term future.
You'll make particularly good progress with any intellectually demanding projects, especially if they involve in-depth study; and between now and next October, Jupiter suggests you embark on a wonderfully exciting and adventurous long-distance journey.
CAPRICORN
21 December-19 January
During January, six planets are visiting your sign, so to say that life's likely to be busy, fun and demanding for the next few months is an understatement.
Mars is among this galaxy, so from the 9th you'll have plenty of extra energy to help you cope.
GH Starline: 0839–666 984
AQUARIUS
20 January-18 February
Avoid stressful situations, especially if they involve other people and really have nothing to do with you.
Take extra care of yourself, since planetary activity is working against you.
The good news: your financial situation could be better than expected.
GH Starline: 0839–666 985
PISCES
19 February-20 March
You should make excellent progress during the first week of the New Year.
If you're thinking about improving your lifestyle, don't be put off by a well-meaning person who may try to get you to change your mind — especially on or around the 19th.
GH Starline: 0839–666 986
ARIES
21 March-20 April
When you get to work after Christmas the pressure will be on — and while a lot of tension may build up, it won't necessarily be negative.
Concentrate on big issues and the broad outlines of projects.
In this way you'll be setting the pattern for 1992.
GH Starline: 0839–666 975
TAURUS
21 April-20 May
As the New Year gets under way, any doubts or fears which may have been bothering you will clear, and you'll feel more optimistic.
The planets are presently influencing you in a positive way, and you'll become more confident about the months ahead.
GH Starline: 0839–666 976
GEMINI
21 May-20 June
Make some New Year resolutions!
If you smoke, give it up; vow to think first before buying anything expensive; and look at your finances for the future — will you be secure when you're older?
This way, you'll be able to enjoy life in true Geminian style.
GH Starline: 0839–666 977
CANCER
21 June-21 July
You've had a hectic few weeks, and the pace is not going to let up now.
Are you getting support from your partner and family?
If not, speak out — don't let them get away without doing their share.
Think of yourself on the 19th (the day of the full Moon).
GH Starline: 0839–666 978
LEO
22 July-21 August
You need a tonic — but that doesn't necessarily mean visiting the doctor!
Think about what does you most good and go for it.
If it's long days in the sun, cheer up — the shortest day is past and holiday brochures follow the January sales.
GH Starline: 0839–666 979
VIRGO
22 August-21 September
This year — 1992 — should be your year.
With Jupiter travelling through your Sun sign, you're into a progressive phase, and this month you should start to move forward.
Take action to further your ambitions and be sure to set your sights high.
GH Starline: 0839–666 980
LIBRA
22 September-22 October
Problems with the younger or older generation — or both — will annoy you.
Try not to dwell on these too much, especially round the 4th and 19th, when the Moon's influence could cause you to overreact.
Resolution will come after the 20th.
GH Starline: 0839–666 981
SCORPIO
23 October-21 November
It's not always easy for you to talk your problems through, but if there's something bothering you, it might be a good idea to open up to someone who can help.
As a result, you'll be in a better frame of mind to meet what 1992 has in store.
GH Starline: 0839–666 982
SAGITTARIUS
22 November-20 December
Most of the solar system seems intent to hurl you into 1992 with the greatest éan.
As a result, your Sagittarian optimism and enthusiasm are high.
There's a lively accent on finance; but don't be too extravagant.
Enjoy January: work hard, play hard!
GH Starline: 0839–666 983
JULIA PARKER, is coauthor of Parkers' Astrology
Calls to GH Starlines are 36p per min cheap rate; 48p per min