

Europe against Cancer
A code for living
10 POINT EUROPEAN CODE AGAINST CANCER
Europe against cancer
‘Europe against cancer’ is a campaign aimed at reducing the number of deaths from cancer by 15% by the year 2000.
It has the support of all those active in the fight against cancer throughout the European Community — cancer specialists and general practitioners, the cancer charities, health and educations authorities, and other organisations concerned with the health of the public.
A code for living
Cancer is a disease which starts with a change in one of the body's many millions of cells.
This then multiplies and can spread through the body often affecting vital organs.
We do not know yet what causes a cell to become cancerous but scientists believe that most causes are linked with our environments and how we live.
In this country, one in every three people will develop cancer at some time in their lives.
Most of these cases will occur in people over the age of 60.
But cancer may take decades to develop, and we know that if we are prepared to make certain changes in how we live, we can help to protect ourselves.
Although there is no way of guaranteeing we will not develop cancer, the European code against cancer summarises in 10 points the practical advice that can help reduce our risk of developing certain types.
If after you have read this leaflet, you would like more information, the Health Education Authority has published a free booklet ‘Can you avoid cancer?; a guide to reducing your risks’ which should be available through your public library, your GP, health clinic or local health education unit or cancer society.
CERTAIN CANCERS MAY BE AVOIDED
1 Do not smoke.
Smokers, stop as quickly as possible and do not smoke in the presence of others.
Cigarette smoking causes a third of all cancer deaths.
At least 90% of lung cancers are due to smoking.
Smoking also increases the risk of cancer of the mouth, voicebox, gullet, bladder and cervix.
The longer someone smokes the more dangerous it becomes; the good news is that the risk begins to fall as soon as you stop smoking.
2 Moderate your consumption of alcoholic drinks, beers, wines or spirits.
Drinking too much alcohol has been linked to about 3% of cancers, specially those of the mouth, voice-box, gullet and liver.
The risk is even higher if you smoke and drink heavily.
A sensible limit is two or three pints of beer, or four or five glasses of wine or measures of spirit two or three times a week — less if you are a woman.
3 Avoid excessive exposure to the sun.
Too much sun can cause skin cancer, so remember to protect your skin in the sun, especially during holidays abroad in hot countries.
Tan slowly, avoid sunburn and use sun filter creams and lotions — lots and often.
You should take special care if you are fair-haired or have a skin which tends to burn in the sun.
4 Follow health and safety instructions at work concerning production, handling or use of any substance which may cause cancer.
There are a number of chemicals and processes in the workplace that can cause cancer.
These include asbestos, vinyl chloride, some wood dusts, some types of tar and soot, some chemical dye stuffs and radiation.
They are strictly controlled by Health and Safety Regulations and if you are in any doubt about health risks at work, talk to your works doctor or health and safety representative.
Your general health will benefit from the following two points of the code, which may also reduce the risk of some cancers.
5 Frequently eat fresh fruits and vegetables and cereals with high fibre content.
There is some evidence that foods rich in pro-vitamin A and vitamin C may give protection against cancer.
Most fruit and vegetables contain these vitamins and vitamin A is also present in fish.
Food containing fibre may protect against cancer of the bowel.
Fibre is found in fresh fruit and vegetables but mostly in wholegrain cereals and bread.
These vitamins and fibre are best obtained through natural food.
6 Avoid becoming overweight and limit your intake of fatty foods
Some cancers are associated with extreme overweight.
Eating a lot of meat, butter and dairy products may give a higher risk of breast and bowel cancer as well as other problems such as coronary heart disease.
Eat lean meat and try fish, chicken or rabbit instead of red meat.
Bake, grill or microwave instead of frying.
Use skimmed or semi skimmed milk.
Regular exercise and a sensible diet will help keep your weight down and reduce the risk.
MORE CANCERS WILL BE CURED IF DETECTED EARLY
7 See a doctor if you notice a lump, or observe a change in a mole, or abnormal bleeding
Many common cancers can be successfully treated if detected early.
A lump, abnormal bleeding or a change in a wart or mole are not necessarily symptoms of cancer, but they should be checked out, so consult your doctor without delay and avoid unnecessary worry.
8 See a doctor if you have persistent problems, such as a persistent cough, a persistent hoarseness, a change in bowel habits or an unexplained weight loss.
It sounds obvious that if there is an unexplained change in your normal health, you should see a doctor.
In reality it's all too easy to carry on and hope it will go away.
Few symptoms are likely to be caused by cancer, but whatever the real cause the sooner you act, the better.
FOR GUMS FOR TEETH FOR LIFE!
Pharmacy Healthcare
Many people today are adopting a healthy lifestyle.
This includes having a balanced and nutritious diet and good personal hygiene.
The message that prevention is better than cure applies just as much to dental problems as it applies to heart disease.
Preventing dental and gum disease will not only make your visits to the dentist more pleasant, but will mean that your mouth feels fresher and you can have a bright smile.
You keep your teeth for life and it doesn't take much to work towards this goal — just follow the advice given in this leaflet.
Keep your gums healthy
Healthy gums should never bleed.
They are pale pink, in dark skinned races they can be pigmented, and they are firmly attached to the teeth.
Unhealthy gums are a little swollen, red looking and bleed when you brush them.
Plaque is a thin, sticky bacterial coating on the teeth which, if not brushed off thoroughly, will continue to thicken at the gum margin (the area between the gum and the tooth).
The bacteria will then start to attack the gums causing them to swell and bleed.
This is known as gingivitis.
Most adults at one time or another suffer from bleeding gums.
You may see traces of blood when you brush your teeth.
It may vary from just around one tooth, to a whole section of your mouth and is not usually painful.
If you do notice blood, don't stop brushing.
Brush more gently for a few days until the gums become healthy again.
It is easy to see, then, that with a good brushing method you can clear up this condition and prevent gum disease.
Some toothpastes are specially made to help keep your gums healthy, as they contain ingredients which fight bacteria.
These ingredients continue to work after the toothpaste is rinsed away, as they are able to cling to the teeth and gums and remain in the saliva for some time.
Mouthwashes
Most mouthwashes just freshen the breath.
Some contain chlorhexidine which may help fight plaque bacteria.
If you use a chlorhexidine mouthwash regularly, this can sometimes stain your teeth.
The toothbrush is important
The type of toothbrush you use is important.
Look for one with medium/soft texture nylon bristles (multitufted) in a small head, so that you can get between your teeth and right to the back of your mouth.
Some brushes are also angled and this can make it easier to reach some of the tooth surfaces, in the more difficult-to-reach places.
Remember that your toothbrush should be regularly replaced, at least twice a year.
Teeth also need protection
Don't forget, too, that teeth are in danger from all the sugars that everyday foods and drinks contain.
Plaque bacteria will act on sugars to form acids which attack the tooth surface.
Undiluted fruit juices are acidic in nature.
If you drink them often, the acid may dissolve the tooth surface.
Just be reasonable with your diet — be aware of what sugary foods and drinks can do to your teeth.
Don't eat or drink too many and don't snack on them during the day.
If you have a sweet tooth, it is much better to make them part of a meal.
Look for toothpaste with fluoride which will help to make your teeth more resistant to attack.
In some parts of the country fluoride is added to the water to help prevent tooth decay.
If you need extra fluoride protection, your pharmacist can advise you about fluoride tablets and drops.
Once again, you should use a good toothbrushing method and if you use dental floss or tape between the teeth, you will reach any plaque or food particles your brush cannot reach.
Ask your dentist or dental hygienist for advice on using floss.
If you have any queries your pharmacist will be pleased to give advice and may also suggest that you visit your dentist.
See your dentist
Regular checkups with the dentist are essential for everybody.
A visit every 6 or 12 months will help to spot problems before they become serious.
With children it is important to start this routine at an early age.
This leaflet is sponsored by Gibbs Dental Division and is available from all pharmacies through the Pharmacy Health Care Scheme.
This leaflet is intended as a guide to simple ways of looking after your mouth.
If you have any queries about oral hygiene your Pharmacist will be pleased to give advice and may also suggest that you visit your dentist.
Gibbs Dental Division pharmacy healthcare
BBC Radio Two Home Check
Your Radio 2 guide to safety in the home
All lit up?
Are stairways, halls and entrances well lit?
Are they free from tripping hazards?
Have you installed a smoke alarm (ideal at the top and bottom of stairs?)
Don't be floored
All floor covering non-slip, secure and in good condition?
Does the stairway have securely fitted bannisters and handrails?
Do you use proper steps or a step ladder to reach things in high places?
Cleaning up
Are household chemicals, like cleaning products, stored safely and out of reach and sight of children?
Check that household chemicals are in their original containers and have not been decanted, especially into drink bottles.
Taking the medicine
Keep tablets and liquid medicines out of reach and sight of children.
If any is left over, flush down the toilet or take back to your pharmacist.
By the fireside
Are all fires fitted with secure fireguards?
Are all gas appliances serviced at least once a year by a CORGI (Confederation for the Registration of Gas Installers) registered engineer?
Are chimneys swept once a year?
Is there good ventilation, free of any blockages, to prevent the build-up of carbon monoxide gas from gas, oil and solid fuel heaters?
Are portable heaters kept away from busy areas where they might be knocked over?
Are all flammable materials, including waste paper, kept away from fires?
A plug for safety
Are all plugs and sockets in good condition, undamaged, no loose wires, correctly fused, etc?
Are all flexes in good condition and carefully positioned to avoid tripping hazards?
Are all sockets or your mains unit covered by an RCD to give added protection?
An RCD, residual current device, cuts off the current when there is a fault.
Child's play?
Are all matches, razor blades and sharp implements out of reach?
Are kettle flexes, irons and saucepan handles kept out of reach of children when in use?
Are stairgates fitted and secure; at top and bottom of stairs where possible?
Do you stay with the baby at all times when he or she is in the bath?
Windows and doors
Are they easy opening for escape?
Are windows and doors secure when children are about?
If safety glass used in glazed doors and low level windows.
DIY dangers
Are garden chemicals stored safely and tools in good repair?
Do you have, and wear, proper safety equipment such as goggles, boots, gloves, etc when, for example, using power tools?
Bathtime
Is a safety rail fitted near the bath and a non-slip mat in the bath and/or shower?
No electrical appliances in the bathroom!
HINT: every bathtime — test the water temperature and put cold in first.
And so to bed…
Does your electric blanket conform to BS 3456?(look on the label).
Is it in good condition and serviced by the manufacturer every two or three years?
EVERY NIGHT make sure that fires and heaters switched off, ashtrays safely emptied and furniture checked for discarded cigarettes 
WARNING!
NEVER SMOKE IN BED!
CHECK YOUR HOME REGULARLY
A thorough home safety check at least once a year is a good idea.
Use the spaces below to remind you when checks need to be carried out.
Annual check
Gas serviced/chimney swept
Electric wiring checked
Smoke alarms tested
Electric blanket serviced
RCD (Residual Current Device) checked
Home check Give your home a check up
Every year around 5000 people are killed and some 3 million more need medical treatment as a result of accidents in the home.
Children and older people are particularly vulnerable.
Most of these accidents could have been avoided by just a few minutes extra care.
You can avoid accidents in and around you home be taking just a little time to check up on your surroundings.
This leaflet highlights some of the areas you need to look at regularly.
Why not use it today and keep it handy for future checks?
Produced as part of BBC Radio 2's ‘Home Check’ Campaign May 20th-24th 1991
Need more information?
This is just a brief guide.
Your Local Environmental Health Department can provide more detailed information.
For consumer advice relating to product safety, contact your local Trading Standards Officer.
Your local Fire Safety Officer can give you fire safety information.
Produced with the help of Ashley Martin, Home Safety Officer for Peterborough City Council in conjunction with the Consumer Safety Unit, Department of Trade and Industry, and with advice from the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents.
Distributed through pharmacists.
BBC Radio 2 FM for music
LATEST NEWS * LIVE CONCERTS * FAMILIAR TUNES * TOPICAL CONVERSATION * COMEDY SHOWS * TOP CELEBRITIES * FRIENDLY VOICES * MUSICAL MELODIES
WHERE IS RADIO 2 FM ON MY RADIO?
First on the FM dial!
Your radio's FM band may be labelled FM or VHF.
Whatever the label, it will be numbered from about 88 to 100 plus.
Start with 88 and tune slowly.
Before you get to 91 you should have found Radio 2 FM at least once, maybe in two or three places, so pick the one that is clearest.
The frequency varies in different parts of the country.
If you need any more help, the BBC's Engineering Information Department can advise you.
Write to BBC Engineering Information, White City, 201 Wood Lane, London W12 7TS.
Telephone Helpline: 0345 010313.