

Decline and Fall of the ‘British Way of Life’
PRESENT TENSE: MODERATES AND HOOLIGANS
To think this is England (The Sun, 6 July 1981)
People are bound to ask what is happening to our country…
Having been one of the most law-abiding countries in the world — a byword for stability, order, and decency — are we changing into something else?
(The Daily Express, 6 July 1981)
Once upon a time, so the story runs in these characteristic  responses to the summer riots of 1981, violence and disorder were unknown in Britain.
The hallowed traditions of the ‘British way of life’ were founded upon civility, reasonableness and an unquestioning respect for law and authority.
Violence was entirely foreign to the nation and its people who were renowned for fair play,sang froid and the stiff upper lip.
But all that is no more.
Now violence and terror lurk in the once-safe streets.
The family no longer holds its proper place and parents have abandoned their responsibilities.
In the classroom, where once the tidy scholars applied themselves diligently in their neat rows of desks, there is a carnival of disrespect.
The police and magistrates have had their hands tied by the interference of sentimentalists and do-gooders.
A new generation is upon us of mindless bully boys, vandals, muggers, head-bangers, football rowdies, granny-murderers, boot boys, toughs and tearaways who laugh in the face of the law, as we stand before the rising tide of violence and disorder with a Canute-like impotence.
‘Are we the same people that we were thirty, forty, fifty years ago?’
Mr Enoch Powell asked himself only weeks before the riots erupted in the British cities in 1981.
Mr Powell, of course, has not been notably shy about declaring his belief that it is black people who are at the root of the decline and fall of the ‘British way of life’.
In the wake of the riots, while denouncing all sorts of ‘sentiment, wishful-thinking and humbug’,The Daily Mail also saw fit to editorialise on the black community who, it was said, ‘must bear no small responsibility for the fear of the mob that has now returned after a century or more to haunt the cities of this land’.
Mr George Gale, on the other hand, sensed a more general deterioration in manners as the fountain-head of Britain's troubles, while bringing a much abbreviated time-scale to bear on their onset.
‘Over the past twenty years or so’, he announced in a Daily Express front-page splash, ‘there has been a revulsion from authority and discipline…
There has been a permissive revolution…and now we all reap the whirlwind.’
‘Permissive’ Rot: History Lessons without Dates
It was never seriously in dispute, of course, that black and white people alike were caught up in the summer disturbances of 1981.
Nor did it need riots to provoke these swan-songs for the old traditions.
Throughout the 1970s, in a gathering storm of discontent, the same accusations had become a dominant and characteristic feature of the social landscape.
The decline of family life, the lowering of standards in the schools, the ‘permissive’ worm within, the irresponsibility of working mothers and their delinquent ‘latch-key’children, the excessive leniency of the law, and the unwarranted interference of the ‘softy-softy, namby-pamby pussyfooting’of the ‘so-called experts’— these were well trodden avenues of complaint by ‘law-and-order’enthusiasts and ‘anti-permissive’moralists, warning of a vast historical degeneration among the British people.
In 1974, for example, we learned that ‘For the first time in a century and a half, since the great Tory reformer Robert  Peel set up the Metropolitan police areas of our cities are becoming unsafe for peaceful citizens by night, and some even by day’— from no less an authority than that great Tory reformer Sir Keith Joseph.
Warning that ‘the balance of our population, our human stock is threatened’, Keith Joseph sensed truly momentous possibilities of decline.
‘Rome itself fell,’ he reminded us, ‘destroyed from inside.’
‘Are we to be destroyed from inside, too, a country which successfully repelled and destroyed Philip of Spain, Napoleon, the Kaiser, Hitler?’
Tory politicians of the so-called New Right have undoubtedly been the most active in promoting these ways of thinking, and the ‘law-and-order’ question played a major part in Mrs Thatcher's victorious election campaign in 1979.
Rhodes Boyson, the trouble-shooting panjandrum of the new moral conservatism, has been particularly energetic in admonishing the ‘mindless sociologists’ and ‘all that mush’which has corrupted the national character.
‘It has not gone unnoticed,’ said Dr Boyson in 1978, ‘that crime has increased parallel with the number of social workers.’
‘It is equally true,’ countered The Daily Mirror in a spirited editorial response, ‘that crime has increased parallel with speeches form Dr Boyson.’
Senior policemen have also queued up in numbers to deliver their judgements against the decline in public morals, and to warn of the imminent eclipse of the old standards and traditions.
‘The freedom and way of life we have been accustomed to enjoy for so long will vanish’, Kenneth Oxford, Chief Constable of Merseyside, prophesied in 1977; ‘what we are experiencing is not a passing phenomenon but a continuing process of change in our way of life…our customary ways of behaving and our traditional values are being radically modified.’
‘The mindless violence, the personal attacks and injury,’ asserted Philip Knights, President of the Association of Chief Police Officers, ‘and above all the use of violence in all its forms to further political creeds, are relatively new to the streets of this country.’
The allegations that such developments are somehow unprecedented, together with the feeling that they involve a massive historical shift, are entirely typical.
The work of the police, according to Sir  Robert Mark in 1978, now required ‘not only as much physical courage and dedication as policing parts of Victorian London but a great deal more moral courage than has been required by the police at any time since Peel’.
Another senior police officer who more than once captured the headlines, James Anderton, Chief Constable of Greater Manchester, decrying ‘the rot that has now taken a firm hold in the fabric of our society’, was so moved as to describe crime as Britain's ‘Top Growth Industry’.
So too, if we consult the Report of Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary , 1975 (or almost any other year for that matter) we find ourselves assailed within the space of only a few paragraphs with repeated references to  The report was generous enough to remind us that the personal violence over which so much ink had been spilled amounted to less than 4 per cent of known serious crime.
Even so, without pause the report resumed its brooding concern over ‘the apparent relaxation of standards of behaviour’, ‘the lowering of hitherto established values’, ‘the erosion of good standards, which were hitherto commonplace’ and the necessity of ‘reinforcing the values of what as a nation we had believed in for many years’.
‘Without due care’, it was feared that ‘the all too common attitude of self-preservation and the growing general acceptance to do as one pleased without fear of retribution would…lead the country to anarchy’.
Nor would it appear that these awful prophecies from her Majesty's Chief Inspector were calculated to depress the spirits of the royal household.
For HRH Prince Philip is known to have entertained his own version of this ‘law-and-order’ jeremiad, warning in 1979 of ‘this avalanche of lawlessness threatening to engulf our civilisation’.
‘Whatever achievements policemen can claim, the ability to communicate is certainly not one of them’, said Sir Robert  Mark in his 1973 Dimbleby Lecture.
‘We share with another more famous service a tradition of silence.’
If so, then we must freely admit that another time-honoured tradition of British self-restraint has very recently bit the dust.
In contemporary Britain it seems almost impossible to go a single day without hearing, from some quarter or another, a senior policeman hectoring us on the deteriorated condition of public morals, while assuming the right to deliver homespun history lessons in which the past is lovingly remembered as a time of harmony.
A time, that is, when the traditions of the ‘British way of life’ held sovereign sway, and the policeman's lot was an extremely happy one.
Locating the Golden Age
Now, what I wish to ask in this book is whether this way of thinking about Britain's decline is useful and accurate.
And if it is not (and I will argue that it is not ) then to what extent does this tradition of anguished regret for the past hinder our actions in the present and in the future?
We must be careful not to place the entire blame upon the amateur historians in Britain's police force.
While policemen freely peddle these cherished beliefs in the lost standards of the ‘British way of life’, they did not invent them.
Nor when the Tory press informs us, as it does unceasingly, that ‘Britain has a profound tradition of unregimented, tolerant order’ should we rush to indict the historical embroidery of newspaper editors.
Professional historians, too, are not unknown to indulge in this kind of historical reasoning, perhaps best exemplified by T. A. Critchley's raptures about ‘the native self-discipline of Anglo-Saxon England’ and ‘this streak of national self-discipline’.
This view of Britain's history as one founded on stability and decency is deeply ingrained in the self-understanding of the British people.
The present, we hardly need to be told, is extremely tense.
But the past, say the accumulated traditions of our national culture, was a ‘golden age’ of order and security.
Nowadays we need the iron fist of policing in order that we might sleep soundly in our beds.
Whereas  formerly we did not, and our love of tolerant freedom was spontaneous, unregimented and natural.
The extremity of these awful judgements against the moral deterioration of the British people, and the enormous vision of chaos and disorder which they conjure up, suggest the need for a cautious organisation of our thought and feeling as we approach these matters.
Clearly, there is an impressive consistency in this line of thinking — both in terms of the belief in a pre-existing era of tranquility, and in the agreement that the natural moderacy of the ‘British way of life’ has been eclipsed in the hooligan deluge.
However, When we come to more detailed considerations — such as exactly where this ‘golden age’ is to be located in real historical time — then we are confronted with such a disorderly jumble of datemarks and vague historical allusion as to allow for wide margins of disagreement even among dedicated ‘law-and-order’enthusiasts.
Indeed, at the centre of the preoccupation with declining standards and mounting disorder, there is an immense historical ‘black hole’.
There are various historical reference points made available to us, by which it is said we can chart Britain's fall from grace.
One of the most popular slogans suggests that we need only look back to ‘Before the War’ in order to reach the solid ground of tradition and stability.
The Society of Conservative Lawyers, for example, confidently announced in its report on Public Order (1970) that such things as gang fights between youths were ‘a distinctively postwar phenomenon’.
Patrick Jenkin, as Conservative Social Services Secretary, more recently described how he had been reliably informed that ‘the increasing turbulence of modern life, with rising crime, industrial disruption, violence and terrorism, was rooted in the separation of children from their parents during the war’.
Sir Keith Joseph offers a flexi-time history according to which, in the same speech where he entertained the spectacular belief that Britain's streets had been plunged into insecurity ‘for the first time in a century and a half’, he also conjured with a more modest timescale whereby ‘such words as good and evil, such stress on self-discipline and standards have been out of favour since the war’.
Finally, from its privileged vantage point to diagnose any deterioration in the  national character, the National Front described its own understanding of pre-war social realities in a leaflet offering advice to schoolchildren on Now to Spot a Red Teacher (1977): ‘Tell the Red Teacher the poor whites during the Great Slump didn't commit muggings on defenceless old ladies.’
Well, we shall see.
If the Second World War is often regarded as the watershed of ‘permissiveness’, then those with more educated tastes — who perhaps remember the precipitating crisis of the Public Order Act of 1936 and Mosley's black shirts, or who might have read the descriptions of pre-war razor gangs in Graham Greene's Brighton Rock — look back beyond the war before that, to the slumbering golden years of Edwardian England which is one of the most authoritative versions of the true location of the ‘British way of life’.
Next in line is the Victorian era, which is commonly remembered as harbouring some kind of gold standard of untarnished moral worth.
‘We need to get back towards the Victorian days of discipline’ says Dr Boyson in one of his attacks on ‘permissiveness’, and he is certainly not alone among Tory fundamentalists in fondly remembering the glories of empire, child labour and workhouse in Queen Victoria's reign.
The idea that the past harbours a golden age of tranquility also readily lends itself to the view that history might furnish us with effective methods of commonsense crime control.
So, one Member of Parliament's idea ‘to have girl muggers whipped’ would turn back the clock to the 1820s when corporal punishment for women was abolished, whereas another Parliamentary recommendation to ‘Bring back stocks for hooligans’would presumably transport us into the Dark Ages.
Indeed, the powerful imagery of pastoral will often suggest that the true location of the golden age lies in pre-industrial Merrie England — a traditional lament that was already well established in Queen Victoria's golden era.
But although devastating historical judgements such as these can be found in abundance amidst the speculations of the ‘law-and-order’ movement, the urgency of Britain's contemporary predicament insists that a much more abbreviated timescale is often used to describe the rapidity of the descent into lawlessness.
‘Twenty Years Ago’, which conveys  the sense of a generational decline, is the slogan most commonly employed.
Patricia Morgan plumps for this timescale in her critique of the ‘New Establishment’ of social workers, psychologists, teachers and other exponents of what she calls the ‘New Socio-Psychological Expertise’of child care and education.
The moral collapse of the younger generation, as she describes it, is ‘the logical outcome of the theory and practice of the past couple of decades’.
From another quarter, Baroness Faithfull took issue in 1979 with the ‘simplistic belief’ in the short-sharp-shock remedy which she viewed as no less foolish than ‘the theories of those false prophets of permissiveness at whose door must be laid a considerable part of the blame for the rise in crime over the last two decades’.
‘Twenty years ago’ has a ring of common sense about it.
A typical letter in the correspondence columns of The Daily Mail in 1977 summed up the commonplace fears and aspirations which are arranged around this slogan: This kind of commonsense reasoning, invariably linked to the perceived upsurge in crime and mischief, has become such a day-to-day feature of life in contemporary Britain that one hears complaints phrased in the idiom of ‘Twenty Years Ago’ amidst the gossip of bus queues, pubs and launderettes.
Even so, when I stumbled across Miss Diana Dors — a permissive sex-symbol of some notoriety twenty years ago — advancing its claims in a popular magazine and asking us to cast our minds towards ‘my era back in the fifties’, I was not immediately sure whose side she was supposed to be on.
But it was business as usual.
‘As an ex-sex symbol’, Miss Dors confessed, ‘I usually amaze those who pose the  question by saying that I believe the permissive society HAS gone too far.’
Nor has the Labour Party, which has traditionally kept its own counsel on ‘law-and-order’ matters, proved entirely immune to the surrounding clamour.
Mr Merlyn Rees as Labour Home Secretary had given voice to the more usually reticent position early in 1978 when he charged Mrs Thatcher with ‘an irresponsible and dangerous approach to law and order…whipping up people's fears in a ‘cynical’’ attempt to win votes'.
Later in the same year, however, appearing on television in a news item on vandalism, Mr Rees was to be found closing the commonsense consensus.
‘You only have to look around,’ he explained, ‘and see that something has happened in the last twenty years.’
It is a simple enough invitation, with no strings attached.
So let us take a look around and see what is to be seen.
TWENTY YEARS AGO: TEDS UNDER THE BED
If Britain could be described in any useful way as a society at ease with itself twenty years ago, then that was certainly not how it felt at the time.
Recoiling from the impact of the Teddy Boys, who were understood to have introduced an entirely foreign and unprecedented streak of violence into British life during the 1950s, the fearful preoccupation with hooliganism and ‘permissiveness’ was already under a full head of steam.
Given that so much of the enthusiasm for ‘law and order’ in Britain has been marshalled by the Conservative Party during the late 1970s, a simple impression of how different things were (or were not) twenty years ago can be gleaned from the business of Conservative Party conferences in the two periods.
At its annual conference in 1978, as the Party girded itself up to meet the forthcoming General Election, there was a full-throated debate on the imminent threat to ‘law and order’.
Amidst calls to bring back the birch and to inaugurate ‘Saturday night floggings’ for soccer hooligans, Mr William Whitelaw reaffirmed his pledge to toughen up the law by introducing a new regime of short-sharp-shock Detention Centres modelled on the Army ‘glass house’system of physical drill and unrelenting discipline.
That much, I expect, we can agree on.
But what happened twenty years earlier at Blackpool in 1958?
By contrast with the unprecedented alarms of the late 1970s, ‘the disturbing increase in criminal offences’ was on the Tory Party agenda, and so was ‘this sudden  increase in crime and brutality which is so foreign to our nature and our country’.
‘Is it not a fact’, asked one delegate, ‘that our wives and mothers, if they are left alone in the house at night, are frightened to open their doors?’
There were calls to bring back flogging ‘to deflate these cocksure young men’— one speaker likened the deterrent properties of the cat-o'-nine-tails with those of the H-Bomb!— while another thought that the stocks ‘have much to commend them’.
And when it was not shouting him down as he tried to suggest that the powers of the courts were adequate, the conference heard Mr R. A. Butler pledge himself to a new building programme of short-sharp-shock Detention Centres.
‘Everything should be done at the double’, he explained, and ‘there should be a maximum of hard work and a minimum of amusement.’
indeed, the mood of the Conservative Party Conference twenty years ago was aptly summed up by one speaker who thought: ‘Over the past 25 years we in this country, through misguided sentiment, have cast aside the word ‘discipline’’, and now we are suffering from it.’
Plus ça change .
An Already Weakened People
As the Tory Party debated the ‘make-believe gangsters strolling about the streets as if they are the monarchs of all’, the conference hall rang with an entirely familiar pattern of complaints and accusations: ‘the leniency shown in the past by the Courts of this country’; the ‘lack of parental control, interest and support’; the ‘sex, savagery, blood and thunder’ in films and television; and the ‘smooth, smug and sloppy sentimentalists who contribute very largely to the wave of crime’so that young people were ‘no longer frightened of the police, they sneer at them’.
Nor was it just the invigorating properties of the sea air at Blackpool that stimulated the appetite for whipping.
Twenty years ago the same testy attitude was asserting itself in Parliament, prompting one MP to urge Mr Butler not to give in to ‘the wild men of the Conservative Party’.
The ‘wild men’ of Westminster were there in numbers, however, as the  House of Commons debated ‘the appalling wave of crime’and the ‘oppressive and startling’upsurge in violence.
‘The minds of many of these young offenders appear to have been numbed by greed and indifference to violence’, asserted one MP as he condemned ‘the parents, indifferent to their children and utterly without social conscience’.
Another, protesting that ‘I am not exaggerating’ against murmurs of dissent from his colleagues, believed that ‘there is a danger of people taking the law into their own hands’.
Although, when he had got it off his chest, he confessed that ‘I am afraid I have been rather carried away’.
There was nothing unusual about MPs getting carried away during debates on crime and violence, however, or for the Speaker to find it necessary to call for ‘Order!’ against ‘shouts of sadistic enthusiasm’when whipping was on the agenda.
Throughout the 1950s the birchers and floggers had been ably represented by a coterie of MPs — Wing Commander Bullus, Brigadier Clarke, Brigadier Medlicott, Captain Waterhouse and the irrepressible Sir Thomas Moore — who had tormented a succession of Home Office spokesmen with their ghoulish enthusiasms, with a substantial measure of support for their aims.
‘These louts who, long ago, should have been smacked on the behind by their parents’ excited Sir Marcus Lipton, who was something of a Parliamentary dove on these occasions, no less than Mr Gerald Nabarro who considered that ‘a proper policy ought to be to ‘whack the thugs'’’.
In the immediate aftermath of war, the Conservative Party had organised its understanding of juvenile crime around different assumptions.
‘The misbehaviour of boys and girls’, said its report on Youth Astray in 1946, ‘is mainly the outcome of conditions, social, economic, and to some extent hereditary, for which they themselves cannot be blame.
The blame — for blame there is — rests largely By 1959, however, when its report on The Responsible Society was published, there had been a remarkable U-turn in Tory philosophy: ‘We reject the notion, propagated by sincere but misguided idealists, that society shares the guilt of its criminals; that most malefactors are the victims of their environment.’
It was not exactly a novel sentiment, but  from now on the dominant message from within the Tory ranks would be that the welfare state had weakened family ties, the increase of working mothers had produced ‘a growing decline in parental responsibility’, and ‘affluence’ had undermined the nation's moral fibre.
Then, as now, the Conservative Party in the 1950s liked to think of itself as a lonely beacon of responsibility in a moral wilderness of couldn't-care-less ‘permissiveness’ and selfish ‘I'm all right Jack’attitudes.
However, these immediately familiar accusations against the moral failure of the British people touched on a much wider current of feeling in 1950s Britain which found a crystallising focus in the problems of the younger generation.
The ‘drifting youth of the welfare state’, as Arthur Bryant described them in 1954, ‘become the inevitable prey of the gang-leader or, at best, grow up to lead, despite all the material opportunities of our age, inert, stunted and purposeless lives’.
This withering criticism of the youth of the nation was reflected by the way in which all manner of novel terms — the ‘mixed-up teenagers’, the ‘wild ones’, the ‘rebels without a cause’— entered into common usage in the 1950s, conveying the feeling that young people were somehow more radically unintelligible to older people than at any previous time in history.
So that when the British Medical Association decided in the late 1950s to inaugurate a programme of discussions among its membership on an appointed ‘Subject of the Year’, it was entirely fitting that for its first discussion-point it should home in on The Adolescent :
Thus, twenty years ago, and already bemoaning what had happened in ‘the last twenty years’, the BMA was to be found rehearsing the familiar diagnoses of the ‘new’ youth problem — most of which appeared to have very little to do with medical science.
One child psychiatrist advised  that ‘the standards of living have risen too rapidly for human nature to cope with’, and as the report cast its eye over ‘moral decay, uncertainty and dissatisfaction’ it was characteristic of the fifties mood that the disorientations of postwar ‘affluence’should receive pride of place within these medical judgements.
‘Poverty is not now the cause of adolescent difficulties’, we learned, ‘but materialism without effort has replaced it.’
And again: ‘Indeed, not poverty, but unaccustomed riches seems an equally dangerous inducement to wild behaviour, even crime.’
The ‘easy money’ said to be available to young people under conditions of full employment was the object of widespread condemnation.
An earlier report,Citizens of Tomorrow (1955) produced by the King George's Jubilee Trust, had worked over this theme of ‘too much pocket-money and too little discipline’.
‘As compared with fifty, or even twenty years ago,’ it was said that ‘children have much more money to spend and more inducement to spend it’which led to ‘that ‘something for nothing’’philosophy which, we are told, has become much more prevalent since the advent of the welfare state'.
In T. R. Fyvel's The Insecure Offenders , which first appeared in 1961 and which represented the most systematic and unsensationalised attempt to come to terms with the youth problem, the argument pivoted upon the assumption that the impact of ‘affluence’ had conspired to produce a novel disorientation among the nation's youth.
Employing the familiar juxtaposition of ‘the remarkably law-abiding character of twentieth century English life’ and ‘the law-abiding England of pre-1940’as against what he repeatedly identified as ‘new’—‘the new juvenile crime’, ‘the new rebels’, ‘the new generation of indifferent parents’, ‘a new type of violence’, ‘the new state of insecurity’— Fyvel thus considered that there was ‘something in the way of life, in the break-up of traditional authority, in the values of the news in the headlines, which encouraged widespread youthful cynicism in general and rather violent delinquency in particular’and that this was ‘a by-product of a new economic revolution which has put spending money on a scale not known before into the pockets of working-class boys and girls’.
‘By the beginning of 1960’, he wrote, ‘it could  no longer be denied that certain parts of London at night were dominated by a new spirit of insecurity’: ‘juvenile delinquency had for the first time in Britain become elevated to the status of a national problem’.
And so, in spite of our nostalgia for the days when Premier Harold Macmillan declared that Britain had ‘never had it so good’, there was nothing at all unusual in the BMA's diagnosis of the appalling state of morals in 1961:
We can only hope, given the disparaging tone of this review of the nation's youth, that these good doctors were talking about somebody else's children.
As indeed they were.
The crystallising focus for these anxieties in 1950s Britain was not some generalised ‘adolescent’.
It was always assumed, as we will repeatedly find in these hooligan discourses, that ‘the adolescent’ was a boy: when the other sex figures at all it is as mothers, usually neglectful ones.
What also tended to go unmentioned was that he was, specifically, a working-class boy.
In fact, he was a ‘Teddy Boy’.
Although, it must be said that as the Teds walked out of the working-class districts of the major cities — first of all from the ‘affluent’ world of the Elephant and Castle in down-at-heel South London — they were unlikely candidates for the job of exemplifying the damaging effects of ‘unaccustomed riches’and ‘materialism without effort’.
‘They were market porters, roadworkers, a lot of van boys,’ said one of Fyvel's informants, ‘all in jobs that didn't offer much — labourers could cover the lot.’
Rock-and-Roll War Babies
The Teds took Britain by storm.
‘The man who can win the allegiance of the Teddy Boys’, remarked Mr Andrew  Fountaine who was later to come to prominence within the leadership of the National Front, ‘can rule this country.’
More conventional politicians entertained more traditional remedies.
‘the ‘de-Teddying’’ of Teddy Boys' was, after all, the original inspiration for R. A. Butler's short sharp shocks.
The Teds took their name from the ‘Edwardian’ dress-style which had been originally promoted for fashion-conscious city gents who wished to cut an affluent fifties dash.
When, in a remarkable act of cultural smash-and-grab, working-class youths adopted the long drape jackets as their own uniform — to which they added embellishments such as greased duck-tail haircuts, thick-soled ‘brothel creeper’ shoes, slim-jim ties and narrow drain-pipe trousers — no self-respecting gentleman was going to adorn himself in what had now become a vulgar ‘Ted suit’.
Sir Thomas Moore, seizing on the Teddy Boys as a further opportunity to sing the praises of the birch twigs, seemed to think that the name itself was a slander against the peaceful Edwardian years: ‘On a point of order…
Instead of using the word ‘Edwardian’’, would not the proper description be ‘young thugs’’ leaving it at that?’
The new Edwardians — who, as I will show, had much more in common with the original Edwardian youth than is usually supposed — swiftly gained a terrible reputation for gang fights, vandalism, street robberies, rock-and-roll cinema riots, and attacks on cafe owners and late-night bus crews.
Adults stared at them in not altogether dumb, but spluttering amazement.
Within the gathering hysteria of the 1950s, young men wearing the ‘Edwardian’ style were banned from cinemas and dance halls.
Law-abiding Teds were urged to throw away their zoot suits, and so repudiate the hooligan element — an initiative that entirely flopped.
The Daily Mirror tried to organise its own weapons amnesty for flick-knives, coshes, bicycle-chains and knuckle-dusters.
Special snatch-squads of women police officers infiltrated Teddy Boy gatherings dressed in bobby-sox and pony-tails.
Psychiatrists were consulted for their expert diagnosis of the Teddy Boy condition, and from America it was reported that chlorpromazine — a heavy tranquilliser, and one of the new ‘wonder drugs’ entering into use in the mid-1950s for the control of excited schizophrenics — seemed  to quieten Teddy Boys down.
And everyone breathed a sigh of relief…so the Teds were human after all.
Human, maybe, but ‘British’?
No.
The social panic surrounding the emergence of the Teddy Boys formed part of a much wider structure of feeling in 1950s Britain that the social changes wrought on the postwar world were destroying the old ‘British way of life’ and the former civility of the British people, and the Teds were understood to be symptomatic of these social alterations.
A principal target for these discontents was the impact of the ‘Americanised, popular amusements of ‘admass’ which were widely deplored.
Richard Hoggart's The Uses of Literacy (1957) was undoubtedly the most evocative survey of these postwar confusions, vividly conveying the feeling that the new ‘candy floss’ entertainments of the post-war era were morally inferior to the older working-class traditions, threatening a decisive break in cultural life.
As he compared the ‘full rich life’ of the old back-street cultures which he thought were being pitted and undermined by the ‘canned entertainment and packeted provision’of the new pulp culture, Hoggart made no effort to disguise his contempt for this barren cultural wasteland — the pop songs, the crooners and the heart-throbs, the hairstyles and clothing, the espresso bars and milk bars which young people frequented, together with the ‘sex in shiny packets’literature and the cacophony of juke-boxes and ‘nickelodeons’.
All this was contrasted uninvitingly against the fondly remembered oral traditions of the working-class neighbourhoods — brass bands, free-and-easy nights at the local pub, and pigeon-fancying — as an essentially ‘hollow’ and ‘faceless’cultural diminishment.
And when Hoggart turned his attention to the ‘juke box boys’ who were a recognisable strain of early Teds —‘boys between fifteen and twenty, with drape-suits, picture ties, and an American slouch’— even the slouch was, characteristically, identified as ‘Americanised’and hence ‘postwar’and ‘un-British’, as the boys sipped their milk-shakes and tapped their feet to the music in their milk-bar rendezvous:
It was a typical mode of response by Hoggart, contrasting the cultural solidity of the English pub and its robust pleasures with the contrived artificiality of the ‘American’ cafe; the fantasy world of admass set unfavourably against the down-to-earth character of working-class tradition.
‘This regular, increasing, and almost unvaried diet of sensation without commitment’ would ‘render its consumers less capable of responding openly and responsibly to life’and ‘induce an underlying sense of purposelessness’.
The associations between this allegedly purposeless irresponsibility and a galloping crime rate have come to be employed regularly in postwar discourses on the decline and fall of the ‘British way of life’.
So, too, the feeling that life was becoming ‘Americanised’ has been used unsparingly to describe the process of ‘permissive’rot and the collapse of traditional authority — most forcibly registered in the adoption of the term ‘mugging’to disown as ‘un-British’the old-fashioned crime of street robbery.
After the first flutters of excitement in the immediate aftermath of war about GIs, nylon stockings, bubble-gum, television, flashy motorcars, labour-saving gadgetry and all-American razzle-dazzle, caricatures of ‘Americanisation’ have come to carry enormous authority within postwar deliberations on the decline of the old ‘way of life’.
These caricatures have offered a convenient metaphor of social change, carrying with them dire warnings of what social change might bring in its wake, with the ability to compress into a single image the ravages of modern trends such as high-speed living, urban anonymity, television violence, endangered streets, weakening affluence and shallow emotional content.
The entrance of the dazzling war babies in their Ted suits, understood as harbingers of irresponsible affluence and rootless materialism, seemed to fit the bill precisely.
The Rehabilitation of the Teds
However, what is altogether remarkable is the way in which these rough working-class youths who donned Ted suits in the 1950s, and slicked back their hair in a greasy imitation of Elvis Presley, could be mistaken for the children of the ‘affluent society’.
The Teddy Boys first emerged, for example, from the slum neighbourhoods of working-class London — and it would be difficult to pretend that communities such as the Elephant and Castle were blessed with ‘affluence’, or anything approaching it.
They were already exciting considerable attention in 1953, some years before the emergence of rock-and-roll which was commonly alleged to be the depraving ‘Americanising’ root of their violent energies.
They had also made their social entrance at a time when television — so often blamed as another demoralising force — was only a minority pursuit in Britain, with no more than two million viewing licences in 1953; and when the commercial TV channel, which was most commonly alleged to be lowering standards, had not even been created.
Indeed, the Teds had appeared on the streets before postwar meat-rationing had been abandoned in Britain — which might suggest that they belonged to the world of postwar austerity, rather than‘affluence’.
Many other aspects of the preoccupation with the Teddy Boys also prove to be factually unhinged.
Before the emergence of the Teds there had been any number of alarms from the 1940s onwards about street violence, robbery attacks, ‘Blitz kids’ and ‘cosh boys’.
Allegations of purposelessness and postwar ennui, together with declining parental responsibility, were also well in evidence before the ‘affluent’ fifties could be said to have worked their moral damage.
The war had no sooner ended than a Mass Observation report Puzzled People (1947) described how ‘the explosion or disintegration of orthodox beliefs has left a vacuum’, and as early as 1950 the ‘quest for a post-war purpose’ was being anxiously scrutinised in a study of young people's lives.
In the following year the public were lectured from the courts on the duties of parenthood when, expressing himself ‘perfectly satisfied that these crimes can be traced to neglect of parents’, the Recorder of  Bradford struck the familiar harmonies of discontent: ‘Parents of this time, unfortunately, do not take sufficient care in bringing up their children.
They expect somebody else to be responsible’ and it was a cause for great sorrow that ‘Gone are the days of Queen Victoria.’
The Teddy Boys also coexisted with compulsory military service — which is so often wheeled out as a panacea for the troubles of youth — and national service was even condemned in the 1950s as ‘a positive adverse influence on young people’ because of the way in which it interrupted the transition from school to work and encouraged an ‘eat, drink and be merry’philosophy.
Finally, what was (and is) totally submerged in the conventional understanding of the Teddy Boys was that their style and demeanour was by no means unprecedented.
Their rough-fighting, territorial edginess, for example, is better understood as a continuation of earlier forms of gang life in working-class neighbourhoods — rather than a sudden departure from tradition.
So, too, the Teds had borrowed large parts of their supposedly unprecedented cultural equipment from earlier youth cultures, such as those identified in a 1949 Mass Observation report as ‘Spiv’ types and ‘Dagos’.
Any number of these stylistic elements — the ‘zoot suits’, heavily greased ‘Boston slash-back’ hairstyles, and the ‘Jive’and ‘Jitterbug’dances — were already in evidence during the war, and even before the war.
Adding it all up, it is clear that the conventional picture of the sudden and unrivalled appearance of the ‘affluent’ and ‘Americanised’Teddy Boys — crazed by rock-and-roll, besotted by television, their pockets bulging with loose change — must be seen as a gross distortion of the actual events.
However, this was not how matters were understood at the time.
The Teds were instantly recognised as symptomatic of the new ‘classless’ society and the ‘affluent’breeze blowing in from across the Atlantic, a feeling that was massively reinforced by the wave of cinema riots that greeted the arrival of Bill Haley's Rock Around the Clock in Britain.
But here we encounter an even more elusive difficulty.
A profound historical amnesia has come to settle around the Teds whereby rock-and-roll outrages of the past, together with the magnified excitements that accompanied them, have been  smuggled out of sight.
The subsequent fate of the Teddy Boys — as public myth, that is — has correspondingly been one of rehabilitation and falsification.
Nowadays the mid-1950s rock craze seems to provoke nothing more than a nostalgic chuckle, and when the original Teds are remembered at all within the contemporary preoccupation with hooliganism it is as something quaint and remarkably innocent.
Whereas-it was common in their own time for the Teddy Boys to be contrasted with a nostalgically remembered state of pre-existing harmony ‘twenty years ago’ or ‘before the war’, given the real horror which greeted their arrival we can perhaps only marvel at the way in which the nostalgic trick of amnesia can now work in the Teds' favour.
Here they are, for example, joining in the patriotic raptures of Jubilee Year: Here we go again: ‘Twenty Years Ago’.
Fond memories of Jerry Lee Lewis who blew up a storm of indignation in the 1950s, not to mention Presley, whose subversive pelvis was  banned from television in some American states where it was only permitted to film Elvis-the-Pelvis from the waist upwards.
Teds passing round the hat for Jubilee Year — theirs or Hers, we might ask — a welcome for a new generation of Teddy Boys, nostalgia for the old dances that shocked a still older generation, Yorkshire's oldest Ted holding court, delighted shoppers: the process of rehabilitation, aided and abetted by total amnesia for even the recent past, seems complete.
Such a fine contrast to the wave of hysteria which greeted the rock craze in the 1950s when the press, predictably absorbed by the outlandish pleasures of the young, railed against its demoralising influence.
‘Tin Pan Alley has unleashed a new monster, a sort of nightmare in rhythm’, wrote a Daily Mail correspondent at the time or the cinema riots in 1956.
‘Rock'n Roll, often known now as rock, roll and riot is sexy music.
It can make the blood race.
It has something of the African tomtom and voodoo dance.’
Describing the new music as ‘a communicable disease’ and ‘the music of delinquents’,The Daily Mail was so moved as to run a front-page editorial, ‘Rock'n Roll Babies’, which apart from issuing a hollow, reassuring prophecy —‘It will pass’— stoked up the fires of respectable discontent against ‘this sudden ‘musical’’phenomenon which has led to outbreaks of rowdyism'.
Here there was room to have a dig at ‘trade unionists…too, screaming abuse and interfering with others on their way to work’, alleging that excitement on picket lines and at rock films amounted to the same thing: ‘These are all manifestations of the primitive herd instinct.’
Also, to mount a stout defence of compulsory military service, ‘to knock the rock 'n roll out of these babies, and to knock a bit of sense into them’.
And then, the awful unblemished truth about this musical force that was rocking the nation:
SINCE THE WAR: PAST PERFECT
We have already met this sorry postwar blues, with its nostalgic lament about the shallow artificiality of life in the concrete jungle, and its jaundiced appraisal of the overwhelming changes ‘in these twenty years since the war’.
The complicating difficulty, however, is that this is a statement from before the war.
It is the voice of the disillusioned and disgruntled George Bowling —‘nerves all worn to bits, empty places in our bones where the marrow ought to be’— in Orwell's pre-war novel Coming Up for Air .
As he searched for the joys of his boyhood, grumpy old George Bowling sensed deterioration all around him: in the news headlines, in threats of imminent violence and destruction, and in the disfigurements of ‘Americanisation’.
‘People then had something that we haven't got now’, he thought as he remembered the years before the Great War, ‘And what was it that people had in those days?
A feeling of security, even when they weren't secure.
More exactly, it was a feeling of continuity.’
And yes, there is another feeling of continuity here, involving an unusual degree of symmetry between ‘pre-war’ and ‘postwar’perceptions of collapsing standards and cultural decay.
Nor was it only characters in novels who were afflicted by the malaise.
Which War was That?
George Orwell was particularly fond of striking these contrasts between the ordered stability of the past against the awfulness of the present, and he was also thoroughly wound up in the myths of English civility: ‘The gentleness of the English civilisation is perhaps its most marked characteristic’, he wrote in an essay of 1940, ‘Everyone takes it for granted that the law, such as it is, will be respected, and feels a sense of outrage when it is not.’
By contrast, Orwell sniffed out deterioration in numerous spheres of public life including what he understood to be new forms of crime, and altered responses to crime and violence.
In ‘The Decline of the English Murder’ he argued that whereas in the past murder had been a serious business involving strong personal commitments and emotions, it had now become an almost casual affair informed by ‘the anonymous life of dance-halls and the false values of the American film’.
Crime fiction, too, reflected these alterations, so that crime stories had ‘greatly increased in bloodthirstiness during the past twenty years’.
Admittedly, in some of his loving characterisations of English life Orwell almost flew off the edge —‘the beer is bitterer, the coins are heavier, the grass is greener’— but even so, the decline of English civility under the impact of ‘materialism’ was not only George Orwell's passion in the interwar years.
In the realm of high culture, T. S. Eliot's writings were drenched in the same anxieties.
‘The culture of Europe has deteriorated visibly within the memory of many who are by no means the oldest among us’, wrote Eliot in his wartime essays that reflected upon the atrophy of interwar life.
Pouring out criticism against this ‘stage of civilisation at which the family is irresponsible’, ‘the moral restraints so weak’, ‘when parental control and responsibility passes to the State’, he thought that ‘the disintegration of class has induced the expansion of envy, which provides ample fuel for the flame of ‘equal opportunity'’’.
And as we might anticipate from Eliot's distaste for ‘equality’ there was no room for the idea that it was possible to educate the masses: ‘There is no doubt that in our headlong rush to educate everybody, we  are lowering standards…destroying our ancient edifices.’
Nor should we suppose that T. S. Eliot was just firing off his big guns against R. A. Butler's wartime Education Act of 1944, for already in the 1930s there had been widespread criticism of ‘standardisation’ and ‘levelling down’.
In 1932, for example, Mrs Q. D. Leavis had roundly condemned the cheapening and weakening influences of the popular press and popular novels which produced ‘merely crude states of mind’ and what she called ‘the disintegration of the reading public’: ‘The reading capacity of the general public, it must be concluded, has never been so low as at the present time.’
Stepping back into the present tense for a moment, we can usefully compare Mrs Leavis's dismal judgement from the 1930s with a more recent complaint against falling reading standards, issued by C. B. Cox and the ubiquitous Dr Boyson in their educational Black Paper for 1977.
There we are told that, amidst the collapsing standards of the comprehensive school system, successful reading standards were now only attained in what are described as ‘traditional’ schools, whereas ‘such standards were usual in the 1930s’.
But whose word are we to take here, I wonder, in these conflicting judgements: the backward-looking nostalgia of our postwar Jeremiahs who think they see a golden age of literacy before the war?
Or the record of the respectable opinion in the pre-war years which was already bewailing the corruption of morals and the decline of standards?
It is a problem that will dog us repeatedly in this history of respectable fears.
One of the most active centres of pre-war discontent was the ‘Scrutiny’ group gathered around F. R. Leavis at Cambridge, who repeatedly and bitterly indicted the degeneration of standards and the old ‘way of life’.
Cheap literature, popular music, cinema-going, the newly acquired habit of listening to the radio, advertising gimmicks, educational bankruptcy and ‘Americanisation’ were all targeted as symptoms of decline.
Because ‘this vast and terrifying disintegration’, as described by Leavis and Thompson in 1933, was thought to be showing itself not only in the alleged decline of literary and artistic values, but also in its effects  upon personal identity, family life and the destruction of community.
In 1930 Leavis could write:
It goes without saying, perhaps, that the feared deterioration of the nation's youth and the manufacture of supposedly ‘new’ forms of outrage and violence provided a gathering focus for these anxieties.
Drawing attention to ‘the decline in Church attendance during the last twenty years’, ‘the greater freedom from restraint which is characteristic of our age’ and ‘this rejection of conventional standards’, Roy and Theodora Calvert in The Law-Breaker (1933) announced that ‘we are passing through a crisis in morals’.
ii In an otherwise cautious account of English Juvenile Courts (1938) Winifred Elkin also gave vent to ‘the feeling that life has no sure foundations and that the future is utterly uncertain', believing that ‘it is not morally healthy for children to grow up in an atmosphere of restlessness and pleasure-seeking…
It must change their attitude of mind and consequently their conduct.’
In a King George's Jubilee Trust report,The Needs of Youth (1939), A. E. Morgan was another who brooded over ‘a growing contempt by the young person for the procedures of juvenile courts’ and the ‘grave reason to believe that parental control is slackening’.
Juvenile lawlessness, he thought, represented ‘a serious challenge, the difficulty of which is intensified by the extension of freedom which, for better or worse, has been given to youth in the last generation’.
It was, then, in a context such as this that a Times correspondent could sum up in 1937 an entirely familiar series of complaints about mounting crime and dwindling authority:.
Hollywood Gangsters and the Professional Foul
Britain before the war already experienced itself as a society afflicted by a deep cultural malaise, one that was described in a language quite indistinguishable from postwar thunderings against the ‘permissive’ and ‘affluent’society.
Moreover, against this backcloth of generalised anxieties about moral incohesion, there were a number of more specific allegations against standards of public conduct which, once again, bear a striking resemblance to the supposedly unprecedented complaints and aggravations of the postwar era.
The main targets for this criticism were football rowdyism, the demoralising influence of the Hollywood cinema, and mounting crime and disorder.
There had been a rumbling discontent about misbehaviour at football matches, both on and off the field, throughout the 1920s and 1930s which came to a head in the late thirties with renewed accusations of declining sportsmanship and crowd disorders.
In 1936 the Football Association found it necessary to issue a memorandum on rough play, in an attempt to stamp out excessive violence and the ‘professional foul’ which is so often identified as the hallmark of the debased traditions of sportsmanship in postwar football.
Indeed, after a particularly heated Derby match between Arsenal and Chelsea,The Times issued a curt editorial judgement, ‘Not Football’: Denouncing ‘the cold-blooded and intentional foul’ such as the Continental ankle-tap, and the deliberate provocation of players known to suffer from ‘temperament’,The Times rounded against ‘the present menace to professional football’.
And it was all so ‘un-English’: ‘The shoulder charge, the fairest and least dangerous weapon in the footballer's armoury, has declined, and in its place has arisen a regiment of mean and dangerous tricks…
What is wanted is increased firmness.’
Behaviour on the terraces was also thought to be deteriorating in the 1930s and crowd incidents — involving pitch invasions, attacks on referees and players, and occasional confrontations between spectators and the police — were exciting the same interest.
In one typical incident in November 1936 when during a match at Wolverhampton Wanderers  spectators had attacked visiting Chelsea players, there were more violent scenes after the game.
Reynolds's News described how a ‘big and angry crowd’ of Wolves fans estimated at 2,000 people gathered outside the officials' entrance, protesting at the club's policy of selling its better players.
The following week police had to be called to quell disturbances at a number of grounds — including  Middlesbrough and Upton Park where the referee was again attacked — and Reynolds's News (15 November 1936) thought that ‘the FA will soon have to issue another ‘rough play’’ memorandum — this time to the spectators!’
Disturbances such as these provided an intermittent focus of attention throughout the interwar years, and a number of grounds were closed because of crowd disorders.
In 1921, for example, the boys section at Bradford Park Avenue was closed down for three months after the referee had been pelted with rubbish, and in the early 1920s the fierce North London rivalries between Arsenal and Spurs flared into open street battles in which some of the more zealous fans were armed with iron bars and knives.
Some years later, to give one final example of the kind of trouble that could break out at football games, the police found it necessary to lead a baton charge against stone-throwers during a contest between Linfield and Belfast Celtic in 1935.
In the absence of any sustained historical research into football in this period, it is not possible to say how frequent or how violent  these occasions were, or to arrive at a balanced comparison between football disorders in the 1920s and 1930s as against those in more recent years.
Nevertheless, it is clear enough that the realities of pre-war football do not find agreement with postwar nostalgia.
Gambling, football pools, fun-fairs, dog tracks, amusement arcades, dance halls, popular songs, street betting and speed-tracks were all attacked at different times in the interwar years for their demoralising influence, particularly on the young.
But it was the picture palaces, where weekly audiences dwarfed even the massive football attendances, which held the limelight within these respectable fears of national decline and moral deterioration.
Cinema-going, as described by A. J. P. Taylor, was ‘the essential social habit of the age’, although he also warns that ‘highly educated people saw in it only vulgarity and the end of Old England’.
One potent centre of respectable discontent was Leavis's group for whom the cinema represented the worst in modern popular entertainment, involving merely ‘surrender, under conditions of hypnotic receptivity, to the cheapest emotional appeals’.
George Orwell was in complete agreement, contrasting the active pleasures of pub-singing and comic-turns with ‘the passive, drug-like pleasures of the cinema and radio’.
And, once again, we can hear the echo of Hoggart's strictures against the supposedly ‘postwar’ aberrations of mass entertainments.
The influence of the cinema on children and young people provided a sharp focus for these anxieties, which had been aired since the arrival of the first silent movies.
In a lecture on The Problem of Juvenile Crime (1917) Charles Russell had warned that, ‘Eye-strain and undue excitement affect their health…
Their vulgarity and silliness, and the distorted, unreal, Americanised (in the worst sense) view of life presented must have a deteriorating effect, and lead, at the best, to the formation of false ideals.’
A report by the National Council of Public Morals on The Cinema (1917) had also scrutinised the problem, entertaining a wide variety of evidence — on such matters as the educational potential of the cinema, censorship and licensing, the molestation of children in picture palaces, and a clouded discussion of  what was somewhat eerily called ‘the moral dangers of darkness’— as well as some monosyllabic evidence from children themselves on whether the moving pictures gave them bad dreams.
A much more specific fear was that young people would be provoked into imitative crime by the daring exploits witnessed on the screen, and the National Council of Public Morals addressed itself with particular vigour to the belief ‘that the picture house is responsible for the increase in juvenile crime, and that boys are often led to imitate crimes (larceny or burglary) which they have seen in the pictures, or to steal money that they may pay for admission,.
Exceptional in its moderacy, the report discounted the fear of imitative crime, arguing that ‘it certainly has not been proved that the increase in juvenile crime generally has been consequent on the cinema’.
Such moderacy did not, however, stem the flood of accusations against the cinema which continued to allege that the movies were encouraging new and dangerous trends of lawlessness among the young.
Hugh Redwood's God in the Slums (1932), which described the work of the Salvation Army, would put matters this way: ‘The boys of the slums are wonderful training material for good or evil.
They are children in their love of pictures and music.
Hollywood's worst in the movie line has recruited hundreds of them for the gangs of race-course roughs, motor bandits, and smash-and-grab thieves.’
In another account of youth work, Hubert Secretan rehearsed the same complaint: ‘Every boy's sympathy goes out to the lithe and resourceful crook…
Occasionally a weak-minded youth may be urged by the exploits of a Chicago gangster to essay a feeble imitation.’
Associated with these narrowly focused fears of imitation, there was a more broadly cast net of accusation against the ‘Americanisation’ of English morality, and the distorted criminogenic values inculcated by the cinema.
‘A never-never land of material values expressed in terms of gorgeous living, a plethora of high-powered cars and revolvers’, as A. E. Morgan described it in 1939, ‘of unbridled desire, of love crudely sentimental or fleshly, of vast possessions, of ruthless acquisition, of reckless violence’.
‘It is a school of false values’, he wrote, ‘and its scholars cannot go unscathed.’
Echoing a related line of concern in 1935, an Assistant Commissioner of Prisons thought that ‘over-sexed films’ were ‘a snare to the young’.
In these criticisms of the cheap emotional appeals of the Hollywood cinema and its incitements to gangsterism, we can discern a continuing tradition which passes down into our own historical time where television has come to be understood as a major criminal influence, inviting similar accusations of ‘copy-cat’ crimes based on TV heroes and tough guys.
We can also begin to see the broad outlines of a much longer connected history of respectable fears surrounding the demoralising influences of popular amusements.
Its lineage reaches back, via the accusations against the Hollywood ‘talkies’ and the earliest silent movies, through and beyond the Music Halls at the turn of the century when directly similar complaints were voiced, towards the cheap theatres and penny-gaffs of early Victorian England when it was commonly alleged that the portrayal of the daring exploits of Jack Sheppard and Dick Turpin caused young people to imitate their crimes, and then back towards the eighteenth century's disapproval of popular amusements such as fairs, interludes, public shows and minor theatres.
Here, if we anticipate the arguments of later chapters, we would find Henry Fielding already mulling over the fall of decadent Rome and its lesson for Old England, and warning in his Enquiry into the Causes of the Late Increase of Robbers (1751) of the disastrous effects of ‘too frequent and expensive diversions among the lower kind of people’.
This monologue of fears about the moral downfall of the common people as the result of debased amusements, stretching back across more than two centuries, must be counted as one of the determining traditions within the unfolding preoccupation with the decline and fall of the ‘British way of life’.
‘No Crime’
The continuities between pre-war and postwar feelings of cultural deterioration are clear enough, and if we turn to  questions of crime and violence in pre-war Britain then equally familiar complaints stare back at us.
The excessive leniency of the law was indicted frequently enough, especially in the wake of the Children and Young Persons Act of 1933 and what appeared to be a monster ‘crime wave’ among the very young.
The loosening of traditional morality, the decline of the family, the incitements of the movie-screen — all these were regularly cited as evidence of a breakdown of authority in a catalogue of accusations which is a carbon copy of the fears that surround the criminal question in our own time.
Running alongside these complaints, however, and often holding them in check, there was a counter-movement in the interwar years which involved a quite different moral emphasis.
So that, particularly in response to rowdyism and lawlessness among the young, there was an unusual degree of sympathy towards offenders.
In discussing pre-war crime, we must be faithful both to the continuities and also to the sometime surprising ‘permissiveness’ of the interwar years.
As an initial pointer towards this counter-movement within respectable opinion, we can take some remarks by Robert Baden-Powell, the founder of the Boy Scout movement, in an address to a conference on juvenile crime.
There had been a perceived increase in youthful crime in the early 1930s that seemed to correspond to an increase in youth unemployment — and again we can reflect on the familiarity of both the problem and the complaint.
But in a typically maverick comment on the matter, Baden-Powell thought that if there had been an increase in juvenile crime, then this was ‘rather a promising sign’.
The Times (25 May 1933) reported Baden-Powell's speech as follows: It is the kind of remark which nowadays would get you into Dr Boyson's little black book as a ‘permissive’ moral hooligan.
Even so, Baden-Powell's intriguing romanticisation of what we would now call ‘muggings’ was not an uncommon response in these years.
But it is not difficult to find conflicting judgements, as in the headline: ‘TERROR GANGS TO BE WIPED OUT.
Flogging advocated for Slashers and Mutilators’ in a news report which described street gangs as ‘this greatest social menace of the century’.
Baden-Powell's characterisation of street robberies as ‘little adventures’ also rubs uneasily against other headlines and news stories of the period: ‘DARING RAIDS BY BAG-SNATCHERS.
Widow Badly Injured and Robbed’; or ‘Woman injured by Violent BagSnatcher’ when she was ‘thrown to the ground and bruised’in what was ‘a brutal assault upon a helpless woman’.
Nevertheless, even in the face of brute facts such as these, there was generally a low-key emphasis in the interwar years towards crime and punishment.
The case of street robbery is particularly interesting, because this is commonly the most sensitive area for registering public concern about crime and violence, itself reflected in the fact that robbery-with-violence was the only common offence for which an adult offender could be sentenced to whipping before the abolition of corporal punishment in 1948.
There was ample evidence of sharp increases in crimes of this nature.
There was a 70 per cent increase in shop raids in London between 1925 and 1929, for example, and a 90 per cent increase in bag-snatches over the same four-year period.
Between the First World War and the later 1920s, there was also a fourfold increase in breaking-in offences in the outer Home Counties — which almost certainly resulted from the greater mobility afforded to house-breakers by the advent of the motor car.
Nevertheless, there was an insubstantial public reaction to these upsurges in recorded crime, and public opinion was not effectively mobilised around these issues in any significant ‘law-and-order’ campaign.
It would also appear, particularly in relation to street robberies, that the law was rarely prosecuted with its full vigour.
Flogging was only used as a judicial punishment in a handful of cases each year throughout the 1920s and 1930s, and the birching of young boys' bottoms was also passing  out of favour.
There was, moreover, a considerable amount of discretion in terms of what might count as ‘violence’ in a street robbery, and it seems likely that street robbers were more commonly charged with ‘bag-snatching’which was regarded as a less serious offence than ‘robbery with violence’.
It was reported in Parliament, for example, that of thirty-two reported instances of ‘highway theft’ over a six-month period in South Kensington in 1932, only one of these was treated as ‘robbery with violence’.
Street robbery was not the only crime to be viewed leniently in the interwar years.
On another Parliamentary occasion, when it was alleged that cases of motor banditry were being grossly exaggerated in the press, reference was made to ‘such trivial acts as the pulling down of shutters of an empty kiosk and stealing cigarettes and sweets’ which were contrasted with what was called ‘real crime’.
And although it is not clear what was meant by ‘real’ crime, it is evident that certain kinds of common theft, damage and injury were regarded as wholly commonplace in pre-war years and hardly worth a moment's thought.
Pulling down the shutters of an empty shop or kiosk, we should remind ourselves, is what would today in the aftermath of Brixton and Toxteth be described as ‘looting’.
Another interesting example of these altered perceptions of crime and disorder comes to us from Sir Robert Mark's memoirs where he recounts some experiences from a brief spell as a beat constable in Manchester in the late 1930s.
There is nothing exceptional in what he has to say, which mirrors many other accounts of the period.
He mentions ‘the odd brawl and punch-up’, for example, the fact that policemen only went in pairs in some districts, and that they patrolled the centre of the city in strength each weekend ‘because prostitutes and drunks frequently started fights and a good time was had by all’.
Already, the description of a street brawl as ‘a good time’ denotes an altered moral terrain.
Sir Robert also mentions the hazardous rough-and-tumble involved in making street arrests while surrounded by hostile, jeering crowds.
In one such incident, described in some detail, he tells us how ‘one Friday night an enormous navvy pushed the head of a constable through a shop window and  started quite a battle in which uniformed and plainclothes men cheerfully joined in’.
Again, it is a cheerful confrontation, even though‘it grew to quite serious proportions, stopping the traffic in Ardwick Green’.
In order to facilitate a quick arrest under difficult circumstances —‘the crowd was jeering and becoming unpleasantly restive’— Robert Mark then confesses that he indulged in a little police brutality, by using his strictly non-regulation rubber truncheon to give the offender ‘a hefty whack on the shin' which apparently broke his leg.
Now, what are we to make of an incident such as this?
Sir Robert Mark goes on to tell us that after the prisoner's appearance in court where, with his leg encased in plaster he was fined ‘the customary ten shillings’, the violent navvy behaved like a perfect gent: Sir Robert Mark thus tries to squeeze out of this story a moral which points to the deteriorated relationship between the police and public.
It is a common enough complaint.
But what holds the attention more is the way in which he characterises these rough incidents — which, judged by other accounts of the period, would commonly involve assaults on the police, bottle-fights and sometimes determined crowd resistance to arrest — as a ‘good time’ and a ‘cheerful’brawl.
The magistrate would also appear to have been infected with the same cheerful disposition: even allowing for the ravages of inflation, a ten shillings fine is a somewhat less than draconian response to a charge of pushing a policeman's head through a shop window.
Times are, indeed, different.
In what is perhaps the most usual response to these altered judgements against crime between pre-war and postwar years, of course, it is suggested that such incidents have become ‘more serious’ or ‘more violent’as the years have gone by.
However, the historical record is difficult to reconcile with  this point of view.
Razor gangs, race-course roughs, violent bag-snatchers, vice rackets and motor banditry were integral features of the crime picture in the interwar years, and feuds between armed mobsters were not unknown.
There were also moments of aggravated political violence — whether clashes between hunger marchers and the police, bitter street-fights between fascists and anti-fascists which led to the Public Order Act of 1936, or accusations and counter-accusations about ‘political hooliganism’ when public meetings were broken up, as they frequently were.
In 1921, in one of the more serious confrontations, the Recorder of Liverpool publicly censured the city's police who had batoncharged a demonstration of unemployed workers with ‘most unnecessary violence’.
In the Chief Constable's view the use of force was ‘fully justified’, believing himself surrounded by a criminally hostile population, with recent memories of the looting and disorder which had accompanied the police strike of 1919 in Liverpool.
There was a continuing thread of disturbance, reaching a new crescendo in 1931 when more than thirty towns witnessed clashes between the police and unemployed demonstrators protesting at dole cuts.
In October 1931 the police led baton charges in Cardiff, Glasgow, Manchester, Salford and elsewhere.
In some places army reserves were called out to protect public property, and in Manchester high-pressure water-hoses were used against demonstrators.
At Glasgow, where there was a full-scale riot when police broke up a meeting of 50,000 people at Glasgow Green, shops were ransacked and the police were bombarded with missiles by tenement dwellers.
While the police were thus tied down, in the Garngad district there was ‘an organised attempt at looting’.
There is nothing in the history of the 1920s and 1930s to justify the cosy nostalgia that is now cloaked around the pre-war years.
In the more notorious slum districts, there appears to have been little or no respect for the law.
These areas provided havens for gambling schools, and the police did not dare to venture there except in strength — when attempts to break up street-gambling, or to douse the high spirits of Bonfire Night could lead to violent eruptions.
Without even trespassing into any of these more perilous aspects of pre-war street life, the Mass Observation study The Pub and the People (1943) filled in some of the detail of the rowdy bonhomie of the working-class weekend, and the ‘high point of mass drunkenness’ during the exodus from the northern towns to Blackpool.
The following excerpt is written in a Mass Observationer's shorthand, which accounts for the bumpy grammar:
Other details of this allegedly gentle pre-war street life are filled in by the writings of youth club workers — Butterworth's Clubland (1932), Hatton's London's Bad Boys (1931) and Secretan's London Below Bridges (1931)— which are teeming with rowdy incident, outbreaks of hooliganism, shoplifting sprees, youngsters terrorising old ladies, foul language, youth club riots and vandalism.
Hatton was so impressed by his bad boys that he gave them colourful 1930s ‘punk rock’ pseudonyms — Alf Artful, Billy Dustup and Reggie Smashem — which are no more suggestive of obedience and docility than other pre-war descriptions of brawls, affrays, legless drunks, or street robbers armed with sand-bags and cut-throat razors.
‘You will continually be living on the edge of a volcano’, wrote Hatton offering advice to budding youth workers, ‘for no one can know when an outburst of general indiscipline will occur.’
James Butterworth followed the hooligan careers of similar boys —‘Sam Smiler’ and ‘Thomas Tiddler’— along with the apprenticeship of ‘Tiddler Junior’, because the British  hooligan was thought to be getting younger in his time, as in ours:
To offer one final example of these pre-war accounts of the untameable energies of young people, here is Hatton's description of a visit to a Day Continuation School for young workers.
The class, it will be noticed, was regulated by the traditional order and discipline existing before the ‘permissive’ deluge.
It was on the subject of ‘Education and Citizenship’:
Pre-war Permissives
In this uninterrupted narrative of rowdyism and mischief running through the writings of these Christian youth workers in the 1920s and 1930s, it is not only the behaviour itself  that is difficult to reconcile with the nostalgia which has come to settle around postwar perceptions of pre-war social realities.
The moral tone is also not what we are led to expect.
Whereas we are encouraged to remember the pre-war years as the home of traditional discipline and common sense, we can hardly fail to notice the sympathy which reaches out to Hatton's bad boys or to Butterworth's hyperactive little terror — a sympathy, what is more, that nowadays would often be slapped down as a sentimental, modern, postwar ‘permissive’ fad.
Sometimes this sympathy could involve quite extraordinary leniency.
In 1937 Basil Henriques, a youth worker, magistrate and pillar of respectability, found it reasonable to excuse shop-lifting from multiple stores, for example, because they offered ‘that most disgraceful temptation…the most attractive gadgets and toys in open trays well within the reach of children’.
Henriques also condoned the practice of fiddling coin machines, thieving from lorries and joy-riding: ‘Again it seems hardly fair to blame children for stealing from the back of lorries, which is such a very common offence, the result, generally, of perfectly innocent joy-riding.’
But what seemed to fall rather short of perfect innocence was a case of ‘attempting to obtain money by threats of violence’ where two youths had sent a menacing note to the old lady next door —‘Unless you provide £500 in old notes…you will be shot by revolver’— thereby reducing her to hysterics.
There are all sorts of reasons why one should not readily excuse such cruel behaviour, but Basil Henriques considered the crime to be nothing more than a boyish prank.
‘Thus what appears to be a serious charge may prove in the end,’ he wrote, ‘to be a very harmless, rather exciting good game.’
Another vivid example of this kind of reasoning was offered in a book on The Troublesome Boy (1936) by Dr H. S. Bryan, a medical officer in the child guidance service and an Assistant County Commissioner in the Boy Scouts, where he brought a little psychoanalytical inspiration to Scouting together with the romanticism of the movement's founder.
After one visit to a juvenile court where some gang members had been committed to Approved School after ‘carrying out depredations against shopkeepers over quite a wide area’, Dr Bryan ‘could  not help feeling a little depressed at the thought of so much high spirit, imagination, ingenuity and daring shut up behind high walls’.
Generally speaking, he thought that the enterprise of young villains received a shoddy deal in the courts:
It is not necessary to reach agreement with Dr Bryan's moral scheme in order to see that it involves quite a different moral emphasis from that projected on to the 1930s by post-war nostalgia.
We invariably find a quite explicit moral alignment, in fact, on the side of young people in the writings of these pre-war youth workers.
Hatton, for example, summed up the delinquency of Reggie Smashem and Billy Dustup as ‘nothing more serious than the symptoms of healthy, vigorous, adventurous adolescence’: ‘I propose to make a practical examination of this question of the ‘hooligan’’, for I am seriously concerned that he is not getting a fair deal.’
Pointing to the lack of decent recreational facilities m the slums, Butterworth also believed that ‘it is pointless to denounce street evils, gang hooliganism or to mourn the absence of team spirit in poorer areas…
Platitudinarians should live for one week where society has compelled millions to live.
They will then cease to hold their hands in horror at giggling girls and boisterous youths around lamp posts, or condemn the pastimes of the young in back alleys.’
Secretan arrived at the same conclusion: ‘It is scarcely to be wondered at that youthful craving for variety and excitement sometimes leads gangs of boys to try and put a little colour into their leisure hours in ways which lead to conflict with authority or to degradation of character.
The line between mischief and crime is not easily drawn.’
The judgements are typical and uniform.
A fair deal for  youth is what is advocated, informed by a recognition of the ease with which boisterous youthful energy can make itself objectionable and even dangerous to others, linked to the necessity of not allowing its troublesome character to dull the awareness of the natural and even positive qualities of youthful misconduct.
The motives behind these uniform statements of allegiance to youth were undoubtedly mixed and complex.
The conditions of mass unemployment certainly helped to support the feeling of leniency, in that crime was thought to be an inevitable consequence of poverty, so that there was an active sympathy for the young unemployed whose miserable condition was further highlighted in a perceived increase of suicides among the young.
The experiences of the First World War, often registered in a feeling of horrific waste, also left a deep impression on the mental landscape of the interwar years and helped to form the low-key response towards crime and hooliganism.
An active sense of guilt for the generation that had been sacrificed encouraged the belief that there was a debt to be repaid to the rising generation.
Finally, the ‘progressive’ educational movement was making great strides in the 1920s and 1930s, with a sphere of influence that reached beyond experiments such as Dartington Hall, A. S. Neill's Summerhill or Home Lane's Commonwealth.
Describing conventional education as a ‘conveyor belt’ and noting ‘the dullness of the eldest pupils compared with the brightness and self-sufficiency of the infants’, Denys Thompson of the Scrutiny group thought in 1932 that while education was ‘very busy mass-producing interchangeable little components for the industrial machine’the concern of education ‘should be to turn out ‘misfits’’, not spare parts'.
Aggressive criticisms of assembly-line education such as this from the 1930s should cause us to stop and think for a moment.
Indeed, it is here above all that the contemporary ‘law-and-order’ enthusiasts who slap down ‘permissiveness, as a postwar invention are badly in need of a history lesson.
It was, after all, as long ago as 1899 that John Dewey enunciated the principle of his ‘Copernican revolution’ in education whereby, just as ‘the astronomical centre shifted from the earth to the sun’, so ‘In this case the child becomes the sun  about which the appliances of education revolve; he is the centre about which they are organised.’
‘Progressive’ educational sentiments also provided important elements in Baden-Powell's Boy Scout philosophy, and he never tired of criticising what he saw as the dulling conformity and uninspired education provided by the State.
In Aids to Scoutmastership (1919) Baden-Powell likened his movement to Montessori's system of education applied to older youths, recommending this as ‘the line that eventually education will take when it comes to be set upon a right footing’.
The boy or girl was not ‘a blank piece of paper on which the teacher should write’, and it was in this liberal spirit that he condemned drill: ‘Military drill fashions him to an approved standard as part of the machine; whereas the aim of Scouting is to develop his personal character and initiative.’
There was much more of this kind of thinking in Baden-Powell's writings where he sometimes committed himself to outrageously libertarian positions on questions of education and authority, although these were perfectly in line with the emerging contours of ‘progressive’ educational philosophy.
‘A plant doesn't need to be taught how to grow; and neither does a child have to be taught, in the old-fashioned meaning of teaching’, Herbert Casson had written in a series of articles for Teacher's World in 1918.
‘A plant needs air, sunshine, moisture, and certain chemicals — given these it does its own growing’, he explained as he amplified his educational stance.
‘So a child needs things to look at, to touch, taste, smell and hear.
Given these, the child will do its own growing, as the plant does.’
Baden-Powell warmly approved of Casson's ideas, and he quoted large chunks of them in his writings.
It must also be said that Herbert Casson's admiration for youth could outbid even Baden-Powell's undying romanticism: For page upon page, across three issue of Teacher's World , Herbert Casson went on like this, at the same unrelenting pace.
And he demands to be quoted at length.
Because these were not casual, throw-away remarks, but a sustained celebration of youthfulness which has now become virtually unthinkable within the thickening twilight of liberal education: This kind of exhilaration has gone out of writings on the youth question, and some people will think that it is no bad thing.
But it is not necessary to share Herbert Casson's breathless enthusiasms, or to reach point-by-point agreement with his educational philosophy, to recognise the quite different moral emphasis that shows through repeatedly in the writings of pre-war youth workers and educationalists: an emphasis which saw youthful energy and also youthful misconduct as the spark of life, rather than the death-knell of the old traditions.
Something to be nurtured, rather than stamped upon.
‘There was a postwar cult’, wrote Mrs Le Mesurier in 1931, ‘which took it for granted that as the devil has all the good tunes, so youth had all the good qualities’, and faced with the giddy enthusiasm of people such as S. F. Hatton, Basil Henriques, James Butterworth, Herbert Casson, H. S. Bryan and Robert Baden-Powell we can perhaps see what she was driving at.
Even so, her own assessment of the needs of young people confirmed the general impression of a positive emphasis in the interwar years.
‘The problems of youthful crime are nearly all problems of education,’ she thought, ‘for although some human problems seem problems of despair, all the problems of youth are problems of hope.’
And it was indeed hope, education and reformation that dominated the sphere of juvenile justice in these years, most solidly embodied in the Children and Young Persons Act of 1933 which consolidated these developments in the treatment of young offenders.
With lamentable predictability, however, there was a wailing from certain quarters against ‘our ‘namby-pamby’’ methods' and ‘our drawing-room courts’, and what was taken to be the excessive leniency of the 1933 Act was accused of unleashing a tidal wave of crime among the young.
Levels of recorded crime certainly did shoot up in the years following the implementation of the 1933 Act, and the crime rate for boys under 14 years of age found guilty of indictable offences almost doubled in only three years.
However, the recognition which is generally held was that the increase in the criminal statistics was because police and public alike were more willing to bring charges against young offenders because of the reshaping of the court  system towards help and reformation, rather than punishment.
Indeed, this was the very reason that the Departmental Committee on the Treatment of Young Offenders had recommended, in 1927, the reform of the system: ‘When it is realised that these courts are specially equipped to help rather than punish the young offender, we hope that the reluctance to bring such children before will disappear.’
On more than one occasion,The Times endorsed this view, reminding its readers that ‘the statistics really reflect the growth of confidence in the system as reformed’ and that it was ‘not that children have suddenly become more wicked, but that the legal machinery has become more efficient’.
This emerged as the consensus view on the juvenile ‘crime wave’ of the 1930s, and The Times was also speaking for a wide consensus when it suggested in a lead article that, ‘It is a good and wise rule that, as far as possible, delinquent children ought to be left at home.’
This was reflected in the decisions of the courts, where slightly more than half of juveniles charges with indictable offences received a probation sentence in the 1930s.
By contrast, since the Second World War this proportion of young offenders receiving a sentence that involves supervision in the community has dropped steadily.
Since the implementation of the much-maligned Children and Young Persons Act of 1969, moreover, while the proportion of young offenders receiving custodial sentences has soared, the proportion dealt with by supervision orders has continued to decline.
So much so, that it has fallen from the 50 per cent standard of the 1930s, to less than 15 per cent in the late 1970s — which is no better, and in some areas far worse, than the standard already achieved before the First World War when the Probation Act of 1907 had hardly consolidated itself.
It is therefore necessary to depart quite sharply from conventional postwar wisdom about the pre-war years — a wisdom that rests on the twin myths of firm punishment in the courts, going hand-in-hand with little or no crime and an untroubled youth — and to state a rather different version of events.
It is not only in the actualities of pre-war crime, nor in the fears surrounding crime, that we find simple contradictions of postwar nostalgia.
With the progressive wing of  opinion in the ascendancy, the operations of the criminal justice system — which have appreciably toughened since the 1930s, in spite of postwar wailings about the weakness of the law — also give a jolt to the customary understanding of the pre-war years.
Nevertheless, what is most notable is the remarkable stability of the complaints and accusations that were arranged around the criminal question, providing firm lines of continuity between pre-war and postwar Britain.
Then, as now, fears of national decline and cultural adulteration were much in evidence, and it was a cause for great concern that the nation's youth were slipping away from the standards of their forebears.
Here is James Butterworth, for example, writing fifty years ago and reciting an uncannily familiar catalogue of ‘postwar’ trends against which the boys' club leader of the 1930s must labour:
Again we must ask ourselves, ‘Which war was that?’
Because this is where we came in.
The world may change, but somehow this vocabulary of complaints against declining standards and morals is immunised against change.
And the ‘golden age’ is there once more: glimmering in the distance, just out of sight, back over the next hill, twenty years ago, ‘before the war’.
The Original Hooligans
THE TRADITIONAL ‘WAY OF LIFE’
Within the remembered traditions of the ‘British way of life’, the late Victorian and Edwardian years — from the Gay Nineties until the Great War — hold a privileged position as a time of unrivalled tranquility.
The cosy fug of the Music Halls, the barrel-organ streets, the unhurried pace of a horse-drawn civilisation — before the motor car, before the cinema, before the sweeping changes of the twentieth century and their attendant disorientations — here, we are repeatedly encouraged to believe, is the original home of ‘Old England’ and a life ordered by tradition and familiarity.
The horrible details of the 1914–18 war undoubtedly serve to heighten the poignancy of this feeling, and the creative energy of the war poets evokes its own sense of loss for a stable life snatched away, amidst ‘the shrill, demented choir of wailing shells’.
So many young men, too, this sorrowful voice from the past reminds us, torn away in the flower of their youth.
The ‘lost generation’, they are sometimes called, lost forever in the Flanders mud.
The sentiment finds many forms of expression, both popular and apparently scholarly.
The popular feeling is beautifully summed up in a recently published collection of faded Edwardian photographs, entitled The Golden Years , 1903–1913.
On the book's cover there is an appealing family portrait of a shy little girl in a pretty white dress, sitting on an elderly gentleman's lap, with an appropriate caption: ‘A pictorial survey of the most interesting decade in English history, when the generation gap meant no more than the gap between grandfather and grand-daughter.’
Taken in isolation, it is a view that might be easily dismissed as trivial sentimentality.
But it finds agreement with more sober, weighty judgements on the period provided by various studies of the official criminal statistics.
V. A. C. Gatrell and T. B. Hadden, for example, have argued that there was ‘a real decline in criminal activity, and quite a spectacular one’ in the late decades of the nineteenth century, and T. R. Gurr and his colleagues agree that crime and public disorder in London (as reflected in the official crime figures) reached a low ebb at the turn of the century.
in another review of the criminal statistics, F. H. McClintock and N. H. Avison also direct us towards the relative stability in recorded crime levels between 1900 and 1914 which, they suggest, ‘might be described as the stable but carefree Edwardian era’.
Youth and Nation: ‘Affluence’ Amidst Poverty
It would only be possible to describe these years in such glowing terms, however, if we were to place our curiosity under strict curfew, refusing to allow it to look beyond the frozen images of faded snap-shots or the scratchy surface realities of the official crime statistics.
It is not a description that would have satisfied Mr C. G. Heathcote, for example, the Stipendiary Magistrate for Brighton, when asked for his opinions on the question of juvenile crime in 1898: Mr Heathcote's remarks are preserved in a report on Juvenile Offenders compiled by the Howard Association which had scouted the opinions of the magistracy and police.
The general impression running through its pages was a riot of impunity, irresponsible parents, working mothers and lax discipline in schools, with magistrates and police believing themselves to be impotent before a rising tide of mischief and violence — particularly ‘the recent serious increase of ruffianism among city youths’.
Any number of voices piped up to recommend ‘the ‘short and sharp’’ punishment of whipping', and there was general agreement that Parliament's refusal to extend the powers of birching — which were largely restricted to use against boys under 14 years of age — was a sign of morbid sentimentality.
It was, as The Times observed in the following year, a sorry fact that there was ‘a vague dread of a wholesome birching’ and that nowadays ‘the father of a scapegrace’no longer saw fit to ‘save his son from the taint of gaol by loyally and soundly whipping him’.
Youthful offenders were also believed to be getting younger, and according to one magistrate parental authority was at such a low ebb that ‘it is melancholy to find that some parents are not ashamed to confess that children of seven or eight years old are entirely beyond their control’, while another thought that ‘in nine cases out of ten,children are entirely masters of the position’.
The sense of moral crisis and social discontinuity reflected here was deeply characteristic of late Victorian and Edwardian society, and from the late 1890s until the First World War there was a flood of such accusations against the youth.
‘A somewhat unlovely characteristic of the present day’, Mrs Helen Bosanquet wrote in 1906, was that ‘there is among the children a prevailing and increasing want of respect towards their elders, more especially, perhaps, towards their parents’.
A few years later, Mary Barnett reiterated the position: ‘One of the most marked characteristics of the age is a growing spirit of independence in the children and a corresponding slackening of control in the parents.’
These typical judgements against dwindling authority formed part of a wider fabric of anxiety in this era, and  there were some quite delirious fears in circulation about a supposed deterioration — both physical and moral — among the British people which was believed to be producing new and unprecedented forms of violence and depravity.
The wretched condition of so many recruits for the Boer War had brought this matter very forcibly into public attention, leading to the extraordinary fact-finding mission of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration in 1904.
And although the committee believed that the problem had been overstated, this did little to allay the anxieties.
Baden-Powell summed up the feeling in the first edition of Scouting for Boys in 1908.
We have already encountered Baden-Powell in his romantic — progressive mode of address, but before the First World War he was more usually to be found singing a different tune: Here he is again, sounding off to the Royal United Services Institute in 1911, in a typical Edwardian Tory response to the Liberal government's programme of welfare reforms:
The creation of Baden-Powell's Boy Scouts is invariably remembered in heroic terms, as a celebration of patriotic spirit and fresh-air fun.
But in fashioning his movement, Baden-Powell skilfully wove together any number of the political questions that preoccupied his contemporaries, and the movement's spectacular growth drew on deep funds of social anxiety — anxieties which invariably settled around the excessive liberty allowed to young people and the attendant demoralisation which was, in turn, linked to a newly  perceived upsurge in crime and violence among the young.
‘The class of lads and young men who spring up in every city’, wrote Sir John Gorst in The Children of the Nation (1901), ‘have emancipated themselves from all home influence and restraints.’
Writing on the boys' club movement in 1904, W. J. Braithwaite thought that ‘itis dangerous for the club and the boys that many of them should have tasted too much of freedom’.
In evidence before the Committee on Physical Deterioration, Dr T. F. Young from Liverpool described how, particularly at the point when they started work, young people ‘throw off all parental authority…get to congregating about the street corners at night…become what we call ‘corner boys’’, and get drunken habits'.
‘Our young people have no idea of discipline or subordination’, said Dr Young, ‘They would not subordinate themselves to anybody’, and before the same committee E. T. Campagnac and C. E. B. Russell recounted a similar state of affairs in Manchester.
The accusations were flat and uniform, although what is truly remarkable is that the youth of the nation were believed not only to be free of all discipline, but also excessively affluent.
‘Rejoicing in their newly found freedom from school discipline and with more surplus cash than they will ever again possess’, one of the contributors to Whitehouse's Problems of Boy Life (1912) believed that youths were ‘tempted to spend as little time at home as possible…the street, rather than the sleeping place, is the home of the average youth’.
Reginald Bray, who was associated with the settlement movement in Camberwell, even seemed to doubt whether the youths needed to sleep, describing in 1904 how they would stay out on the streets ‘until it is dark, and often in summer until dawn begins to break…the street and not the house ought probably to be regarded as the home’.
‘Speaking generally,’ Bray wrote in Boy Labour and Apprenticeship (1911), ‘the city-bred youth is growing up in a state of unrestrained liberty’, and describing how ‘the habits of school and home are rapidly sloughed off in the new life of irresponsible freedom’he agreed that ‘the large amount of money he has to spend on himself is by no means an unmixed benefit’.
These statements reflected generalised anxieties about the  youth, but particularly aggravated accusations of irresponsibility, freedom and affluence were brought against young people employed in various kinds of street work: as van boys, messenger boys, boys to hold horses' heads, and street traders.
Pointing to the easy pickings and careless pleasures of newspaper sellers, flower sellers, barrel-organ boys and other youthful street traders, a government report of 1910 provided what was perhaps the most extravagant version of these common Edwardian fears:
Nippers and Dead-End Jobs, Suffragettes and Strikes
It is probably as well to pause here a moment, in order to take a few social bearings against which to judge these accusations.
We need to remind ourselves, and quite forcibly, that these typical complaints come from the period of history in which Charles Booth and Seebohm Rowntree conducted their pioneering studies of urban life which revealed such awful poverty among the common people.
The bandit freedoms of young street traders would be indulged in the grubby common lodging houses of the slum areas, in the company of more elderly bandits such as tramps, habitual drunkards, casual labourers, drifters and infirm beggars.
The disparity between the frequent allegations of luxury and freedom, as against the wretched conditions of the lower rungs of the working class, is truly astonishing.
In such a context, therefore, it comes as less of a surprise to find Sidney Webb actually advocating a cut in the wages of working youths — in evidence before the 1909 Royal Commission on the Poor Laws, of all places — so that‘the youth, who now has even too much pocket-money, and gets, therefore, too soon independent of home, and too easily led into evil courses’ could be brought down a peg or two.
‘The  undisciplined youth, precocious in evil, earning at seventeen or eighteen more wages than suffice to keep him’ could be brought under more effective control, Webb believed, ‘his leisure absorbed under discipline’, by a system of compulsory physical training and technical instruction for all youths under 18 years of age.
The similarities between such a scheme of reclamation and discipline and those widely mooted proposals of the 1980s to reclaim the youth through compulsory job-training or ‘community service’ should not pass unnoticed.
Nor should the similarities in the broader dimensions of the problem of youth employment escape our attention.
The Edwardians were much perturbed by what was known as the problem of ‘boy labour’ and the structural unemployment which was built into the labour market for youths.
Young people would start work at any point between the ages of 10 and 14 years, for although the school-leaving age stood at fourteen there were many irregularities in the enforcement of the regulations.
On leaving school there was an enormous demand for boy labour in many spheres of work.
In factories and workshops, advances in machine technology had deskilled numerous working-class jobs, thus making it possible for employers to replace skilled men with successive relays of unskilled boys, and at lower wages.
The uneven development of the technologies of production and communication had also produced a sharp, and apparently increasing demand in the job market for boys to do all sorts of simple work in the sphere of communications and transport: van boys, errand boys, messenger boys, boys to answer telephones, boys to hold horses' heads and other kinds of trivial but essential work.
Finally, respectable England required various other, if less essential, fetch-and-carry amenities: hotel pages, uniformed door-openers, billiard-cue chalkers, boy golf caddies, and a myriad of other forelock-tugging dogsbodies and serfs.
‘Considering how troublesome errand-boys are,’ wrote Helen Bosanquet in 1898, ‘it is wonderful how many of them are wanted.
They are like postcards, so easy to send and so cheap, that everyone likes to have one handy.’
It was a typically snotty remark from this doyenne of the Charity  Organisation Society which, nevertheless, managed to sum up the gulf between social classes at the turn of the century.
Mrs Bosanquet might also have mentioned, without stretching the point too far, the wonderful convenience of being able to give these troublesome boys the sack at a moment's notice.
Because respectable England, being what it was, did not want to be waited upon by gangling adolescents with spots, nor to have itself paged by unmodulated voices that were just breaking, and youths in such positions invariably got the push when they grew out of the uniform, or lost their boyish looks.
‘Boy labour’ in all spheres was a transient period of employment, and even in the more essential areas of work boys would lose their jobs — whether as ‘nippers’or ‘handy lads’in factories, or as van boys and messenger boys — when they reached early maturity and lost their enthusiasm for boyish wages.
Consequently, the jobs available to youths came to be known as dead-end' jobs or as ‘blind-alley’ employment in this period of history.
It was greatly feared, in fact, that the structure of employment was such that it supplied the rising generation with little discipline and even less skill, and that it threatened to produce an endless tide of loafers, unemployables and ne'er-do-wells who had been thrown on to the scrap heap in their late teens or early twenties.
The employment opportunities for working-class girls — whether in factory work or in domestic service — would not appear to have excited either the same sympathy or alarm.
But when it looked at the boys, Edwardian England was invariably moved.
‘Without a trade, without a craft, without any values — scrap iron that does not count, rubbish fit only for the waste heap’ is how Canon Henry Scott Holland summed up the problem: ‘We the public have used him up: he is no more to us now than a squeezed orange.’
Or, to strike another chord of apprehension, as expressed in the Report of the Prison Commissioners for 1907–8: ‘He drifts, and the tidy scholar soon becomes a ragged and defiant corner loafer.’
Whichever way it was phrased, Edwardian Britain considered that in the problem of ‘boy labour’ it faced a crisis of some magnitude in the social reproduction of steady work disciplines and skills.
These feelings of dwindling authority and social discontinuity which focused on the young were informed by the wider political insecurities of this anything-but-carefree era which was plagued by engulfing fears of national decline and incohesion.
In global terms, the industrial advance of the United States and Germany insisted on a reappraisal of Britain's position in the world economy, while the muddled fortunes of the Boer War came to underline the fragility of the British Empire in military terms.
The early years of the century witnessed widespread invasion scares, and extra-parliamentary pressure groups were actively campaigning for the introduction of compulsory military service which had never existed in Britain.
On the domestic front, there was what one historian has described as ‘the sense of impending clash’ with widespread labour unrest.
There were bitter struggles in the courts on the right to strike and the power of trade unions, which led to the creation of the Labour Party, with fearful signs of a new and radical anger among the working class through and beyond the strike-bound year of 1911 when even schoolchildren came out on strike in some districts, ‘for shorter hours and no stick’.
The movement for women's emancipation was also spreading its wings, sending ripples of anxiety through British society which were not unassociated with the common allegations of mounting parental irresponsibility and the decline of family life.
In 1909 there was a constitutional crisis of considerable magnitude over the right of Parliamentary veto in the House of Lords which shook England to its respectable depths.
Taken as a piece, these describe the not altogether calming preoccupations of this ‘golden’ Edwardian era.
The question of Ulster was there, too, with the shadow of the Irish rebellion hanging over the constitutional unity of the British Isles.
Yes, this was ‘our’ England, and no other.
Amidst all this shaking and trembling, respectable opinion was also waking up to the fact that new forms of life and organisation had emerged among the working class — both in a political, cultural and material sense.
Working-class life had changed, quite measurably, in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
While one third of the people lived near or below a stringently drawn poverty line, there had been  nevertheless tangible improvements in the living conditions of the bulk of the people after the squalid upheavals of the earlier phase of industrialisation and urbanisation.
For better-paid workers and their families, housing conditions were much improved and the diet was better.
Meat consumption had increased by something like a third between 1870 and 1890, and working-class people had begun to eat fruit, which had previously been a luxury.
New developments in the production of clothing and footwear, involving the manufacture of cheap commodities for a mass market, meant that people were better clothed and also that they had a purchase on ‘style’— including, as we shall see, ‘youth styles’.
Hire purchase was another development of the 1890s, and relatively cheaper consumer durables such as the sewing machine came within the reach of more prosperous working-class families.
There might even be a piano in the working-class parlour hinting at ‘affluence’, and the bicycle boom of the 1890s enlarged the mobility of many people — as did the new transport system of the tram.
A whole range of material and cultural innovations in the late nineteenth century had begun to transform urban life.
The football stadiums, the Bank Holiday, the Co-ops which boomed from the 1880s, the New Unionism and the socialist revival, the music hall, the seaside excursion, even the fish-and-chip shop, should all be added to this already impressive list of cultural and material innovations in this period.
‘In a word,’ writes Eric Hobsbawm in his summary of these developments, ‘between 1870 and 1900 the pattern of British working class life which the writers, dramatists and TV producers of the 1950s thought of as ‘traditional’’came into being.’
But he also adds a warning that, ‘It was not ‘traditional’’ then, but new.’
We can push Hobsbawm's point a little further.
Because what is truly remarkable, given the nostalgic lament which has accompanied the subsequent displacement of this ‘traditional way of life’, is that in their own historical time these emerging cultural institutions were greeted not only as something ‘new’, but as signs of an alarming development among the British people which threatened to destroy the ‘British way of life’.
‘Football Madness’ and the ‘Cyclist Terror’
Almost every aspect of popular culture came under fearful scrutiny at the turn of the ‘century.
The music halls, professional football, the ‘penny dreadful’ comics and the ‘penny bloods’which were said to be inducements to crime and immorality, the rowdy presence of working-class people at seaside resorts on Bank Holiday excursions, the evening promenade of young people that was ridiculed by their elders as the ‘monkey parade’, the depravity and violence associated with the pub — they all came under attack at different times.
Even the poor old bicycle was dragged into the act, amidst a blizzard of respectable fears.
The Music Halls, as might be readily anticipated, attracted the familiar accusation that they lowered moral standards and encouraged imitative crime.
Asking ‘how far a Music Hall programme may be held to encourage lawlessness’, one observer considered that the types of song in currency ‘could never have been written if the loafer, the liar, the drunkard, the thief, and the sensualist had been regarded as subjects unfit to be glorified in song’.
Another critic who took up the moral cudgels against the ‘spicy’ jokes and suggestive songs described how ‘this kind of garbage is part and parcel of the repertoire of nearly every music hall in the kingdom…it puts decency and clean-living at a discount, and it glorifies immorality all round’.
In his Manchester Boys (1905) Charles Russell also recounted how ‘horrible murders and terrible tragedies were enacted before the footlights’, leading to ‘so many instances of violence on the part of young men, in the back streets of the city’.
Soon, the early moving-pictures would be condemned in the same terms as ‘a direct incentive to crime, demonstrating, for instance, how a theft could be perpetrated’.
‘Before these children's greedy eyes with heartless indiscrimination horrors unimaginable are…presented night by night…terrific massacres, horrible catastrophes, motor-car smashes, public hangings, lynchings’ is how the lurid impact of the cinematograph was seen in 1913.
Many children, it was said, ‘actually begin their downward course of crime by reason of the burglary and pickpocket scenes they have witnessed’: ‘All who care for the moral well-being and education of the child will set their faces like flint against this new form of excitement.’
In the same year, when a judge confronted with a boy burglar at the London Sessions was to be found pontificating against the cinema as ‘a grave danger to the community’ which was ‘responsible for the downfall of many young people’, the prosecutor jokingly remarked that ‘it was perhaps an example of retributive justice that one of the houses broken into belonged to a cinematograph proprietor’.
But, given the doom and gloom already surrounding the earliest silent movies, maybe he wasn't joking at all.
As for football, it also came under the hammer for the usual reasons.
The Football League had been founded as recently as 1888, with its base firmly in the North and Midlands.
The behaviour of the crowds — vulgar, noisy and violent — immediately excited considerable apprehension, and the excesses of the transfer market and professionalism were thought to be ruining the native traditions of ‘fair play’ and sportsmanship.
Football had been a traditionally rowdy and sometimes violent game, but as a regulated spectator sport it provided novel opportunities for conflicts between the players, referees and fans, and there is a well documented history of pitch invasions, attacks on referees and players, and fighting between rival fans throughout the latter part of the nineteenth century and into the new century.
A few scattered examples can give some indication of these disorders.
In 1893, spectators burst on to the field during a game between Nottingham Forest and West Bromwich Albion, and a fight ensued between players and fans with the Albionites attempting to defend the referee, although it was observed ‘that none of the home players could be seen assisting in trying to stop disorder or to protect the Referee’.
Earlier, in 1888, another referee had complained bitterly about his ill-treatment by a Bolton crowd and ‘the dirty-nosed little rascals, who spoil every football match they go to’.
In the same year a Northern sporting rag reported how ‘a continuous hail of empty bottles’ had showered the pitch during a recent game, and here there were further complaints against the ragged discipline of the  players themselves.
On their way to a match against Great Lever, it was said that four members of the Accrington team became so ‘liquored up’ when they stopped to take refreshment at Blackburn that they missed their train.
While not wishing to ‘suggest that Blackburn ale is too potent for Accrington heads’, the football correspondent thought that this kind of thing happened too frequently.
With the advent of the new Leagues, and with larger attendances at football games, efforts were made to regulate the conduct of players and crowds, and the clubs were encouraged to protect referees more effectively.
Even so, this did not stop the trouble.
In a blistering attack on ‘The Football Madness’ in 1898, Ernest Ensor was particularly shocked by the epidemic of excitement among the fans: ‘A constant attendant at great football matches must have seen more than once a large crowd vertere pollicem in a manner which made him thankful that murder is illegal.’
Rounding against the people of the North of England, ‘whose warped sporting instincts are so difficult to understand, even when they are quite familiar’, Ensor condemned the commercialisation of sport, the sensationalism of football journalism, and the adoption of what he understood to be French and American coaching tactics, as a wholesale corruption of sporting values.
‘As regards morality,’ he thought, ‘the old English feeling for ‘sport’’and ‘fair play’’has receded to thinly-populated or remote districts where athletes cannot be exploited for money', prophesying that ‘soon the only football played, as used to be the case, for the love of the game, will be seen among University men’.
At the end of his torment, Ensor was to be found down on his knees in prayer ‘that the inherent virtues of cricket may continue to preserve it’ from the hooting and yelling mobs of the football stadiums.
Many of these fearful criticisms of the working class centred on the feeling that they were getting above their station in life, or that they were encroaching upon previously reserved territories of the middle class.
For some years there had been a gathering discontent around the boisterous arrival of working-class people at holiday resorts, where the Bank Holidays were regularly associated with heavy drinking, shrieking girls and the occasional free fight.
The plebs were getting everywhere, and in a survey of ‘Cheap Literature’ Mrs Bosanquet even found reason to frown upon the working-class lads who were now sauntering into the public libraries:
However, undoubtedly the most extraordinary aspect of this grumbling against the tendency of the working class to assert its noisome presence in places where it clearly had no right to go, was to be found in the magnified excitements which surrounded the bicycle craze of the 1890s.
Cycling was at the centre of a number of social panics.
It was feared that the push-bike was a health hazard, for example causing ‘bicycle face’, ‘bicycle hand’ and ‘bicycle foot’, as well as the dreaded kyphosis bicyclistratum , or ‘cyclist hump’, which resulted if the handle-bars were set too low.
Evidence placed before the Physical Deterioration Committee even suggested that cycling was a threat to the nation's manliness, inducing varicocele of the testicles ‘from the pressure of the saddle’.
More  grievous allegations were brought against the bicycling ‘scorchers’ who went too fast or, to strike another note of discontent, who went too far and barged into middle-class leisure haunts.
There were editorial fumings in The Times (15 August 1898) about ‘the East-End or suburban ‘scorcher’’, dashing along quiet country roads and through peaceful villages with loud shouts and sulphurous language, and reckless of life and limb’, and The Lancet (6 August 1898) saw fit to have a medical entry on ‘The Fool on the Cycle’.
Accounts of youths whizzing about madly on their bikes, causing pandemonium among the traffic, frightening horses, and knocking over pedestrians were as commonplace as the headlines which repeatedly sensationalised ‘The Cyclist  Terror’, ‘The Risks of the Cycle’, ‘The Perils of the Wheel’, ‘Moloch of the Wheel’, ‘The Dangers of City Cycling’ and ‘Cyclomania’.
There were many complaints by cyclists of harassment by the police and, in the midst of a social panic such as this, woe betide anyone who fell foul of the law while in charge of a bike.
The Daily Graphic (30 March 1898) described the fate of one young man, Thomas Duff, who had been unlucky enough to be charged with ‘riding a tricycle to the common danger’ and to encounter a magistrate who took an extremely dim view of the matter.
Thomas Duff, who had been going about his business as a messenger boy when it was said that he ‘nearly ran in to two gentlemen’, put up a stout defence in court.
He ‘produced his bell and rang it, stating that that was what he did at the time’, but the magistrate told him ‘that he must not think that everyone had to scamper out of the way upon hearing the sound of his bell’.
Under its headline ‘Mercantile Tricycles Denounced’, the Graphic described how, in default of paying a 10 shillings fine plus costs, this cycling desperado was sentenced to seven days' imprisonment — and what is more, poor Thomas Duff had been estimated by the police to have been rattling along at somewhere between 8 and 10 miles per hour.
There were, however, more tangible reasons for concern in that bicycle deaths and injuries were frequently reported in the press, with moments of aggravated alarm about ‘hit-and-run’ cyclists.
This provoked some heated confrontations in coroners' courts when cycling cases were brought before them.
In one hit-and-run case, one of the jurors had the effrontery to challenge the coroner's authority, stating that he was a cyclist himself and that pedestrians were often at fault because they took insufficient care.
‘The manly part for the cyclist,’ retorted the coroner, ‘whether he is to blame or not, is to face the consequences of his acts.’
In another coroner's court, called to enquire into the death of a 70-year-old man after an alleged hit-and-run accident, there was further uproar when the jury defied the evidence of medical experts and returned a verdict of ‘heart disease from natural causes’.
‘You discard the doctor's evidence?’ asked the astonished coroner.
‘Yes,’ replied one of the jurors, ‘and the  cyclist story too.’
This kind of squabbling in the courts was most unseemly, and The Daily Mail launched an angry editorial broadside: ‘There were cyclists on the jury, we read, and this fact has a grim sound…
Steps should be taken to put these people down.’
The woman cyclist was another object of fearful contemplation, and there were snide allusions to the improper ‘rational costumes’ women were adopting to facilitate travel by bike, as well as their recklessness in traffic.
There was always more than a hint, of course, that the real source of anxiety was that the bicycle might be enlarging the freedom of women in undesirable directions, because both in terms of class and sex the bicycle was a great leveller.
Indeed, among these villains of the wheel, the woman cyclist was possibly even more of a portent than the cyclist juror.
The bicycle was obviously shaking the old order to the roots, and with its customary irreverence the socialist Clarion (30 July 1898)— which had a large stake in the matter, because of the enormously popular Clarion Cycling Clubs — wondered ‘how it is no one has written a cycling melodrama, with a hero and a heroine and a villain on wheels’.
No doubt the rapid growth of the Clarion Clubs, spreading the socialist cause by bike, was another of the spectres haunting Old England in its alarmist response to the pedal cycle:
The bicycle was a powerful symbol of social change in this era, summing up so easily the fears brewing around popular freedoms and popular amusements, and it seemed to touch a brittle nerve of the process of democratisation.
The Times (15 August 1898) had given the broadest indication of the shock-waves produced by the push-bike when it delivered its editorial judgement on ‘The Bicycle as a Social Force’, which  bristled with otherwise unaccountable fears and allusions to deeper moving forces within society.
The bicycle was accused of enlarging the scope for theft, and we were encouraged to linger over some of the more squalid details of profiteering and corruption which had accompanied the boom in the cycling industry.
Pondering over the cycle's military potential, whether or not it might ‘mitigate the decline of the rural population’, fearing that it would tempt people away from the churches, but rejoicing that it would lure others away from‘demonstrations in Hyde Park or low-class places of amusement’,The Times thus moved its discussion skilfully between different planes of anxiety.
Indeed, behind the fears and accusations which surrounded the villainous working-class ‘scorcher’, his emancipated female accomplice, and the unruly cyclist juror we can perhaps sense the vaguely incoherent feeling that the democratic bicycle — which was now only upsetting the respectable pleasures of a quiet Bank Holiday weekend in the countryside — was representative of a force that might be calculated to upset a few other things as well.
A Frightening New Race of People
The alarm bells that were ringing around popular amusements and freedoms as the new century arrived moved in concert with a much darker current of anxiety about national decline and incohesion, involving some quite spectacular fantasies of racial degeneration.
Theories of ‘urban degeneration’ which suggested that the conditions of city life were manufacturing a deteriorated race had been aired since the 1880s, lending themselves to a number of schemes of reclamation.
General Booth's Salvationist doctrine was a notable example, recommending mass emigration from the city slums to virgin colonial territories.
There were also many more limited ventures such as Pearson's Fresh Air Fund, established in 1896 by Arthur Pearson, the founder of The Daily Express , to provide country holidays for city children, and this was itself among the inspirations for the fresh air philosophies of Baden-Powell's Boy Scouts launched in 1908.
Some rather fanciful Darwinian speculation had helped to inform these developments, as when Karl Pearson had brooded over the damaging evolutionary processes at work in National Life and Character: A Forecast (1894) where he had identified the growth of towns, the reliance on standing armies which would induce mechanical habits, the decline of individualism, family feeling and national pride as the emerging contours of the future.
As to‘its effect upon national character’, Pearson thought that ‘whether we are changing in the direction of a higher or lower morality is…the point that is most really at issue’.
But although he could not be said to have reached any hard-and-fast conclusions to this question, so fearful were the prospects of this supposed evolutionary degeneration that Karl Pearson took refuge (and a certain amount of comfort) in the fact that its results were far away: ‘Happily, what the distant future of the world may be is a matter that does not much concern us, and about which we may rejoice to know nothing.’
A few years later, however, the distant future showed every indication of having already arrived when these nagging anxieties grabbed the headlines around the large numbers of recruits who had been found unfit for service in the Boer War, and in spite of the half-hearted reassurances of the Physical Deterioration Committee of 1904 fears of racial deterioration were rampant.
‘Race suicide is possible’, exclaimed an anonymous commentator on ‘Sport and Decadence’ in 1909, while another author writing under the cloak of anonymity warned in 1912 of ‘a canker at the heart of the people which will surely destroy it’, believing that ‘the first stage of decay has already been reached when the stolid, God-fearing puritan of two-and-a-half centuries ago has given place to the shallow, hysterical cockney of today’.
Apocalypse was in the air, and in strict accordance with the traditions of this connected history of fears of British decline, the ghosts of Rome were summoned to make their judgement.
Writing on ‘The Fall of the Roman Empire and Its Lessons for Us’ one author had already struck the easy notes of comparison in 1898 — the decline of the arts of soldiery and manliness, the financial oppression of the middle classes, subsidised food prices, bread and circuses (that is, football) and the recruitment of the barbarian ‘lower races’into the imperial armies were all listed as forces ‘which may tend to enervate and degrade us, to destroy our love of truth, to poison the fountains of family life’.
Baden-Powell was particularly fond of this extravagant, but nevertheless deeply felt historical posture, and he saw the shadow of Rome hanging over the huge crowds attending the football stadiums which he likened to the ‘unmanly’ attitude of the young Romans who loafed around the circus entertainments —‘they paid men to play their games for them, so that they could look on without the fag of playing, just as we are doing in football now’— as he charged into battle against this betrayal of the British traditions of ‘fair play’and sportsmanship:
The pattern for these accusations had been set by the young Liberal Charles Masterman in The Heart of the Empire (1902) where he had thundered out his warning of inevitable decline as the result of the ‘perpetual lowering in the vitality of the Imperial Race in the great cities of the Kingdom through over-crowding in room and in area’: What was never entirely clear was whether it was merely a  physical deterioration that was eating away at the ‘Imperial Race’, or if a moral decay was not also in evidence.
The blurred sense of catastrophe usually insisted that it was both.
jack London, as an American journalist visiting Britain, picked up the mood in The People of the Abyss (1902).
Under the conditions of city life he believed it ‘incontrovertible that the children grow up into rotten adults, without virility or stamina, a weak-kneed, narrow-chested, listless breed’.
But within this ‘huge man-killing machine’ of the city he also sensed a temperamental alteration: ‘A new race has sprung up, a street people…
The traditional silent and reserved Englishman has passed away.
The pavement folk are noisy, voluble, high-strung, excitable.’
Reginald Bray, a friend of Masterman's, would remark on the same development: As Bray organised the arguments of Iris powerful Christian treatise on The Town Child (1907) around deep shades of pastoral contrast between the serenity of natural phenomena and what he regarded as the unnatural and shallow inconsistency of the irreverent city, he thought that ‘the most remarkable effect of an urban environment is to be sought in the disappearance of the habit of self-control’: The riotous jingo crowds which had accompanied the Ladysmith and Mafeking celebrations during the Boer War had indeed provided one of the most visible manifestations of  these perceived alterations among the British people, and observing that ‘to ‘Maffick’’ is not really congenial to the British character' The Times (30 October 1900) had mused upon whether ‘our national character was changing for the worse’.
However, there were even more terrible signs of this supposedly new streak of violent irritability to be found among the youth of working-class neighbourhoods, which could not even be justified on the grounds of over-enthusiastic jingo patriotism.
It showed itself at the turn of the century in a rash of gang fights, stabbings and street robberies, and in some parts of London there were excited rumours of youthful gangs armed with guns.
The phenomenon had first been noticed in the last years of Victoria's reign, among the new generation coming through who would be the new Edwardians and who would inherit the new century.
Indeed, the golden age had invented another new word to name its fears: it was called ‘Hooliganism’.
VICTORIAN BOYS, WE ARE HERE!
The word ‘hooligan’ made an abrupt entrance into common English usage, as a term to describe gangs of rowdy youths, during the hot summer of 1898.
‘Hooligans’ and ‘Hooliganism’were thrust into the headlines in the wake of a turbulent August Bank Holiday celebration in London which had resulted in unusually large numbers of people being brought before the courts for disorderly behaviour, drunkenness, assaults on police, street robberies and fighting.
One of the more alarming aspects of these Bank Holiday disturbances was that they highlighted fierce traditions of resistance to the police in working-class neighbourhoods, so that not uncommonly policemen attempting to make street arrests would be set upon by large crowds — sometimes numbering two or three hundred people — shouting ‘Rescue!
Rescue!’ and ‘Boothim!’
At first it was not entirely clear where the word ‘Hooligan’ had sprung from — and it remains unclear to this day — or exactly what it meant, other than some kind of novel reference to street violence and ruffianism.
It seems most likely, however, that it was a word like ‘Teddy Boy’ or ‘Mod’or ‘Skinhead’which, coming out of the popular culture of working-class London, had been adopted by youths in some localities in order to describe themselves and what they took for their common identity.
A Music Hall sling from 1890s, introduced by the Irish comedians O'Connor and Brady, had  probably first popularised the word: How it came to be adopted by, and applied to, youthful street gangs is something of a mystery.
But whatever its humble origins, when the new word was picked up by the newspapers in August 1898 it was quickly transformed into a term of more general notoriety, so that‘Hooligan’ and ‘Hooliganism’became the controlling words to describe troublesome youths who had previously been known more loosely as ‘street arabs’, ‘ruffians’or ‘roughs’.
And once they were christened, as we might expect, the ‘Hooligans’ were understood as an entirely unprecedented and ‘un-British’phenomenon: indeed, we must allow that it was most ingenious of late Victorian England to disown the British Hooligan by giving him an ‘Irish’name.
In other ways, too, the phenomenon was located within a scale of alien values and temperaments, thus stamping it as foreign and ‘un-English’.
When The Times (17 August 1898) first turned its attention to the August disorders, describing them as ‘something like organised terrorism in the streets’, it struck the key-note in an editorial on ‘The Weather and the Streets’:
A couple of years later, asking ‘What are we to do with the ‘Hooligan’’?
Who or what is responsible for his growth?’
The Times (30 October 1900) would harp on the same theme, announcing that ‘Every week some incident shows that certain parts of London are more perilous for the peaceable wayfarer than the remote districts of Calabria, Sicily, or Greece, once the classic haunts of brigands’.
In the heat of the immediate events of 1898, however, while denouncing the excessive leniency of the law,The Times (17 August 1898) had boomed out an even more momentous possibility that ‘un-English’ violence might have to be curbed by un-English methods:
Headline News
If the ‘Hooligans’ were regarded as an un-English phenomenon, they were also understood as an entirely unprecedented development and respectable England felt itself to have been suddenly engulfed in a new rush of crime.
A pattern of trouble quickly came to be associated with the street gangs.
The Hooligans fought pitched battles among themselves — Chelsea Boys against Fulham Boys, or Chapel Street against Margaret Street — and they were said to take great pride in their famous victories over rival neighbourhoods.
The Hooligans were also said to hunt in cowardly packs, however, and news reports regularly featured them smashing up coffee-stalls and public houses, assaulting staff in pubs and cheap eating-houses, robbing and assaulting old ladies, attacking foreigners such as Italian ice-cream vendors or ‘Froggy’ cafe owners, and setting upon policemen in the streets with savage howls of ‘Boot ‘em!’
Because, if the supposedly traditional habit of respect for the law was not much in evidence here, then frequent headlines such as‘Boot 'em’ at Waterloo’, ‘They Play Football with a Man’and ‘Kick a Man like a Football’serve to  remind us that the English ‘fair play’tradition of fighting with the fists — and not with the feet — had also gone into eclipse.
In South London, for example, it was said that the gangs wore ‘boots toe-plated with iron, and calculated to kill easily’.
Not everyone was agreed, however, that the Hooligans represented a novel development, nor about the scale of the outrages.
When a question was asked in Parliament in August 1898, the Home Secretary's department was ‘not satisfied that there was any such insecurity as was alleged’.
Mr Patrick McIntyre, a South London publican and former New Scotland Yard detective who wrote a regular crime column for the South London Chronicle , was another who cast doubt on the Hooligan panic, accusing newspapers of being in their ‘silly season’ and of taking the matter up merely ‘as a suitable and sensational means of filling their columns at the present moment’.
Thomas Holmes, the distinguished London Police Court Missioner, agreed and described the affair as ‘pressmanufactured Hooliganism’.
Nor was there much evidence of concern in the correspondence columns of The Times — that bush-telegraph of respectable opinion — which were absorbed with more pressing matters such as the scarcity of swallows in England that summer.
There were even backbiting accusations among some sections of the press that their competitors were indulging in ‘silly season’ sensationalism.
Further controversy was prompted by a manifesto issued from the self-styled South London Ratepayers' Association which called for a ‘display of fearless strength’ by local people, advising that ‘a discriminating application of the ‘cat-o'-nine-tails’’will soon sweep away this reign of terror'.
There were any number of flogging editorials in response to the Hooligan outrages — in The Daily Mail , for example, the News of the World and even the medical journal The Lancet — and the Ratepayers' Association manifesto was widely reported in the press as evidence of public support for flogging.
But The Sun thought that ‘the meeting was a bogus one, if it was held at all’, further alleging that this clandestine organisation (which said that it had met in secrecy because it feared Hooligan reprisals) was a put-up job by someone in the pay of The Daily Telegraph .
Amidst such confusion as    this, however, the press was more commonly inclined to shout down the leniency of magistrates, or ‘this appalling apathy on the part of the police’, because if in some quarters the press were accused of bulling up the Hooligan affair, elsewhere the police were said to be playing it down.
More radical sections of the press placed further doubts against the feeling that there had been a sudden eruption of street violence.
Describing London as ‘a city of illusions, subject every now and then to a series of harsh awakenings’,The Echo (11 August 1898) believed that while some of the stones were undoubtedly exaggerated they nevertheless served a purpose: ‘We steadily shut our eyes to the submerged lawlessness of less fortunate districts until a series of Whitechapel outrages, or Hooligan exploits, make us not only aware of what is going on, but actually afraid of our lives.’
In a similar line of argument,Reynolds's Newspaper (14 August 1898) viewed the Hooligan panic as an indictment of the hypocrisy of a civilisation that took ‘so painful an interest about moral handkerchiefs and hymn books for the barbarians of the wild Soudan’ while turning a blind eye towards ‘the far wilder barbarians they may find within a few paces from their own street-doors’.
For the socialist press, in any event, the burning issue in working-class London during the hot summer of 1898 was not the Hooligans, but the water shortage which was reaching crisis proportions.
With a fine eye for a ‘newsworthy’ item, the News of the World (28 August 1898) blamed youths for wasting water by larking about with street taps, but the socialist press saw a more permanent difficulty in the negligence of the private water companies.
Indeed, urging people not to pay their rates to the East End Water Company,Reynolds's Newspaper (28 August 1898) conjured with the circumstances under which, in the struggle against what it called ‘Horrible London’, even the horrible Hooligans might lend a hand:
The Clarion , with its devilish sense of fun, would no doubt have agreed.
Although it hardly seemed to notice the Hooligan affair, and its only immediate response was a front-page poem ‘Hot Weather and Crime’ which can only have been intended as a slap in the face for The Times leader on ‘The Weather and the Streets’: The message was clear enough: if it took crime and violence to attract the attention of the mighty to the lives of the poor, then so be it.
It was not that ruffianism was thought to be funny, but the radical and socialist press wished to place a different emphasis on the criminal question which took full account of the social and material circumstances of working-class life.
What they could find room to laugh at, however, was the way in which respectable England could ignore the  realities of slum life for so many years, while showering the Empire with the benefits of Christianity and imperial wars, and then get itself into a respectable lather in such a short time about a few broken heads among rough lads.
A Tour of the Quiet Streets
Before looking in more detail at who the ‘Hooligans’ were, and in order to place the controversies that surrounded them in perspective, it will be helpful to make an imaginative effort to reconstruct the kind of social world in which the original ‘Hooligans’moved.
On so many occasions, the way in which ‘Hooliganism’ was greeted implied a sudden, alien interruption of a peaceful and well-ordered way of life.
But what did this way of life look like at street level?
And what were the habits of the Hooligans' gentle neighbours and families and friends?
A brief tour of inspection of London's streets at the time that the Hooligans were publicly christened will help us to see something of what these quiet streets were made of.
In some localities trouble had undoubtedly been expected at the time of the Bank Holiday, and it was reported in Lambeth police court that plainclothes men had been specially stationed for the purpose of dealing with cases of street ruffianism'.
The newspapers were particularly impressed by the appearance in Marylebone court of 88 people in a single day, 70 of whom were charged with disorderliness of some sort, although The Times (16 August 1898) observed that ‘the majority of cases were of a very ordinary kind’.
The troubled signs of this ‘ordinary’ street life were very much in evidence, however, and press reports were packed with accounts of assaults and robberies, ‘dipping’gangs at race meetings, gang fights and stabbings, vandalism, punch-ups and ‘free fights’.
The ‘free fight’ must have been sometimes quite an occasion: a Bank Holiday bust-up in the Old Kent Road, for example, consumed the energies of 200 people.
In the foreground of the Bank Holiday outrages were the ‘Hooligan’ gangs themselves.
In one disturbance that received wide publicity, a policeman had stumbled across a gang of about twenty youths, said to be known as the ‘Chelsea Boys’ who ‘armed with sticks and stones were fighting a contingent of similar young ruffians from Battersea’at Cheyne Walk by the river.
A 17-year-old paper-stainer, James Irons, was brought before the magistrate — described by the police as a ring-leader and by his mother as ‘a good boy’— where it was said that he had ‘used disgusting language, and discharged a number of stones larger than walnuts from a powerful catapult’.
Charged with disorderly conduct and with discharging stones from a catapult to the common danger, he was found to have four previous convictions against him for gambling, disorderly behaviour and stone-throwing.
Regretting ‘that he had no power to send him to prison without the option of a fine’, the magistrate imposed a fine of 40 shillings (probably amounting to more than a month's wages) or twenty-one days' hard labour.
Another typical Bank Holiday incident of the kind that brought such infamy to the Hooligans involved four young men, described as ‘larrikins’ aged between 17 and 20 years, who were charged with damaging an ice-cream feeder belonging to an Italian ice-cream vendor, and assaults on police and a park-keeper.
There had been an argument and the youths had overturned the ice-cream barrow, and after a chase there was a scuffle with the police.
Identified by police witnesses as the ‘Somers Town Boys’, the two youths charged with assault received six weeks' hard labour and a month's hard labour.
According to one witness, as they ran away across a park they were heard to shout, ‘Look out for the Hooligan gang.’
After these incidents the look-outs were certainly posted in the press, and the word ‘Hooligan’ began to be used widely, if at first somewhat indiscriminately.
More to the point, if ‘Hooliganism’ was an entirely novel outburst as was usually supposed, then a tropical growth of gang life must have sprouted overnight.
From August onwards the newspapers were over-flowing with the exploits of the various gangs in London: the ‘Lion Boys’ from the Lion and Lamb in Clerkenwell; the so-called ‘Clerkenwell ‘pistol Gang'’’; the ‘Girdle Gang’which took its name from Thomas, alias ‘Tuxy’, Girdle; the ‘Somers Town Gang’who were said to be the pests of Euston Road and Gower Street; the ‘Pinus Gang’who  infested Leather Lane and Clerkenwell; the ‘Drury Lane Boys’; the notorious ‘Waterloo Road Gang’; the ‘Pickett Gang’;, ‘McNab's’; the ‘Rest Gang’; the ‘Fulham Boys’; the ‘Chelsea Boys’; the ‘Velvet Cap Gang’; the ‘Plaid-Cap Brigade’from Poplar; the gangs who romped around King Street and Great Church Lane in Hammersmith and who were said to be ‘not ‘Hooligans’’but worse'; and many others, including a band of youngsters who had adopted the dare-devil title of the ‘Dick Turpin Gang’.
At first the press were inclined to brand anything as the newly named ‘Hooliganism’.
When the Girdle Gang appeared in court for an assault on a man whom, it was said, they had kicked ‘like a football’,The Daily Graphic described them as ‘a gang of the Hooligan type’.
Mr Girdle's solicitor, on the other hand, complained that ‘the ‘Girdle Gang’’ did not really exist, except in the imagination of a ‘needy paragraphist'’’.
But although ‘Tuxy’ Girdle may not have been a youthful Hooligan, it did emerge that he had been running whores and he received a substantial sentence of penal servitude for the assault on the man whom the gang had suspected of being a police spy.
The new word quickly settled down, however, as a regular pattern began to emerge in the trouble associated with the London Hooligans.
They cluttered up the streets in noisy gatherings, swearing at passers-by, spitting on them, and sometimes assaulting and robbing them.
The Daily Graphic (15 August 1898) reported the antics of the ‘Velvet Cap Gang’ from Battersea: ‘Some dozen boys, all armed with sticks and belts, wearing velvet caps, and known as the ‘Velvet Cap Gang’’, walking along…pushing people off the pavement, knocking at shop doors, and using filthy language.’
And then, a few days later there was a similar story from another part of London: ‘A gang of roughs, who were parading the roadway, shouting obscene language, playing mouth organs, and pushing respectable people down.
The young ruffians were all armed with thick leather belts, on which there were heavy brass buckles’(The Daily Graphic , 25 August 1898).
There were innumerable accounts of a similar character, describing ‘larking’ in the streets.
The frequent reports of  people being hustled, or pushed off the pavement, probably derived from the practice among working-class youths known as ‘holding the street’.
This violent ritual of territorial supremacy, as described by Walter Besant in 1901, sounds remarkably like the modern practice at football grounds of ‘holding the End’: ‘The boys gather together and hold the street; if anyone ventures to pass through it they rush upon him, knock him down, and kick him savagely about the head; they rob him as well…the boys regard holding the street with pride.’
Fights and disturbances in pubs were also commonly reported.
One 18-year-old youth appeared in court after throwing glasses at a publican's head, while in another pub case that ended in court a landlord had refused to serve Bank Holiday revellers whereupon they ‘knocked him down, and kicked him in the eye and about the body’.
Back in the open street things were no better.
We hear of ‘an elderly woman…set upon by a gang of young ruffians who knocked her down and stole a bag of provisions she was carrying’, and in another case a 17-year-old youth was charged with assaulting an elderly woman on Bank Holiday night: ‘Both her eyes were blackened and there was an abrasion on her nose.’
These kinds of incidents could be repeated time and time again, and nor were black eyes and bruises the only injuries sustained.
Arriving home late one Sunday night on a railway excursion from Herne Bay, a bottle-fight broke out among the holiday-makers as a result of which a man was killed.
But what must astonish us, I think, more than the details of violence is that the only charges brought as a result of this death were against three men who were charged with assault and punished with a 20 shillings' fine, with the additional requirement that they should pay the doctor's bill on the dead man.
In another case, headlined as ‘The Alleged Hooligan Tragedy’, a man died after a street-fight and it was reported that on arrival at hospital he had made a statement to the effect that, ‘I got my injuries in the Borough through being kicked to death by Hooligans.’
Eye-witnesses denied this, however, saying that he had been engaged in a ‘fair’ stand  up fight, but that when other people joined in he had fallen and struck his head on a tramline.
There were other cases of deaths in the streets which could not be cleared up, except as ‘accidents’, and reluctance to give evidence must be counted as an important aspect of popular hostility towards the law.
It was assaults on the police, however, together with fierce resistance to street arrests, that provided the most vivid illumination of popular feeling.
In one almost comic instance, a man described as a ‘wooden-legged ruffian’ who was well known for drunk-and-disorderly offences had kicked a policeman with his wooden leg.
In a violent struggle, the policeman found it necessary to unscrew the man's wooden leg as he wrestled him to the ground, striking him across the head with his truncheon.
A crowd then assembled and threw pepper at the police, causing such a commotion that it was only possible to get the one-legged prisoner to the police station with the assistance of twelve constables.
In a more typical case, when attempting a street arrest ‘a hostile mob raised the cry of ‘Boot them’’ against the police';, in another, police attempting to separate a man and woman who were quarrelling were ‘set upon by a crowd of 200 persons, who called out ‘Boot them’’, and they were assaulted and kicked'.
On yet another occasion at Alexandra Park Race Day in 1898, which was said to be ‘infested with a crowd of scoundrels and ruffians of the worst race-course stamp’, when police arrested a pick-pocket ‘the constables were surrounded by a crowd, who kicked them and brutally ill-treated them, and released the prisoner’.
There were repeated instances, in fact, of assaults on policemen who then found it necessary to draw their truncheons and fight their way out of a crowd.
In a ‘desperate struggle in a drunken crowd’ a police officer had been stabbed to death in Wilmer Gardens, Hoxton, said to be ‘a low neighbourhood infested by a very dangerous class’.
While at the height of the Bank Holiday disturbances there was what was described as a ‘Midnight Riot’ in the vicinity of Euston Road when a policeman attempted to deal with a disorderly woman who ‘began to shriek, and…screamed that she was being choked’.
Surrounded by a hostile crowd who began to hiss and hoot, the  policeman blew his whistle for assistance.
‘Unfortunately for the constable’, we were told, ‘this only had the effect of bringing reinforcements to the mob.’
A roar went up of ‘Rescue!
Rescue!’ and among those who joined in were the notorious Somers Town Boys.
‘Hooliganism’ was invariably portrayed as a totally alien presence, but here we see Hooligans acting in concert with their neighbours, reflecting the fact that m many working-class neighbourhoods hostility towards the police was a remarkably cohesive force.
Typically sparked off by what might have been seen as an unfair arrest or an arbitrary use of police power, resistance to arrest on this scale was such an entirely, common feature of working-class life before the Great War that it constitutes the most articulate demolition of the myths of deep-rooted popular respect for law and authority in England.
A report by Robert Blatchford of a visit to a Music Hall in the ‘Gay Nineties’ offered a vivid portrait of how these feelings expressed themselves in everyday life.
Blatchford did not reckon much to the artistic qualities of the old-fashioned melodrama presented on the stage, but he thought the audience ‘were human enough for anything’.
Amidst the banter of the assembly of dockers, costers, labourers and mechanics, with their wives and sweethearts and babies — the lads at the back whistling improvised mood music to the events on stage, some pelting those in the pits below with orange pips, and all howling with laughter at their own jokes — he considered that ‘very significant were the marks of popular interest and favour’:
Attacks on the police touched on complex structures of loyalty and tradition which cut across simple-minded notions    from on high about obedience and civility.
Even murderers could be the object of local sympathy.
An attempt was made to rescue William ‘Fatty’ Gould, for example, the accused in the Redcross Court murder case, when he appeared at the inquest: ‘assailed by a savage mob’outside the court who shouted their encouragement, ‘You will be all right, Bill!’and ‘Don't give way Fatty!’
In another murder case, after a 19-year-old youth had been found guilty of a stabbing murder in Oakley Street, a woman who had given crucial evidence against him was ill-treated by neighbours and eventually turned out of her Oakley Street home amidst ‘a terrible scene’.
Raphael Samuels has also reported an instance of a suspected police informer in the East End who was visited by a mob who expressed their displeasure by burning  effigies .
We can perhaps only guess at what exactly lay behind such incidents, although these kinds of details begin to add up to something more than a fringe resentment of the police by a marginal ‘criminal element’.
Suspicion and hostility towards the law in working-class London at the turn of the century drew on much deeper funds of popular feeling than can be usefully or relevantly summed up as the work of ‘Hooligan’ gangs or ‘Hooliganism’.
‘The constable in certain districts’,The Pall Mall Gazette (19 February 1901) observed, ‘is apparently looked upon as the common enemy whom it is right to kick and beat whenever that can be done with safety.’
‘When he attempts to arrest disorderly persons who have the active sympathy of a crowd of roughs’, it added, ‘a policeman's lot is not a happy one.’
Of that we can be sure.
Some idea of how badly the police were treated is given by the reports of the Metropolitan Police Commissioner which show that roughly one-in-four of London's policemen were assaulted each year — 3,444 cases were reported in 1899, for example, when the constabulary strength was 13,213 men and 1,949 sergeants — as police authorities pressed for firmer measures in assault cases.
It seems likely, moreover, that the police deliberately avoided mixing it in the more perilous districts.
We have already heard complaints against the apathy of the police, and publicans who complained about violence were said to have ‘got the name among the police of being ‘fussy'’’.
It  would have been a disappointed reader, however, who turned to The Daily Mail's titillating headline ‘HE ATE A POLICEMAN’ at the high pitch of the Bank Holiday alarm in 1898 for more news of the monstrous Hooligans, because the story thankfully described the exploits of a truculent crocodile.
Against this background of a bustling, potentially violent and effectively unpoliced street life, we can point to a wide variety of other kinds of rowdyism and misbehaviour at this time in history.
There are stories of gangs of roughs waylaying cyclists and pelting them with stones, and in one case a South London cowboy was brought before Lambeth court for lassoing cyclists —‘a kind of horseplay that must be stamped out at once’ said the magistrate, with good reason.
The police were also being urged to take action against the practice of ‘throwing coloured lights’ from coaches that were returning from holiday excursions, and there was a growing concern about a wave of incidents in which obstacles — sometimes quite large ones — were placed on railway lines by people described as ‘wreckers’.
Throughout the late 1890s the police had been bothered by complaints about young boys throwing stones or spitting from the London bridges on to boats and their passengers below.
In 1896 while sculling at Putney, an oarsman had been sunk by a stone-throwing youth, and in the following year there was a complaint that a yacht's skylight had been broken at Lambeth Bridge and then ‘a shower of horse dung greeted us at Chelsea’.
‘I find the spitting this year worse than ever’, complained a gentleman in 1900.
And although the names given of some of the boys arrested for these offences — David Stones and Arthur Gobbing, for example— suggest the possibility of a hoax, police reports repeatedly referred to ‘this dangerous practice’ and that ‘the danger to the public seems sufficiently marked to warrant some special steps’.
Indeed, from 1896 plainclothes men had been deployed to patrol the bridges.
We read in the newspapers of other cases of vandalism.
Gas-lamps that are broken, and night-watchmen assaulted when they complain.
A case comes to hand of two children, a boy of 8 years and a 10-year-old girl, who broke into their local school and ‘then completely wrecked the school furnishings’, and this was not the only instance of vandalism and  arson in schools.
In one Southwark neighbourhood attempts had been made to prevent children from using the drying area on the roof of a block of model dwellings as a playground.
Doors and bolts had been fixed, but in a three-month period it was said that ‘14 dozen locks’ had been broken, the children had burned down the door, and even iron gates had not stopped them from gaining access to the roof and throwing stones on people below.
There are graffiti, too, and commenting on the improvements in children's drawings since the advent of the Board Schools, the Westminster Budget (12 August 1898) described for us how these ‘wall sketches’ commonly depicted ‘the little disagreements which are natural to healthy children’.
Here is an example of this Board School artistry: ‘This [pointing to a drawing of a girl]is fanny Ives and she is going to have a smack in the Jaw for hitting Nellie Western.’
Smacks in the jaw between little girls are one thing, perhaps, but there were more formidable indications that all was not well with the gentle sex.
A brawl among three women, for example, resulted in one of them ‘scoring her face with a door key’ because the other woman ‘tore her hair and beat her with a poker’.
Elsewhere, three girls aged 15 and 16 years were brought to court for robbing a woman of 9s 2½d after they had hustled her.
Described by the police as a well-known gang of ‘expert pick-pockets’, the news headlines identified them as ‘Girl Hooligans’.
There were other mentions of ‘Hooligan Girls’ and ‘Female Hooligans’and their ‘hooliganesque’behaviour.
Young women, for example, who were ‘arm-in-arm right across the pavement, and kept pushing people off’, or another court report which described how ‘a respectably-dressed young girl was set upon by four factory girls and unmercifully beaten’.
She said that she had ‘accidentally brushed against one of the four girls who were standing on the pavement’, whereupon ‘all four caught hold of her, and beat her in a most savage manner, using fearful language’ and left her on the pound bleeding profusely from the nose and mouth.
Sometimes in these accounts of the hurly-burly of the streets, we must feel that we are edging into an unfamiliar world, but here the characters need no introduction and eighty  years later their motives are immediately familiar and lifelike.
We can easily picture the respectably dressed girl, swinging her skirts as she approached, and as she not-quite-accidentally brushed the ‘common’ girls to one side.
We do not need to be told that the factory girls were probably doing their best to make sure that it was impossible for her to pass without brushing against them, and that this would be construed as an insult.
Nor to be reminded of their smouldering resentments against this girl of their of age who was so ‘lady-like’ and ‘nose-in-the-air’so that they might feel that she needed to be brought down a peg or two.
None of this excuses their behaviour, of course, but this is an unusually human account of an all-too-human encounter in the streets which reminds us of a certain constancy of human motive, and of conflicts built around the human meanings that are attached to the social realities of class, physical appearance and territory.
And nothing in these accounts, whether familiar or otherwise, is compatible with the myths peddled by the merchants of nostalgia.
With the sexes thus reunited in the obscure origins of the word ‘Hooligan’, let us pay a find visit in our tour of these troubled streets and pop in to see Mrs Jenkins and her family of Bean Street, South London, on the occasion or that fateful Bank Holiday.
Happily, we find them at home ‘sitting on their front door in the cool of the evening, enjoying a song and a glass in a quiet way’.
Can this, at last, be a glimpse of that untroubled way of life in the cobbled, horse-drawn streets of Old England?
But no.
Quiet, untroubled summer evenings do not usually command the headlines, and trouble arrives quickly enough in the shape of 18-year-old Maria Powers and her young man.
Maria (whose name is pronounced ‘Mah-Rye-Yah’, as in ‘Black Maria’) is the daughter of a Bean Street neighbour, and suddenly without provocation it is said that she starts an uproar of a fight in which Mrs Jenkins is stabbed.
In fact, Mrs Jenkins is left in such a poorly condition that she is unable to present her version of events when the matter is brought before the police court.
Next, Maria Powers is called to give evidence.
She is described as ‘a decent-looking workgirl, employed at a mineral  water factory’, and hers is a rather different tale of woe.
There is no point denying that there was a ‘free fight’ in Bean Street between the Powers' and Jenkins' families, with men rolling on the ground.
Nor that Mrs Jenkins emerged from the confusion with a knife wound.
Maria's only crime, however, was that she was ‘peaceably promenading Bean Street’ with her young man, when without provocation the Jenkins family started ‘singing at’her.
Here is the offensive chorus of the song that started the fight: The magistrate listened to all this with a benevolent interest, although he confessed that it sounded like six-of-one and half-a-dozen-of-the-other, and that it would be unwise to take any action without clarifying evidence.
And so the miscreants trooped back home to Bean Street, perhaps to bandage the wounds of their neighbourly dispute.
As things stood, no ‘crime’ had been committed and their moment of human folly would pass unremembered in the official calendars of criminal acts.
Nor are there likely to be any surviving family snapshots of the Bean Street Bank Holiday stabbing affray.
What self-respecting photographer would have risked his new-fangled box camera within a stone's throw of a ‘free fight’?
Criminal statistics, which reflect only the informal justice which was held compatible with these all-too-human streets, and faded photographs of carefully posed moments of tranquillity, tell us one thing about this ‘stable and carefree era’.
The annals of the police courts, and headlines in the newspapers, tell a rather different story.
Dressed to Kill: the Fashionable Hooligan
One thing that quickly became apparent in the aftermath of the Bank Holiday affair was that the Hooligans all looked alike.
But it was not in the way that the poor had always   looked alike — it was not, that is, because they were shabby, shoeless and grubby as moles — but because the gangs wished to look alike, and had adopted a uniform dress-style.
‘Look at them well,’ said The Daily Graphic (16 November 1900) when the dust had settled a little and the danger could be looked in the face, ‘They are the genuine article — real Hooligans’:
There can be no doubt that the buckle-end of a belt could be a formidable weapon, but in fact the belts were often pricked out in fancy patterns or embellished with metal studs in much the same way that modern motor-bike boys adorn their jackets with stud designs.
Newspaper cartoons depicting the London Hooligans added another small detail of fashion: the bell-bottom trousers were shown with a tasty buttoned vent in the side.
Local gangs also improvised local variations in style — velvet caps in Battersea or plaid caps in Poplar, for example, as a badge of identity — and there were certainly trend-setters among the Hooligans.
One way-out youngster appeared in court following the Bank Holiday disturbances with his hair dressed in what sounds remarkably like the ‘Mohican cut’ which had a brief moment of popularity among more outlandish Teds in the 1950s and which has reappeared with the Punks.
‘The appearance of the witness caused some amusement in court,’ observed The Daily Graphic (6 August 1898).
‘His hair had been clipped as closely as possible to the scalp, with the exception of a small patch on the crown of the head, which was pulled down over the forehead to form a fringe.’
It was probably no more than a daring exaggeration of the ‘donkey-fringe’ style which was the standard Hooligan haircut.
But here was a youth so far ahead of his time that if he had turned up on the streets of London sixty or seventy years later, he would still have been recognised as a sure sign of an alarmingly unrivalled degeneration among the young.
What is perhaps even more remarkable, given postwar wisdom about the unparalleled nature of postwar youth cultures, is that the youth style that came to be associated with the London Hooligans was a nationwide phenomenon.
In Manchester, the gangs were known as ‘Scuttlers’— a word which went back to the 1880s — and their gang fights and rowdyism as ‘Scuttling’ or ‘Scuttles’.
Local gangs such as the infamous ‘Forty Row’ from Ancoats, the ‘Bengal Tiger’from Bengal  Street, the ‘Bungall Boys’from Fairfield Street, ‘Alum Street’or ‘Hope Street’from Salford would do battle for neighbourhood supremacy, sometimes retiring to parks or open crofts for these engagements.
One fight reported from Newton Heath in 1890 involved a pitched battle in Holland Street of  between 500 and 600 youths, and shopkeepers were obliged to barricade themselves behind shutters to prevent damage and looting when a ‘Scuttle’ was announced.
The Scuttlers also jealously guarded the territorial seclusion of their local beer-house — known as the ‘blood-house’ or ‘blood-tub’— and they were such a force in Lancashire that the public authorities made various petitions to the Home Secretary for sterner repressive measures to put them down.
Charles Russell described the Scuttler's appearance:
In 1890 Alex Devine, Police Court Missioner to Lads in Salford, had described how the ‘professional scuttler’ was attired in a ‘puncher's cap’, ‘narrow-go-wides’trousers, and narrow-toed brass-tipped clogs.
Devine was particularly taken by the ornamental designs on the Scuttlers' belts, produced with metal pins: ‘These designs include figures of serpents, a heart pierced with an arrow (this appears to be a favourite design), Prince of Wales’ feathers, clogs, animals, stars, etc., and often either the name of the wearer of the belt or that of some woman.’
Early in the new century the Manchester and Salford Scuttlers were succeeded by a new generation calling themselves ‘Ikes’ or ‘Ikey Lads’, a name which may have had something to do with distinctive dress-styles made by Jewish tailor shops.
Robert Roberts recalls that the Scuttler's girl friend also had her own style of dress —‘clogs and shawl and a skirt with vertical stripes’— although I know of no other references to female attire, and as usual within these hooligan preoccupations attention was rootedly fixed on the boys.
In Birmingham, corner boys and street gangs were known as ‘Peaky Blinders’, or less commonly as ‘Sloggers’, and they too had adopted the standard uniform of bell-bottom trousers, neck scarf, heavy belt, peaked cap and short cropped hair   with a ‘donkey fringe’.
There was even a character in Comic Cuts in the 1890s, a youthful prowler named ‘Area Sneaker,— and what a pseudonym that is to conjure with from this supposedly untroubled late Victorian era — who reflected the fashion.
Young Area Sneaker was the faithful companion of ‘Chokee Bill’, himself a prototypical comic-strip crook with swag-bag and cosh, and in their weekly scrapes with the law — personified for Comic Cuts readers in the ineffectual shape of ‘Fairyfoot the Fat Cop’— he was quite recognisably  dressed in a budding Hooligan's attire: bell-bottoms, flowing neck-scarf, cap set at a jaunty angle, and boots two sizes too big.
The Scuttlers, Peaky Blinders and Area Sneaker himself all pre-dated the christening of the Hooligans, and in other towns there were similar gangs — the ‘Grey Mare Boys’ from Bradford or the ‘High Rip’gangs of Liverpool — and London also had an earlier tradition of gangs such as the ‘Tiger Bay’, the ‘Monkeys’Parade' gang at Bow, or the ‘Bowry Boys’of Poplar who were already in evidence in the late 1880s.
It is possible that some elements of the Hooligan dress-style were derived from the clothes favoured by costermongers in mid-nineteenth-century London.
Henry Mayhew described how the costers preferred tasty cable-cord trousers, ‘made to fit tightly at the knee and swell gradually until they reached the boot, which they nearly cover’.
The bell-bottom trousers, together with the King's Man neck-scarf, a small cloth cap and well-kept boots were the main features of the coster style.
The boots, Mayhew tells us, were an object of special pride, often ‘tastily ornamented…with a heart or thistle surrounded by a wreath of roses, worked below the instep’.
We should remember from Mayhew's account that the boots also came in handy for kicking policemen and other traditional foes of the costers.
Arthur Morrison's subsequent descriptions in A Child of the Jago (1896) of the clothes in fashion among the cosh-carrying denizens of the slums again resembled Mayhew's costers.
However, his version of the Jago people buying their ‘kicksies’, ‘benjies’ and ‘daisies’— that is, their trousers, coats and boots (‘daisy roots’)— from a local ‘ikey’tailor may simply have been borrowed from Mayhew.
In any case, Morrison's narrative of violent neighbourhood rivalries, robberies and attacks on policemen —‘for kicking practice’ as he put it — did not need to be either borrowed or invented in late nineteenth-century London.
The ‘Hooligan’ fashion also bore a resemblance to that of their Australian cousins, the ‘Larrikins’, who wore a uniform of high-heeled boots, bell-bottom trousers, neck scarves, heavy belts and snazzy hats.
Before the word ‘Hooligan’ had fully established itself in England, young ruffians were often described as youths of the ‘Larrikin type’or as ‘London    Larrikins’.
The Larrikins, who can be traced back to 1870 in Australia, were also organised into local gangs or ‘pushes’, and even allowing for exaggeration and over-involvement (we need not readily accept, for example, that they gorged themselves on raw meat or rigged elections by terrorising voters, as was sometimes alleged) their behaviour was unbeatably appalling.
Assaults on policemen, Chinese and defenceless women, window-smashing, gang fights, breaking up holiday resorts, and gobbing on the steps of churches and also the worshippers assembled there, were among their least terrible adventures.
A verse from the Sydney Bulletin in 1882 summed up a familiar controversy about how to interpret a phenomenon such as Larrikinism: We must leave the question of the origins of the ‘Hooligan’ style where it rests, however, as simply one murky aspect of an otherwise murky affair.
It is difficult enough, in any case, to unravel how contemporary youth styles such as‘Skinheads’ or ‘Teddy Boys’originated and were disseminated, and we can recognise the Hooligan uniform for what it was: a simple adaptation of the clothing available to young working-class people in order to create an easily reproducible style.
The Scuttlers in their clogs and fustian would no doubt look  somewhat dowdy alongside modern youth in their crease-proof, sta-prest trousers, their swinging blue jeans, or their body-hugging drip-dry shirts.
But the rudimentary nature of the ‘Hooligan’ style was not in any essential way different from the later youth fashions in the ‘affluent’postwar era where the kids would put together their ‘unprecedented’styles out of various permutations of available scraps such as tight trousers, baggy trousers, long hair, short hair, no hair, jeans, braces, T-shirts, string ties, broad ties, no ties, heavy boots, narrow winkle-picker shoes, long jackets, short jackets, etc.
With the Punks, of course, this jumble-sale of fashion would arrive at a self-consciously surreal conclusion in that the scraps were now held together, literally and very visibly, with safety-pins.
As for the Hooligans, newspaper cartoonists' sketches of their dress permutation depicted a more sharply defined style than anything that can be discerned by modern eyes from surviving photographs of the period — although that should not surprise us, because it is also a characteristic feature of the emphasis given to the cut of clothes within ‘high’ fashion sketches.
The essential point, moreover, is that the ‘Hooligan’ style was recognisable to their contemporaries (and presumably to themselves) as a distinctive mode of attire, thus helping to form the feeling which was struggling to give itself expression in other areas, that too much  freedom and affluence had been given to the working class at the turn of the century.
The evening promenade, ridiculed as the ‘monkey walk’, when young people gathered together in their finery hoping to ‘click’ with a member of the opposite sex was another sure sign of the unchaperoned freedoms of the new street people who would inherit the new century.
Not only could slum youth sometimes afford to pay their fines when they appeared in the police courts — a shocking enough fact to their respectable contemporaries that was often remarked upon — but they could even pick and choose what clothes they would wear when they came to court.
Where would it all end?
Was the Hooligan Armed?
Amidst the excitement of what The Daily Mail (17 August 1898) aptly termed ‘Hooliganiana’, accusations and counter  accusations flew thick and fast about whether the sudden alarm was justified.
However, of all the confusions that confront us the rumours alleging that the Hooligan gangs were armed with guns are particularly difficult to unravel, or to state in any balanced way.
Without doubt, the late Victorian and Edwardian gangs did not restrict themselves to fist fights or kicking contests.
A private collection of weapons confiscated from Manchester Scuttlers included ‘old cutlasses, pokers, pieces of strap having iron bolts affixed to the end, the tops of stone ‘pop’’ bottles fastened at the end of a piece of string and used for whirling round the head, specially made pieces of iron…knives, and loaded sticks'.
Describing how the boys of Cable Street would ‘constitute themselves, without asking the permission of the War Office, into a small regiment’, Besant provided another inventory of this street-fighting armoury: Of the last point, I think we can be sure, although Walter Besant was obviously less confident that they were armed with ‘real’ guns.
In the penny oracles of the press, however, there were bolder accusations as when The Daily Graphic (16 November 1900) confidently asserted that ‘the pistol is the ideal weapon of the Hooligan…his love for it can be traced directly to the influence of the ‘penny dreadfuls'’’.
Or when the London Echo (7 February 1898) warned of ‘the young street ruffian or prowler, with his heavy belt, treacherous knife and dangerous pistol’.
There can be no doubt that in the early years of the twentieth century the use of revolvers was widespread among adult mobsters in London's criminal underworld, and that feuds between rival outfits were not uncommonly settled by gun battles in the open streets.
What does seem more difficult to believe, however, is that the practice of carrying firearms was habitual among Hooligans.
The streets may not  have been nearly so safe as nostalgia for ‘Old England’ suggests, but it is likely that if working-class youths had been firing off guns throughout London, then we would have heard a little bit more about the matter.
Even so, the question of the ‘pistol gangs’ was not entirely a mare's nest.
Cases of wounding by pistol shots occasionally came before the courts and in at least one instance a child was killed, although apparently by accident, which nevertheless brought great notoriety to the so-called ‘Clerkenwell Pistol Gang’.
The background to this affair involved rivalries between the gangs of Chapel Street and Margaret Street.
‘The lads’, it was said, ‘were in the habit of attending a cheap place of amusement at Sadler's Wells, and quarrels arose about girls who accompanied them.
In an ensuing fight around Christmas time 1896 the police had swooped and arrested twenty-eight youths some of whom were found to be in possession of pistols, which was taken to link them to a young girl's death — although this was some months later.
Another 15-year-old youth, arrested for an entirely separate offence — pushing people off the pavement — was also subsequently charged, and the upshot was that five youths (including one 15-year-old girl) received prison sentences ranging from three weeks to six months.
It was an extremely murky business, but on any reckoning the details do not seem to add up to systematic armed gang warfare.
Nor do other reported pistol cases: such as a 13-year-old boy who shot an 18-year-old in the leg on a canal tow-path, or a boy of 14 who was charged with shooting his 2-year-old brother.
The allegations suggesting regular armed combat among Hooligans usually mentioned pistols or ‘toy pistols’.
A case that caused some alarm in 1908, however, revealed that revolvers could also fall into the hands of youths.
What proved particularly shocking in this instance was that the licensing of firearms was so haphazard that a 16-year-old Whitechapel youth, who had already stood trial on a charge of wounding his 16-year-old girlfriend with a revolver, could obtain a licence at a later date without even having to show proof of his age.
The girl had not been seriously hurt in the shooting, suffering only a superficial wound, and police reports said that she was ‘fortunately wearing a large quantity  of underclothing which, no doubt, prevented a more serious wound’— which, unless the young lady's underwear was armour-plated, must cast serious doubt on the power of the weapon employed.
Having secured his new gun licence, however, the youth, who was said by the police to be ‘nightly associated with a gang of Hooligans who undoubtedly used revolvers’, had then waltzed into such a commonplace retail outlet as a barber's shop and purchased a five-chamber revolver.
For some years attempts had been made to prohibit the sale of firearms and a Pistols Bill had been presented to Parliament in 1893.
Describing it as ‘grandmotherly legislation’, Charles Hopwood figured largely in opposition to the Bill, believing it to be an encroachment on the rights of the freeborn Englishman.
‘Why should not Englishmen arm themselves?’ he asked.
‘It was natural, and they should not interfere with such a right.
Why did they not interfere with catapults?— these did more injury than other weapons.’
There was nothing in the Parliamentary debate, in fact, to suggest that the pistol cases were particularly serious and the Bill was easily thrown out — although it must be admitted that the gentlemen of Westminster have more than once shown a remarkable capacity for getting things wrong.
The continuing refusal of the Home Secretary's Department to support the prohibition of pistols provoked controversy for some years.
The Clarion (24 December 1898) seemed to think that the Home Secretary's intransigence was some kind of Malthusian plot: In another discussion of ‘Those Pistol Cases’The Daily Graphic (15 February 1898) had taken a more traditional line, recommending more traditional remedies: ‘If birching and short sentences will not stop it, then more birching and longer sentences will have to be tried.’
The case which had prompted these remarks involved a 13-year-old schoolboy, John Bird from Camden, who had shot an 18-year-old greengrocer's son in the arm.
Engaged in a quarrel, in which some bullying might have been going on, the younger boy had produced a pistol and shouted: ‘You won't touch me when I have this.
I'll put daylight into you.’
The victim had then chased the boy and caught him, before realising that he had been shot in the arm, which once more suggests that it cannot have been a terribly powerful weapon.
But The Daily Graphic drew the gravest conclusions, suggesting that whereas earlier shooting cases had been accidents, they had become increasingly frequent and serious:
Wherever we might finally strike the balance, it seems clear that whereas nostalgia for the once-safe streets and the once-quiet youth is phoney, we can be equally sure that those who sensationalised the ‘pistol gangs’ sometimes got carried away with themselves.
We must remember, even so, that this was the golden age's own assessment of its own golden youth, and the repeated alarms about pistol gangs gives a further indication of the depth of the fears surrounding working-class youth at this time.
Because while from the safety of our historical vantage point we may doubt whether this kind of incident was anything more than an isolated occurrence, and while the details leave room to quibble about the gravity of the wounding cases, to commentators at the turn of the century here was a sure sign that something dangerously new was afoot, which had come all-too-terribly alive in the person of the ‘Hooligan’.
Perhaps one final vignette can move us closer to a balanced view of the Hooligan's weaponry.
After Parliament had eventually passed a Pistols Act in 1903, the police were persuaded in 1907 to bring a charge against the London firm  of Gamages at Holborn who were advertising pistols for sale through the post.
The weapon was an air-pistol with a barrel extending to 7½ inches, and this was probably the kind of ‘toy’ most commonly available to youths.
The police were advised that it was a potentially fatal weapon, but when the case was brought before Mr Bros at Clerkenwell, he ruled that although the pistol was a ‘weapon’ it was not a ‘firearm’, and so did not fall within the prohibitions of the Act.
The police pursued this question of ‘pop-gun or firearm’, as it came to be known, through a High Court which referred the matter back to the magistrate.
Whereupon Mr Gamage himself appeared and stated that he was fully prepared to be shot in the hand from close range, in the full view of the court, in order to defend his honour and his business interests.
The magistrate was having none of this, however, believing that it would lower the dignity of the law, although the prosecuting counsel had a better idea and asked Mr Gamage if he was equally prepared to be shot in the face.
Mr Gamage declined the offer, and given his proximity to the matter, his is perhaps the most adequately balanced appraisal of ‘Those Pistol Cases’ that can be reached.
Mr Gamage was fined 20 shillings on two summonses, plus one guinea costs.
Boys, however, should be birched.
The Hooligan Prepares for War
Armed or otherwise, the Hooligan was in the headlines.
In November 1898 it was said that effigies representing ‘Hooliganism’ were burned on Guy Fawkes Night, although the new folk devil was destined for even more global notoriety.
Early in the new century, for example, the Hooligan's name was snapped up as far away as Tsarist Russia where it was used to describe crimes as diverse as murder, arson and rape, as well as a wide scatter of mischief such as obscenity, window-breaking and stone-throwing, defacing buildings, singing indecent songs, blocking public thoroughfares, brawling and stealing carriage wheels.
Sometimes mistaken for the name of a tribe of redskins, the word ‘Hooliganism’ established itself in Russia with such authority and incomprehensible rapidity that one observer thought in 1912 that it was ‘as if it had long been expected, as if necessary for the filling of an empty space’.
Back home, the observation would have been no less apt.
In the years leading up to the First World War the Hooligan embarked on a remarkable career, appearing in name if not in person before numerous governmental and semi-official bodies of enquiry.
He loomed large in the apocalyptic discourse surrounding the fears of racial decline and physical inefficiency.
He figured centrally in the Edwardian era's deliberations on the ‘boy labour’ question.
He would crop up repeatedly in the anxious preoccupation with the demoralising influence of popular amusements, the collapse of ‘fair play’ sportsmanship, and the allegations of excessive ‘freedom’and ‘affluence’that were levelled against the young.
The name of the Hooligan, in fact, provided a crystallising focus for any number of overlapping anxieties associated with imperial decline, military incapacity, the erosion of social discipline and moral authority, the eclipse of family life, and what was feared to be the death rattle of ‘Old England’.
Most emphatic, however, was the feeling that some new initiative was required in the education and early work training of youths, to rescue them from the undisciplined authority of the streets.
The authority of the Board Schools (otherwise known as the ‘Bored Schools’) was widely regarded as suspect and frail.
‘It is a common experience’, said Urwick, ‘to find a boy a Jekyll in the classroom, and a Hyde in the street.’
Even so, as Arnold Freeman argued in Boy Life and Labour (1914) if it were not for the admittedly frail system of compulsory schooling, ‘we should be manufacturing a race of hooligans who would make our existing civilisation an impossibility’.
When the Hooligans first put in an appearance, the floggers and die-hards had been much in evidence, but they were  eased aside with the growing recognition that Hooliganism was a pointer towards a general dislocation among the youth — and not just a ‘hard core’— and that the problem was therefore immune to a narrow penal response.
The task, then, was to supplement the existing system of elementary education and an extraordinary range of schemes were proposed (although not necessarily implemented) for gymnasia and football pitches, Continuation Schools and night classes, schemes of physical training and drill, fresh air funds and camping holidays, and all manner of initiatives within the boy's club movement from Bible classes to boxing clubs.
On occasion the underlying philosophy was extremely crude, recommending that ‘if you provided them with footballs and made them kick footballs, they would not be so inclined to kick policemen in the street’.
More usually, however, it was the public school ethos that was embraced, linking sporting activities to the development of esprit de corps and instruction in the art of ‘playing the game’.
Above all, advised Viscount Haldane the War Secretary in 1911, the scope of national education must be enlarged to include moral instruction and physical training ‘if you want to eliminate the hooligan’.
In the space of a few years the word ‘hooligan’ had outstripped its humble local origins and its specific reference to London gang life (it had also begun to lose its capital ‘H’) and had come to be understood and feared as a much more general affliction among the nation's youth.
The feeling, if not the reality, that hooliganism was a universal problem could be gauged by Baden-Powell's anguished calculations in Scouting for Boys :
As the new word gained in popularity, military allusions also came thick and fast.
Within weeks, the Westminster Gazette (15 September 1898) had taken it up in order to  ridicule the enemy forces in the Sudan campaign.
‘The KHALIFA with his 50,000 Dervishes was a powerful foe,’ it was admitted, ‘but…the KHALIFA was, after all, only a sort of Soudanese Hooligan.’
Lord May cast a different slant on the word early in the new century when he called for a ‘Hooligan Conference’, later to go under the more dignified title of the Twentieth Century League.
‘As for Hooliganism,’ he explained, ‘it consists really in a misapplication of energy.
High spirits that would be of use on board a man-of-war or on the march find vent in ‘bashing’’ the casual pedestrian or demolishing coffee stalls.’
But perhaps the most remarkable adaptation of this versatile word was to be found in Robert Buchanan's fierce attack on Rudyard Kipling's poetry, which he denounced in 1899 as ‘The Voice of the Hooligan’.
In Kipling's verse, especially The Barrack-Room Ballads , Buchanan argued that the British army was portrayed as ‘a wild carnival of drunken, bragging, boasting Hooligans in red coats and seamen's jackets, shrieking to the sound of the banjo and applauding the English flag’.
‘The Tommie Atkins they introduce’, he insisted, ‘is a drunken, swearing, coarse-minded Hooligan, for whom, nevertheless, our sympathy is eagerly entreated.’
It was not that Buchanan doubted the accuracy of Kipling's descriptions of army outrages: soldiers rampaging drunkenly in the streets, for example, fighting with the buckle-ends of their belts.
His objection was that these poetic celebrations of the coarse side of army life were an offence against English traditions of Christian civilisation, forming part of a larger ‘back wave’ which was manifesting itself in various ways: ‘the Hooligan in Politics, in Literature, and Journalism’, ‘the Hooligan spirit of patriotism’, and all the other barbaric symptoms of ‘the restless and uninstructed Hooliganism of the time’above which ‘the flag of a Hooligan Imperialism is raised’.
The irony of Buchanan's attack on ‘Hooligan Imperialism’ was that one important way in which the Hooligan figured within the troubled preoccupations of his contemporaries was precisely as a fighting-fit recruit for the imperial armies.
What was never entirely clear was whether Hooliganism represented the end-point of the evolutionary deterioration  of the ‘Imperial Race’, or just the kind of rough boys needed as a warrior class to defend the Empire.
The Hooligan, in fact, was not at all unlike Rudyard Kipling's celebrated ‘Fuzzy-Wuzzy’ who broke the British square: ‘a pore benighted 'eathen but a first-class fightin' man’.
The confusion was there from the beginning.
The Spectator (27 August 1898) had provided the clearest statement of the degenerative thesis, identifying the ‘London Larrikins, as a throwback or ‘reverted type’ which was said to be ‘one of the very central ideas of evolutionary doctrine’produced by ‘every kind of artificial civilisation’.
E. J. Urwick, on the other hand, found it difficult to reconcile talk about ‘the decline of physical energy’ with ‘a class of boys bursting with animal energy’.
And he was not alone.
Thomas Holmes thought that slum youth were faced with a simple choice, ‘whether to become dull-eyed, weak-chested, slow-witted degenerates, or hooligans.
Of the two, I prefer the latter.’
‘What can big lads of this description do in such surroundings?’ he asked.
‘Either to stay in their insufferable homes, or to kick up their heels in the streets…
Curl up and die, or go out and kick somebody.
The pity is that they always kick the wrong person.’
Charles Russell also found much to admire in his Manchester Scuttlers, seeing in their violent gang fights a ‘sense of comradeship’ which he could not altogether disapprove of: ‘The ‘Scuttler’’was not wholly bad; he would rather be a blackguard than a dullard.
His real desires, as I have said, were natural and healthy…
Here at least was force, and something can be made of that.’
There was no doubt a certain amount of wishful thinking in these common beliefs that gang fights represented some kind of scaled-down patriotism, but Britain's military preoccupations were never too far out of sight when Hooliganism was on the agenda, involving reversals such as these on the Hooligan's worth and character.
Baden-Powell, the man who galvanised the hopes and fears of Edwardian England into a truly spectacular social movement, was also given to some equally spectacular celebrations of Hooliganism.
‘Scouting attracts the hooligans,’ he told the National Defence Association in 1910, ‘who are really the fellows of character if you can turn them in the right way; and no doubt these fellows  will be of some use to us in the future instead of being absolute waste material, fit only to be buried.’
There was considerable irony in the fact that it was Baden-Powell, the maverick hero of Mafeking, who should come to rescue England from its Hooligans, if only because the feverish excitement of the jingo crowds and the ‘Mafficking’ that accompanied the South African campaign was thought to be no less of an affront to the English sang froid than ‘Hooliganism’itself.
There may even have been a certain temperamental affinity between Baden-Powell's Scouting philosophy and the restless energies of Hooliganism, and he was even so outrageous as to recommend the Hooligans to the National Defence Association as ‘the best class of boy’: Predictably, his remarks invited the characteristic reversal of the problem, when a member of the National Defence Association asked:
In common with so much of this history of respectable fears, we find ourselves once more in the realm of feeling rather than fact, for although Baden-Powell never tired of claiming that Scouting could reach the Hooligans, on the available evidence it would seem that the movement's major recruiting base was among middle-class and lower middle-class youths, rather than among slum youth.
Nor did Baden-Powell's optimism about reclaiming ‘unclubbable’ Hooligans receive universal support within the boys' club movement.
The Reverend Peter Green warned in How to Deal with Lads (1911) of how ‘the club is rushed by a swarm  of rough lads whom you don't know and over whom it is impossible to exercise any control’.
Urwick also poured cold water on the idea, believing that boys' clubs, could only cure Hooligans if there were ‘a separate club for every one or two, but not otherwise…
Any gang of hooligans will quickly break up any club.’
It would also appear that in some areas the rougher element ganged up against Boy Scout troops in the early years of the movement, throwing stones at them and mocking their uniform of floppy hats and silly short pants.
In any case, what did the Hooligan want with a uniform?
He already had his own.
We must entertain doubts about Baden-Powell's enthusiasm for Hooligans, and the extent to which it represented Edwardian wish-fulfilment rather than real accomplishment.
But there can be no doubt that the Boy Scouts made an extraordinary impact on the era.
When Scouting for Boys first appeared in a series of fortnightly instalments in 1908, the fly-leaf of the final issue was already claiming that ‘at the present moment something between 500,000 and 700,000 young men are interested in this scheme, which will come into full swing about April’.
The figures were wildly optimistic, although the real events were dramatic enough in themselves.
Within not much more than a year, the Boy Scouts had already outstripped the older Boys' Brigade and Church Lads' Brigade movements, claiming more than 100,000 members by 1910.
By the outbreak of war, with the Boy Scouts riding along on the crest of a wave, the figure stood at 150,000.
When the war ended it had reached 200,000 and by the early 1920s there were a quarter of a million Boy Scouts.
The wildfire growth of the Boy Scouts serves to remind us of the enormity of the Edwardian era's preoccupation with its youth, and the groundswell of not only national enthusiasm but also deep funds of social anxiety.
Dissuaded by his friend and mentor Arthur Pearson from his original intention to call the movement the ‘Imperial Scouts’, Baden-Powell performed a remarkable juggling act in the early editions of Scouting for Boys where he struck every nerve of the Edwardian anxiety — as fresh air philosophies, nature study and camp fire yarns jostled for space alongside a tub-thumping  imperialism, anti-socialist harangues and shuddering prophecies of racial doom.
On the militarist question, there can be no doubt that the Boy Scouts made a significant contribution to the growth of the war mentality, although the early movement was nearly torn apart by the question of militarism which eventually led to break-away groups such as the Woodcraft Folk.
Even so, Baden-Powell's own response to the military associations of the Boy Scouts was extremely uneven.
It is hardly surprising that in the aftermath of the First World War, when there was a rising current of anti-militarism, the Boy Scout Association felt it necessary to issue a disclaimer in 1920: ‘Our Scouting has nothing to do with SOLDIERING; it is merely the practice of backwoodsmanship…
We do not preach war and bloodshed to the lads, and we do not favour military drill for them.’
Following the war, a great deal of redrafting of the official creed took place, and Scouting for Boys was repeatedly updated so that not only was militarism explicitly disowned, but the earlier racial imperialism was swapped for international brotherhood and goodwill.
Before the Great War, however, Baden-Powell's public attitude towards the military significance of the Boy Scouts had been hedged about with all sorts of reservations, and he had always actively disfavoured drill which he thought produced merely mechanical obedience.
True enough, in the original imprint of Scouting for Boys he had sounded off with all the usual gusto about ‘How the Empire Must be Held’:.
There was much more in the same vein.
For example: ‘There is a very great danger, because we have many enemies abroad, and they are growing daily stronger and stronger.’
Or: ‘Manliness can only be taught by men, and not by those who are half men, half old women.’
Or: ‘Your forefathers worked  hard, fought hard, and died hard to make this Empire for you.
Don't let them look down from heaven, and see you loafing about with your hands in your pockets, doing nothing to keep it up.’
And finally: ‘Don't merely talk, like some gasbags do, about shedding the last drop of your blood for your country — the difficulty with them, when the time comes, is getting them to shed the FIRST drop of their blood.’
However, after this early burst of full-frontal militarism, Baden-Powell became decidedly shy about the matter.
Perhaps there was some amount of crafty deception here, as he explained to the National Defence Association: ‘By not insisting on military drill we catch a lot of boys who would otherwise have no idea of coming into the education that we are trying to give.’
The meeting's chairman, Sir George Taubman-Goldie, KCMG, quickly cottoned on to the idea:
‘Softly, softly, catchee monkey’ was one of Baden-Powell's mottos for his Boy Scouts, and no doubt the same stealthy philosophy was in evidence here.
In the following year, addressing the Royal United Services Institute, he was to be found covering his tracks across the same ground: ‘They accept us now; they used to suspect us of being a trap to catch boys for the Army…
Anti-military parents will allow their sons to join the Boy Scouts, but prohibit them from joining a Cadet Corps…
So we will fill a gap.’
We find ourselves in one of the gathering grounds of Edwardian opinion, moving towards a resolution of its deeply felt anxieties.
We must remember that there was no compulsory army conscription in Britain — compulsion in schools was bad enough, and standing armies had long been anathema to the ‘freeborn Englishman’— and it was not until the years following the Second World War that compulsory national service would come into existence in peace-time Britain.
But  there were powerful pressure groups at work such as the militarist National Service League who were not slow to advance their cause by arguing that compulsory military training would act as a tonic against ‘the physical and moral degeneracy attendant upon industrial civilisation’.
Militarism also infected some sections of the socialist movement, as in the later jingo-outpourings of Robert Blatchford of The Clarion .
‘A mob of pale-faced, weedy ragamuffins,’ wrote Blatchford in My Life in the Army (1910), ‘with town stoops and town slouches had become clean, well-groomed, alert, upstanding young soldiers, with bronzed faces, muscular arms, and bright eyes…
We were new men…
I am strongly in favour of compulsory universal military training.’
No doubt Sergeant Blatchford and Lieutenant-General Baden-Powell would have found much to argue about — not least the question of full-time socialist agitators — but here was agreement of sorts, although as we have seen Baden-Powell was more inclined to smuggle in militarism behind fresh air philosophies, nature study and the smoke of jolly camp fires.
‘We put patriotism and self-sacrifice into them, and there is no doubt that after they have learnt a certain amount of that,’ he explained as he outlined his strategy to the National Defence Association, ‘they will feel bound to take up the defence in one form or another, should it be necessary, when the time comes.’
‘When the time comes…’
It was a phrase that Baden-Powell let slip more than once in his speeches and writings in the thickening twilight before war.
And when the time did come, there was great rejoicing in the land that Britain had recovered its sense of purpose and destiny.
There was also a renewed enthusiasm for the birching of boy's' bottoms in the courts.
But as the news leaked back from the trenches of the horror and futile brutality of the Great War, the mood changed to one of sorrow and mistrust, and even an old trouper like Baden-Powell could not hide his feelings.
‘The convulsion of war has opened our eyes to many strange things’, he wrote in 1919, ‘Few of us had realised till war had exposed it how thin is the veneer of civilisation over the underlying animal proclivities…the failure of religion to direct, and education to balance, the actions of men.’
When Britain came to mourn her dead — three-quarters of a million killed, nearly two million wounded — the ‘lost generation’ of the First World War would usually be remembered as the flower of the youth, the cream, the Oxford lieutenants, the gifted warrior poets, the junior officers, the early volunteers.
But no doubt some of the original Hooligans —‘instead of being absolute waste material, fit only to be buried’ as Baden-Powell had somewhat indelicately described the goal of reclamation — were buried alongside them, remembered only in the writings and memoirs of youth workers which act as their tombstones.
‘Very soon after the campaign of unspeakable suffering had commenced,’ James Butterworth wrote in 1932, ‘those who had laboured long in building up a club saw the once-hooligan juniors, who had become stalwart seniors, whipped away as by magic…
All the struggles of years appeared wasted.’
‘If the wholesale destruction of Youth be considered a saner method for world betterment than training the Boy,’ he added as the bitterness showed through, ‘then the club movement will not press its claim.’
The Stable Traditions
A NEW VARIETY OF CRIME
If the original Hooligans do not confirm the lovingly remembered traditions of order and stability in late Victorian and Edwardian England, then what of the generations that went before them?
To their contemporaries, with a few notable exceptions, the Hooligans' violence was a sure sign of a novel deterioration in the national character, symptomatic of the lowered morality of the new ‘city type’ or urban degenerate.
‘The break-up or impairment of the old ideas of discipline or order, and the life of great cities create occasions for some varieties of crime’, is how The Times summed up the feeling in 1899.
‘Instead of civilisation exterminating them, it seems, though perhaps only temporarily, to encourage some of them…
The pickpocket is dying out, the Hooligan replaces him.
'i
Different timescales were invoked in order to delineate this sensed deterioration.
Grandiose evolutionary theorising on the fate of the ‘Imperial Race’ presumably implied centuries of wastage and human alteration.
But it was also in keeping with the felt rapidity of the descent into a new barbarism that the advance of lawlessness should be phrased within a much more compressed historical scenario.
William Tallack, who as Secretary of the Howard Association had experience of criminal affairs reaching back towards the mid-nineteenth century, was among those who took this line.
For him, violent crime had advanced because of the excessive leniency of the law: ‘the crime of cruel laxity’ as he put it.
Frowning upon influential American experiments in penal reform and ‘the modern and far too numerous school of pseudo ‘humanatarians'’’, Tallack recounted in his Penological and Preventive Principles (1896) how ‘during the last years of the Nineteenth  Century there has arisen in Great Britain, also, a specially cruel class of ‘humanitarians’’ so called'.
‘Partly as a result of excessive leniency,’ he went on in a familiar line of argument, ‘there has been developed a pestiferous class of young ruffians who have caused great suffering to the respectable…to whom they have become a terror.’
And all this had come about ‘during the last quarter of the Nineteenth Century’.
In other words: ‘Twenty Years Ago’, before the sentimentalists and do-gooders, when traditional discipline meant that violent ruffianism was unknown.
And where have we heard that before?
Another Golden Age…
What would we find if we were to accept William Tallack's invitation to retreat a little further into history in search of the lost traditions?
If we take his timescale literally and approach the late 1870s and 1880s, and merely flick through the pages of Punch magazine — a sure guide to the pulse of respectable discontent in Victorian England — we have an uncanny experience of déjà vu , assailed by complaints of assaults by ‘roughs’ on London's underground railway system; riotous holiday excursions; ‘brutal assaults on elderly females’by frightful characters such as‘Burly Jack’, ‘Bloodstained Bill’and ‘Smashjaw Ned’; the streets already disfigured by fights involving ‘the too free use of that popular institution the British boot’.
We also come across nervous jokes that fashionable Belgravia was to be renamed ‘Burglaria’ because of the frequency of house-breaking, and numerous stabs against the ineffectual reassurance of ‘the defective police’, the ‘seldom-at-Home-Secretary’and his ‘not-at-Home-Department’.
The sentimentalists are there, too, as Mr Punch lampooned the sumptuous diet afforded to convicts and the dancing lessons provided for the ‘Roughs’ in Her Majesty's Prisons.
The early 1880s also witnessed some quite extraordinary scenes of disorder when an organisation calling itself the ‘Skeleton Army’ mobilised these same roughs against the Salvation Army, attacking their meetings and bombarding the    houses of sympathisers.
Ostensibly defending the sanctity of the Sabbath against the joyful musical interruptions of the Salvationists, it was reported from one area that rioting Skeletonites were dressed in ‘coloured rags and tinsel, masks, helmets, and other pantomime clothing’, and in several localities police chiefs found it necessary to ban Salvation Army processions for fear of riots.
It was also in 1883, amidst considerable alarm about the increasing use of firearms by burglars, that the London police were armed for the first time in their history.
Government papers sanctioning the issue of arms referred to ‘the constant dangers’ to which London was exposed, which ‘were never greater than at this present time’.
Some sections of the press were apprehensive about the ‘un-Englishness’ of an armed police, but within a year 821 police constables had received instruction in the use of firearms — although some of their senior officers believed that their men were ‘nervous and excitable’, ‘men of excitable temperament’who were ‘not to be trusted to use revolvers with discretion’.
It is not exactly an auspicious beginning to our search for Victorian civility, and if we journey up North things are no better.
According to Mr Punch ‘kicking out teeth’ was a regular pastime among the good citizens of Oldham, and Salford — which would give birth to the Scuttlers at some later point in the 1880s — was already on the boil.
‘Rowdy Salford’, complained a local rag in 1876, was too much in the headlines: ‘Brutal Assault in Salford: Maliciously Wounding with a Knife’; ‘A Kicking Case in Broughton’; ‘Knocking a Man's Eye Out in Salford’; ‘Assault with a poker in Salford’; ‘Breaking a Woman's jaw in Salford’; ‘Another Assault on the police in Salford’.
Or, to strike another familiar note, the ‘penny-farthing’ bicycle was already the object of significant alarm in the late 1870s.
It would seem that the rot had set well in.
So, perhaps we should enter into the heart of the respectable Victorian tradition, and travel in the company of Matthew Arnold.
He is not a very reassuring guide.
Bemoaning the corrupting influence of ‘Americanisation’, and already reading the last rites over the decomposing virtues of English civility and order, Arnold's influential Culture and Anarchy (1869) was   regularly punctuated with fearful glimpses of ‘a multitude of miserable, sunken, and ignorant human beings’ in the city slums.
‘My friends of the Liberal or progressive party, as they call themselves,’ wrote Arnold, ‘are kind enough to reassure us that a few transient outbreaks of rowdyism signify nothing.’
But he saw things differently:
Arnold's fearful preoccupation with the violence of his time drew on a number of sources, for it was not only the ‘rough’ of the East End slums who was ‘asserting his personal liberty a little, going where he likes, assembling where he likes, bawling as he likes, hustling as he likes’.
Agitation over the Irish question had assumed the proportions of a major political threat in the 1860s, bread riots were not unknown in London in this period, and in the shadow of the second Reform Bill of 1867 there had been occasions of political violence over voting reforms.
The notorious ‘Hyde Park railings affair’, when an angry political assembly of more than 100,000 people invaded the park by smashing down the gates and fences, had left a particularly deep impression on Arnold's already troubled mind.
Because the awful prospect of extending the Englishman's permissive habit of ‘Doing as One Likes’ to what he called the ‘playful giant’of the working class was one of the most worrying signs of incohesion.
The promise of enlarged democratic rights had encouraged the ‘playful giant’ to be less submissive than formerly, Arnold thought, and he was beginning to assert with increasing regularity ‘his right to march where he likes, meet where he likes, enter where he likes, hoot as he likes, threaten as he likes, smash as he likes’: Matthew Arnold thus proposed in the late 1860s that crime and disorder should be understood as a consequence of the already evident ‘permissive’disintegration of the stable traditions, and although he was not narrowly obsessed with street violence and rowdyism, nevertheless these were an integral feature of his vision of decay — something which was deeply characteristic of this era.
The early 1860s had witnessed the culmination of the great modernising transformation of the criminal justice system in  Britain: away from the reliance on hanging, whipping and transportation that had dominated the ‘Bloody Code’ inherited from the eighteenth century, towards an essentially novel emphasis on the reformation of character through the discipline of the penitentiary.
Transportation had been virtually abandoned in 1853 and then abolished in 1857, although with a great show of reluctance, the government's hand having been forced by the refusal of the Australian colonies to accept any more convicts.
With the abandonment of transportation, prison sentences and penal servitude had correspondingly assumed their pivotal role within the criminal justice system, and the 1850s also saw the beginnings of reformatory institutions for young offenders.
After the first round of hanging reforms some forty years earlier, capital statutes were greatly reduced in number by the legislative changes of the early 1860s as a result of which the only common crime punishable by the death penalty became murder.
Flogging for adult male offenders was abolished in 1861, and after a large amount of public controversy, public hangings were terminated in 1868.
As a piece, although the overall process had taken almost a century to unfold and the measures were sometimes half-hearted in terms of their practical realisation, these changes signalled the arrival of a distinctively modern penal system which rested on the reformative and deterrent influence of the prison as its major instrument.
At the moment of its inception, however, the reformed system of criminal justice was greeted with howling disapproval.
The introduction of the ‘ticket-of-leave’ system of parole for convicts who could no longer be transported provoked waves of anxiety from 1853 onwards that dangerous criminals were being released to prowl the streets of the metropolis with no evidence of the character reformation promised by the new prison disciplines.
Respectable England was haunted by the feeling that ‘the safety of society would soon be at an end’ and that the ‘dangerous classes’were gaining the upper hand because of the weakened authority of the law.
It was immediately much regretted that the death penalty could not be applied to burglars and footpads, and the prison system was the object of particularly fierce  criticism.
Punch regularly indicated the ‘mildness of magistrates’ and the ‘luxurious’convenience of a ‘snug cell in prison’which ‘unless the Government interfere to make the living less luxurious…will be popularly looked upon as one of the most comfortable ways of spending life’.
‘The present gaols are really beautiful penal toys’, wrote a complaining correspondent to The Times in 1863, ‘the perfection of lodging-houses-for-single-men architecture…in a better situation Pentonville would sell well as ‘chambers’’ for Bank clerks and MPs of limited income'.
The moral vocabulary of these accusations against sentimentality, leniency and crinolined philanthropy that unfolded in the wake of the great legislative transformations of this era is one which we would find entirely familiar in our own historical time, and which has rolled down to us virtually unchanged across more than a century of resistance to penal reform.
It is also worth noting another entirely familiar set of complaints centred on the demoralising effects of indiscriminate charity and fears of a growing mass of pauperised scroungers.
Matthew Arnold echoed the belief in 1869 that the social system was groaning under the weight of ‘those vast, miserable, unmanageable masses of sunken people — one pauper at the present moment, for every nineteen of us’.
It was in the same year that Culture and Anarchy first appeared that the Charity Organisation Society was founded, to busy itself with the task of classifying and purifying the demoralised lower orders, and to sift out the ‘deserving’ from the ‘undeserving’poor.
Although, if we wish to test the depth of these mid-Victorian fears and also to judge the constancy of the vocabularies of reaction, then we must edge back a few years to an episode that would bring back flogging as a judicial punishment almost as soon as it had been abolished.
Putting the Hug On
Panic swept through respectable London in the winter of 1862 about what The Times (10 June 1863) would eventually describe as a ‘new variety of crime’.
‘This modern peril of the streets’, it was observed, ‘created something like a reign of  terror’ in which ‘whole sections of a peaceable city community were on the verge of arming themselves against sudden attack’.
Here is one example of what the new crime amounted to: ‘Suddenly set upon by two men, one of whom seized him by the throat and threw him upon the ground, whilst the other thrust a quantity of mud in his mouth’(The Daily News , 15 December 1862).
Here is another case, which took place in the Caledonia Road: ‘An elderly woman…seized by the shawl, and dashed upon the pavement.
There was a good deal of ill-treatment, which ended with robbery’(The Times , 28 November 1862).
This second assault was committed by two girls, said to be under the age of twelve.
Again speaking about ‘this new rush of crime’,The Times wondered whether ‘they had learnt the new crime at play, and practised ‘putting the hug on’’ as boys used to rehearse the best tricks of Jack Sheppard'.
The new crime was called ‘garotting’, a form of violent robbery that involved choking the victim.
A correspondent for Cornhill Magazine , who claimed that in order to gain an inside understanding of ‘The Science of Garotting’ he had visited an experienced convict in his cell and offered himself up as a guinea-pig victim, described the main elements of this ‘most inclement ruffianism that ever disgraced a nineteenth century’.
Garotting gangs were said to work in threes — a ‘front stall’ and a ‘back-stall’who acted is look-outs — and a ‘nasty’man' who moved in from the rear: hug on' had been used by guards in the convict hulks in order to subdue troublesome prisoners, and that this was where the original garotting gangs had learned the art.
Be that as it may, the story certainly helped to shape and support the belief that discharged ‘ticket-of-leave’ men were responsible for the outrages.
But 12-year-old girls would certainly not have possessed the physical strength for such a form of attack, and although the rubric of ‘garotting’ was used universally to encompass these crimes, most of the cases reported in the newspapers seemed to describe fairly straightforward street robberies — sometimes using a variety of coshes, knuckle-dusters, ‘Indian claw’devices and other forms of life-preserver — or what we would now call ‘muggings’.
It is obviously a very old crime, although this was not obvious in 1862.
Moreover, it was understood to be a crime which was entirely foreign to the national character, and in one of its earliest references to the affair The Times (7 November 1862) registered the compulsive feeling that the new crime was ‘un-British’: ‘When the outrages first commenced, it was doubted whether the crime was not of foreign importation…but the ruffians who have been arrested arc of pure English breed.’
Even so, like a dog at the bone,The Times was driven to search out the foreign disposition of the garotters, accusing them of abandoning the traditional civility of the traditional English highway robbery: ‘Without the old challenge and parley in use among highwaymen, your garotter knocks a man's head against the kerbstone as the best way of getting at his pocket.’
And so, drawing together the threads of this obsessive preoccupation with the civility of ‘Old England’ which had been ripped apart by a new strain of hot-blooded and un-English violence, the Old Thunderer arrived at a truly horrific conclusion: ‘Our streets are actually not as safe as they were in the days of our grandfathers.
We have slipped back to a state of affairs which would be intolerable even in Naples.’
Other sections of the press reflected the same feeling, as when The Spectator entertained the view that ‘roads like the Bayswater Road are as unsafe as Naples’, or The Observer lamented how ‘the ‘gentlemanly’’ highway-man' had  ‘degenerated into a coarse, brutal ruffian’.
Charles Dickens had something similar on his mind when, in an embittered flogging essay of 1860, he accused ‘The Ruffian’ of making London's streets as perilous as a ‘solitary mountain-spur of the Abruzzi’.
During an earlier panic about garotting robberies and stabbing incidents in 1856,The Times had enjoyed the good fortune actually to discover some real foreigners to blame for the outrages, pointing the accusing finger at ‘men who have been discharged from the foreign legions’.
The use of the knife, identified as an un-English custom, was the most worrying sign.
‘Happily,’ we were told, ‘this specific change in the character of London crime’could be dealt with ‘in a very summary manner indeed’.
‘The half-hundred Italian ruffians who are now rollicking about Whitechapel and Stepney with their stilettoes and bowie-knives’, together with their legionnaire friends, could be ‘got rid of at once’ through deportation.
During the garotting panic of 1862, however, there was no such luck and it was therefore necessary to scramble about for alien pejoratives in order to disown this home-brewed violence.
Not only were the garotters thought to be visiting hot-blooded Neapolitan outrage upon English soil, but on other occasions they were said to be ‘like the sanguinary fanatics of the French Revolution’ as well as resembling the ‘Indian ‘thuggee'’’.
If the impression created by these furious responses was that garotting (as in other instances of street violence that we have already encountered in other historical periods) represented a novel departure in the national character, then elsewhere the garotting panic itself was taken as a sign of temperamental instability.
Reynolds's Newspaper viewed ‘all the fuss and bother’ as ‘a mere club-house panic’, for example, while The Daily News repeatedly warned of the way in which ‘a social panic naturally produces a great deal of wild excited talk’, believing that ‘the enormous crop of exaggerated and fictitious stories’was ‘furnishing food for farce writers and arrangers of pantomimes’:
Mr Punch and the Crinoline Robberies
The most obvious sign of this peculiarity of the English was the behaviour of Mr Punch who went completely overboard on the garotting outrages.
In the space of only a few weeks in the winter of 1862 Punch carried more than a dozen cartoons and a score of witty articles, fake court reports and novelty songs — including a seasonable Christmas Carol.
One of the better songs, ‘Sweet Sentiment's Pet’, showed enormous flair for improvising irresistibly improbable rhymes: The final verse, a sort of policy recommendation, advocated the remedy that parliament would so readily agree to in the ensuing months; one that was ‘cheapest and quickest and best’:
Mr Punch's attitude to the whole affair was thoroughly ill-tempered.
Gruesome flogging cartoons and fantasies of violent    reprisal dominated the response, and when the magazine crashed down against the garotting packs and the sentimentalists (and it was not always clear who was supposed to be the real villain) both humour and artistic quality were sometimes surrendered as hostages to the gout.
For example, ‘The Song of the Anti-Garotter’:
It was not the only time that the Home Secretary, Sir George Grey, was identified as a sentimentalist.
Colonel Joshua Jebb, the powerful architect of the prison system, was also implicated in the conspiracy, accused of selecting only the burliest convicts for release on ‘ticket-of-leave’; and the well-fed convict feasting on turtle soup, rump steak, pudding and ale was another obvious target.
Here and elsewhere, the police also came in for a fair amount of criticism —Punch portrayed London's genial giants Gog and Magog dressed as policeman, defending themselves from the wrath of the respectable populace — and there were perfectly sound reasons for such discontent.
The fact that between 1866 and 1870 almost one quarter of the entire uniformed strength of the Metropolitan Police were dismissed because of misconduct gives some indication of the social organisation of     policing in this period.
The general drift of Punch's enthusiasm, in fact, was that gentlemen should take steps to arm themselves because of the uselessness of the police force.
It was occasionally recognised, however, that self-defence might create more problems than it solved, as when Mr Punch    recovered his wit and arranged for two anti-garotters to meet one dark night in a lonely street:
As well as rumours of troops of infantry escorting respectable citizens to afternoon tea in the suburbs, and the recommendation that gentlemen at a loose end because of the shortage of decent game reserves might turn their hand to a new blood-sport —‘We have got together a splendid pack this season, and the game is still so plentiful that I'll bet we'll show you some really first-rate sport’— the ‘anti-garotte’ movement launched by Punch invented various kinds of anti-robbery device.
Metal collars with long steel spikes were undoubtedly the favourite form of protection against throttling, although Punch (13 December 1862) also dreamt up ‘great coats made a-la-porcupine…with spring daggers at the elbows and sharp spikes all up the back’ in order to discourage attack from the rear.
Bowie-knives, sword-sticks, bayonet-revolvers, protective head-gear and knuckle-dusters completed the anti-garotte arsenal.
‘Really,’ sighed Mr Punch when he had got it all off his chest, ‘from the outrages which have been late perpetrated, one might think that one was living now in London as it used to be a hundred years ago.’
The Times agreed: ‘It brings back Old London, unlighted and without a police.’
It is not necessary to go back a hundred years, however, in order to discover a London haunted by unusually similar fears about the leniency of the law and the terrors of the night.
Only six winters earlier, respectable London had been awash with fears of violent crime.
Lamenting ‘the feeling of morbid sympathy with criminals which at the present moment undoubtedly exists’,The Times (18 November 1856) had arrived at a sorry conclusion: ‘Philanthropy, like crinoline, has become the fashion.’
The magnificence of crinoline and the billowing hoop-skirt were certainly exciting an interest of their own in the mid-1850s, as something symptomatic of the extravagant optimism of the period.
Mr punch had been in high spirits, too, in the summer of 1856, thinking that crinoline was a great joke.
‘It is no longer correct to say ‘the height of fashion’’…rather ‘she was dressed in the full breadth of fashion’’.'
Recommending that hoop-skirts could be usefully converted into play-pens for children,Punch also pondered on whether Regent Street might have to be widened ‘in order to accommodate the growing dimensions of the ladies’ dresses'.
It was all lightness and air.
But as the months passed and the winter fogs thickened, Mr Punch discovered a new source of inspiration in the hoop-skirt, transforming it into an ingenious anti-garotte device whereby its flowing dimensions could prevent a street robber from approaching his intended victim.
Because, six years before the supposedly unprecedented alarms of 1862, Chokee Bill the Garotter was already practising his ‘new’ crime and the beacons of respectable discontent were already aflame warning of ‘the social dragon of the hour, Ticketofleave.
The police were also hard pressed by criticism and ridicule in 1856.
For example, that they were diligently enforcing bye-laws about where costermongers’ barrows could be parked, while ducking their responsibilities to deal with ruffians and robbers.
Or that London bobbies were too often to be found whispering sweet nothings to kitchen maids, and tucking into pastries in servants' quarters on foggy nights, when they should have been out walking the beat.
When Reynolds's Newspaper (9 November 1856) tried its hand at    a garotting song, it summed up the feeling well enough:
Perhaps the strangest think of all about the garotting panic of 1862 was that in the haste to describe the awful contours of the ‘new’ crime, the equally ‘unprecedented’alarms of 1856 were almost entirely forgotten, although the same complaints and accusations had been well rehearsed.
Mr Punch, for example, had already invented the spiked steel collar and the other improbable trappings of his anti-garotting campaign; and even the solemn judgements of The Times (10 November 1856) had been tempted from the paths of seriousness:
Who Holds the Whip Hand
Whether or not The Times did seriously entertain the possibility of vigilante self-defence, there were indeed serious considerations placed before its readers during the alarms of  1856.
Hanging leaders were nothing out of the ordinary, and the Old Thunderer even confessed itself vexed by the ‘overmagnanimous spirit of British law, which always presumes a man innocent until he is proven guilty’.
This placed an unfortunate obstacle in the path of the police who might otherwise, simply on the grounds of suspicion, make a ‘clean sweep’ of all known criminals — a policy that had been advocated for some years by Matthew Davenport Hill, the Recorder of Birmingham — as a sure means to guarantee the safety of the streets.
Respectable England did not have the stomach for such a drastic curtailment of civil liberties, however, and although fearful of how to absorb the most noxious criminal elements back into society without the option of packing them off to the colonies, the deliberations of the mid-1850s bogged down in suggestions for more effective surveillance of ‘ticket-of-leave’ men, together with some wishful thinking about reviving transportation in some form or another.
But the wishful thinking (suggesting the Falkland Islands as a possible convict settlement and, even more improbably, the Antarctic) remained wishful thinking.
‘Be it so,’The Times grudgingly conceded, ‘we must pay the penalty for our chivalry in the shape of daily outrage and nightly fears.
Amidst the ‘garotting’ agitations of 1862, however, those who were discontented with crinolined philanthropy and magnanimous justice discovered a much more amenable slogan around which to marshal their energies.
Reintroduce transportation, they could not do.
But bring back flogging — abolished as recently as 1861 — they could, and did.
Stirred into action when a Member of parliament, Mr Pilkington, was the victim of a garotting attack in Pall Mall while on his way to the Reform Club, a Security from Violence Bill was brought before the House of Commons to reinstate the penalty of flogging for robbery offences.
Ignoring the advice of the Home Secretary Sir George Grey, who regarded the Bill as ‘panic legislation after the panic had subsided’, the House pressed ahead to implement the ‘Garotter's Act’ of 1863.
The Act was destined to become something of a cause célèbre among successive generations of floggers who would fondly remember (although without a shred of evidence to  support their claim) how flogging had put down the garotters and could be relied upon to stop Hooligans or Teddy Boys.
Introduced so hastily after the original abolition of flogging, and remaining on the statute book until judicial corporal punishment was ended as recently as 1948, the Garotter's Act was thus a historic landmark of reaction; and it was quickly followed by measures to toughen prison discipline and to introduce a minimum penalty of five years of penal servitude for second offenders.
The reformative principle was on the retreat.
In a recent analysis of the garotting panic of 1862, Jennifer Davis has argued that there was in fact no startling upsurge in crimes of violence which could justify the extent of the alarm.
Moreover, that those increases in recorded crime which did occur came after the onset of the panic.
The increase in arrests, in other words, was the result of increased police vigilance: the ‘crime wave’, such as it was, was created by ‘the actions and reactions of the press, public, and various government agencies…rather than any significant increase in criminal activity in the streets’.
This increased sensitivity to street crime, furthermore, was orchestrated into a powerful lobby of reaction against the reformative penal system: ‘it was the mobilisation of public opinion during the panic’, Davis writes, ‘which facilitated the effective dismantling of the reformative penal system by its critics in the years following, and its replacement by a punitive model of convict treatment’.
The issue which divided public opinion largely revolved around the ineffectiveness of the prison system and the ease with which convicts could bamboozle prison chaplains into believing that their characters had been reformed, thus securing their release on ‘ticket-of-leave’, and there was little room fur the idea that the roots of crime might be found in social conditions.
In this respect, however,Reynolds's Newspaper had devised an interesting prototype of what we might nowadays call ‘anomie theory’, arguing that crime was an inevitable result of the system of distribution of wealth and opportunity.
The criminogenic nature of the social system, as it was described, was that honest labour was rewarded only with poverty-level wages and filthy cellar    homes, while the ruling class indulged itself in idle luxury ‘enshrined in palaces, furnished in a style of Oriental splendour’, thus encouraging the lower orders to improvise their own short-cut to the universal aspiration of acquisition:
There was, indeed, a certain amount of questioning at the time of dishonest business practices and the morality of trade, although this intemperate radicalism was but a marginal force in the ensuing debates on the criminal question.
Reaction was firmly enthroned, and when during the parliamentary debate on the Security from Violence Bill one MP voiced the belief that ‘the want of employment was the parent of crime’, this seems to have been regarded as little more than a sentimental eccentricity.
The debate on the Bill to bring back  whipping was a thoroughly undignified affair in which the principles of the matter seemed to count less than considerations such as the size and weight of the flogging instrument to be used: calculations made necessary no less by the desire to limit the discretion of ‘judges infected by maudlin sentimentality’, than by the requirement that it should measure up to the brutes who were ‘so degraded, that they could only be deterred by forcible appeals to their fear of physical pain’.
There were momentary objections to the business, as when Mr Clay questioned whether an ‘exceptional state of crime’ did actually exist, protesting that the House was ‘legislating under an unreasonable state of panic’.
Colonel John Sidney North, on the other hand, spoke for the majority of Punch enthusiasts in the House, and ‘could not understand why they should be so mealy-mouthed about flogging a set of ruffians’, denouncing anyone who dissented from flogging    as ‘a wretched old woman for his lenity’.
Colonel North, in fact, was the star turn:
The Garotter's Act became law on 13 July 1863 when, after a speedy passage through its readings, it joined the rump of archaic flogging laws which had escaped abolition in 1861.
The names and dates tell their own story: the Treason Act of 1842, passed after an impotent attempt to frighten the sovereign by a young hunchback with a faultily loaded pistol; the Vagrancy Act of 1824 which allowed the flogging of ‘incorrigible rogues’, commonly elderly tramps, and which has come into more recent notoriety through the ‘sus’ laws; the Diplomatic Privileges Act of 1708 which offered protection to Ambassadors and their servants; and the Knacker's Act of 1786 which dealt with the irregular slaughter of horses and cattle.
In company such as this, the Garotter's Act must almost seem enlightened.
After ill, had it not been brought before Parliament by Mr C. B. Adderley' ‘in no retrograde spirit’, but as something which merely followed ‘the dictates of commonsense’?
But why was the Garotter's Act passed?
It trivialises the issue to say that it was merely the result of panic — although there was certainly panic in good measure.
Because this conventionally liberal response to the prevailing mood disguises the fact that the them as which arranged themselves around the flogging solution reflected a much more mature retrenchment, and a much more solid base of opinion and material circumstance than is usefully summarised by the word ‘panic’.
The Times was certainly not panicking, as its editorials rattled off the press each after another, priming the fuse of Parliament's deliberations and heralding the garotters as something that signalled ‘the failure of sentimental legislation’.
Indeed, it was in a mood of celebration rather than panic that the garotters were actually toasted for having ‘taken upon themselves the duty of upsetting a whole fabric  of amiable delusions’ concerning the reformation of criminals, and further congratulated that through their ‘inexcusable crime’they had made a salutary impact on public opinion and ‘created a general belief that right and wrong are, after all, essentially distinct’.
As we listen to these phrases that rolled so easily off the  tongue, and which have also rolled on down through history to our own time, we must make a special effort to remember very carefully just who the men were who engineered the Garotter's Act — what kind of men they were; what kind of times they lived in; and what forces helped to shape their upright moral certitude.
Because these men who knew with such unquestionable certainty the difference between right and wrong, and who blithely described the garotters as creatures capable of responding only to the fear of physical pain, were people who knew a great deal about physical pain.
Floggings in the public school system, through which so many of these men had passed, had undoubtedly accustomed them in their youth to scenes of sordid violence, such as were everyday occurrences in these nineteenth-century centres of educational excellence.
Floggings in the army, and more especially in the navy, were another integral feature of the moral landscape of the rulers of Britain in the 1860s.
At the very time that Parliament was debating the garotters, there had been a public sensation when The Liverpool Mercury exposed an eye-witness account of a brutal navy flogging on HMS Majestic in which it was alleged that the officer-in-charge had taken considerable pleasure from the proceedings.
The gentle mercies of the lash were used even more extravagantly for civilising the ‘primitive’ peoples of the Empire in the nineteenth century, and in one of its anti-garotting tirades Punch (6 December 1862) had good cause to remember the lesson of the Indian Mutiny of 1857 which had been put down in a sea of blood.
‘Hang without mercy, hang like fun,’ recommended Mr Punch, ‘and you will check Garotters as effectually as Sepoys.’
Flogging was reintroduced in India at this time by the Whipping Act of 1864, and even the bare statistical details of the numbers of floggings carried out by the British are enough to make the blood run cold.
Tens of thousands of whippings were inflicted in India: 75,223 in 1878 alone, for example, and 64,087 in 1897.
What would ‘the general belief that right and wrong are, after all, essentially distinct’ have to say to this?
Again, the Morant Bay rising in Jamaica in 1865 was put down with savage majesty by Governor Eyre — 600 men, women and children indiscriminately massacred, many more   hundreds executed, and a thousand homes burned to the ground — as Eyre's troops went on a three-week orgy of hanging, torture, flogging and rape.
In the immediate aftermath of this squalid affair a former Stipendiary Magistrate  of Jamaica, Mr H. Pringle, had felt obliged to lift the veil from the ‘abominable and ferocious’ treatment of black people in the Caribbean.
And although, according to the conventions of the time, he acknowledged that ‘the subject is quite unfit for women to think of’, he nevertheless urged a loosening of convention, for ‘it is absolutely necessary for the ends of justice, and a due regard for outraged humanity, that these things should be made known to the women of England’.
But it was not only the women of England, with their crinolined frailties, who needed to be shielded from the details.
The punishments dealt out to the Morant Bay rioters were so hideous — it was reported, for example, that women were lashed on their naked buttocks, sometimes with piano wire — as to shock even lusty sexual flagellants such as Swinburne.
The Governor Eyre controversy dragged on for a number of years, creating deep divisions within respectable society.
An attempt to bring Eyre to justice on a trial of murder, spearheaded by John Stuart Mill, was to prove unsuccessful in spite of the Lord Chief Justice's eloquent support for his indictment.
And when Parliament eventually turned back the tide of opposition to Eyre and voted financial support to the former Governor, it was poetically appropriate that those who had been most vocal in their support for the Garotter's Act — such as Mr Adderley and the rampant Colonel North — should be in the thick of it again, shouting their praise for Eyre's loyalty to the Crown and his firm action that had saved a colony.
The Times , for its part, while maintaining a discrete silence when the fortunes of the case were in the balance, eventually brought its influence to bear against those who were understood as Eyre's malicious persecutors.
The people who created the Garotter's Act, together with the gentlemen who egged them on from the sidelines helping to fashion the vocabulary of objections to penal reform which remain with us to this day, were thus the same men whose blunted moral sensibilities enabled them to preside over this magnanimous process of ‘civilisation’ without turning a hair.
People, that is, who although they were scandalised by the outrageous behaviour of the garotters  and roughs, lived nevertheless in an untidy moral proximity with systematic brutality, degradation and mass violence.
Sometimes, as in the case of Governor Eyre's atrocity at Morant Bay, it was not even particularly systematic.
Two wrongs do not make a right, of course, although they must necessarily shift the balance in how we might approach such an inalienable moral precept as the ‘general belief that right and wrong are, after all, essentially distinct’.
And when we begin to gain, if only the merest glimpse of the deeply ingrained brutalities and prejudices embodied in what was judged to be ‘right’, then we can see more clearly that the Garotter's Act was not so much a moment of panic which led respectable England off its true course, but a mature expression of the existing social relations — including the self-assumption of the mighty, and their attitudes and actions towards the lower orders and the plebs.
This was, when all is said and done, class legislation: enacted by one class for the betterment of its lower brethren; not for the correction of its own bad habits.
‘To a wealthy or aristocratic criminal the vengeance of the law is as a flea, which merely tickles’, observed Reynolds's Newspaper which thought that as far as the Garotter's Act went ‘only poor, plebeian criminals will be exposed…rich and aristocratic ruffians…are certain to be exempted from flogging’.
It was an entirely sound judgement.
On the very day that the Garotter's Act became law, the essential distinction between right and wrong faltered appreciably in the pages of The Times where a disturbance was noted at Cremorne Gardens which had resulted in some upper-class rowdies being heavily fined.
Admitting that ‘a ‘row’’ at Cremorne on the night of Derby and Oaks day' was ‘too ordinary an occurrence to deserve any comment’,The Times nevertheless lingered over this scene of young gentlemen at play:
Given the habit of The Times to diagnose working-class violence as a deterioration of the national character, and to equate it with a Southern ‘hot-blooded’ temperament, this was an intriguing turnabout on the racial origins of upper-class ruffianism.
And there was more to come.
The respectable rowdies had set about their business with gleeful shouts of ‘Now, boys, for a jolly spree!’ and ‘Go it, boys, go it!’doing damage amounting to £300 and causing the proprietor of Cremorne to pay out £500 in prosecuting the case.
It is hardly surprising, then, that one observer thought this such ‘a scene of riot, confusion, destruction of property, and injury to persons which would have been a disgrace to a savage land’.
The Times , however, begged to differ: ‘Knowing what we do of human nature, and of the licence claimed by young gentlemen in past times, we are inclined to take a somewhat less gloomy view of it.’
So that, when young gentlemen were on the rampage, the past — instead of being used as a stick with which to beat the deteriorated present — became the justification for taking a lenient view.
The sequel, in which the young bloods of Derby and Oaks night received their rebuff, was that they were distracted from their other responsibilities by a four-day jury hearing which found them guilty of riotous proceedings, but not of riotous intent.
Then, for four of the culprits there were whopping fines of £50 — which were paid immediately — plus even heftier sureties to keep the peace.
The Times had no quarrel with this.
These were people of means who could afford to foot the bill: no appeal to the fear of physical pain was needed here.
The sentence, said the judge, was ‘more for an example’ for this was ‘a matter to be dealt with with great leniency’.
Indeed, he confessed that he was deeply troubled by having to pass sentence at ill: ‘Itis with feelings of great pain that I pass sentence upon you, the defendants, and I can make great allowance for the youthful spirit which has been exhibited by you.’
Justice must be seen to be done, however, and when it had been seen to be done, the miscreants were cheered by a crowd assembled outside the court.
Describing it variously as a lark and a spree,The Times was satisfied that although ‘genteel ruffianism has met with a very decisive rebuff’, the Cremorne affair was nothing more  than something done ‘on the impulse of the moment, and out of pure love of mischief’.
If the purity of the motive was not here in question, we can sorrowfully contrast the fate of Alfred Berry, an unfortunate young man of 18 years from Camden whose idea of mischievous fun was to make an annoying din in the open streets between three and four o'clock in the morning in late December 1862.
There was no trial-by-jury for him, of course, and no Times leader.
Nor had he spent the night at the opera, or at the Naval and Military Club, or feasting at Hummums Hotel as in the case of the respectable ruffians of Cremorne.
But there were remaining points of similarity.
When he appeared before the magistrate at lowly Clerkenwell, charged with ‘willfully ringing several door bells and knocking at the doors in Upper Street, Islington, without lawful excuse’ it was said that this kind of mischief — like the Cremorne Gardens affray — was a ‘frequent occurrence’.
Alfred Berry also confessed that he had been drinking, and hoped that a lenient view would be taken of his misconduct.
But here the similarities stopped.
The magistrate could see no redeeming features in the case.
He considered it ‘very foolish for a young man to act in such a silly way’ and ‘What he did it for he could not tell, for there was no fun in it.’
Unable to pay the ten shillings fine placed against him — a trifling sum, of course, compared with that paid out by the Cremorne merry-makers after their destructive binge — Alfred Berry was sentenced to seven days in the House of Correction.
Here, moral certainty had found its feet again, secure in the knowledge that a short, sharp dose of discipline would curb the moral pauper and ensure the safety and the silence of the night.