

EDITORIAL Uneasy Calm after the storm
Never again.
This must be the watchword of the Western democracies who have so painfully and yet so necessarily dismantled Saddam Hussein's war machine, at such a cost in lives and scarce resources.
Never again, because Iraq's military might was built with the active encouragement of some western powers, while many others turned a conveniently blind eye to their arms merchants' activities.
Never again, because in sheer economic terms it is lunacy to spend upwards of £80 million to knock out a war machine that actually only provided some £20 billion of contracts for western industry.
A pretty poor rate of return indeed.
Never again, because those resources, now being consumed at vast speed in the Gulf, should have been used to stave off world recession, build new infrastructure, encourage better education and training — at least that's where the UK's £3 billion or more share of the total cost could have gone.
Perhaps the only heartening aspect of the whole Gulf conflict has been the way that in the post Cold War age, there has been a sustainable coalition of western and eastern states determined to prevent Saddam profiting from his attack on Kuwait.
This coalition must hold together in the post-war settlement and resist the siren voices calling for a huge re-arming of the region.
Every arms merchant worth his salt is now ready to re-arm the Gulf after the war, and never has there been a greater abundance of lethal hardware to choose from.
There will be those saying that of course the UK must help this or that ruler protect himself, and anyway, it's a little naive to ignore the markets.
The French or Americans will do it if we don't, and what about the jobs in Preston, Chelmsford or Rochester?
But this is exactly the sort of attitude that has forced RAF pilots to take on the most terrifying assignments and attack runways and hardened aircraft shelters (built with British expertise), to be fired on by Soviet missiles or Soviet antiaircraft guns, or face the threat of German-developed chemical warfare or French Exocet missiles.
Never again.
Clearly, an array of export prohibitions by one country will not work in isolation.
It will require the sort of active co-operation in peace that has been displayed in the war by the United Nations coalition.
Fortunately, the recent freeing of the UN from its ideological rancour, which crippled its effectiveness for so long, has now largely ended.
If the new-look UN is to move forward after the war, it must use its newly discovered teeth and confidence to slap some form of strict embargo on weapon supplies to the area to complement a long-standing Middle East peace.
A first step must be to restrict any military hardware sales to defensive weapons.
If the arms race is not stopped in the Middle East, any hope of the long-sought peace dividend will simply disappear, crippling even further the UK and US economies.
More importantly in the long-term, continuing military tensions in the Middle East will divert the West from the much more important task of helping to build democracy east of the Oder.
One of the particularly tragic consequences of the war has been the way it has distracted attention from events in the USSR and Eastern Europe, just when it was needed most.
Never again.
BIM SOUNDING BOARD Custodians of a priceless past
Angus Stirling, director general of the National Trust and a companion of the BIM, explains the commitment of his organisation
A remarkable feature of the last decade is the way in which the environment has been moved to the top of the political agenda.
Politicians espouse it; government departments ignore it at their peril.
In a year of economic recession, the Government enacted an Environmental Protection Bill with major implications for public and private expenditure and produced a White Paper on the environment pointing the way to the allocation of further resources.
In a year when all other parts of the charitable sector have been hit by the drop in disposable income, environmental charities have gone from strength to strength.
There is no doubt that the National Trust has been a beneficiary of public interest in the environment.
This was especially apparent in 1990 when the Trust recruited its two millionth member in August, and received an overwhelming response to the Enterprise Neptune Appeal for the purchase of coastline in Wales, Cornwall, Northumberland and County Durham.
It took from 1965 to 1973 to raise Neptune's first £2 million, but the last £2 million was raised in barely 12 months.
However, growing environmental awareness also poses challenges for conservation bodies.
To begin with, our understanding of the environment has changed and with it the expectations of what bodies concerned with its protection can and should achieve.
The Victorians understood ‘The environment’ to mean the background to human activity, in particular, industrial activity — a subject of concern to public health inspectors and philanthropists, but not society in general .
It was one of those philanthropists, Octavia Hill, who, in order to ‘cast away from them [the children of East End slums]the misery around, to remove them from air poisoned and close, to give them God's free Light’, developed a corresponding interest in countryside protection and, in 1895, founded the National Trust.
This generation has, by contrast, made the environment a focus of attention and, with the Green movement, invested it with a value of its own separate from its value as a resource for industry, recreation and other human activities.
Scientists, meanwhile, have shown that our activities affect not only the air we breathe, but the air which regulates our climate and even climates on the other side of the world.
Moreover, uncontrolled activities cannot be sustained without loss of plant and animal species, natural habitats, coast and hinterland, and the decay of buildings.
Hence the need for a genuine commitment to sustainable development which is integrated with national policy on industry, energy, transport, trading and planning.
It may be thought that a body like the National Trust with a well-defined statutory purpose to preserve places of natural beauty or historic interest in perpetuity for the benefit of the nation, is not affected by changing public opinion or fears for the global environment.
This is not the view of the Trust, for three reasons.
First, properties can be affected by adverse changes to the environment.
for example, the Trust is concerned about the possible effect of rising sea levels on the East Anglian, North Devon and other vulnerable coastlines; of acid rain on historic buildings, lakes and trees; of severe storms like those of October 1987 and January 1990, which felled 250,000 and 80,000 trees respectively in Trust woods and gardens.
Second, the Trust is a body committed to conservation on such a wide scale — it is the second largest landowner in Britain — that it also has a clear duty to ensure that it follows good environmental practice in its own affairs.
Thus it is currently carrying out an environmental audit which will guide its policies in future on such matters as the use of energy, water purification, and fertilisers.
The third and most important reason is that by virtue of its ownership of an almost infinite variety of coasts, countryside, woods and waterways, gardens, historic houses and works of art, it can make a unique contribution to public and professional debate, and to environmental education.
The Trust has become increasingly aware, as funding becomes available, of the unrivalled educational resource of its properties.
Teachers' packs have been prepared and lists of the properties most relevant to national curriculum courses in each region have been sent to schools.
In terms of property management the Trust is catering for increasing numbers of well-educated visitors who want to be involved.
This has perhaps affected opening arrangements more than anything else.
So the Trust, as a voluntary, charitable organisation receiving no direct government subsidies, is very dependent on the help it receives from some 20,000 volunteers annually, working on a great variety of projects.
The Trust is also responding to increased threats to the environment.
It is wellplaced to direct attention to and comment on these threats where they affect its properties.
Ownership by the Trust is often the surest way of guaranteeing the preservation of beautiful places of national importance.
The Trust is also uniquely empowered, under its Act of Parliament, to declare its properties inalienable, which means that they cannot be compulsorily acquired or used for any purpose against the Trust's wishes without specific parliamentary consent.
In spite of changing perceptions of the environment and the differences that has made to the Trust's approach, it is the ability to manage property in a sustainable way, that underpins the Trust's relevance to protection of the environment in the 1990s sense of the word just as much as it did in the 1890s, in the Victorian sense of the word.
Stirling: ‘the Trust is reliant on the generous support of its members and the wider public’
INSIDE STORY
Velcro comes unstuck
Velcro, the touch fastener so beloved of outdoor skiing types and their like, is at the centre of a bitter spat between its board and disgruntled shareholders over that vexed question of shareholder value.
Invented over 40 years ago by a Swiss engineer, the product is now owned by a Netherlands Antilles company with its major manufacturing operations in the US.
But the chairman of Velcro is a very British knight, Sir Humphrey Cripps, a 75-year-old Northamptonshire businessman whose extraordinary generosity to charities, Cambridge colleges, and Nottingham University earned him a knighthood in 1989.
However, some Velcro shareholders do not feel quite so well-disposed to Cripps.
A minority group led by Alan Kahn (right), president of Kahn Brothers, a New York broking house, rebelled against the Velcro board late last year.
Kahn reckoned that a plan either to make them sell their shares or to force a swap of the shares for shares in a newly-formed corporation called Velcro Reorganisation NV was ‘in effect Hobson's choice,’ as he put it in an affidavit filed with a New York Federal district court.
In his affidavit, dated 27 September, Kahn alleges that ‘remaining Velcro minority shareholders will be faced with the unpleasant choice of receiving either a grossly unfair cashout price of $21.75 per share based upon artificially depressed market prices, or equity in VRNV, a company which will not be traded on NASDAQ or any other stock exchange requiring the necessity for public filings and resulting in an illiquid market’.
Kahn's thesis is simply that both because of its profit record and its potential as a brand name, Velcro's share price should have been a lot higher — in the region of over $40 a share.
He pointed out that the company's investment portfolio alone, ‘which will be worth $17.73 per share by 30 September 1990, if the portfolio experiences the same rate of growth as last year, is equal to nearly the value of the total cash-out price’.
Kahn also claims that a new and superior Velcro product, Ultra-Mate, had not been mentioned in the original proxy statement outlining the Velcro reorganisation.
The problem for Kahn and his fellow minority shareholders, representing approximately 25%/ of Velcro's publicly held share, was the powerful presence of a 65%/ block in Velcro held by a company called Cohere, which had originally committed itself to support the liquidation proposal.
Registered in the British Virgin Isles, the ultimate ownership of Cohere is unclear.
Nonetheless, the notice sent to Velcro shareholders for the 1991 annual general meeting does give some clues.
Three of Velcro's nine directors are members of the Cripps family.
Apart from Sir Humphrey, his sons Robert and Edward also sit on the main board.
Sir Humphrey has just 100 shares in Velcro, but neither son holds any shares.
Robert Cripps is a director of Cohere Limited, which holds as an investment 1,963,528 shares in Velcro — or 65%/ of the share capital.
The action by Kahn and fellow minority shareholders prompted a re-think as the recent Velcro annual report made clear: ‘Upon hearing of the action and wishing not to become embroiled in US litigation, Cohere advised the company that it would reverse its previously announced decision and vote against the proposal.
At a special general meeting held in the Princess Beach Hotel and Casino, Curacao, by Netherlands Antilles, on 22 October 1990, Cohere duly did just that and the whole battle over the future of Velcro was put on ice.
But not quite.
The shareholders in Velcro have received no dividends in 1989 and 1990, despite the fact that pre-tax earnings have grown from $6.3 million in 1988 to $9.4 million in 1990, and the company is awash in liquidity with marketable securities as of 30 September 1990 worth slightly less than $50 million.
Moreover, the economic outlook for the company hardly warranted no dividend payments, as Sir Humphrey made clear in his chairman's statement last November: ‘There is a degree of optimism for the 1991 year in the expectation that the negative effects of the economy may be offset and minimised by the advancements being implemented in many areas of our business’.
Vestel visited by sins of the parent
You might think that anyone connected with Polly Peck would be keeping a low profile these days.
Not so Tahsin Karan head of Vestel, the Turkish electronics company 87% owned by Polly Peck.
He was at the World Economic Forum in the Swiss resort of Davos last month, mingling with the great and the good.
Karan was in bullish mood about the future of his company.
‘The majority of shares will stay with Polly Peck, of that I am sure,’ he declared confidently.
He confirmed that there were people interested in buying Vestel, but insisted there were no negotiations.
As for the effects of Polly Peck's troubles on Vestel, Karan claimed they were purely psychological.
The share price of the 18% of Vestel quoted on the Istanbul stock exchange is climbing slowly, but is still 40% down on the all time high.
Much of the fall, however, is due to the Gulf crisis, rather that the misfortunes of Vestel's parent.
Of these Karan comments: ‘Playing with the banks is a two-way street.
Polly Peck got credit unsecured but the banks gave it without a term, that was Nadir's (above) biggest Mistake’.
For Vestel, of course, those unsecured loans are a saving grace, preserving its assets from hungry creditors.
Ownership, however, is another matter.
And for all Karan's bravado, it is one which will be settled not by Vestel, but by Polly Peck's London administrators.
A case of art and the round table
The English National Opera hopes to get away with murder.
It has just invited audience sponsorship for this season's revival of the Shostakovich opera Lady Macbeth of Mtensk .
For £25 you can secure two tickets to the dress rehearsal, an LP and personal line credit in the programme.
The ENO is no stranger to creative financing.
It has also secured a share of the £200,000 which KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock is handing out in a tripartite sponsorship deal.
The money — a drop in the ocean to KPMG — is hardly big.
But what is new is MPMG's success in introducing the tactics of management consultancy to the world of the arts.
The three participating companies — the ENO, RNT and Tate — were asked to co- operate in drafting the sponsorship programme.
The staff that plays together
Banish self-important job titles and jargon, states a new list of 50 suggestions for reducing pomposity in the workplace.
The organisers of National Motivation Week (NMW) have joined forces with the Industrial Society to compile a list of the things that kill commitment.
According to NMW coordinator Jan Martins, some employers don't just have separate canteens for different grades of staff, they even have two sorts of lavatory paper — soft for the senior executive and, you guessed it, the scratchy kind for your humbler bottom.
Christian-name terms and parity of treatment might ‘encourage a more constructive dialogue on the topic of ‘classlessness’ at work’, Martins believes.
But, she argues, it's not simply a new spirit of democracy which should prompt such thinking.
It's a question of productivity.
NMW is launching a new award for the silliest job title in Britain ‘to demonstrate the degree to which posing has penetrated many companies, at the cost of performance’.
Scots succumb to southern comfort
One of history's greatest takeovers was surely the successful Stuart bid for the English throne.
When James VI of Scotland became James I of England, he brought haggis to the home counties and kilts to the capital.
However, the Stuarts eventually got traded in for solid Hanoverian stock, and the latest evidence suggests that the South learned fast.
The trend since then has been confirmed, with England's corporate raiders prospering at the expense of the Picts.
In an analysis of Scottish plcs in the industrial and commercial sectors, P-E International's Dennis Henry found that, from 1985 to 1986, Caledonia haemorrhaged, losing control of companies responsible for 53% of the capital employed in January 1985.
From 1987 to October 1990 the bleeding has been somewhat staunched, but only because the bigger and better companies had already been acquired.
In the last three years some 23 plcs have been lost from the Scottish scene.
Control of Belhaven Brewery first went  firth of the forth when Nasmu Virani bought it in 1984.
But in 1986 Virani sold the little beer-maker for £25 million — only to buy it back again in 1988 for £8 million less.
Trouble was brewing elsewhere too, as the hard-pressed William Collins went down to Rupert Murdoch.
Within months Murdoch had revamped Collins and given its most important author the full hype.
The new paperback version of the Bible substitutes a high-rise building for the word ‘holy’, leaving John Knox to turn in his grave at this testament to the Tower of Babel.
Industrial holding company Thomson T-Line also succumbed to southern comforts, when it was sold to Ladbroke, the hotel and high-street gambling chain.
Horses for courses, it seems.
Yet the news wasn't all bad on the northern front.
William Somerville was purchased by a US firm which had previously bought Colter Guardbridge.
The US parent then hiked turnover at one of the subsidiaries from £6.7 million to £24.2 million in only six years.
The fate of Smith & McLaurin, together with the £2.2 million investment which secured it, is surely a promise of good things to come.
Likewise Guinness has established a substantial operation in Edinburgh to manage its distilled products, even though its headquarters remain in London.
In this way the boys in the field still get a crack at the business.
The same is true of Coats Viyella, which continues to use the Glasgow office formerly housing Coats Paton for a number of the group's services.
But, good news apart, Scotland's corporate base has indeed been eroded.
Capital employed is down by nearly 6% and turnover by 5% on the January 1987 figures (see table 1).
This is not merely a matter of Northism, Henry argues.
There's a very simple reason for the scotching of the Scots.
Comparing the performance of Scottish companies still locally controlled with those of the 250 largest UK-owned plcs in the relevant sectors shows that Scottish firms must plead guilty to underperformance.
Return on total assets is 1.53% less, profit margins are 0.5% less and sales per employee fall short by £12,631 of their UK rivals (see table 2).
The result is that Scottish firms are likely to remain targets for their lean and acquisitive English cousins, unless they can learn to ‘make their assets sweat’.
After all, if they don't, somebody else will be sure to do so.
Promise of Eastern exploitation
The chief executive of Roffey Park Management College is a brave man.
When he addressed a conference of business leaders and academics in Budapest recently, Dr Ian Cunningham announced that too many western management consultants are offering quick fix answers to Hungary's problems.
‘The pressure is on to make money and a lot of consultants are suffering,’ notes Cunningham.
‘So they say, ‘Where can we place our business?
Ah, Eastern Europe’.’
The consultants are ‘mostly naive’, he adds.
It's not that ‘they're saying, ‘We've got these things that don't work well and we'll dump them on unsuspecting countries.’’
Rather, they have put forward a number of proposals which are plainly unsuited to an eastern culture and structure.
Attempts to introduce information technology, which sometimes ‘distorts the problem and doesn't fit the solution’, failure to train management adequately for new challenges and promotion of export markets without addressing question of product quality, will only exacerbate Hungary's predicament, not resolve it.
The great god privatisation is not the answer, Cunningham insists.
‘A change of ownership doesn't change the relationship (of a company) with the market’.
What is needed, he believes, is recognition of Hungary's strong engineering tradition and economic history.
Far from being a source of cheap labour, the country has a talented work-force and the route forward is application of those skills, and their revolution by way of involvement and training.
If foreign advisers don't realise this, Hungary will be turned into a giant screwdriver operation, entailing massive lay offs and — ultimately — massive resentments.
A brief glimpse at Maxwell's soft centre
Robert Maxwell, publishing tycoon (left), was apparently showing his more charitable side at the World Economic Forum in Davos last month.
In a brief interval between merging The European and the The Sunday Correspondent , addressing sessions on global media, and generally meeting the most important people, Maxwell found time to do a good deed for the poor people of Bulgaria.
The prime minister of that country, Dimiter Popov, was in Davos on a beggingbowl mission extraordinaire.
(It was a nifty move to be out of the country because prices back home had just been ‘liberated’, sending inflation on basic commodities soaring.)
But the mission was not in vain.
Popov came away waving a cheque from Mr Maxwell for £50,000 to buy medicines for sick Bulgarian children.
A round of applause please, ladies and gentlemen.
Goldsmith hides behind the green door
Five months after shocking the business world with the announcement of his retirement, Sir James Goldsmith was greeting old friends in Davos.
Sir James, who now devotes his energies to saving the environment, flew in on his private plane for the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum.
He looked relaxed.
And it was hard to reconcile his soft-spoken good manners with the ruthless determination of his business career.
But is Goldsmith missing the business world?
‘Not particularly,’ came the reply.
And what about converting his former CEO colleagues to the green gospel.
Again a no.
‘I'm given too high a profile,’ he says modestly.
‘I'm not personally active except in one or two projects.’
Indeed the former corporate raider would not be drawn on any specifics, even by questioners more illustrious than Management Today .
In the plenary session which he addressed, Sir James discreetly avoided the question (conveyed by no less a person that the Aga Khan) about which British companies he rated in environmental terms.
Does this mean there aren't any, or was Goldsmith merely worried about upsetting old friends?
Velcro may be good at keeping its customers happy but it's not too popular with its shareholders
It is hard to believe that any fall in Polly Peck-owned Vestel's share price could be mostly due to the Gulf crisis
The constant cuts in arts funding are forcing organisations like the ENO to look for backing from other sources
To encourage a spirit of ‘classlessness’ at work, the organisers of National Motivation Week are promoting incentive drives
The Scots' reputation for industry may be called into question if the results of a P-E International survey are to be believed
Many people are offering quick solutions to Hungary's problems, but careful thought is needed
Gratitude is not what many feel towards Robert Maxwell but with £50,000 from the tycoon, the Bulgarian PM must be one of the few
Sir James Goldsmith insists he is enjoying his retirement.
Living proof that the grass is greener
WILSHER ON EUROPE So singular in each particular
Peter Wilsher ponders on the difficulties of thinking ‘European’ when there is apparently so little unity, of any kind, in existence
How shall we market Europe?
How should they market Europe?
Is Europe indeed marketable as a concept, a brand-name, a rallying cry?
Can one imagine any circumstances in which it might be possible to launch the Continent-wide equivalent of a Buy British campaign?
The answer for the foreseeable future, is almost certainly No,Non, Nein , and no doubt, in the fullness of time,Nyet .
But although, for many purposes, this sense of separate identity is not only understandable and indeed highly desirable, it is going to make it extremely difficult to get the best out of that ambitious enterprise which goes under the code-name ‘1992’.
The other day, as a small example, I met a young trainee manager working for one of the few substantial Northern Ireland engineering firms.
He was doing fine acquiring all the necessary disciplines in finance, sales planning, product development and personnel relations.
But a few weeks earlier he had tentatively approached his departmental head to point out that the qualification which had got him his original interview was a first-class degree in French and Spanish, and that perhaps these abilities might be harnessed to the service of the business.
The response was one of total bemusement, with the director concerned unable to conceive of any circumstances in which linguistic talent might have any bearing on sales prospects or the acquiring of contracts.
It hardly seemed to augur well for the firm's chances when it goes head-to head with the likes of Brown Boveri ASEA or GEC Alsthom.
Such obtuseness would have been common enough a few years ago.
But it is more than slightly worrying to find it still rampant in a largish UK company.
Can all those bracing ‘think European’ messages have fallen on completely stony ground, and were Lord Young, Alan Sugar and Sir John Harvey-Jones just wasting their breath and the tax-payers' money?
Part of the problem, of course, is the vagueness, for most people, of the framework within which such thinking is supposed to take place.
What is this ‘Europe’ we are talking about?
Where exactly do you establish its boundaries, when most of the well-known definitions, turn out to be legally and politically meaningless?
How do you capture its essence when there is so little ethnic, linguistic or any other kind of unity? who exactly put it all together?
Did Julius Caesar, Charlemagne, the mediaeval popes, Martin Luther, Napoleon or Hitler have any idea what they were doing when they made their own particular contributions to the architecture?
It is not only the insular British, of course, who find such questions a puzzle.
Ask the Bretons why they feel an affinity with the Serbo-Croats which somehow does not extend the Azerbaijanis or the Mexican Indians.
Or attempt to explore with a Central European Jew the precise nature of the ties that he or she feels with a culture which down the centuries has been responsible for so much persecution and pain.
For many years Frederick Delouche felt a particular need to unravel such mysteries.
With a French father, a Norwegian mother, and a mainly English education, he found himself perpetually treated as an object of faintly mocking derision: a Frog at school, an Anglo-Saxon Milor on holiday in France, and some sort of raping and pillaging Viking everywhere.
But he himself just felt European, and his sense of identity only deepened as he grew up and travelled.
He married an Englishwoman brought up in Uganda, worked in Buenos Aires, New York, Ankara and Beirut, and every time he came ‘home’ grew more frustrated by the narrowness of people's horizons.
Late in life, he embarked on a project.
With a team of eminent academics, from Germany, France, Spain, Italy and Britain, an overall editor in the shape of Jean-Baptiste Durosell, former professor of contemporary history at the Sorbonne, and the backing of a powerful group of international publishers, he attempted the task of assembling, in one substantial but accessible volume, a distillation of all the elements, chronological, geographical, ethnographic, cultural, philosophical, spiritual, which have blended down the centuries to create the state of ‘Europeanness’.
The resulting book, in eight different language versions, has now appeared in Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands and Denmark.
It pulls together, with impressive clarity, the tangled story that started at Chilhac, in the Auvergne, where a group of five hand-worked pebbles demonstrates that human habitation in Europe dates back at least 1,800,000 years.
As it sweeps on, through Greece and Rome, dark ages and renaissance, world empire and industrial revolution, towards this present century of war and destruction, it succeeds in suggesting that, against all the odds, there may still be some basis for the political and economic union now intensively, if fractiously, under discussion.
It would probably be rash, however, to set one's hopes too high.
The UK version of the enterprise came out well before Christmas under the title Europe: A History of its Peoples (Viking Penguin, £25).
But the testimony from the High Street is mixed, to put it mildly.
I finally ran a copy to earth, with some difficulty, at Penguin's own bookshop in Covent Garden, and telephone enquiries to a selection of London's larger booksellers indicated that two out of three had at least one copy on their shelves.
But the Economists' Bookshop, near the London School of Economics, which seemed the most likely to be interested in such a topic, failed, after an extensive search of its microfiche catalogue, to find any trace of it.
Which seems to bring us right back to the question we started with: is Europe actually marketable?
Peter Wilsher is assistant editor , Sunday Express 
Alan Sugar: a star of the DTI's Europe Open for Business TV campaign
EGLIN ON INDUSTRY Engineering — the last resource
Can mechanical engineering be a growth industry when few can name one significant UK- owned example?
By Roger Eglin
Asked to name a market which could show real growth of 4% a year during the 1990s and expand by a half over the decade, few would suggest mechanical engineering.
We have become accustomed to writing off the engineering industry as one of the casualties in the reshaping of British industry during the 1970s and 1980s.
Engineering, which played so central a role in this country's industrial development, now has little more than a bit part according to many economists and politicians.
There is no doubting this decline.
Engineering companies like GKN and Vickers, once household names, are no longer the significant force in the economy that they once were.
Certainly few would see the engineering industry as a powerful engine of future economic growth.
Yet the great potential for growth of the mechanical engineering industry is a central theme of a recent study in the Deutsche Bank Bulletin.
It is the Deutsche Bank which confidently asserts that the industry will grow by 4% a year over this decade and its conclusions are encouraging, seen from a European standpoint.
Leaving aside the former Eastern bloc countries, the bulletin estimates that the world market for mechanical engineering is worth about DM1,500 billion a year.
Assuming that the growth of the OECD economies averages some 3% a year during the 1990s, the bulletin reckons that continuing pressure on the industrialised countries to modernise their manufacturing base will generate real annual growth of at least 4% for mechanical engineering — hence the expected increase of 50% in world market volume by the year 2000.
During this period of growth, European Community manufacturers will do well.
They account for over a third of the western world's output of mechanical engineering products and should, says the bulletin, maintain this position.
The US, with a world market share around 30%, will remain a significant force.
The Japanese with just under 30% will be chasing the lead hard, but above average growth in Germany, helped by the stimulus of unification, will keep Europe in the lead.
Where Britain stands in this bullish picture is less encouraging.
The birthplace of the industrial revolution is no longer as dominant as it once was.
German engineering output could grow at about 5%.
Italy could also perform better than the EC average of 3% as could Spain — with the admitted advantage of starting from a smaller base.
Regrettably the UK comes into the category of the also-rans, together with France, with less than average growth in the latter part of the 1980s and only average growth in the 1990s.
The German study spells out how catastrophic the last 15 years have been for the now emasculated British industry.
Over this period, Italy expanded its output of machinery by two-thirds, Germany by over a half and the French by a tenth.
British output actually fell — by an eighth.
The contrast with Germany is an uncomfortable one.
Where the decline of British engineering has diminished the industrial base and opened a black hole in the trade balance, the growth of German engineering output, matching that in Japan and America, has helped create a near impregnable manufacturing trade surplus.
It is the biggest manufacturer of mechanical engineering products in the EC with 44% of the total output — a disproportionate share as Germany only accounts for a quarter of total EC output.
Export performance is outstanding.
In 25 out of the 45 main engineering export categories, Germany is the leader.
What any German industrialist will tell you is that his workforce is better trained than the UK's.
They enjoy more respect in society.
They gain more fulfilment from the jobs and in the end, backed by a high level of innovation, they produce a better product.
Genuinely skilled workers in this country are simply too scarce for the sort of industrial base we want to create.
During his last weeks as chancellor, John Major toured the Midlands, speaking to industrialists.
When asked why they were giving such big pay increases in a difficult period, they said it was because they feared losing their skilled men.
Contrast this, for example, with Porsch, most of whose workforce is skilled.
Chief executive Arno Bohn told me that securing skilled labour for its Stuttgart plant was no problem.
Every major employer in the area ensures that their workforces are trained to uniformly high standards.
Not for the Germans that weary British cry that if we spend money on training workers, someone will poach them.
This suggest that if manufacturers spend on training, it is difficult for rivals to achieve the level of competitiveness that will allow them to poach workers or markets.
Germany's performance seems yet another example of a successful rival economy taking the sort of long-term view that still eludes us.
Roger Eglin is managing editor of the Business section of The Sunday Times 
Better days for the industry: the Standard Motor Company works at Coventry in the '50s
POLITICAL NOTES Labour fails to manage Major
Labour must now display some political creativity if it is to offset the effects of Major's plans for Toryism.
By Charles Leadbeater
Sequels are Hollywood money-spinners.
A single film can spawn a dynasty which extends for years.
At first sight it might be quite reasonable for the Labour party to employ the same approach to its political strategy.
Its version of the Nightmare On Elm Street series is to dub John Major, the ‘Son of Thatcher’, the bearer of the Thatcherite torch into the 1990s.
It will not work.
The production will be a flop.
In the past couple of years the opposition parties have become skilled at being anti-Thatcherite, consuming rich pickings from the slow collapse of Thatcherism.
Now they face a new situation.
Thatcher's dominance of the Government means that her departure in itself amounts to a considerable change in the country's political agenda.
The opposition can no longer live on a diet of anti-Thatcherism.
They face a prime minister, surrounded by figures such as Chris Patten and Michael Heseltine, who shows an appetite for developing Toryism beyond the agenda it had in the 1980s.
Labour has been feeling its way since Major's election, as if the corridor it was traversing was suddenly plunged into darkness.
There are three arguments for this cautiousness.
The first and most compelling has been the war in the Gulf.
The Labour leadership has taken a typically defensive position on the politics of the war.
Its support for sanctions until war became inevitable limited the risks of internal disunity, without provoking accusations of disloyalty to British troops whose lives were at risk in the Gulf.
Labour is unlikely to lose from the Gulf.
Normal politics will only resume once the Gulf is settled.
But there are scant signs that Labour is ready to take the initiative once normality returns, because its response to Major has been marked by cautiousness on two further counts.
The second main line has been to tar Major as ‘Son of Thatcher’.
He cannot renounce policies which he supported at her cabinet table.
He is a prisoner of his immediate political past, so the argument goes.
‘Son of Thatcher’ may have provided a holding position in the first days after his election but it has no life left in it.
Major has already brought in change and more is in prospect.
And this approach underestimates the scale of Thatcher's dominance of the Tory political agenda.
Having spent years attacking her as the author of awful policies, it is not credible to claim now that her departure hardly matters.
More importantly, ‘Son of Thatcher’ also underestimates Major's determination to develop an alternative agenda to match his quieter, more reasonable style.
His manner suggests he will be open to ideas.
His political astuteness means he has no sentimentality about ditching unpopular and unworkable policies bequeathed to him.
With the likes of Michael Heseltine, Douglas Hurd and Chris Patten around him he will attempt to put Toryism onto a different path of development, combining a more measured approach to the EC, with a prudent economic policy and a more liberal social policy.
The third argument for Labour's cautiousness is only slightly more convincing.
It starts with the observation that Major is struggling desperately to gain stature and authority.
He will be severely tested as the economy goes further into recession, and the poll tax still thumps onto people's doormats.
The recession will limit his capacity to spend more on health and education and fatally undermine his claim to be concerned about these issues.
In this scenario Labour needs to play safe, while the Tories' waning popularity in the country takes its toll on Major's position.
There is something in this approach.
The economy could easily be in a mess by the time of the next election.
But it leaves far too much to chance.
Major has swiftly moved towards the middle ground of politics.
Unless Labour develops its policies the next election will be a battle between two parties with virtually identical economic policies.
The choice will be between two Euro-pragmatist, technocratic, cautious, managerialist parties.
In such a contest everything will hinge on the state of the economy and whether Major and his team are trusted more than Neil Kinnock and his.
But the main reason why defensiveness is not enough, is that it has never been enough.
Labour's policy review made Labour an effective anti-Thatcherite force.
It now has to become a modern social democratic party which can win because of the popularity of its vision.
Rather than respond defensively Labour should see this as an opportunity to break out of the strait-jacket politics of the Thatcher era.
One step Labour could take is to adopt the final part of the SDP/SLD agenda it has not yet embraced — electoral and constitutional reform.
This would open a distinctive new front.
A second theme is the reform of the public sector: How it is financed, structured, managed, from education and health through to local government, will be the major issue of the 1990s.
Labour needs to match its commitment to spending with innovative ideas about service delivery, financing and management.
Under Kinnock's leadership Labour has shown considerable capacity for discipline.
That allowed it to weather the Thatcher bombardment.
Now it is time to come out of the bunker and display some other qualities, chiefly some political creativity.
Charles Leadbeater is industrial editor of the Financial Times 
Chris Patten (left) and Michael Heseltine (right): surrounding himself with such figures Major shows a measured approach
ECONOMICAL COMMENT This would be the kindest cut
Not for Norman Lamont the luxury of a tax-reforming budget.
One based on lower interest rates is the best hope.
By David Smith
Recession budgets are rare in Britain.
The last one was in 1981.
Since then chancellors of the exchequer have been able to put together their annual tax plans in relatively favourable circumstances.
The result has been that recent chancellors have been able to give free rein to their tax-reforming ambitions.
Nigel Lawson's corporation tax reforms of 1984 and personal tax reforms of 1988 (when he established a single higher rate of income tax of 40%), will have repercussions for many years to come.
So too, if more modestly will John Major's budget, the ‘savers' budget’ of a year ago.
Norman Lamont is not so fortunate.
That the economy is in recession, is now in no doubt.
Indeed, one interesting aspect of the budget will be the extent to which the Treasury revises its economic forecast to take in the realities of recession.
Recession budgets used to be easy to predict.
When the economy was growing too fast, and inflation and balance of payments problems were starting to emerge, the budget was used to apply the brakes — through higher taxation, tighter hire purchase controls, etc.
In the opposite situation of slow growth or economic decline, and rising unemployment, expansionary budgets were very much the order of the day.
The Chancellor would ease up on credit controls, ease taxation and (in his autumn statement) loosen the Government's grip on public spending.
The process was helped by the so-called ‘automatic stabilisers’— the tendency for taxation to increase faster and public spending at a slower rate in a boom, thereby reducing government borrowing, and vice versa in a recession.
The last recession budgets of this type were seen in the 1974–75 slump.
When the first oil crisis sent the British economy downhill, the response of the then Labour government was to try and expand its way out of trouble.
The Conservative government which was elected in 1979 saw things very differently.
The big problem with this sort of fine-tuning, advisers said, was that it usually did more damage than it corrected.
This was because policy was and is subject to important time lags.
Take the current situation for example: it is clear that the economy as a whole embarked on the present recession in about the middle of last year.
The earliest the Treasury could act on the tax front, would be March 1991.
And it would be well into the second half of 1991 before the effects of those tax changes would start to have an impact on economic behaviour.
The Conservatives also saw tax policy as a means of establishing control over public sector borrowing, and of introducing tax reform to assist the supply-side of the economy.
Touches on the economic tiller were to be reserved for monetary policy — and changes in interest rates in particular.
This was why the last recession budget, in March 1981, differed from its predecessors.
Instead of cutting taxes to boost the economy out of recession, Geoffrey Howe then Chancellor, effectively increased them, by not raising personal tax allowances in line with inflation.
The spirit of 1981 still survives in the Treasury today although political constraints, and the fact that an election cannot be too far away, will prevent anything quite as austere as 10 years ago.
But the analysis is much the same.
The Treasury wants a budget which will assist the process of cutting interest rates and this means keeping the financial markets happy.
The additional complication this time, of course, is that the pound is in the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
The House of Commons Treasury and Civil Service Committee has argued for the more active use of fiscal policy (in other words a more aggressive use of tax cuts in recession) because of the constraints on interest rate changes caused by ERM membership.
The Chancellor is, however, unsympathetic and safety-first will be his watchword.
The danger, clearly, is that a tight budget will not bring about the desired response from the financial markets, and business will get the worst of both worlds — continued high interest rates and no help from the budget.
The Confederation of British Industry, in particular, is concerned that, with investment falling sharply this year, the absence of business tax reductions can only serve to deepen the gloom.
The CBI makes two important points.
The first is that, with the consumer being the main culprit in the spending boom which led to the current difficulties, there is a case for shifting the tax burden from industry to individuals.
This could be achieved by limiting the increase in personal tax allowances, and using the money saved to, for example, introduce more generous depreciation allowances against new investment.
The budget would still be a tight one, but it would be geared to maintaining business investment as we approach the post-1992 European single market, and limiting the effects of the recession on business.
The organisation's second point, as the chart shows, is that industry has been the unintended victim of high inflation, which has led to a significantly higher corporate tax take than the Lawson reforms of 1984 intended.
I suspect that, in the highly political times in which we live, Lamont will reserve any spare cash in the budget kitty for vote-catching ideas.
Even so, for both individuals and business, the best recovery hope is the one that is based on lower interest rates.
David Smith, economics editor The Sunday Times
HELLER ON MANAGEMENT Less sense than a lemming
Borrowers and lenders must share the responsibility for financial fiascos which have occurred on both sides of the Atlantic.
Robert Heller
Inside every boom there's a bust screaming to get out.
When that happens, more than economic activity takes a plunge.
So do reputations, balance sheet totals, and financial and management theories.
When the latter start sinking out of sight, their revealed folly appears so deep that previous adoption by certifiably sane human beings becomes difficult to credit.
Did bankers ever really believe it was perfectly safe to lend billions, not on the security of the borrower, but on that of the assets he was proposing to buy.
For that matter, were the borrowers actually convinced that the consequent hair-raising levels of gearing mattered not, so long as the cash flow covered the interest rate, no matter how high?
Over-borrowing should have been shunned, for the elementary reason that a decline in over-geared profitability can destroy the net worth of shareholders.
Nobody who still holds shares in Saatchi & Saatchi will need reminders on that score: the bankers' proposals for ‘reconstruction’ will rob the equity owners of 70% of their company.
Note that the killer was a Euro-convertible, brilliantly conceived by the company's advisers: it proved as fatal as another financiers' wheeze, the repurchase of 40% of IBC, which helped greatly to destroy virtually the entire value of that company's equity.
In less dramatic cases, the damage lies in collapsed share prices rather than massacred equity: but the financial pain is much the same.
It isn't eased by the knowledge that the bankers who aided and abetted these exercises have suffered as much as anybody.
Yet those same bankers are people to whom managements are supposed to turn for sage guidance.
If the Western economies emerge unscathed from the current fine mess, to what degree of unimaginable disaster will the next boom lead?
In theory, salvation lies in the hands of managements themselves.
They need only mind their own businesses, exercise tight financial controls, keep debt levels right down, cherish their customers, develop their people, innovate in both products and processes, and stay fully alert to changes on the marketplace and in technology.
That's a short list, but a tall order.
Plenty of companies have sailed through the post- war booms without being seduced far from the necessities.
Yet at one extreme a genuinely creative entrepreneur like Rupert Murdoch veered off into over-expansion and over- borrowing which have become as life-threatening as the antics of Alan Bond.
In consequence the News Corp equity is now valued at little more than half-a-billion: that's an eighth of the capitalisation of Thomson, whose giveaway sale of its newspaper interests was the booster for Murdoch's sensational rise in the '80s.
At the other extreme, a genuinely conservative but also progressive business like Marks & Spencer, anxious to ease its dependence on its enormous and deserved UK success, paid a huge $750 million for Brooks Brothers.
This American menswear firm, of totally different culture and nature, has just reported a vestigial half-year profit of $1.5 million.
The desperate remedy now adopted is to link the employees's pay (possibly cutting it by 25%) to their success or failure in selling suits, etc. — a measure which runs totally contrary to the new management wisdom referred to above.
It demonstrates that the success or failure of the Brooksites must depend overwhelmingly, not on individual efforts, but on the quality and appeal of the merchandise, the attractiveness of the stores, the strength of the promotional spend, the effectiveness of training, and the relationship between managers and managed — something which is hardly helped by putting the latter under the financial lash.
The M & S managers have long known and practised all this instinctively on their home ground: but that's what happens when businesses move away from first principles.
Time and again, Gadarene management spreads the damage: many boards of directors as one swine plunge over the same edge, ignoring the well-established fact that the conventional wisdom is usually stupid.
If everybody else is bankrolling Australian entrepreneurs, or expanding expensively into the US, or financing umpteen deals with untold debt, that's a very good reason for doing something completely different.
Witness the 24% rise in fourth quarter income reported by J.P.
Morgan amid the flood of red ink submerging the likes of the Chase Manhattan: that's Morgan's reward for going against the swine in, of all things, its conservatism.
Yet the banking Brits, too, chose to ignore the lessons of previous fiascos and bankers on both sides of the Atlantic are now trying to recoup by exacting most onerous prices: thus breaching another first principle.
It's a hoary one at that: the higher the interest, the greater the risk — which, of course, cuts both ways.
But the risk-taking borrowers have compounded their danger by other stupidities.
Two Phillips & Drew analysts, for example, have just shown how Coloroll ‘created’ its 1988–89 profits by writing off the goodwill on the Crowther carpet acquisition — the very buy that broke its back.
The same team shows that WPP, while crippling itself by debt, threw away its crutches by taking on so many small earn-outs (over 30) that it risks, on this count alone, a 150% increase in share capital — with awful implications for dividends.
In taking new-fangled ideas to such excess, of course, WPP was by no means alone.
The many variations of Gadarene behaviour imply that the fault lies, not with the system, but those who operate within it: auditors, regulators, investors, commentators, but above all managers themselves.
After all, most of the bust would have been avoided by applying the oldest management technique there is: common sense.
LETTER FROM SEVILLE Exposing the assets of Andalusia
Expo '92 is forecast to exceed all records as the biggest exhibition of its kind, but the important question is whether it will live up to long term expectations.
By Hashi Syedain
For decades past tourists have come flooding into Seville.
Well perhaps not flooding: most have remained supine on Spain's southern beaches.
But thousands of visitors have filtered through, drawn by the balconies, narrow alleyways and Moorish air of the old Andalusian capital.
This year's visitors will, however, find an additional attraction.
Across an arm of the river Guadalquivir lies Europe's biggest building site where, a year from now, the gates will open on the 1992 Seville Universal Exposition.
Even today, those who wish can survey the scene from a panoramic tower ascended, thanks to German technology, in a revolving viewing platform.
From a height of 90 metres one looks down on an emerging pattern of roads, lakes and gardens, which will shortly be lined with pavilions from over a hundred countries.
The view extends far beyond Expo's 500-odd acres, across the city and its surrounding rather featureless plain, to the distant mountains.
If Spanish dreams come true, this relatively poor agricultural region will soon become a centre of European high technology.
For the whole point about Expo is that its influence should long outlive next year's extravaganza.
Technology transfer is the name of the game.
The organisers hope that at least some of the multinational companies taking part will stay on permanently.
Certainly, what they bring will in many cases remain.
The communications network established by Rank Xerox, for example, will be bequeathed to Andalusia ‘as a contribution to technological development and to training a generation which will take Andalusia into the 21st century’.
Big plans indeed.
Expo '92 is scheduled to exceed all records for events of this kind, which began with the great exhibition in London in 1851.
But since the War exhibitions have been held at Brussels, Montreal and Osaka by wealthy nations, celebrating their achievements.
Spain, by contrast, despite recent strides, is still struggling to develop a modern industrialised economy.
Expo '92 along with the Barcelona Olympics, is being used as a catalyst to accelerate this process with a host of infrastructure projects.
In Andalusia itself, the investment in transport is scheduled to exceed $7 billion.
However, throwing money at problems does not in itself bring solutions.
The authorities are attempting to build a technological society on unpromising foundations.
Unemployment in Andalusia is the highest in Spain and the workforce remains, to a large degree, uneducated and unskilled.
Various efforts are being made to bridge this gap.
Nine specific areas have been identified for special training programmes, including construction, catering and cleaning.
All of these have obvious relevance to the running of Expo, but not a great deal to the maintenance of a high tech culture.
Leaving the technology issue to one side, there is also scant evidence in the local population of commercial aptitude at the level required.
Some 200 restaurants and retail concessions will be dotted around the Expo site.
In a region that prides itself on its cuisine and that boasts a strong tourist industry, it might have been supposed that indigenous entrepreneurs would leap at such an opportunity.
True, local business is not entirely absent but on the whole, foreign operators have been the first to benefit.
The Americans are, as always, well to the fore.
‘We can learn from them,’ says Expo official Luis Estrada.
‘The Sevillians are late — and insecure.
I am more or less a consultant to them.’
A tremendous effort has already gone into making Expo a success.
The site itself is beyond question the most spectacular theme park in Europe.
The theme, incidentally, The Age of Discovery, could not be more apt for the city from which Columbus set sail for the Americas 500 years ago.
Expo has already brought considerable gains to Seville, not least environmentally.
Whole forest of trees and plants have been specially cultivated to adorn the site and protect visitors from the blistering Sevillian sun.
Open exhibition spaces will have to be air- conditioned and a number of experiments on how to achieve this are being carried out in the Bioclimatic Rotonda, located at the Expo office compound.
According to forecasts no less than 2 million people will visit Seville in the six months of Expo, many of them for the first time.
Enthusiasm among the local population is also running high.
The important question is whether it fulfils the longer term expectations which the Spanish authorities have invested in it.
The Bioclimatic Rotonda where temperature control experiments are taking place
LETTERS
UNIONS Dark age altitudes
Dear Sir
John Lyons (‘Trade unions plugged in’Management Today , January 1991) gives a glimpse of how the thinking of some senior trade union officials in Britain remains stuck in the dark ages.
‘There was a tremendous resentment,’ says he, to the idea of PowerGen being sold to Hanson.
‘We should take industrial action against any bidder who did not meet a number of conditions relating to employee practices.’
In other words, Lyons, a man who preferred and prefers to make his bargaining points through the media, was prepared to disrupt vital supplies, inflicting untold damage to the economy, without having had any direct discussion with us as to our plans or policies.
The clear message must be that the old, negative, anticompetitive, anti-business attitudes are still alive and well in the minds of Labour's paymasters.
May I remind John Lyons that the issue of security of supply had been addressed by the Government with us long before the trade unions became involved.
The specified conditions as to the amount of supply that could be sold off, were ones to which we were asked to agree — conditions to be applicable to all bidders — before the Government would even consider pursuing the possibility of a private sale.
BRITISH RAIL Unacceptable apologia
Dear Sir
Your article, ‘BR Signals Profitable routes’,(Management Today , January 1991) could more aptly have been headed ‘Outlook For Customers — Continuing Unfair’.
No doubt it will have given satisfaction to the chairman of BR and his chief executive as they sit, to quote your article, ‘in their new headquarters building next to Euston Station…(feeling)…confident about the future in a way few other British executives might, notwithstanding the recession’ and waiting it would seem, either for rescue in the form of ‘more generous’support for rail from the present government (‘always mindful that its majority is dependent of MPs representing the London commuter belt’) or, conversely, a doubled grant from a future Labour administration.
A recipe for corporate opportunism, perhaps, but hardly good management.
Your interpretation of the information you gather for your articles is, of course, a matter for your own judgement but those of us who are obliged to use Network SouthEast at fares ‘much higher than in Europe to help keep the whole show on the rails’ might be pardoned for taking a less sanguine view.
The whole thrust of the article seems designed to justify BR's corporate performance against a shortfall of government funding, and while you accept and refer to the shocking conditions experienced by passengers, you do so as if this was a problem imposed on BR rather than as a function of its own management performance at operating level.
It is disappointing to read such an apologia in the magazine of one's own institution, which professes to advance the cause of competent management, BR can hardly be counted among the best of examples.
The reality of life at passenger-level, mentioned only indirectly, could have been examined more thoroughly to determine the efficiency of British Rail's service delivery, surely the basis for its existence.
Instead you appear to accept, almost as inevitable God- given phenomena, the ‘thousands of angry commuters packing the station concourse at Charing Cross’; ‘a string of further crashes after Clapham’(which you refer to in the context of PR imagery); ‘overcrowding for many commuters in Kent and Essex (as) a way of life, with some trains carrying 150% of their capacity’(what about Surrey and Hampshire?)
Are we to believe that all of this is due to shortage of investment?
The quality of product delivered by BR management is experienced daily by the many thousands who travel to and from Waterloo, where the indicator boards are frequently inactive at peak travel time in the evening, and only the desultory, forlorn and uncertain voices of junior staff is available to advise hapless passengers over the tannoy when and where they might expect to find an uncancelled train to get them home on time — if they are lucky — and to deliver an occasional apology.
The absence of senior and middle management leading from the front is only too apparent.
Four-coach trains regularly substituted for eight- coach, with passengers jam-packed way beyond the safety margin acceptable to a factory inspector, let alone providing a modicum of comfort, cannot surely be explained away simply as lack of funding or union intransigence.
As for Sir Robert, who is, I believe, a man with a strong marketing background, might I suggest that he emerges from the confines of his embattled empire and experiences at first hand the market in which he is now operating incognito during the evening rush-hour.
He will then be able to see for himself the resignation, if not quiet contempt, with which his customers regard the service for which he and his managers must hold themselves fully accountable.
EUROPE Tyrolean traumas
Dear Sir
As an expatriate Tyrolean living in London, I want to endorse Peter Wilsher's report, ‘Traffic trouble in the Tyrol’(Management Today , January 1991).
On my regular trips back home, I am always a witness to the unspeakable hardships which the local population endures as a result of living alongside one of Europe's most important arteries for the transport of people and goods in the North-South direction.
And even though I am a committed European, I can easily see why many of my fellow Tyroleans are desperate to put an end to this ever-increasing nightmare.
On the other hand, as your writer points out, the realisation of the single market will, by its own definition, compound this problem and similar problems in other regions of Europe.
What is badly needed is a pan-European initiative for an economically and ecologically meaningful transport system and corresponding infrastructure.
The often criticised EC would be well-advised to tackle this problem urgently and, for once, the general public would be applauding Brussels.
The editor welcomes correspondence from all readers on any subject covered in Management Today .
Please send all letters to:
Chris Green: BR director responsible for the overcrowded Network SouthEast
UPS AND DOWNS OF THATCHERISM Money-making became a respected activity in the Thatcher era; paper millionaires mushroomed.
Now we are left counting the casualties.
Philip Beresford and Annabella Gabb
For the Sainsbury family of Garfield Weston of Associated British Foods, the Thatcher years certainly were good times.
These models of quiet efficiency ignored much of the razzmatazz associated with booming stock markets, to emerge collectively some £2.5 billion wealthier in the eleven-and-a-half years Mrs Thatcher occupied Downing Street.
These were the years of course when money-making became respectable again in Britain.
The enterprise culture was born and the number of new paper millionaires mushroomed from around 5,000 to 18,000.
But the October 1987 crash put paid to many ambitions.
In the next four pages we catalogue the winners and losers among the businesspersons, who were held in such high esteem by the occupant of Number 10.
Some were well-known names who dominated the financial pages with their derring-do.
Others ran discreet private companies, but prospered mightily in a climate created by deregulation and a curbing of what many perceived as excessive union power.
While no clear pattern actually emerges to explain the performance of our 20 ‘winners’, the advance in their estimated wealth from their shareholdings was staggering.
From a hefty £685 million in 1979, their combined share wealth rose to some £6.7 billion when Mrs Thatcher left office, a ten-fold increase easily beating the 240% increase in the cost of living.
The winners encompassed all the various strands of business.
Apart from those who largely followed the path of organic growth — the Sainsburys and Westons — there were the clever deal makers, such as Robert Maxwell, Sir James Goldsmith or Peter de Savary.
Their main characteristic, as perfectly represented by Sir James, was their sense of timing.
He famously bailed out of the market just before the October 1987 crash.
Maxwell's good judgement came in taking over the BPCC printing business and transforming it into a global communications empire.
In the next few months, he should garner the fruits of his £100 million purchase of the Mirror group, when it is floated on the market for £500 million or more.
Other winners cashed in on their success, quite literally.
The Beckwith brothers and Tony Clegg exited from property shares with perfect timing just before the current disastrous recession.
Jack Walker and his brother Fred also managed to pick up a British record of £330 million for the sale of their stockholding business to British Steel last year.
Sadly few of the early '80s high flyers appear to have survived unscathed.
Even Richard Branson had to take his Virgin group private with Japanese backing to prosper, while Anita Roddick's Body Shop, riding the environmental bandwagon, has taken a hammering of late in the stock market.
For many of the other '80s stars, life has been tough of late.
And that is reflected in the declining wealth fall of our 20 losers from their respective peaks.
Collectively, they were worth over £2.8 billion at their high point.
When Mrs Thatcher left office, they were down to £455 million and falling fast.
In the early '80s, the high flyers were in computers, profiting from a burgeoning interest in cheap micro-computers.
But this sector was the first to feel the heat of intense competition and spiralling development costs.
From the mid-'80s, retailing and agencies threw up new players.
Stephen Marks of French Connection, Sir Bernard Ashley of Laura Ashley and Sock Shop's Sophie Mirman were typical of these stars.
But today, their shareholdings are worth a fraction of what they once were.
More recent casualties have been Asil Nadir and Roger Levitt, whose groups have now crashed with stunning speed.
Just last year, Nadir was worth nearly £500 million on paper.
Today, any share certificates they own only have worth as collectors' items.
But then as the lady said on leaving office: ‘It's a funny old world.’
To compute the winners, Datastream has compared the value of the publicly quoted shareholdings held by individual directors and their families between 4 May 1979 and 28 November 1990.
Where they have sold the shareholdings, the proceeds of the sale are given.
With private companies, Datastream has estimated the value of the shareholdings in line with prevailing stock market values.
If a company was floated after May 1979, the date of its market debut is the base.
The same rules apply to the losers, except that the date used is when their shares were at their peak.
Winners They were the clever deal makers with an impeccable and infallible sense of timing
The Sainsbury family Supermarkets
Britain's No. 1 supermarket chain started out in 1869 when one John Sainsbury opened a dairy shop in London's Drury Lane.
The first supermarket appeared in 1955, with the end of wartime rationing.
Lord Sainsbury,(above) great grandson of the founder is chairman, while his cousin, David, is chief executive.
Under their leadership, profits have risen above £420 million, on sales of £5.6 billion.
Garfield Weston Food Manufacturing
Identified as one of the 10 industrialists closest to Mrs Thatcher, the intensely private Weston heads Associated British Foods which produces household names like Twinings tea and Ryvita.
Even after his £880 million purchase of British Sugar last year, the company still has a £300 million cash pile.
Sir James Goldsmith Financier
Always a gambler, the colourful Sir James won fame and a £750 million fortune on Wall Street in the '80s.
He beat the 1987 stock market crash by selling out of his major holdings at the peak, returning briefly for an unsuccessful bid for the giant BAT.
He has now put his money into gold and is concentrating on saving the environment.
Richard Branson Leisure and Travel
Not many top businessmen would even contemplate crossing the Pacific in a hot air balloon, for fun or any other reason.
But that's just the sort of costly stunt that the unconventional Richard Branson attempts when he's not at the helm of his two highly successful businesses, music group Virgin and airline Virgin Atlantic.
He's now 41 and with a couple more deals he'll be Britain's youngest ever self-made billionaire.
Robert Maxwell Publishing
Born Jan Ludwig Hoch, the son of a Czech labourer, Robert Maxwell escaped the Nazis to distinguish himself in the British Army.
His fortune is based on the scientific journals of Pergamon Press, which he founded in 1948.
He spent the 1980s building up his communications group to one of the world's largest, in everything from printing to newspapers to satellite TV.
Jack Walker Steel
With brother Fred, Jack Walker took his father's sheet metal company into steel stockholding.
By 1988, Walkersteel was making profits of £48 million.
Two years on, they sold to British Steel for £330 million.
Jack has put £30 million into his Jersey European Airways, which is now a highly successful airline.
Joe Bamford Construction
Joe Bamford, who hailed from a distinguished Staffordshire agricultural family, built his first excavator after the war.
The bright yellow JCBs, now dominate the construction market, although they face a tough battle today with depressed state of the industry.
But the company, now run by Joe's son, Sir Anthony Bamford (above), has seen it all before in the early '80s.
Its last results showed profits of £38 million.
Tiny Rowland Mining
Perhaps best known for his feud with the Al-Fayed brothers over Harrods and the House of Fraser, Tiny Rowland built up his mining and trading company, Lonrho, in the '50s and '60s.
With 1,000 subsidiaries in 100 countries, it made profits of over £273 million last year.
Rowland, who this year celebrates 30 years as head of Lonrho, sees the 1990s as a time of great opportunity particularly in Eastern Europe and South Africa.
Lord Forte Hotels
Lord Forte was always a staunch supporter of Mrs Thatcher, and during her years in office, his THF group certainly thrived.
Increasing tourist revenue, booming business travel and a British population with increased leisure all helped the fortunes of his hotels and restaurants.
The value of the business grew fivefold from 1979 to 1990.
Ken Morrison Supermarkets
The Morrison family own around a half of the Wm Morrison chain in Yorkshire.
Though they only opened the first supermarket in 1961, there are over 40 today.
Morrison's strong showing in recent years reflects its performance as a recession-proof business.
Winners Many cashed in on their success by exiting just before the current recession began
Ken Scowcroft Insurance
Mancunian Ken Scowcroft pioneered the sale of motor insurance through high street shops.
His broking group, Swinton, founded in 1957, now has 729 outlets nationwide.
Over the past three years, Scowcroft, whose son and daughter also work for the group, has gradually sold 75% of Swinton to Sun Alliance, for a total of £105 million.
Sir Donald Gosling Car parks
When Donald Gosling left the navy in 1949, he became a trainee surveyor with Westminster City Council.
A chance encounter with ex-soldier Ronald Hobson, who wanted to know how to get planning permission for a car park on one of London's many bomb sites, led to the birth of National Car Parks.
The two are still together.
Now one of Britain's largest private companies, NCP has a turnover of over £151 million.
John Asprey Jewellery
After 200 years supplying jewellery and expensive knick-knacks to the wealthy, Aspreys has proved largely immune to economic downturn.
Chairman John Asprey last year merged the company with Mappin & Webb, but retained majority control.
In 1989/90, profits were £21.9 million on sales of £75.3 million.
Lord Rothemere Publishing
Fleet Street's last hereditary newspaper baron, Viscount Rothermere, has carved a dominant position in the middle market of the British press with the Daily Mail and Mail on Sunday .
Through his controlling stake in the Daily Mail & General Trust, Rothermere is enjoying the benefits of increased profitability resulting from the papers' lower cost base.
Anita Roddick Niche retailing
Anita and Gordon Roddick's Body Shop is a rare thing — a 1980s niche retailer that's survived.
While its peers succumbed to high interest rates and slower consumer spending, Body Shop, with no debt, continued to meet the public's demand for natural, environmentally friendly products.
Founded in Brighton in 1976, the chain had 400 stores worldwide by 1990, over half of them overseas.
Beckwith Brothers Life Insurance
Peter and John (above) Beckwith set up London & Edinburgh Trust in 1971, in time to suffer the 1973/74 property crash.
But their debts paid, they took off again and rode the '80s boom in commercial property.
In April 1990, as the downturn deepened, they sold LET to Swedish life insurance giant SSP for £550 million, pocketing £40 million each and staying on to run the company.
Peter de Savary Property & trading
With his huge cigars and luxury yacht Peter de Savary looks every inch the tycoon.
Yet when Mrs Thatcher came to power, he was virtually unknown.
But with money he made from oil trading in Nigeria, a series of quick-fire deals and massive development work in Cornwall, he has built a fortune of around £75 million.
Trevor Hemmings Brewing
Builder Trevor Hemmings first met holiday camp king Sir Fred Pontin in 1967.
Their partnership prospered.
In 1987, he organised a £57 million management buyout of Pontins, then owned by Bass.
Two years later, he sold it to Scottish & Newcastle, netting a cool £70 million in shares.
He now holds over 5% of S&N's equity.
Tony Clegg Property
A tough Northerner, Tony Clegg built up his Mountleigh group in the 1970s and 1980s by working 18-hour days on multi-million pound property deals.
But ill-health led him to cash in his 22.6% stake for £70 million in late 1989 and he retired to the Yorkshire Dales to tend his Highland cattle.
The quiet life obviously palled: he is said to be making a comeback.
Earl of Iveagh Brewing
Despite the Ernest Saunders scandal, the Earl of Iveagh and the Guinness family did well out of him.
Up to the infamous Distillers bid, Saunders did much to revive the brewing group's fortunes and expand its activities.
Now under Anthony Tennant, both brewing and spirits are performing well.
Losers The computing sector was the first to feel the intense heat of competition and spiralling costs
Asil Nadir Fruit exports
Nagging doubts persisted over Turkish Cypriot, Asil Nadir's fruits to packaging to electronics empire, Polly Peck.
It seems the doubters were right.
Within days of a proposed buyout, the banks' support disappeared.
Valued at £2 billion a year ago, the company is now under administration.
Stephen Rubin Sportswear
Reebok trainers were the making of Stephen Rubin's Pentland.
The 32% stake cost just $77,500 in 1981.
By 1989, it accounted for 80% of profits of £71.4 million.
Now falling consumer spending is hitting Reebok sales in the US, its share price is dropping on Wall Street and Rubin wants to sell.
Pentland's future and Rubin's 58% stake in it depends on whether he can find a deal to match Reebok.
Alan Sugar Electronics
East-Ender Alan Sugar shot to fame packaging yesterday's technological wonders for the mass market.
Between flotation in 1980 and sales peak in 1988, his company, Amstrad, saw pre-tax profits rocket to £160.4 million.
But in 1988–89, Amstrad was caught out by massive overstocking.
Sir Bernard Ashley Retailing
The Laura Ashley chain was the classic role model for the Thatcherite enterprise culture.
In 1985, it was floated on the stock market to a rapturous City which valued the family stake at £292 million.
Even the death of Laura Ashley did not dim City enthusiasm.
But the high interest rate policy and squeeze on retailers hit hard.
Roger Levitt Financial services
Providing financial services for the wealthy made Roger Levitt one of them.
His clients were sports stars like jockey Pat Eddery and boxer Lennox Lewis.
But last year regulatory body Fimbra withdrew his registration after uncovering ‘disorganisation’ in the Group's finances.
Administrators were appointed to review the company's affairs.
Sir Terence Conran Retailing
After huge success with Habitat, Sir Terence Conran built up his great retail empire.
Then came the ill-fated £1.5 billion merger with British Home Stores in 1986.
After bitter boardroom feuding, Conran left Storehouse, by then ailing, in 1990.
He still retains a 2.2% stake in the business.
Stuart Lipton
Renowned for his involvement in blue-chip developments like London's Broadgate and the proposed King's Cross scheme, Stuart Lipton's Stanhope Properties rode high in the '80s.
But in the harsher conditions of the '90s, pretax profits slipped £544,000 to £15 million in 1989/90.
Despite net assets up 35% to £458 million at Stanhope, the city is unimpressed with the sector.
Hermann Hauser Computing
Austrian-born physicist Hermann Hauser, as co-founder of Acorn Computers, led the team which invented the BBC micro in the early '80s.
But in 1985, Acorn had to be rescued by Olivetti.
Hauser's stake, worth £102 million in May 1984 had shrunk to £11 million by March 1985.
In 1988, he left to develop a pen-based computer through his new Active Book Company.
Sir Clive Sinclair Inventor
The pocket calculator and home computer made Clive Sinclair Britain's best-known inventor.
But his management skills were not equal to his ideas.
In 1986, his computer company was sold to Amstrad for £5 million.
Another famous invention, the Sinclair C5 electric car, was a spectacular flop, but he's still inventing.
Chris Curry computing
In the mid-'80s, Chris Curry was one of a group of entrepreneurs busy creating the Silicon Fen in Cambridge.
Acorn Computers, which he founded with Hermann Hauser, was a pioneer in the mass computer market, making Curry a multi-millionaire on paper.
When his shares became almost worthless he quit Acorn.
His new company is Science of Cambridge.
Losers £100 million fortunes just dribbled away to nothing in no more than a couple of years
Sophie Mirman Niche retailing
From lowly origins as a typist at Marks & Spencer, Sophie Mirman became an M&S management trainee.
After a spell at Tie Rack, she found her own niche in socks.
Sock Shop mushroomed, but too fast, and entry into the US was a disaster.
With debts of £17 million, it was sold to management for £3.2 million.
Shareholders received nothing.
Mirman now runs a children's shop in London's King's Road.
Stephen Marks Retailing
Since 1983, Stephen Marks' French Connection fashion group has given its shareholders a roller-coaster ride.
From the high point in 1984, when Marks' fortune was worth some £47 million, the group has often plunged into losses, and Marks had to bring in a new chief executive.
But 1990 half-year results showed signs that the worst was over.
George Walker Property & Leisure
George Walker was a professional boxer before starting his business career.
He built up his property and leisure group to pre-tax profits estimated at just under £100 million in 1990.
But a debt mountain of £1.4 billion brought it to the brink of collapse late last year.
A condition of rescheduling the debt was that Walker split his dual role at the top.
Godfrey Bradman Property
Former tax avoidance consultant Godfrey Bradman was one of a handful of property developers who reshaped London in the '80s.
But speculative ventures in the late '80s have proved costly to fund and unprofitable to sell in a worsening climate.
Rosehaugh's results for 1989/90 revealed a pro-tax loss of £165 million, the largest deficit ever for a UK property enterprise.
Michael Green Television services
At 12, Michael Green could read a balance sheet; by 20 he had his own company.
In eight years he built his television services company, Carlton Communications, to a value of £1 billion.
But in 1990 it started to unravel.
Flat prospects have seen the share prices plummet by two-thirds: Green has relinquished the chief executive role, though he remains chairman.
Saatchi Brothers Advertising
After leading its sector in hectic growth, Saatchi's became the largest ad agency in the world.
When growth weakened in 1989, it also led the sector's decline.
A pre-tax loss of £15 million in 1989 was turned into profit of £36 million in 1990 after the brothers (Maurice, above) handed over management control to Frenchman Robert Louis Dreyfus.
Tony Martinez Electronics
Tony Martinez took his computer company Microvitec, to the stock market in 1984.
Soon, his shareholding was worth some £15 million.
But in recent years Microvitec has had a chequered history.
Profit margins collapsed and Martinez was ousted as chairman.
He remains a major shareholder, but his shares are worth only a fraction of their '84 value.
Reg Valin Communications
In 1987, Reg Valin was proud of VPI Group, the communications consultancy he co- founded.
In three years VPI's value had risen from £9.55 million to £121 million.
But it was sold to Tranwood Consortium late last year for just £1.6 million, just before going into receivership.
The trigger was the 1987 purchase of The Carter Organisation.
Valin had resigned the chairmanship in 1989.
Jon Summerill Advertising
The Yellowhammer advertising group was founded by Jon Summerill.
After the great bull market, he was sitting on a £13 million paper fortune.
Following expansion overseas and as recession deepened in 1989, the group folded.
The main advertising agency was bought by the US group, DMB&B.
Summerill is staying on as chairman for the time being.
Martin Sorrell Advertising
Regarded as the third Saatchi brother when he was finance director of their advertising group, Martin Sorrell decided to branch out on his own in 1985.
Buying a small Kent engineering company, Wire & Plastic Products,(WPP) he went on to create an advertising group to rival the Saatchis, with two giant American takeovers in 1987 and 1989.
He is struggling under a mountain of debt today.
When Mrs Thatcher came to power in May 1979, union power was at its height and British industry was going through the crippling after effects of the winter of discontent
‘It's a funny old world,’ said Mrs Thatcher on leaving office.
MT's 20 losers, whose collective worth dropped from £2.8 billion to £455 million, would no doubt agree
HARD NEWS HARD TIMES Tiananmen Square, the Berlin Wall and now the Gulf — news that's not cheap.
Daniel Butler
ITN's cash problems have come at a time when news is more in demand than ever
Hard news can mean hard cash — the US cable network CNN has proved that
‘It's been a difficult year,’ admits Sir David Nicholas wearily as he contemplates how best to manage 40 staff in the Gulf.
He is chairman and former chief executive of Independent Television News and the news at ITN has not been good recently.
The principal British rival to the BBC has faced an uncertain future, with costs rising just as recession was slashing into advertising.
Add to this, expensive new headquarters developed as property prices tumbled, government intervention, a threat to its monopoly position and criticism from some customers and you have a difficult brew to drink.
At the heart of ITN's problems lie the uncertainties over the future of British broadcasting.
These were exemplified in the Government's Broadcasting Bill which became law last October, but in reality cannot be resolved until the next century.
Will existing television and radio stations, or satellite and cable TV win out in the popularity stakes?
Can the independents continue to match the BBC?
Will news-gathering open up to market forces or continue to receive government protection in the name of the consumer's interest?
Only time can tell how news media will have to adapt to the demands which loom ahead, but that's little comfort to an organisation plagued with financial problems and worries.
There is a curious irony about all this.
Information has been one of the biggest business growth areas, and in recession or boom, the thirst for it has grown steadily.
This has been particularly clear over the last couple of years.
First there was Tiananmen Square, then the collapse of the Berlin Wall and successive East European regimes, climaxing with the Christmas Day firing squad for Romania's Ceausescus.
Last spring Nelson Mandela was released and the USSR began to split apart at the seams.
In Nicaragua the Sandinistas fell from power, while next door General Noriega was toppled by a US invasion.
Finally, to cap it all, in August Iraq invaded Kuwait, precipitating one of the longest runs of lead-stories in decades.
And ITN was there throughout.
Present as each crisis arose, its footage from around the world was sought eagerly by stations both at home and abroad.
In almost any business sector this would be a recipe for a rapid rise in the share price and a cause for celebration — but not so at ITN.
There, events abroad caused major problems: costs were soaring.
In October last year it was forced to turn to its shareholders and bankers to ask for £18 million to sort out its difficulties.
They were distinctly unenthusiastic at the prospect, but in the end had little option — the independents simply have to have something with which to challenge the BBC.
Central to this need are the question marks that the Broadcasting Act has thrown up over the whole of the future of British television and in particular the woolly ‘quality threshold’ that franchise holders are expected to meet.
Although no one seems to know how this will be defined in practice, all observers agree that a news service will clearly play a crucial part.
Here ITN has an inbuilt advantage.
The service enjoys a monopoly position, supplying news to the independent television channels that own it and pay accordingly (the initial estimate for 1990–91 was £60 million).
While this has just been confirmed for the next 10 years, until recently there was some doubt as to whether it would be renewed.
When, thanks in large part to world events, ITN's chiefs were forced to turn to their backers for more cash, there was heavy resistance.
The advertising industry was in deep recession.
As British companies began to feel the pinch, it was ad campaigns which felt the finance director's scalpel first (the Saatchi-owned, media-buying organisation, Zenith, which bulk-buys TV slots predicts a real-term fall of 3.5% in revenues over the next year).
As a result, to keep to their schedules, the television companies had to cut rates, resulting in falling revenues.
The last thing they wanted was unexpected demands for cash from ITN.
Bob Phillis, ITN's new chief executive, thinks that the company will be able to sort out its future funding by agreeing a three-tiered agreement.
This would agree a price for the basic service, with extra money for extraordinary items (like travel and accommodation in the Gulf) and additional money for increased amounts of news coverage over and above the norm.
In this way the Gulf war may prove a useful argument.
Financial problems were compounded by ITN's move to the site of the The Sunday Times former headquarters in Gray's Inn Road.
The massive £45-million building was planned when property prices in London seemed set to rise forever, but the scheme was still dependent on the top five floors being let out for an annual £6 million.
The collapse of the property sector in the capital has left ITN with a major headache.
Not surprisingly the company turned to obvious areas of cost-cutting and revenue- raising.
Beginning three years ago, it began slimming down its workforce.
So far it has lost about 175 staff which represents ‘the thick end of 20%’ according to deputy chief executive Paul Mathews.
At the same time productivity has improved dramatically, with news output having trebled.
While ITN gamely maintains there is still some more scope for cuts, it says there is now precious little fat left and implicitly suggests that additional revenue will simply have to be found by the shareholders.
If the level of foreign news keeps up it will turn again to its shareholders, says Mathews, adding that in that event: ‘I would be very surprised indeed if they didn't make more resources available.
Once you agree on the level of quality, the price almost works itself out.’
ITN's editor, Stewart Purvis, agrees.
While the Gulf conflict has represented a huge drain on the organisation (in the week prior to hostilities breaking out he had to spend £200,000 arranging coverage) this is in part covered automatically.
He points out that no matter where a report is filed from, it takes the place of another and was optimistic that the organisation could cope with the extra cost.
Even so, this prediction was made before hostilities broke out, when the campaign was predicted to last only a matter of days, and his rival at BSkyB managing editor of Sky News, Lis Howell, is less sanguine: ‘There isn't a bottomless pit of money in any news organisation,’ she points out.
‘Anyone who says they are coping with the Gulf without sleepless nights is telling lies; it's amazing how far you can stretch yourself, but it hurts sometimes.’
As a result of the general squeeze over the past year ITN has turned to additional revenue raisers.
One such area has been its library services which until now, maintains Mathews, were regarded simply as a programming resource.
Now: ‘Without really trying, they generate £1 million a year,’ he says and claims this could easily be increased.
In addition the firm is looking at opportunities for its World News on US cable channels.
It is already available on the Nordic satellite that broadcasts to much of north and western Europe.
And there certainly is money to be made out of hard news as the idiosyncratic Ted Turner has proved with his Cable News Network (CNN).
When Turner founded the Atlanta- based 24-hour news service the pundits pronounced him mad, but a decade later Turner owns a world-wide network and is watched by millions.
CNN has proved repeatedly, and most recently with its remarkable Gulf coverage, that hard news can mean hard cash.
Even ITN has had to turn to CNN for some footage of the Gulf, but that doesn't cause Phillis any problems: ‘I'm a great admirer — Turner's done a marvellous job,’ adding that while the US network has received plaudits for its Gulf coverage, it is merely returning the coverage that ITN provided of the Conservative leadership contest.
As for emulating CNN, he is more cautious: ‘Our terrestrial activity has to remain our core activity, but we have to explore new business opportunities.’
At present he is looking at renewing ITN's contract with Channel 4, linking into breakfast TV, negotiating for the new Channel 5 franchise and possibly supplying news programmes for cable and satellite stations abroad.
If they last, Phillips believes that joint ventures may hold the answer and thinks that the new shareholders who will take stakes after the existing owners are forced to divest themselves of 51% of ITN could provide the answer.
An interesting recent suggestion is that ITN and TV-AM (currently non-ITN serviced) should merge, or at least take stakes in each other.
The highlyprofitable morning broadcaster has a 24-hour franchise, but only operates a three-hour service.
ITN could broadcast a news service throughout the day, generating the much-needed extra cash.
Other possibilities lie in providing radio coverage to challenge the BBC and Independent Radio News (IRN), or possibly in publishing.
There is, however, a problem with too much diversification, ITN is committed to providing a service to its owners, the ITV stations.
Provided that news bulletins are shown at agreed times across the country, for example at 5.45pm and 10pm, this is no problem.
If, however, it spreads itself about too thinly it may find conflicts of interest.
What if the Prime Minister were assassinated at five past nine, in time for a satellite station's nine o'clock news, but 55 minutes before News at Ten ?
Does it hold on to the exclusive for its major shareholders or go with its journalistic impulses?
To add to the problems, some stations began to voice unease about the format and content of the traditional, international and national ITN service followed by a short local programme.
Stuart Prebble, head of Granada's regional news, argues that this is ridiculous.
He points out that in times of national emergency the public turns automatically to the BBC.
‘Let us cheerfully concede that the BBC is the voice of the nation as viewed from London, and provide for ITV's viewers a perspective on the news the way it is seen from where they live.’
He wants ITN to continue to gather the news, but for individual companies to be left to edit and present programmes, giving ITN bulletins a local dimension.
ITN's Purvis was strongly against the idea.
He felt that there would be too little control over quality and points to the US to back his case.
There, he says, they have three types of news programme: national and international, regional, and a hybrid of the two.
‘But,’ he points out, ‘the experience in the US has not necessarily been a success.’
Sir David goes further in dismissing the scheme, saying that Granada is in no position to talk, having, as he says, a particular problem because, ‘in many ways it is the weakest of the regions in its regional news coverage.’
But he is not unsympathetic to the idea: ‘In some ways I don't think Prebble is radical enough.
Why not start off with a major ITN chunk, and start cutting in regional programmes later?’
Further major threats loom in the well-publicised ‘franchise auction’ due to take place this Autumn.
Amid some confusion over ‘quality thresholds’, all existing ITV companies will have to bid for their futures and this will affect ITN.
Mathews will have to spend the coming months negotiating revenues with companies which may cease to exist in October.
But in the end ITN continues to have a bright future.
The advertising squeeze and huge costs of covering the Gulf and upheavals in Eastern Europe are worries, but rivals are similarly affected.
The BBC has had its licence fee cut in real terms and Sky news has been told to slash spending by 10%.
And ITN's position as monopoly supplier of news to the Channel 3 stations (current or future) is assured for at least the next five, and probably 10, years.
While admitting that the Gray's Inn Road site's top five floors are a major worry, Mathews points out that they have taken into account that there will be no revenue from them until the end of the year.
They are, he adds, in a prime site, and its importance is likely to grow with the development of the nearby King's Cross Channel Tunnel terminal.
Notwithstanding the gloomy economic prospects for the year ahead and the blighted advertising market, ITN can claim that news is even more important than ever.
When the television marketers object, ITN can point to its News at Ten slot; its 10.15 advertising break commands the highest rates of the day — £50,000 for a 30-second ad.
As ITN's Purvis points out: ‘Increasingly, we're going to find ourselves having to argue that news is good business — but I don't think that's too difficult.’
While bullets fly in the Gulf, deputy CE Paul Mathews (above) scours London for tenants
Chairman, Sir David Nicholas (right) has to deal with government, shareholders and editors
It is for new CE Bob Phillis (above) and editor Stewart Purvis (left) to provide quality at the right price
A VERY DISTINGUISHED MARQUE Aston Martin has, since 1987, been owned by Ford, but has not lost its exclusiveness
by Charles Darwent
Hand-made panels do not necessarily make for better cars.
But it is this aspect that costs £120,000
A ‘popular’ car, set for production in 1995, at £85,000 is referred to as ‘The Cheapo’
‘Welcome to the last outpost of British incompetence,’ beams Victor Gauntlett, extending a large hand and an air of bonhomie.
Executive chairman of a car manufacturer would not be one's first stab at Gauntlett's profession: ruddy in a way that Englishmen aren't any more, a pinstripe only just this side of loud, silk handkerchief, he looks hand-stitched, coach-built, bespoke.
They say dogowners come to look like their dogs.
Perhaps this holds good for makers of motor-cars.
For Gauntlett's product is that most impeccably British of all motor-cars (not automobiles), the Aston Martin: a car so devastatingly English as to make Rolls-Bentleys seem like Hondas.
In its 77-year history, laughs Gauntlett, the firm has manufactured some 11,000 cars, rather fewer than three a week.
This they have managed by dint of an almost wilful maintaining of standards (or refusing to accept reality, depending on your point of view).
Aston's Newport Pagnell works is like a room at the Science Museum: on a given day in any given corner, two men will be shaping a bonnet-lid by rocking it through a hand-press; in another, a third-generation Astonian will be hand-beating an aluminium (Astons have always been aluminium) wing.
Others hand-stitch Connolly hide, or hand-assemble engines: one to a man, his signature appended to the finished product on a brass plate.
Vantages and Virages now roll off the assembly at the dizzying rate of five a week, and are bought by very rich men (cost: £120,000) with a taste for abiding values in a changing world.
The platonic Aston owner is HRH The Prince of Wales, who has two.
His wife, reputedly to his fury, once sat on the bonnet of one and scratched its paintwork.
O tempora, o mores .
But this is by no means a tale of automotive Flat-Earthers.
For all its Wilton carpet, a Virage will speed its owner from 0–60mph in a shade over six seconds, and thence, constabulary allowing, to 155mph.
Likewise, Gauntlett, for all his gold watch-chain, is the model of a modern manufacturer, funding his 1980 part-purchase of Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd from the proceeds of an earlier creation, Pace Petroleum.
Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd itself is also something of a corporate trompe l'oeil : its bonnets may still accommodate itinerant royal bottoms, but its equity — 75% of it — has, since September 1987, been owned by (of all things) Ford.
Gauntlett cites this last fact as evidence to support a pet theory.
‘Aston Martin,’ he says, ‘is  analogous to Britain.
When I first arrived here, shortly after Margaret Thatcher arrived in Downing Street, both the country and the firm spent all their time looking back to past glories.
It took us both some time to wake up to the fact that the world didn't owe us a living.’
This realpolitik was most vividly demonstrated by the Ford purchase, an act an automotive Harold Macmillan might have condemned as selling the family silver.
Indeed, says Gauntlett, ‘Had someone suggested such a thing to me in the mid- '70s, I, too, would have been horrified.
But there was simply a major change of reality in the '80s.’
A manufacturer of rich men's toys, Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd had itself always been something of a rich man's toy, owners like the mythical David Brown (he of the DB4 and 5) underwriting the firm's losses for sheer love of the marque.
By '87, such indulgence had become not merely unfashionable, however: it had become impossible.
‘The last 25 years had been bloody,’ Gauntlett winces.
‘Bankers were even tapping David Brown on the shoulder.
By the '80s, receivership was a real possibility, and new rulings on safety and emission levels were the last straw.
The will and even the whim were running out.
When Ford offered us a safe harbour, it took me all of 15 seconds to say yes.’
But a wind of change had already begun to blow at Newport Pagnell.
For the two years before Ford's buy-up, Aston Martin Lagonda had actually shown a profit (albeit modest), the first time in its history that it had managed to do so two years running.
This, too, suggests that, as with his cars, something steelier lurks beneath Gauntlett's fogeyish mien.
When he arrived, Aston's industrial relations structures, like its capital equipment, looked like a museum display.
‘Not only were there no training programmes or recognition of skills,’ recalls Gauntlett, ‘there was no personnel department for 400 workers.
Some people had been made redundant four times, and, what was worse, they were almost proud of it.’
At one stage, says AML's chairman, strikes were in danger ‘of harming the firm very greatly indeed.’
All of this has changed, first through such departures as day-release apprenticeships, second through what Gauntlett darkly refers to as ‘explaining the facts of life to the staff.’
‘I was a jolly nice chap in 1980,’ he notes.
‘Rather less so now.’
Such changes were possible, but other obvious ones — increased mechanisation notable among them — were not.
The appeal of an Aston Martin is, in Victor Gauntlett's words, ‘illogical’.
Hand-beating an aluminium panel does not necessarily make for a better car, confers no empirically measurable added value: nonetheless, it is the hand-wroughtness of Aston Martins that make otherwise sensible men write out cheques for £120,000.
Remove the brass engine-maker's plaque, and those same cheque-books might more than conceivably snap shut.
As proof of his point, Aston Martin's chairman points out that one of his 155mph product's soundest markets was Hong Kong, an island so small, says Gauntlett, that the only things moving at more that half that speed ‘were taking off from Kai Tak airport’.
Nor could much be shaved off of AML's purchasing inventory, Connolly hide and bespoke cylinders being notoriously inflexible on pricing.
One happy side-effect of manufacturing laughably expensive cars is, however, a certain price insensitivity in the product itself.
A customer capable of signing a cheque for £100,000 is unlikely to balk at the extra £10,000 or so, and Aston's aberrant mid-'80s profitability was due in no small part to the fact that Gauntlett made his car more expensive, in real terms, than it has ever been.
By dint of demanding £25,000 deposits up front, AML's order-book has not been hit by the '90s recession or the Gulf War (some 30% of Aston Martins go to Arabic buyers), but some more permanent answer is clearly needed.
‘Some are born realists,’ Gauntlett observes, dolefully, ‘and some have realism thrust upon them.’
This realism has obviously become all the more desirable since the genesis of Fords.
The accepted wisdom that bulk car manufacturers buy exclusive marques (Chrysler and Lamborghini,et cetera in the hope of garnering reflected glory is misplaced: any benefit that might accrue to the Escort by dint of its coming from the same stable as the Virage would be heavily outweighed by the damage done to the Virage by the Escort.
Aston's usefulness to Ford will almost certainly come from being able to use AML's highly- skilled engineering department as a technological test-bed.
At the same time, Ford is not famous for spending money unnecessarily, and AML will also be expected to produce something of more immediate value to the corporate bottom line.
This it intends to do in two ways.
First, while Ford has been careful to avoid trumpeting its Aston connection (‘There's been no bastardisation,’ says Gauntlett, ‘no ‘Can we have a discreet Ford badge’.
It would be better to close Aston than to ruin it,’) it may be less loath to advertise Aston's kinship with the other of Ford's British buy-ups, Jaguar.
Already Aston Martin's most successful dealerships in the US — another major market — are also Jaguar dealers, and a joint marketing venture is certainly plausible.
‘It gives Aston somewhere to go in the family,’ notes Gauntlett.
Second and more tangibly, AML will also launch a new and — in comparison with its existing product range — popular car, now known as the DP 1999, set for production in 1995 and priced, in today's terms at £85,000.
With an intended output of 700 a year, the DP 1999 will treble AML's production at a stroke, requiring a new, Ford-funded plant near the Newport Pagnell site.
Since the car will be ‘still intrinsically an Aston, but not completely coach-built’, it will also have to acquire relatively speaking, mass-production skills.
Here again, Jaguar may have its role to play, although any suggestion of a production merger is dismissed by Gauntlett.
Even so, the DP 1999 will undoubtedly bring problems of its own, the most obvious being one of image dilution.
Although Gauntlett is insistent that ‘£85,000 is still pretty up- market, and 2,000 cars is half Rolls-Bentley's batting average’, the car affectionately referred to at Newport Pagnell as ‘The Cheapo’ has unhappy antecedents.
One of its own ancestors, the pre-war, down-market Lagonda Rapier, almost destroyed its parent company.
Recently, Porsche's 928 series —‘more properly, an Audi coupe’, says AML's marketing director, Michael Haysey —‘got things nastily wrong’.
Haysey emphasises that the DP 1999 will have to be ‘pitched very carefully indeed, and that includes pricing’: something of a departure for post-war Astons.
‘When I joined the company from BMW, I was heard to remark that my job would be a doddle,’ says Haysey, ruefully.
Now the BMW 8-series will be among competitors in a newly bare-knuckled market place.
How the ensuing scrap will affect the DP 1999's grander cousins, the Virage and Vantage, must be a matter of concern at Newport Pagnell.
The Ford deal was accepted by most Aston owners ‘with a surprising degree of sympathy,’ says Gauntlett, ‘largely, I suppose, because a majority of them are independent businessmen themselves, and understood the necessity.’
How far their goodwill can be stretched is a moot point.
Broadening product-range (the company are also aiming at the ‘company chairman’ market, pitching a recreated Lagonda at Rolls-Bentley's traditional slot) will undoubtedly ensure that Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd circa 2010 is a more secure financial proposition than in 1980.
Whether the Princess of Wales will still sit on its cars is another question.
Charles Darwent is a freelance writer 
An iron fist in a velvet glove: Victor Gauntlett (left) of Aston Martin was ‘a jolly nice chap in 1980’ when the company's structure was like a museum display, a structure he modernised
Formerly of BMW, marketing director Michael Haysey (left) thought his job at AML ‘would be a doddle’.
Now the BMW 8 series will be among his competitors in a cut-throat market
AML's usefulness to Ford will come from being able to use the highlyskilled engineering department (left and below) as a technological test-bed
CITY UNDER SIEGE London has long been the centre of European finance, but the slide in business now could just be the start of a lasting loss of market share.
By Shirley Skeel
More fund managers are employing in-house research teams and traders to get an edge
The Cabinet's attitude to Europe is critical.
‘If we sit on the outside, then it will be difficult for London to retain its top position’
Brokers will have to be big and robust or smart and small to survive
The opening up of European borders will pit British finance houses against the huge German conglomerates, the American powerhouses and the French
Technology is making its own bid to shoulder out the financial middleman
‘I just keep coming in and see someone sitting at a computer not moving, and I wonder, should the computer be there in lieu of the person?’ says one broker
Finance could have less influence in the City, as accounting, law and computing grow
Futurologists love to speak of a time when the equities of international corporations will be traded 24 hours a day in one electronic marketplace
If the financial world is a big cake, as our learned economists kindly inform us, then it is no wonder London has a stomach ache.
Witness, for example, the morose faces ordering house white rather than champagne in the City bars; the sheepish scramble for the Surbiton train dead on six o'clock; the City staff noticeboards selling Fiats rather than Ferraris.
And even more telling, the slow, sad exodus of young traders who find they no longer have a job.
The City, as any mother could have forewarned, is feeling poorly.
As the tale is told, it was our historical imperial taste that set us up for our indulgent role in the money boom of the last 30 years.
The old Brit's risque interest in places and things exotic led to open-door policies and this to London's pre-eminence as Europe's finance centre.
But now things are on the slide, and despite grunts that the City's slump is only a passing phase, warnings of London's undoing are arising.
Researcher Amin Rajan, for one, cites Rome and Constantinople as models of the fragility of cities that become supreme.
‘Every notion or industry enjoying pre-eminence had failed to retain it for long,’ he writes.
‘This is largely because success for one becomes a bench mark for the other.’
Naturally, it is almost duty to bring with bad news a panacea, and his is bottled as ‘knowhow’.
Only if the city wakes up to its need to shore up its bank of knowhow, will its superiority in Europe be secure, he suggests.
His point, made in Capital People , published by the eminent London Human Resource Group, is taken.
His prediction (and he's by no means alone in this), of a new Europe with five major financial centres, with London maybe only a scratch above the rest, falls on more reluctant ears.
Regardless, he insists, ‘London's share will be diluted.’
Among the cake-eaters, Andrew Hugh Smith, chairman of the International Stock Exchange, London (ISE), is one of the more reassuring figures.
Solid as a bull whale in his confidence and peering through eyes that suggest he is not lacking in a little magic himself, Hugh Smith calmly rebuts every argument that London is in decline.
After all, London's SEAQ International system is the biggest trading pool of cross- border equities in the world, handling over two-thirds of this business.
London has more international banks than any other city on the globe.
Our merchant bankers do more cross- border deals than any other European city's.
And our knowhow in finance brings the Italians, the French and even the Germans to our doorstep.
The City loves to play up the fact that even the giant ogre, Deutsche Bank, came to London to buy its merchant banking arm, Morgan Grenfell.
‘I don't see a serious challenge to London as a financial centre as things stand currently,’ Hugh Smith intones calmly.
‘We have the skills, markets…and a huge collection of international players.
It's beginning to happen in Frankfurt and Paris, but…’ he trails off in a manner sufficient to make the Continentals want to cut the United Kingdom adrift.
The chairman predicts that a more unified Europe will result in the kind of financial federation we see in the US, where there is one main centre in the time zone — New York (read London) and several satellite centres (Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam).
Rajan's alternative, however — of several major European centres — is backed by one potent argument.
Its name is ‘technology’, and at least one of its architects, consultancy firm BWW's chairman Peter Bennett, leans to the decentralised view.
Now involved in work in PIPE, a proposed Europe-wide trading system, Bennett argues that whether or not Europe's 12 stock exchanges agree to the controversial idea of a ‘13th market’ where all major stocks can be traded in one big pool, the market players will demand it and, if necessary, create it themselves.
The eventual move to an electronic screen system served by satellite would mean traders could live anywhere and ‘they will locate where it best suits them’.
This means fresh consideration of factors like tax regimes, property prices, travel convenience and even lifestyle.
Of course, this must not be overplayed: London's advantages of liberal regulations and a critical mass of services, capital and knowhow, are sizeable carrots.
But times are changing.
Deregulation is spreading Europe-wide.
Frankfurt and Paris have already beat London in setting up an electronics settlements system, while the fully-automated Frankfurt Terminborse (futures and options) is vying with the open outcry Liffe market in London.
Rajan also points out that French banks are now investing 9% of their budgets on staff training, the Germans 7% and the British only 2%.
‘The City needs to double its efforts,’ he states bleakly.
And, not to be forgotten, is the sheer weight of the German economy.
As the engine on the European train, its power to direct money flow is considerable.
And so far its major banks have sworn faithfulness to Frankfurt.
Liffe chief executive Michael Jenkins warns that, in his personal view, the Government's attitude to Europe is critical: ‘If we sit on the outside, then it will be difficult for London to retain its position.’
The pain the City is now feeling is too easily brushed off as a short-term punch in the stomach from the economy.
Yes, sharemarket volumes have halved and mergers and acquisitions fees have quartered in the past year.
Says Hoare Govett chief executive Peter Voss: ‘From 1988 to 1990 there were very few firms that traded profitably and no firm made an adequate return on its capital.’
These symptoms are indeed merely cyclical ones, but, the talk is, a more serious illness may be edging in.
In Wall Street journals now speak of an irreversible decline of the middleman — the suave dealmaker who carves a chunk out of the real workers' profits by flitting with bright notions from door to door.
International Business Week suggests several trends are alienating the broker and merchant banker from their clients: moves towards in-house corporate financing and in-house research, index investing, global trading and automation.
To what extent is this true in London?
Certainly it is so that more financial work is being brought in-house.
Hanson, British Petroleum, Guinness, Cable & Wireless, BTR and ICI handle a large part of their own M&A while several do their own forex trading and groundwork for bond issues.
‘It gives quite a clarity of management information if you do it yourself,’ says BP spokesman Ian Fowler.
The likelihood is the trend will continue as more companies come of size to justify it, but as James Capel chief investment strategist, Alastair Ross Goobey, says, ‘I don't think you get any company that thinks they have the whole answer.’
The same phenomenon is occurring with brokers' research.
Research is spilling out of the broking houses by the shovelful, but often straight into the fund manager's bin.
Prudential's equities director, Rodney Dennis, uses copious research but complains it is often ‘more descriptive than analytical’.
Legal & General senior director Michael Payne adds that the merger of brokers and merchant banks (which have vested interests in some stocks) has created suspicion.
‘It's the recommendation that you can no longer trust.’
As a result, more fund managers are employing their own in-house research teams and some their own traders to get an edge.
The stress on quality is such that Prudential puts every broker, from Sydney to Milan, through a point by point assessment, and eliminates all but the best.
The clear implication is a future world peopled by fewer brokers.
This is all the more true because of a trend towards bigger finance houses, which are chewing into a shrinking cake.
It is a little like the adage that it takes money to make money.
Big market makers and brokers can give big investors the volumes and flexibility of trade that they need.
And the more deals they get, the bigger they become.
Additionally, the practice of ‘soft broking’(giving kickbacks eg, paying the cleaning bills), of institutional investors who do trade through them, is putting pressure on the less monied brokers.
‘A broking house might pay back £120 (in perks) for £100 they get in,’ complains one trader.
He claims it is a deliberate ploy to squeeze out weaker brokers.
However, these are only blips in the stream of things, as are the rise of index investing and increased use of futures to rebalance portfolios (both of which slice back the brokers' business).
There are weightier events to consider.
In one respect the City is more threatened than Wall Street.
The opening up of European borders will pit British finance houses against the huge German conglomerates, the infiltrating American powerhouses and the self-protective French.
The Wall Street firms at least have the stability of a huge market at home.
The British are not so fortunate.
So far, in the consulting business, we have done reasonably well abroad.
Bob Dowcett, a director of Morgan Grenfell, says that their growth in non-UK deals — from 18% of their total in 1985 to 55% in 1990 — is a particularly good indication of the City's success.
But even ISE chairman Hugh Smith admits that on the broking side not only will London's share of cross-border deals have to fall (it is now precariously high at 90%), but that brokers will have to be big and robust or smart and small to survive.
Of the medium- sized firm he says, ‘That is the dangerous place to be’.
Likewise London's stranglehold on futures and options is likely to loosen.
Liffe's Michael Jenkins says London handles over half of European financial futures trades and 90% of the German bund trade.
But he is keenly aware of history.
The US, he points out, at one time had 100% of the financial futures business; now it has 40% or 50%.
This is the question in all markets: whether the cake as a whole will grow fast enough to keep London's absolute volume of business growing.
Goldman Sachs partner Alan Gillespie believes that London ‘still will be the place where cross-border deals are done’.
But he pours cold water on the notion of some 1992 explosion of new business in Europe.
‘I can't say it will create more deals.
Europe is all about internationalising, and that will continue to happen for years and years.’
European deals also do not promise the same rewards as the UK mega-deals of recent times.
Many takeovers in Europe are friendly and it is said that two in three are negotiated without merchant bankers.
On the sharebroking front, James Capel's Alastair Ross Goobey warns that ‘the present level of trade is not an unusual phenomenon.
It is certainly lower than four years ago, but it's better than 1980–81.
The rest of it is cream on the cake.’
If his thinking is right, sharebrokers not only have to trim down now, but be prepared to stay trim.
This idea is backed by another prediction.
Clearly, in a deregulated Europe mollycoddling of local business will be replaced by tough new efficiencies.
Some economists say the net effect will be up to a 50% cut in European production capabilities.
The end result for the City is a much smaller clientele.
Which brings us to one final ugly matter.
Quiet, insensitive and inhuman, modern technology is making its own bid to shoulder out the financial middleman.
Reuters, friend of the new school of ‘the level playing field’ and enemy of the old boy network is doing everything it can to wrench the advantage of the ‘nudge and the wink’from the City's established players.
Its Monitor system, providing financial news to nearly 200,000 screens worldwide, has already ‘democratised’ the flow of information.
Next Reuters hopes to take over ‘bread and butter’ dealing in equities, ie, those trades requiring no creative human input.
Its fledgling Instinet system already allows fund managers to trade share parcels direct with one another, eliminating the human broker.
Dealing 2000 Phase Two, due out this year (forex dealing), and the upcoming Globex after-hours futures trading system hope to do the same in other markets.
One leading broker admits, ‘I just keep coming in and see someone sitting at a computer not moving, and I wonder should the computer be there in lieu of the person?’
Tempting, but the truth so far is that in equities the machines aren't quite making the required grade.
‘At least if there's a human being there you can talk about the deal,’ says Legal & General's Michael Payne with just a trace of exasperation.
‘Is it the right sort of market?
Are you prepared to take it on or what?
And he says, ‘Well actually I know someone down the road who's happy to take 10 million on’, And then you're in business.
It might even be a foreign investor not plugged into your fancy computerised system.’
There is also the problem that machines hate to take on risks.
If there is no immediate buyer for a share parcel, then tough.
A market maker, however, takes on the shares until he finds a buyer.
This liquidity, and the market maker's ability to adjust prices for news events, is essential for big investors.
In any case, Payne and Prudential's Rodney Dennis both say they want brokers' research, and dealing through them is the way they get it.
Paying independently for research would be far too expensive, and as Payne acknowledges candidly, ‘If we're paying commissions and thus get literally the first call on the telephone, we have an edge when it comes to news items.
We can lean on them because of our size.’
Obviously the playing field still has its bumps, and understandably some players like it that way.
Reuters' managing director of Instinet UK, Bryan Cavill, agrees that bigger and more creative deals need the human touch, but he believes the lower cost, speed and transparency of automated trading will in time capture a good chunk of the market.
Instinet is still small in London, but has had reasonable success in its five years in the US and, says Cavill, ‘once you get the ball rolling this is the only game in town.’
Automation may just come into its own as global cross-border trading picks up.
Futurologists love to speak of a time when the equities of numerous international corporations will be traded 24 hours a day in one electronic marketplace.
The suggestion is that these companies could be virtually homeless — traded universally and capable of raising capital anywhere.
The intimation is that such giants would likewise be serviced by global finance houses.
Hoare Govett's new American boss, Peter Voss, adopting typical British cynicism, responds: ‘Nobody's really yet proven the success of the global firm.
We all went global.
We all said ‘Gee, 24-hour trading — it's only a blip away.’
Well, since '87 and some of the shocks like Kuwait, people have all gone home.
They sell their foreign stocks first.
It's the domestic franchise that still is the bulk of earnings.’
Large investors are nonetheless venturing abroad more these days.
Overseas investment by UK fund managers has jumped from about 8% to 20% of total assets in the ten years to 1990.
Legal & General's Michael Payne says that over the next few years he expects his fund ‘will grow more in Europe at the expense of UK equities,’ particularly now that entry into the ERM has reduced the currency risk.
He also says he deals through the broker with the ‘best local intelligence’.
That usually means a local one.
The implication for City brokers is clear.
Either they are one of the best of the bunch at home, or they make their name abroad.
James Capel is taking the latter tack, while Hoare Govett, which will soon be 51% owned by its employees, will concentrate on quality here.
‘Our goal is to be in the top five,’ Voss states confidently.
London itself is also bound to transform.
It might be the only city in the world that speaks ‘English proper’, and English is easily the reigning language in the financial world, but success can breed complacency, and complacency sloppiness.
The Continent is eyeing London's huge tranche of cake jealousy and the Americans and Japanese will yet again start to roam abroad.
Inevitably some of London's international financial market share will go the way of its former land empire.
Whether that means less business overall for the Londoners will depend on their own fiestiness and on the speed of Europe's growth.
Awareness of this is high, but survival, not aggressiveness, is still at the top of the agenda.
Christopher Brown, managing director of the City-based Corney & Barrow bar and restaurant chain is quite right when he insists the hearty times of eating and drinking will return, ‘because people still want to meet and talk’.
But Amin Rajan could also be right in predicting that financial houses will have a declining influence in the City.
He suggests that they will be replaced in part by three more diversified and stable services, all of which are sitting on golden eggs in a restructuring Europe: accounting, law and computing.
The greying of the City, you could euphemistically call it.
More grey matter, more grey suits, more grey faces.
The City's once colourful financiers could still prove the theory wrong.
But if somehow they don't, it may be time to start buying Eurotunnel shares.
The Church of England is a kind of conglomerate, but what City folk would want the running of it?
THE MEN FROM THE MINISTRY How do you run the Church of England?
Helen Kay looks at how the God Squad handle some huge assets and equally big liabilities
Mediating between Church and State: a balancing act not always successfully maintained
The Church of England has two major sources of revenue: its historical assets and donations from the man or woman in the pew
Change is slow and complex.
No Archbishop of Canterbury can simply pronounce to his flock, as does the Pope, and have the whole Church toe the line
Imagine a conglomerate with 44 subsidiaries.
Each has a chief executive who, though he sits on the board of nearly 600 directors, is not accountable to the head of the group.
Add to this the facts that each chief executive has only limited authority over many of his staff and that much of the finance of this complex body is handled by a separate company accountable to Parliament, and it might well be enough to make Lord Hanson heave or Tiny Rowland throw in the towel.
The unenviable job of heading such a body falls to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
It's not entirely fanciful to suggest that the Church of England is a kind of conglomerate.
The 44 dioceses which comprise the regional branches of the Church are indeed limited companies.
Each files an annual report.
The holding company, General Synod, files a separate set of accounts, as do the Church Commissioners, whose job it is to manage the greater part of the Church's historical property.
In short, the administration of the Church of England is not just a spiritual matter; it is also a managerial task of daunting proportions.
Many of the senior men in the ministry now see management as part of their office.
There is, after all, something of a biblical precedent for this point of view; if the Church cannot husband its talents wisely, its spiritual harvest will be correspondingly small.
Take the Right Reverend David Jenkins, Bishop of Durham.
An outspoken liberal, Jenkins firmly believes that the gospel and good management are by no means mutually exclusive.
‘Though you must subordinate the managerial [to the pastoral and spiritual functions of the Church],’ he argues, ‘you can't be unrealistic about it.’
His episcopal purple shirt and pinstripe suit underline the point.
Yet the fragmentation of the Church makes it exceedingly difficult to implement anything like normal management practice.
It three key resources — finances, buildings and staff — are scattered, quite literally, across the country.
there is, for example, no central accounting system which neatly summarises total income and expenditure, though a report written in 1988 estimates that running costs amount to some £390 million per annum .
About a third of these costs are met by the Church Commissioners, who generated investment income of £140.8 million in 1989.
This sum met almost all the pension costs of 10,000 clergy pensioners and widows.
It also provided approximately 40% of the stipends and housing costs of the 11,500 serving clergy.
Donations from the man or woman in the pew form the Church of England's other big source of income.
In 1988 (the last available figures), some 1,165,000 churchgoers (measured by usual Sunday attendance) put a total £166.7 million in the plate.
This figure reflects an active drive on the part of the church to increase giving from, for example, a 1978 total of £53.7 million.
The increase has outstripped inflation, but any parish priest will tell you that both the number of ‘bums on pews’ and the amount they donate are disappointing.
At the regional level, income and expenditure vary considerably.
In 1989, for example, the diocese of Southwark had a budget of £7 million, while Durham's was under £3 million.
Diocesan resources are in part historically determined — the older dioceses like Lincoln, Canterbury and Winchester enjoying rather more riches than their modern counterparts — but all derive a considerable part of their revenue from allocated parochial contributions.
Some of those contributions are channelled back to the Church Commissioners for distribution.
In 1989 £60 million worth of parish or diocesan contributions was ploughed back into stipends.
The Church Commissioners also handle the stipends of the diocesan and suffragan bishops, as well as stipends for the deans/provosts and two residentiary canons at all but two of the cathedrals.
One other body deserves mention, though it is very small fry in the financial stakes.
The Central Board of Finance (CBF), acting on behalf of General Synod, levies contributions from the dioceses to pay for the theological colleges.
In 1989 some half of the £8.8 million thus raised went on training future clergy, the rest on a variety of projects including the running of General Synod itself.
It would hardly be surprising if so many organisations, each with a finger in a large but nonetheless limited pie, sometimes disagreed on how the money should be spent.
However, it is the separation of powers which vests the assets in the Church Commissioners and the policy-making function in General Synod that seems to cause most difficulty.
In practice, the division may be honoured more in the breach than the observance; the first Church Commissioner (who is broadly responsible for its financial as distinct from political or pastoral duties) is also chairman of the CBF.
Sir Douglas Lovelock supervises capital assets amounting to roughly £3 billion in his role as first Commissioner and a further £630 million in his capacity as chairman of the CBF.
Lovelock sees this dual function as a vital bridge, but others argue that it puts him in an invidious and altogether too powerful position.
One former employee at Church House recalls occasions when he has intervened in staffing decisions more properly the sphere of General Synod on the basis that it is he who writes the cheques.
A second cause of friction is the precise nature of the Commissioners' investment policy.
A pending court case will determine whether ‘financial responsibilities must remain of primary importance’ as the Commissioners argue, or whether, as the Bishop of Oxford believes, assets should be invested in a way that more actively promotes Christian values.
In fact, the tensions between the Church Commissioners and General Synod have as much to do with the Commissioners' function as mediators between Church and State.
A number of clergy have expressed high regard for their contribution to the provision of homes, stipends and index-linked pensions.
What most disturbs General Synod, it seems, is that, despite being the voice of the Church, it has no power to create ecclesiastical law without endorsement from Parliament.
Yet it is the second Church Commissioner, Michael Allison MP, to whom falls the task of representing the Church in the Commons.
Thus, tired of being the poor and comparatively impotent relation, General Synod is now chafing at the bit.
The power structure and finances of the Church go some way towards explaining the management of its buildings.
So, inevitably, does the fact that its enormous resources are matched by enormous liabilities.
In 1989 the Church Commissioners provided block grants worth £2.1 million towards the upkeep of the cathedrals.
However, as Lovelock points out: ‘Every cathedral in the country needs £10 million spent on it to stop it falling down.’
Some have been able to introduce charges for particular tourist attractions, but a large number still depend on the good will of visitors, too many of whom studiously ignore the collection box.
The Christian belief that a house of God should be open to everyone precludes the Church from cashing in on some of its most beautiful assets.
Though the Commissioners also act as custodian trustees of the churches and parsonages, their management is largely a matter for the dioceses.
Martin Cawte, secretary of the Southwark diocese, explains that centralisation of stipendiary obligations has taken place in conjunction with devolution of more day-to-day duties.
Thus the diocese of Southwark contributes up to £200,000 a year towards the 314 churches and a further £1 million on providing a roof for its 500 clergy.
Responsibility for the maintenance of parish property, such as church halls and curates' homes, lies with the most local level of all, the Parish Church Council.
Many a PCC is also actively engaged in raising funds for the preservation and development of its church, an activity to which Dr George Carey testifies in his book The Church in the Market Place .
Over and above such day-to-day management, the Church of England has made substantial efforts in recent years to rationalise its portfolio of buildings.
With the assistance of the Church Commissioners, the future of some 1,261 redundant churches has been sorted out; only a quarter suffered demolition.
The money raised from the sale of such churches and sites has contributed to 391 new church buildings and, currently, the Church has nearly 16,400 churches in regular use.
The 10,300 parish priests whose job it is to man these churches are thus a rather scant resource.
Many are forced to double or triple parts, as if in a Brian Rix farce.
Things don't look likely to improve, since recruits are hardly piling up at the door.
Last academic year 778 full-time students were in training for the ministry — it's a flow that will maintain present manning levels, but no more.
Of course, a good half of the population is still barred from anything but the most humble roles.
The ordination of women would certainly alleviate shortages of staff.
However, nothing so remotely secular will enter into the forthcoming discussion, for as the Bishop of Durham colourfully observes, it all depends on whether you see God as a ‘male thug’ and the Church as a male authority structure.
If quantity is a problem so, arguably, is quality.
Candidates under 25 are supposed to have a minimum of 5 O levels and 2 A levels; for those aged 25 and over the university of life is enough.
In practice, 65% of approved candidates are graduates.
The remainder train for three years at theological college.
Mention this to most clergymen and they will rightly say that spiritual development is far more important than a degree.
Pointing to the isolation and emotional stresses of the parish priest, they will add something along the lines that all do a valiant job in the face of overwhelming odds.
In many instances, no doubt, it's true, but Canon Ian Hardaker, clergy appointments adviser, is refreshingly honest about the need to improve the intellectual calibre of the would- be clergy.
Hardaker certainly isn't suggesting that academic qualifications should supersede spiritual criteria, but he insists that intellect and leadership are also important attributes in serving God properly.
It's a view that many of the younger, university-educated clergy seem to share.
Of course no bright young thing who wants to make a quick buck would consider going into the ministry.
Nevertheless, considerations such as‘career development’ find their way into the Church as elsewhere.
Here too there are problems, often of historical provenance.
Nowadays no clergyman is entitled to a living of the sort which used to make or break his marital prospects in Jane Austen novels, but incumbents still enjoy tenure.
Some can, and do, choose to stay put for many years, risking staleness and obstructing the development of other staff.
The ‘parson's freehold’ has much to justify it.
In the days when a powerful bishop or squire might take exception to his views, the humble parson clearly needed protection.
These days however, many people believe that it might be better to work on contracts, as team ministers and chaplains do.
In short, the argument goes, with the right sort of ecclesiastical employment legislation, the freehold should be abolished.
But even if the Church takes this controversial step, there remains the fact that it has few structures for evaluating its chief resource.
As Philip Mauer, secretary general of General Synod, remarks, ‘The personnel systems within the church are rudimentary.’
There is ‘no coherent set of personnel procedures, for lay employees or for ministers, whereby they can see a career path with training and proper systems of appraisal.’
A number of bishops have instituted some form of voluntary assessment, the Bishop of Durham being one.
But, Jenkins warns, when neither promotion or a pay increase is on the agenda, annual appraisals may be wrong.
It is also, as he points out, rather hard to measure the productivity of a minister.
A head count of the congregation has obvious flaws.
Nonetheless, when one's spiritual master remains silent, it can be comforting to have a pat on the back from an authorised agent.
One passionate advocate of appraisals is Canon Hardaker, whose lucid guidelines should be compulsory reading for many a line manager.
Hardaker maintains that a distinction must be preserved between work and the inner life.
To address the latter, he suggests a spiritual friend freely chosen and consulted in confidence.
By contrast, appraisal of a minister's work should be formally conducted and recorded.
The subject of the appraisal should be given time to prepare and the opportunity to corroborate the report.
In other words, Hardaker wants to adopt the best of those personnel systems employed by the secular world.
Changes are afoot in the Church but, as with any big organisation, they are slow.
Moreover, its unique mixture of democracy and authority can impede progress, for no primate of all England can simply pronounce ex cathedra to his flock.
Over the last 20 years the Church has begun to appraise itself.
The Christian Organisations Research and Advisory Trust (CORAT) was established in 1967.
As chairman Michael Graham-Jones explains, its purposes were three-fold; to consult with internal and external advisers; to research appropriate management principles; and to run management courses.
CORAT still administers two summer schools, though its other functions have diminished.
But in its time it represented a real advance.
Three years ago the Church also called upon adult education lecturer Dr Norman Todd to run a series of induction courses for bishops.
Todd addresses such things as time management.
Another stalwart is Professor Charles Handy, who commands much respect in secular circles.
However, John Barton, an archdeacon in the Birmingham diocese, would like to see such work go further.
‘Any organisation ought to subject itself to the sort of management consultancy which will allow it to define its objectives,’ he believes.
But, with a few honourable exceptions, the Church has relied upon ‘home-grown consultants.’
The Church of England is by no means about to collapse.
But, though it may have perfected the art of crisis management through long necessity, it will have to face some additional strains in the next few years.
The recession has hit the Church Commissioners as badly as everyone else.
The ordination of women and treatment of homosexual clergy — both sensitive issues — may well cause rifts.
There is also the continuing challenge of secularism.
The ‘Decade of Evangelism’ may do something to refresh the parts other influences can't reach, but even this new drive has critics among those who don't want the Church to become a ‘holy disco.’
In recent years, as the Bishop of Durham admits, ‘there's been the beginning of a realisation that the legal and structural diagrams [of the Church]are not the same as the financial diagrams’.
All need to be sorted out.
In the end, however, to quote the Right Reverend Richard Harries, Bishop of Oxford, ‘I don't think you can treat the Church as a business.’
He is, of course, right.
Though formerly something of a manufacturer, God is clearly rather more than a management guru.
The Right Rev. David Jenkins, Bishop of Durham (right): the Church must husband its talents to reap a rich spiritual crop
For the Right Rev. Richard Harries, Bishop of Oxford (above), the Church of England is not a business and should never be treated as such.
Company skills are out of place in a spiritual environment
THE BRIGHTEST SPARK In this profile by Malcolm Brown, Sir Eric Ash, Rector of London's Imperial College, laments the anti-intellectualism pervasive in UK society and the effect this has on the funding of university education
Twenty years ago more than three quarters of the College's income came in the form of a government grant.
Today that figure is nearer 42%, the rest obtained competitively from research grants or from student fees
Sit next to Sir Eric Ash at dinner these days and, sooner or later, the conversation will almost certainly turn to ‘graceful degradation’.
It is not quite as racy as it sounds.
Ash, Rector of the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, is an engineer and ‘graceful degradation’ is the term engineers use to describe the slow, bit-by-bit, collapse of a system.
In a telephone network, for example, if one key element breaks down and the whole system immediately crashes you have a ‘catastrophic failure’, but if, instead, there is simply a progressive deterioration leading, after a period, to the same ultimate end, silence, then you are experiencing ‘graceful degradation’.
Sir Eric thinks the British university system, after years of financial squeeze, is suffering ‘graceful degradation’.
Imperial College itself is still flourishing — in the last Universities funding Council assessment of research, 12 of its 16 departments got the top ‘5’ rating, equal to Oxford and only slightly behind Cambridge — but, even there, there are small, disturbing signs that all is not well.
Take the library.
‘We can't afford to have all the scientific journals in our library that we had 10 or even five years ago,’ says Sir Eric.
Now that is not a tragedy.
If a researcher really wants an unstocked journal there are always ways of getting hold of a copy.
But that completely misses the point about the way the academic mind works.
Academics are inveterate browsers.
They may pick up ideas almost at random from skimming journals, ideas that may spark new trains of thought or fruitful new cross-connections.
If the journals are not there, that erratic, but often valuable, process cannot even start.
Sir Eric is not expecting the sky to fall in over his campus, but in a sense that is the problem — graceful degradation is just a mite too graceful.
What is needed, perhaps, is a bit of disgraceful degradation of the sort that nobody can ignore.
Sir Eric Ash was appointed Rector of Imperial in 1985, almost exactly 40 years after he first stepped through its doors as a 17-year-old undergraduate.
He had been born and spent the first 10 years of his life in pre-war Germany where his father, a German-Jewish lawyer, was head of the legal department of electrical giant AEG (now part of Telefunken).
The family lived a prosperous middleclass life in Berlin and Ash senior, says Sir Eric, was advised by colleagues ‘not to worry about this silly man Hitler’.
Luckily he did worry and, by 1938, had decided to move the family to England.
Young Eric, who was modestly competent in English but certainly not fluent, was packed off first to a boarding school then to University College School, Hampstead.
He breezed through the ‘school cert’(which he had to take in UCS's cellars because of the air raids) got a First and a doctorate at Imperial then went on to research posts here and in America.
Although he has spent most of his working life in academia he did have an eight- year stint, from 1963, in industrial research.
Industry is generous to Imperial — it endows chairs, sponsors students and gives the college millions of pounds of research contracts every year — but, despite that, Ash is still very critical of it.
He thinks that, unlike its competitors, British industry has never quite understood the nature, or the importance, of research and development.
Quite simply, it doesn't recruit enough top R&D talent for its own labs.
‘There isn't the depth of strength which you find in the best labs in the States or in Japan.
For many years I consulted for the American GE in Schenectady and the thing that struck me there was the way that when they wanted to attack a particular area they could mount an army of people on it, all of whom were pretty good.’
It is very difficult to understand the root causes of our failure to take industrial R&D seriously, but Sir Eric thinks that it is at least in part simply a reflection of a more pervasive anti-intellectualism which seems to run through British society.
There is a distrust of the intelligentsia and of theoretical learning.
Britain, says Ash, must be one of the few countries where being ‘too clever by half’ is regarded as a stinging insult.
‘On the whole intellectual sparks are not admired all that much.
People tend to admire common sense and strong business instincts rather than going for those who can out- think the competition.’
We are paying for it now, says Sir Eric.
The most notorious example is the shipbuilding industry which did not employ any graduates at all until about 1970.
‘By the time they discovered that maybe graduates were quite useful people the Japanese had stolen the industry.’
High-tech companies have been a bit better, but even there, says Sir Eric, there is a serious question as to whether they have recruited anything like enough graduates.
If you look at the failures in UK high technology, then it is arguable that the British companies concerned simply did not have enough able scientists and engineers available to address the problems, compared with their competitors.
He does not deny that some scientists and engineers in British industry are doing world-class research — the signal and image processing work at British Telecom's labs is an example, says Sir Eric — but he would argue that there are no world-class labs as such in the UK, nowhere that has attained the kind of critical mass in R&D that Bell Labs has in the US or Hitachi and NEC in Japan.
When Sir Eric was appointed Rector in 1985 everyone was congratulating themselves that the financial squeeze on the universities, which had lasted 15 years, was now at an end and that stable funding was just around the corner.
They were wrong of course.
Even now there is still no end in sight.
‘I think I could take a barrister's brief for arguing that up to, say, 1985 the squeeze was a necessary remedy for the rather free expansion which had taken place in the 1960s, and early 1970s,’ says Sir Eric, ‘but I don't believe I could even theoretically argue that it has been justifiable since then.
I think that since then it has been damaging.’
But, of course, because Imperial is scientifically at a zenith people are reluctant to see that there can really be anything wrong.
‘I would not wish to make the argument that we're sinking scientifically,’ says Sir Eric, ‘but there are signs that the squeeze has gone too far and that any further squeeze — and all the evidence suggests there is another bit of squeeze in store for us this coming year — will do real damage which will not be easy to recover from.’
He has in mind things like another increase in the student/staff ratio.
A decade ago, Imperial had a ratio of the order of 7:1.
That has now risen to around 11:1 and if the squeeze goes on could go even higher.
The irony, of course, is that the figures mean very different things to academics and to politicians.
To the politicians the increase in the ratio means they are getting better value for money, greater efficiency — each student educated is costing fewer taxpayers' pounds.
Academics on the other hand will argue that beyond a certain point (and there is no agreement exactly where it lies) an increased student/staff ratio is bound to mean a dilution in the quality of the product.
Sir Eric believes that very few people outside the universities really understand the nature of the squeeze.
Twenty years ago more than three quarters of Imperial's total income came directly from government in the form of a grant.
Today it is around 42% while the rest is obtained competitively from research grants and contracts or from student fees.
‘That sounds like good news,’ says Sir Eric.
‘It almost sounds as if we're 58% in charge of what we're doing.
The trouble is that that 58% is largely money in-and-money-out.’
What he means is that although in one sense the competitively won money is very desirable — it gives a terrific boost to Imperial's research and, because many of the contracts are from industry, keeps the university closely in touch with the real world — it actually contributes next of nothing to the core costs of the college, of which, of course, academic salaries are the largest single component.
‘So when it comes to paying the academic and administrative core staff of the college, when it comes to heating and lighting the buildings, ensuring their safety, maintaining the basic fabric of the place, it is the Universities Funding Council block grant which is the only money available to cover these costs.’
The most dramatic effect of the squeeze, says Sir Eric, is seen in academic salaries, He produces figures which show that while dons' salaries have retained their real value over the last 15 years or so — that is to say, they have kept pace with the Retail Price index — almost every other non-manual worker in the UK has done significantly better.
Academics are about 36% behind the average (non-manual) index.
The main problem that Ash foresees is among the younger academic staff.
He could not argue, looking at Imperial, that there has been a major brain drain of senior staff.
But it is quite different in almost any university if one looks at the immediate post- doctoral level.
There is now overwhelming evidence that the UK is actually losing most of the best of these researchers.
Over the years, says Ash, he has worked with a great number of PhD students, all of them very able, some outstandingly so.
Almost every one of those in the second category has left the country.
The trouble is that taken overall the drop in academic competence has not been dramatic.
It is simply another instance of ‘graceful degradation’.
‘It does not hit the headlines; it does not readily rise to the top of any politician's list of immediate concerns,’ says Sir Eric.
‘Yet in the long run — and we have already had a pretty long run — the results are potentially devastating.’
Malcolm Brown is a freelance writer 
1928 Born in Germany.
Son of German-Jewish lawyer
1938 Moves to England
1945 Engineering undergraduate at Imperial College, London
1952–54 Research fellow, Stanford University, California
1954–55 Research assistant, Queen Mary's College, London
1955–63 Research engineer, Standard Telecommunications
1963–65 Senior lecturer, University College, London (UCL)
1965–67 Reader, UCL
1967–80 Professor of Electrical Engineering, UCL
1980–85 Head of Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, UCL
1985 Rector, Imperial College
A CHANGE IN STORE Littlewoods is one of the high street survivors, but its mail order catalogues are on the market.
Hashi Syedain checks out the future of the whole group
Index which was started by Littlewoods, as a rival to the immensely successful Argos stores, is moving into profit ahead of time
The late 80's have seen investment in new systems — for home shopping £35 million in the past five years on computers
Despite all the changes it still bears many of the hallmarks of a family-owned company.
Its magazine is full of long-service awards
The splendid views over Liverpool Bay are the one redeeming feature of the JM Centre, Headquarters of the Littlewoods Organisation, this 14-storey concrete block proclaims the company's 60s heyday.
But a lot 's been happening at Littlewoods lately.
A decade ago its dowdy department stores had more or less been written off in the frantic race to carve up the high street.
The Littlewoods formula, built so successfully by Liverpool legend Sir John Moores, seemed hopelessly outdated — nothing more than boring clothes in boring stores.
Ten years on, in the sober light of the 1990s, things are looking very different.
The retail revolutionaries have burnt themselves out and one by one dropped exhausted by the wayside.
Littlewoods, meanwhile has been gathering its forces and is poised for a comeback.
The company's approach, says chief executive Desmond Pitcher, has been vindicated at last; boring is in fashion again and the common sense of great British public has prevailed over tinsel and razzmatazz.
Results for 1990, unlike so many other retailers', are expected to be strong, with profits up on the '89 figure of £64 million.
And for once this year, Littlewoods' results will be most keenly awaited not just by its rivals but by the financial community at large.
The 32 members of the Moores family who still own 100% of Littlewoods, have let it be known that the sale has begun; the biggest part of the Littlewoods Organisation — mail order catalogues — is on the market, with a reputed price tag in excess (probably well in excess) of £350 million.
The announcement came as no great surprise; except in as much as it had been thought the family might hold back in the lifetime of Sir John.
The great man himself is now 95 and too frail for any involvement.
Three family members sit on the board as non-executive directors.
But none of them, it is widely acknowledged, has the talent, flair or business acumen of ‘Mister’ John who is variously described by senior Littlewoods executives as ‘a genius’, ‘unique’and ‘the most significant pre-War businessman still alive.’
The empire he built, now Britain's largest private company, covers three broad areas — home shopping, high street retailing and, of course, the football pools.
In addition there is a small credit and information branch, CDMS, and a printing operation which turns out the eight million pools coupons played each week by aspiring millionaires-to-be.
Officially the reasons for selling home shopping is to focus the group on the pools and the high street, while releasing capital to fund expansion.
No doubt, however, the Moores family are also considering their own pockets.
Barred from selling shares to outsiders, some of the younger generation of Moores are keen to realise their enormous paper wealth.
Strategically, home shopping is the obvious part to sell.
Agency catalogues of the Littlewoods type, with housewives selling to family and friends, are a stagnant if not shrinking market.
Home shopping as a whole accounts for only 3% of retail spending.
And unlike the US and some of Europe, the UK mail order business has never been able to break away from its traditional downmarket image.
When John Moores set up the first Littlewoods catalogue in 1932, housewives' shopping clubs were all the rage.
A group of women would put money into a weekly kitty and then take turns to spend it.
With a catalogue, however, you could buy immediately and pay in instalments, a form of credit built into the price.
It was also very convenient, in the days before widespread car ownership.
Now that credit and mobility are almost universally available, catalogues have lost much of their appeal.
Indeed the only area showing real potential is direct sales in niche markets — the overweight for example, who may be disinclined to shop in public .
Or the Next Directory, a fancy, hardback, charged for catalogue, owned by Next and aimed at young professional women.
But Littlewoods is in the mass market.
It has six catalogues, each historically in a different market or geographical position.
In recent years they have been streamlined to the point where they are totally identical, except for the name and the cover.
Curiously, explains Bill Huntley, head of home shopping, the brands are still differentiated by the users.
These users, unsurprisingly, are mostly housewives.
Huntley, a burly 51-yearold, has created a constant reminder of who they are and what they want in the form of glossy profiles, complete with pictures, inserted beneath a glass plate on the leather topped table in his office.
‘Our typical agent is 35, married, not working, has an income of £10,500, two kids and a Ford Escort,’ he explains.
In recent years she has often taken to using the catalogue just for herself, looking on the agency commission as a personal discount.
Indeed half of Littlewoods' 2.5 million agents have adopted this route and the average number of customers per agent has fallen from between six and 10 to just over two.
This is bad news for Littlewoods since turnover among agents tends to be high and recruiting new ones costs the same (about 50) irrespective of the amount of business they bring.
‘We are concerned,’ says Huntley, ‘But there's no point trying to fight it.
That's just the way it is,’ he adds.
Littlewoods, therefore, has concentrated on cutting costs.
The last five years have seen heavy investment in a fully integrated computer system that allows it to deal with a customer's total needs in one phone call — ordering, cancelling and general enquiries.
It has also beefed up debt collection by the simple expedient of using the phone instead of relying on writing to people for all its credit control.
This combination of measures has pulled home shopping up from its early '80s doldrums: '89 turnover was £956 million and pre-interest profits a reasonably respectable £54.4 million.
On those figures, reckons Joan D'Olier, retail analyst at County Natwest, the business must be on the market at £350-£450 million.
Sears is the obvious potential buyer, with 15% of the mail order market.
Littlewoods' 25% would give it the size to be able to rival Great Universal Stores, the clear market leader on 40%.
If Sears is not interested, speculates D'Olier, Littlewoods may float the division.
With home shopping out of the way, Pitcher will be able to concentrate on the football pools and high street retailing.
The pools is how Littlewoods first began back in 1923 when John Moores, a working class lad from Manchester, made his first million with a winning blend of football and gambling.
Seventy years later, the magic mix of high rewards, low outlay and supposed skill in judging football results, continues unchanged; except, of course, that punters can now win £1.5 million instead of the modest £2 12s that comprised the first ever dividend.
But despite being a household name, pools is the most secretive part of Littlewoods' business.
What is known is that Littlewoods has a virtual monopoly (over 75%) of the £750 million pools market.
The business is effectively recession proof, if anything it probably does better when times are hard.
In the year to July 1990, Littlewoods paid out some £70 million in prize money (15% up on 1989) and according to finance director Barry Dale, brought in £17 million profit.
What's more, the law is on Littlewoods' side in keeping its dominant position.
Since companies are allowed to pay out dividends only from that week's stakes, market share is the sole key to the magic lure of vast prize money.
A distant second to the Littlewoods giant is Vernons pools which can offer punters a mere half million.
However, now in the hands of Cyril Stein's Ladbroke group, Vernons has been making bullish noises about capturing extra market share.
Pitcher seems unperturbed.
‘They've done little different except increase advertising,’ he suggests dismissively.
But it's the high street where Littlewoods is staking its future, and here its position is much less secure.
‘We face formidable competition in a market overshopped with chain stores,’ says Pitcher.
In addition to this, Littlewoods's latest high street venture, the Index catalogue stores, are in markets sensitive to recession and high mortgage rates.
The 96 new shops, are, in Pitcher's words, ‘in the heartland of discretionary spending on presents and household requirements.’
Nevertheless, 1989 was unexpectedly strong on the high street.
Index which was started in 1986 as a rival to the immensely successful Argos stores, is moving into profit ahead of time.
These modest triumphs are the result of eight years of hard work by Pitcher and his team.
When he joined Littlewoods in 1983 the company was just emerging from a disastrous turn in fortunes that had seen profits plummet from £49 million in 1978 to £11.5 million two years later.
Indeed, the situation was so bleak in 1980 that Sir John came out of retirement to replace his second son Peter, who had taken control of the family firm three years before.
When Sir John let go for the second time at the age of 86 in 1982, he put Littlewoods in the hands of the first non-family chairman.
That man was John Clement, previously from dairy and poultry group Unigate.
A year later Pitcher was recruited as chief executive.
With his background in high technology (Plessey Telecoms and Sperry) and no experience of retailing, Pitcher, now 56, was not an obvious choice.
But in keeping with the Littlewoods culture, he was a local man, Liverpool-born and working there for much of his life.
‘We had a lot to catch up,’ he says of his early years at Littlewoods.
‘We had ineffective systems and a lack of clarity in our offer.’
The various branches confirm this analysis.
Huntley speaks of lax credit policies and antiquated debt collection.
Prodip Guha, group marketing director and deputy chairman of stores points to random buying policies that left the stores without a clear direction.
And finance director, Barry Dale proclaims simply, ‘When I arrived [in 1987]there were no management accounts that we would recognise today.’
The late '80s have seen, therefore, considerable investment in management systems.
Home shopping alone has spent £35 million over the past five years putting in computer systems.
And on the stores side, claims Pitcher, ‘We're probably the only retailer with manufacturing standard stock systems.’
Apart from the investment in systems, 1984 saw the start of a steady refurbishment programme to update and revive the 116 chain stores, which were so run down, they looked in Pitcher's words like ‘a missing tooth on the high street.’
A new pastel coloured logo appeared and Inside Story, a household department was created in 1985.
Index followed a year later, originally launched inside the stores, but eventually intended to be fully independent.
(Currently just over half the 96 Index stores are free standing.)
More thought has also been given to the products on offer.
Marketing director Guha has put tighter control on buyers to ensure a consistency of approach.
‘I believe the only way we can go forward is to be value for money.
Not glamorous but stable, sound and reputable.’
In this, he believes, Littlewoods has no direct competition when it comes to clothes.
‘It's partly BHS, partly M&S and partly C&A.
But we have no excessive fashion content.
What we do have is a high design content.
I don't understand why people don't see the difference — good design won't go out of fashion.’
Fashion and design aside, it's clear that Littlewoods intends to retain its traditional constituency among the lower socio-economic groups.
As Guha points out, there is none of this management ego trip stuff of going upmarket so that people compliment you on your Littlewoods tie when you go to the golf club.
‘I don't want that,’ he says vehemently, the YSL on his shirt pocket discreetly visible.
Guha is a curious mix of a marketing man.
He has the fast talking sales pitch and easy familiarity common to people of his profession, coupled with a calmer side, fond of quoting wise sayings from his native India and disdainful of marketing favourites like ‘adding value’ with fancy packaging or ‘creating new markets.’
‘Businessmen can't innovate,’ he says sagely, ‘they can only harness what's latent in customers.’
Following on from this logic, Guha has his most ambitious plans in the area of food.
He wants to take the M&S formula one step further ‘by offering the customer more flexibility’.
This has meant things like pick'n mix fruit — six items for a fixed price whatever the combination; or self-service salad bars — fill a tub with your own selection for 99p.
The next step will be ready meals — Chinese, pastas and curries in single portions that will do away with the need for cooking.
Unlike M&S says Guha, ‘We will do it cheap by cutting the frills.
Minimal packaging helps everyone, including the environment.’
With talk of a series of stand alone shops it's hard to believe that the idea isn't to rival Marks.
It wouldn't be the first time Littlewoods had copied a successful high street idea.
The Index catalogue, Guha admits, bears more than a coincidental resemblance to that of rival Argos.
‘We have learnt from Argos.
I believe we're better because if you copy something you can do it better,’ he says confidently.
Then he adds an Indian saying, ‘The ordinary man learns from his experiences, the wise man learns from the experience of others.’
Despite all the changes Littlewoods still bears the hallmarks of a family-owned company.
It's the sort of place where people go for a job for life.
The company magazine is full of details of employees' long service awards (next to the details of how to enter the annual ‘Miss Littlewoods' contest).
Loyalty is of course a good thing.
And Littlewoods must be commended for the way it looks after its staff and for the role it has played as a responsible Liverpool employer.
But the danger is that things get too cosy.
Changes are slow.
Growth tends to be organic and gradual because of the problems of raising finance.
‘Life might be more exciting, if we could create paper’, says finance director Dale, ‘but look at our results.
We're now in the strongest financial position the company has ever been in.’
And he points out, being private has made it easier to invest without worrying about the effect of reduced profits on the city.
‘Our relative losses have been higher than would have been accepted in a listed plc,’ he says.
‘But that's the listed companies' loss.’
That may be so.
But it's just as easy to put another slant on it.
Last year's results were OK, but nothing spectacular.
And let's face it, it's hardly been a lightning turnaround.
Guha surely had it right when he likened Littlewoods to a giant tanker that takes ages to change direction.
This isn't surprising.
Littlewoods has been through the classic problems of succession for a company built by a single man.
Even once a professional, nonfamily management had been put in place, one gets the feeling they were never really given free reign.
(They would never admit it, of course.
All Pitcher will say is ‘the shareholders are very supportive’.)
On top of this family politics have also intervened — and with 32 members there is plenty of scope for, shall we say, differences of opinion among the Moores.
John Clement is a case in point.
A year ago when he resigned as chairman, it was widely held that he had been pushed and that Peter Moores was about to mount another bid for the post himself.
Given his previous record at the helm, the rest of the family was none too keen.
In the event Leonard van Geest — already a non-executive director — was appointed as caretaker chairman.
It is obviously still a sticky subject.
A year down the line Pitcher, who after all is chief executive, feels unable to confirm if van Geest is officially permanent or not.
Putting all these problems aside, the real question about Littlewoods now is whether the sale of home shopping means the rest of the group will soon come to market.
The company's line is no.
Pitcher pooh-poohs the notion of a stock market listing at a time when so many entrepreneurs are taking their companies private once more.
For the time being it's a convenient argument and there's no point in pressing him further.
After all, as he's quick to point out, ‘It's all a matter for the shareholders to decide.’
Desmond Pitcher (left), Littlewoods chief executive felt that, in 1984, the stores were ‘like a missing tooth in the high street’
Prodip Guha (left), marketing director, is a curious mix.
He has the fast talking sales pitch, but is also fond of quoting wise Indian sayings
Bill Huntley (right), head of home shopping believes his typical agent ‘is 35, married not working, has two kids and a Ford Escort’
Barry Dale (left) the finance director says Littlewoods is ‘now in the strongest financial position’ it has ever been in
Private Enterprise THE UNORTHODOX GREEK Why does a European middle manager choose to set up in business in Britain?
Barry Foster
Major defence contractors do not like minor jobs.
Thus a small company with sound quality, good engineers and extremely low overheads could well win such contracts
The military market puts no stop on growth since Euravia's projects are labelled as cost-saving
Britain has frequently offered outsiders a refuge from political persecution.
It has sometimes held out the promise of release from grinding poverty; or, for the moderately well-off, the prospect of a fairly agreeable way of life.
But not many people this century, even during the boom of a few years ago (when Tory ministers still bragged about the ‘sea change’ that had supposedly taken place in the British economy), have ever seriously thought of the UK as a ‘land of opportunity’.
Such expressions of wide-eyed optimism were always associated with the New World, or the new nations of the Commonwealth, hardly ever with the Old Country.
There has long been, of course, a thin trickle of foreigners who, having landed on these shores without any pressing necessity, contrived to find fame, fortune or both: maybe as writers or singers, or cooks or clowns, or (just occasionally) as entrepreneurs.
But a European middle manager in his middle 30s, with a safe job in the engineering sector in his own country, and on the fast track for promotion, would generally have been well advised to stay at home.
For such a one to throw up his job, sell his house and come to Britain with little more than the proceeds of sale in his pocket, in order to start his own business from scratch in an unfamiliar environment, would seem, the height of folly.
Yet up in the Pennines, in the little former mill town of Earby on the Yorkshire- Lancashire border, there is physical evidence that such imprudent behaviour can be rewarded.
It is not, to be sure, hugely impressive to look at: a modest, single-storey, office- cum-workshop tucked away in a side street.
Nor have its occupants been there very long.
A few years back the building was used as a warehouse for chemicals, before that it was a BMW garage.
It currently houses a defence contractor, Euravia Engineering & Supply, whose main line of activity is servicing and providing parts for military jet engines.
While not large, the business is a healthy performer: in the 12 months to February 1990 it turned over £3.8 million and made £158,000 after tax.
But the remarkable thing is that three years ago Euravia didn't exist at all— except in the mind of its founder, Denis Mendoros, who had only lately arrived from his native Greece.
There was nothing capricious about Mendoros' choice of Britain as the place to set up shop.
For one thing language was no problem.
(Not for him, anyway; his accent can cause mild difficulty for others.)
He had spent his early years in a largely English-speaking community at Port Sudan where his father was a shipping agent (hence the acquired Dennis, his real name is derived from Dionysus).
He had also studied in Britain and married a British girl, although they have recently been divorced.
Far more pertinent was the fact that Mendoros thought he could see a gap in a market about which he knew a great deal, and which he reckoned could best be filled from the UK.
So he simply resigned his job, sold up and bought air tickets for all the family.
For most of the previous decade Mendoros had been employed by Hellenic Aerospace Industry, a partnership between the Greek state and three US companies: Lockheed the airframe builder, General Electric the engine manufacturer, and Westinghouse which knew all about instrumentation and controls.
The terms of the agreement cannily provided that the American groups should each equip and run a manufacturing-cum-service facility — all on one site — but that the whole show would eventually pass to the Greek government.
Mendoros joined in the early days, taken on as a quality engineer by GE acting on behalf of HAI.
He must have been a natural for the job, being one of the very few Greeks with an appropriate qualification.
He already had an engineer's licence, the product of nearly three years at the AST (Air Services Training) school of aeronautical engineering near Perth.
While in Scotland he also learned to fly, paying for the lessons himself by repairing the cars belonging to richer Arab students at weekends.
Mendoros's enthusiasm for aviation dates, he says, from his childhood in the Sudan, when he used to get taken up in the helicopters servicing Italian-operated drilling rigs.
His first ambition was to be a pilot or flight engineer.
After high school in Greece, to which the family returned when Mendoros was in his teens, he looked round for the best place to pursue his obsession — which is what brought him to Perth.
Back home in Greece there was national service to be done, in the air force naturally.
But by this time he realised that the best opportunities came to those who kept their feet on the ground — not their heads in the clouds.
He also began to think seriously about business.
Commissioned as an administrative officer, he eventually became adjutant to the commander of the tactical air force, based at Larisa in central Greece, and made a point of being around whenever any representatives of civil suppliers appeared at headquarters to make presentations.
‘I came to realise the hugeness of the market,’ he recalls.
‘I could see that this was where my future lay.’
Once out of uniform and into HAI, Mendoros made rapid progress, mainly up the quality assurance ladder.
He was still, he says, ‘acquiring knowledge very, very fast’.
Because HAI was in its infancy, in every job he filled during the first few years he had an American opposite number, sometimes with 30 years' experience of the industry.
‘Those counterparts could pass on not only technical advice but also management skills, and an understanding of the workings of the international market.’
The tuition he received gave Mendoros a profound respect for GE, but at the same time he learned something about the limitations of giant companies.
After five years, and aged about 30, he was appointed programme manager for all foreign engine maintenance contracts.
Although HAI was capable of servicing every aircraft owned by the Greek government, it was also greedy for export business.
The organisation has assembled civil aircraft parts for British Aerospace, for example.
It has also won engine maintenance contracts from the Nato central procurement office, from the US Air Force in Europe and from the UK Ministry of Defence — for the GE-engined Phantom — among others.
As programme manager, Mendoros was responsible for establishing contacts, negotiating requirements and ensuring that contractual obligations were met.
At this stage he no longer had any Americans holding his hand.
And during his four years on the job he had the satisfaction of seeing all three major contracts renewed in competitive tender.
He was now in line for promotion to some of the most senior positions in the — admittedly small — Greek aerospace industry.
But it was when he was programme manager that he became aware of the market opportunity that led to his abrupt change of course.
The fact was, Mendoros explains, that while the bigger defence contractors often gave their government customers excellent service, they were not at all keen on performing minor jobs, or good at responding to sudden demands.
They had spent heavily on facilities and they wanted a nice, even flow of work.
‘The big companies had high overhead expenses.
They didn't want small contracts — they were headaches.’
But the gap was wider than that.
Many of the aircraft in service with the world's armed forces are elderly designs, and powered by ‘mature’ engines with maybe another five or seven years of useful life.
‘The big companies were not going to invest in equipment for maintaining these engines,’ argues Mendoros.
‘The defence ministries had to bend their ears to get the work done…
I was convinced that a small company with sound quality credentials and low overhead expenses, and with a team of highly skilled and capable engineers, could get a good portion of these smaller contracts.’
There were several reasons why he believed that Britain was where such an enterprise should be.
The country possessed a substantial defence industry — including, in Rolls Royce, the biggest aero-engine manufacturer in Europe.
As a by-product of this, UK quality standards in aero-engineering were internationally accepted.
In addition, British membership of Nato and of the Commonwealth held out the possibility of access to a multiplicity of markets.
Lastly, in January 1988, when Mendoros arrived in Britain — having turned down the carrot of promotion — the economy was booming.
the same cannot be said today but at least the other conditions still apply.
Mendoros went to work straight away.
The first task was to open communications with customers — frequently people he had previously known in the defence ministries and air forces.
Starting from point zero, and with no capital to speak of, all he could afford to offer them were spares.
He became the local agent of US manufacturers and engine parts stockists, and at one time represented as many as 15 companies.
From the same ministry contracts he was able to elicit official references — on departmental letter-heading and addressed ‘to whom it may concern’— to bolster his standing with the suppliers and with other customers.
‘Establishing a level of confidence is quite important when you are trying to start a new business’— especially in a sector like aerospace.
Spare parts, says Mendoros, ‘helped me back into the market’.
They are still a significant constituent of Euravia's business.
Apart from their contribution to cash flow and profits, spares can be useful providers of market intelligence; a demand for particular items may say a lot about a customer's problems.
At the outset the gross margin on spares must have been slender indeed, since Mendoros aimed to put his own business on the map by deeply undercutting any competition.
But as a one-man band, his overheads were similarly negligible.
Overheads continued to be minimal when, after four months, he moved from Cheshire, where he had temporarily alighted for personal reasons, to Barnoldswick in Lancashire.
The location was carefully chosen: Barnoldswick contains a Rolls-Royce factory and supplied the B in RB211, as everyone in the vicinity is proud to proclaim.
That meant a reservoir of skilled engineers, some of whom might have accumulated 15 or more years' experience before being made redundant or taking early retirement.
But before he could think of engaging skilled workers, Mendoros had to have something for them do — beyond sending out a few spare parts.
‘I was determined to take a calculated risk,’ he says.
‘Perhaps in a few years I wouldn't have done.’
The opportunity arose late in 1988 when the MoD had an urgent need for an RB211 engine — of a specific configuration — for fitting to an RAF transport.
Mendoros undertook to supply it.
He found an engine core of the right type in the Middle East, obtained various components from the US, Hong Kong and elsewhere, and had the engine assembled, tested and delivered all within three months.
He was not able to do it all by himself, of course, but he assumed the responsibility, arranged the shipment and testing, recruited consultants (from among retired engineers) and certified the work.
The exercise went far to establish his credentials in the right quarters.
The revenues it generated — well over £2 million — were what enabled him to bid for the factory at Earby, only a couple of miles over the hill from Barnoldswick.
With further financing and other assistance from the Rural Development Commission and the local authority (the borough of Pendle encompasses both towns), the building was expensively adapted to fulfil his second major contract, which followed hard upon the first.
‘The customer had a requirement for a stock of components but it also had a lot of outdated engines.’
Thus Euravia secured the job of completely dismantling several dozen Conway engines, of identifying all the parts that could be reused (or repaired — in which case the machining was put out to subcontractors, mainly local firms) and of returning the salvaged parts to source.
This RTP (reduce to products) contract was expected to last two-and-a-half years, and has just about come to an end after less than two.
Mendoros has won several minor orders in the meantime: for special tools designed to extract parts, for example, which are also being manufactured outside.
He is ‘diversifying’ into modification of nacels (engine housings), and into thrust reversers (which slow down an aircraft after landing), that will further help to keep his little team of engineers occupied.
But having shown how, when it comes to flexibility and speed of response, the small firm can far outdo big business, Euravia is paradoxically just beginning to feel some of the pressures that weigh upon the latter.
For it does rather need a constant stream of work to get full value from the investment in girders, gantries, hoists and related hardware that were installed for manipulating (and originally for dismantling) huge aero-engines.
The company is contracted to look after engines at two big RAF bases, where it provides unscheduled attention beyond the scope of routine maintenance.
Such fieldwork, which is actually carried out by consultants, represents a highly important part of the business — classified by Mendoros as ‘engineering support’.
But the Earby factory itself is certainly not yet an established aeroengine service centre.
As it happens, there is a substantial engine refurbishment contract in the offing which (although tenders have not yet been invited) promises to bring someone several tens of millions of pounds in revenue over a period of a few years.
If Mendoros could land the contract it would eliminate the danger of under- utilised assets — and simultaneously confer a kind of official recognition.
He rates his chance of capturing the job as better than 30%.
Euravia does not at present have the resources for such a large volume of work.
For one thing, it lacks a test bed.
But that could be made good, Mendoros reckons, by a joint venture with a well known local aero-engine manufacturer.
A couple of years ago, he points out, he didn't have all the facilities needed for the RTP job.
He has already demonstrated an ability to meet delivery dates, and cannot be said to neglect quality.
‘Quality is the name of the game,’ he keeps repeating.
The workshop, where ‘Den’ seems on easy terms with most of his 15 employees, is hung with notices urging ‘Think Quality: Perfection — the only standard worth working to’— and other variations on the theme.
Yet when it comes to price, Euravia still endeavours to undercut the market.
Even if he aims for a gross profit 5–10% less than a competitor, Mendoros believes, overheads are such that he should come out better at the net level.
But, whatever the effect of the Gulf war in the short term, isn't defence likely to be a declining sector?
Euravia has already attracted some civil work, like the engines of aircraft used in crop spraying, and it will be looking for more.
In any case, Mendoros is confident that the military market has plenty of scope to offer for decades to come.
‘Peace will not stop growth,’ asserts the shrewdly calculating Greek adventurer.
Why?
‘Because we're dealing here in projects which are labelled cost-saving exercises.’
Such optimism is almost a rarity these days.
Euravia's history is altogether too brief for any outside to make positive predictions about its future.
It may be that Mendoros, who has integrated extraordinarily well into the local scene,(he can enter many a pub in the vicinity and expect to meet someone he knows), will succumb to the familiar British failing of allowing enjoyment of life to absorb a shade too much attention, and business a fraction too little.
But on the whole that seems unlikely.
He is buying a farm house along with several acres of ground, but the riding will be strictly for his children.
Mendoros is the kind of man who enjoys working far into the night.
He now has a scheme for a second Europe-wide enterprise that he intends to run with an English friend.
‘He's a distributor but doesn't travel much himself.
He'll implement the requirements.
I travel a lot.
I'll bring in the business.’
Some people have a talent not only for making things happen but for making them fit neatly together.
Den Mendoros qualified in Britain as a pilot and aeronautical engineer.
He came back, after a decade in the Greek aero industry, to fill a hole in the market
Dismantling two of the last Conway engines in the return-to-products contract at Earby (right).
Prospects for new work are thought to be good.
Nearby (at left) are some of finest views in England
The former mill town of Earby was chosen for proximity to Barnoldswick and its Rolls Royce aero-engine plant, which meant a pool of vital skills
TAKING GUARD ON THE GRID Techniques Everyone gets double figures on Bob Blakes's Grid, as Phil Neale of Worcester found.
By Tom Lester
Four-fifths of course participants believe they conform to the ideal: they're soon disabused by their peers
The crucial difference in cricket is that the consulting process can only be conducted on the field
Put a tried and tested American management development technique together with English county cricket, and you might expect to get something of a cultural googly.
The world of interface development goals and positive confrontation resolution is a million miles from fast wickets and slow bowlers.
it is perhaps a tribute to the resilience of both that they can come together at all: for the result, we may have to wait a few more cricket seasons.
The technique in question is Bob Blake's Managerial Grid, still going strong 30 years after it was developed in the US, and likely to show new life in the UK now that management consultants P-E International have taken on the somewhat dusty licence.
The Grid's unchanging purpose is to demonstrate, in special training courses, how leaders can modify their own management styles to become personally more effective, and develop the synergy inherent in their teams.
(However, P-E sees a special need for its application in these days of frequently changing corporate cultures and structures: for example, a successful predator might well want to stir up the management of a recent acquisition, and encourage its executives to start thinking along the same lines as their new bosses).
The cricketing connection is provided by Phil Neale of Worcestershire, one of the most respected captains in English county cricket.
In the winter months, Neale works as a P-E consultant, and recently went on one of the Grid courses that P-E now regularly provides.
‘It's not how you think you are, but how others see you,’ says Neale, reflecting on both his course and his experience as a cricket captain.
‘If you are successful, you become less receptive and less self-critical.
I felt I was running a 9,9 system (see box), involving the team and getting the job done.
But as the course went on, I realised I'd backed off some decisions, and shut myself of from what my superiors were saying.
We only came fourth in the county championship last year and we lost a major final at Lords.’
The self-criticism that Neale volunteers is characteristic of the Blake training, but one of the features that some critics find most disturbing.
According to P-E, 80% of course participants believe when they arrive that they conform to the 9,9 idea,.
They are soon disabused by their fellow students, and in ways which are not necessarily calculated to soothe the individual's amour propre .
As earlier articles in Management Today have pointed out (e.g. Grid on the Grill, September 1970) there's an element of brainwashing in the way the course is structured.
On the other hand, ‘if the level of candour is not high, you don't get results’, as Dick Penfold points out.
(Penfold is a director of P-E's human resources group and a principal tutor.)
‘The Grid is extremely tightly structured all through the week, and it's hard work.
The seminar managers don't intervene unless the group is failing to learn.
Initially, when they try to work as a team, the results are worse than the individuals produce on their own, and the best solutions don't get brought out.
By the end, the team results are better than the individuals can produce.
Executives going on the course are expected to do 20–30 hours pre-work, in which they read the book and, with the help of questionnaires, assess themselves, their management styles and values.
Their answers form the subject of the opening sessions when they have to produce a team answer to each question.
‘There's a little bit of stress at this point, as we see whether they are starting to synergise,’ explains principal consultant Tony Gemmell.
‘Invariably, the team scores lower than the individuals.
Team scores are compared to introduce some rivalry (which usually means that participants work into the early hours later in the course), and critiques prepared on how their performance might be improved through reference to Grid styles.
Case studies are analysed, and teams are then set to develop their own models of teamwork.
At the same time, further conflict is introduced by pairing course members off, and instructing each to try to persuade his pair of the merits of his model.
‘This is the turning point, when conflict really starts to arise’, says Gemmell.
Whether light as well as heat is generated in these reactions has been questioned by some critics.
As a matter of policy, the tutors seldom intervene, so pass up the opportunity of helping the students learn; also (critics say) much time is wasted in interminable discussion over semantic niceties.
The Grid boils down to only five behaviour patterns — the four extremes and the middle one.
This design is not open to question.
Whatever the merits of alternative analyses, and however rare the 9,9 ideal may be among undoubted business leaders at the top of companies, the students are expected to take the Grid as gospel.
Yet judging from the book, the case material lacks an essential element of realism, in spite of 30 years' development and three editions.
To overcome the heavy American influences P-E is currently preparing some cases of its own.
Meanwhile, reliance is still placed on that golden oldie film Twelve Angry Men , which offers possible archetypes — Henry Fonda's 9,9 hero being set against Lee J. Cobb's 9.1 bully boy.
However, these fictional characters could be given quite different valuations in the classroom.
The whole point is to open managers' eyes to the consequences of their own behaviour through observing the behaviour of others.
Teams always come to appreciate the impact of individual styles on performance.
They also recognise the positive and negative effects of organisational culture.
The quietest member of the group is often found to have the most to contribute.
‘Other people think you've opted out,’ says Neale, ‘so you have to show that you're concentrating hard on a problem.
In our group, we said to one member, ‘Every time you say something, we find ourselves acting on it, so why don't you contribute more?’’
This is the point at which each individual is discussed by his team in open session.
‘Candour and openness are important to help people see themselves,’ emphasises Penfold.
‘They take it to heart and put a lot of effort into it.’
To the criticism that such exposure is as likely to be destructive as constructive, he counters that it is the person's behaviour in a team with a specific task ahead that is under discussion, not the person himself.
In the final session, the agreed scores are compared with those from the pre-work.
Out of 10 who said their style was 9,9 at the beginning of the week, only one is likely to be able to say that at the end, affirms Penfold with relish.
Neale was rated 9,9 by his team members, a fact that he acknowledges with appropriate diffidence.
‘But there were some problem areas, and I went for a swim to get it out of my system.’
The real test of any training, of course, is how well it is applied back at the workface, and apart from Neale's role in P-E, only the coming cricket season will show him how effective the Grid can be.
Neale carries a formidable management burden in a team containing both Ian Botham and Graham Dilley plus a number of younger, inexperienced players.
In addition, for economic as well as morale-building reasons, he has to do well in the county championships.
‘The big players have found it easy to settle in,’ he claims, ‘and I try to involve everyone in key decisions — like whether to bat first if we win the toss.’
Reflecting business experience, not everyone wants to be involved, he finds.
But a crucial difference in the case of cricket is that the consultation process can only take place off the field.
Once on the field, it's a terse ‘Whatever you think, Skip’, and some isolation is unavoidable.
‘The biggest difficulty is having one foot in the committee and one on the playing field.
You have 16 or 17 people available for a match, and you have to select 11.
This I find most difficult.’
What he has learned is to bring any incipient conflict out into the open.
‘The biggest problems occur when you shirk responsibility and allow resentment to fester.’
Neale was re-elected captain for the 1991 season last November, already equalling the record for longest serving captain.
With three years of his contract still to run, he should beat that easily.
But he is 36, and may soon have to hang up his boots and concentrate more on consultancy.
As a graduate of Russian at Leeds and being closely involved with Worcestershire's sponsorship programme (which includes P-E), he seems well placed to make the transition.
That 9,9 course rating will be no impediment.
Without doubt, the Grid lends itself supremely well to training programmes: its relevance to real life is less sure.
Yet if you accept that managers change styles to suit the occasion or their mood, it is a small step to suggest that they should aim for constructive change, either tactically or as a permanent shift.
As Michael Gordon explained in these pages two decades ago: ‘If all Blake had offered was a framework, that would have been the end of it.
But…he devised the first, most complete and most sophisticated learning package for those who wished to study organisational development’.
With companies demanding flatter structures with fewer middle management ‘facilitators’ and more teamwork, the Grid's applications today could be endless.
The hows and whys of the Management Grid
For those unfamiliar with the principle of Blake's Grid, the term 9,9 indicates that a manager scores the maximum rating on the two dimensions of his style which it measures: ‘concern for people’ and ‘concern for production’(i.e. for results, however defined).
These two elements of a manager's job were picked out by the US organisational psychologists Robert Blake and Jane Mouton as characterising the leadership role, following studies they made in the oil industry soon after World War 11.
They compared the distinguishing characteristics of high-performing and low-performing management groups, and concluded that the way people were handled and results pursued were what mattered most.
How far Blake and Mouton were pioneers in this field is open to dispute.
Many psychologists credit Ed Fleishman with formulating the original concepts.
He singled out ‘consideration for people’ on the vertical axis and ‘initiating structure’on the horizontal.
Blake and Mouton's main contribution, it's suggested, has been to promulgate the basic ideas through a well-thought-out and packaged training course.
Blake's view is rather different.
In The Managerial Grid 111 (over a million copies were sold of the first two editions alone) Blake and Mouton accuse Fleishman of ‘faulty formulation and lack of demonstrated validity.’
In Blake's terminology someone scoring 1 on the ‘results’ scale is described as a ‘country club manager’; the opposite 9,1 style is characteristic of the dictator.
The unfortunate 1,1 executive doesn't deserve the title manager at all, having minimum concern for either results or people.
A 5,5 score indicates an average, middle-of-the-road ‘organisation man’.
Blake and Mouton emphasised from the outset that managers switch from one style to another, or combine elements of several in running their operations.
The successful ones adjust purposefully to achieve their ends, the less successful act involuntarily.
The implication, write Blake and Mouton, is that managers should aim for the 9,9 combination, a ‘goal-centred team approach that seeks to gain optimum results through participation, involvement, commitment and conflict-solving of everyone who can contribute.’
The authors go on to explain how, on their analysis, individuals can adapt their style to become more effective personally; and, working in a team, can build the synergy needed to raise output above the level that could be achieved individually.
Critics of the Grid complain that, being two-dimensional, it inevitably oversimplifies a highly complex and fluid relationship between manager and staff.
But the simplicity of Blake and Mouton's original conception has probably been the main reason for its success.
Tom Lester is a specialist writer on business management 
One of England's best respected county cricket captains, Neale (right) won top marks from his fellows — despite some ‘problem areas’ that he had to get out of his system
WHERE TO DRAW THE GREEN LINE Can UK industry be criticised for not living up to its environmental responsibilities when clear, universally agreed targets are still lacking on many issues.
By Tom Lester
Whether you consider industrialists to be the unprincipled rapists of Mother Earth, or see environmentalists as idealistic nutcases, there is little question that opinion and judgement, even prejudice, are at the heart of the environmental issue, at least as it confronts managers.
Global warming or any of the thousand other worries that come under the environmental heading may or may not have a sound scientific basis, but subjective judgement is still required to determine what priority to give them, and what rules, actions and expenditure are justified to relieve them.
That in turn poses the question, whose judgement is to be applied — the management's, Whitehall's, Parliament's, the EC commissioners', the pressure groups', or that of the public?
In practice, no group can be excluded from the process.
The responsible manager must ensure that his company is greener than green on all the major issues according to current opinion, demonstrate to the world at large that this is so, and, for the future, to help form opinions and set the standards for the company's own as well as the common good.
IBM for example, is currently considering what action, if any, it needs to take about its computers' visual display units.
VDUs are suspected by some of causing eye strain, postural problems and even of spreading harmful radiation across the room.
IMB could simply ignore the worries, on the grounds that there is little or no scientific evidence to support the complaints.
But ‘all these things are a matter of judgement,’ thinks David Livermore, IBM's director in charge of the environment, ‘and our intention is to be in the forefront.’
Its policy is to meet or exceed all applicable regulations, and to set its own standards where no relevant government standards exist.
But for that policy to be effective, it has to be understood and believed by opinion-formers and the world at large, including, of course , potential customers.
With these issues in mind,Management Today commissioned some research into one of the most important UK groups, the MPs, to gauge their opinions on how British industry is living up to its environmental responsibilities.
With the Environmental Protection Act just on the statute book, no company can afford to ignore MPs' views.
Air pollution and waste disposal were the two issues most in need of further legislation, according to the research.
In all, 71 MPs were questioned in October and November last year, the sample numbers reflecting the party and regional balance.
Around 60% of participants believed that laws covering industrial pollutants and effluents, and recycling, were not tough enough, and virtually all thought that industry should place a high priority on cutting pollution and conserving energy.
Of the opposition MPs, half considered that British industry was less responsible towards the environment than its main European competitors.
Arguments about who is greener than whom are sterile.
The principal concern for companies is first that they should be kept in touch with prevailing opinions on environmental issues that could affect them; second, that any misconceptions on technical or other matters should be corrected.
Like many other large companies, ICI now employs a team of executives to handle the environmental issue.
Others have hired government relations consultants to help them build communication links with the Government and Whitehall.
It is, perhaps, no surprise that the MPs questioned in the survey believed that industry should place ‘very high’ priority on reducing pollution (84%), conserving energy (73%) and cutting the consumption of scarce resources (48%).
But they are not simply pursuing every fashionable preoccupation: 76% thought that in the long term, an environmentally responsible company was more profitable, whereas only 12% thought is less.
In similar vein, 76% considered that companies should attach a high priority to maximising profits.
As ICI struggles in the current climate to maintain its investment programme it might find the two thoughts sitting uncomfortably together.
But the parties' replies reveal a difference in emphasis rather than polarity: the green-is-moreprofitable school consisted of all but one of the Labour MPs and two-thirds of the Conservatives.
The profit prioritisers comprised 86% of the Tories and 58% of Labour.
The corporate concern is therefore that the profit implications of a particular measure are widely understood, and that the legislators are not going to saddle companies struggling for survival with disproportionate costs — or at least, not without the public being made aware of the consequences.
As ICI's environmental communications manager, Dr Richard Robson explains, ‘A lot of older plant was not designed to operate to current standards.’
A further concern is that all competitors in a particular market should be treated equally, to avoid a green version of Gresham's law where bad environmental practices are allowed to chase out good.
That is one reason why companies like ICI and IBM are building up comprehensive communications programmes, internal as well as external which involve listening just as much as talking.
Livermore explains that under IBM's Speak Up programme, every employee has the right to express concern anonymously to the top of the company, which has to answer quickly.
‘It's a useful barometer for us on what people think.
People recognise what you are doing, and it's difficult in this area to create an image which is different from reality.’
Hopes that the environmental issue can be pinned down and categorised, however, are likely to be disappointed.
Even a firm's intellectual product, like systems for psychological measurement and testing can have an environmental impact just as pervasive as the air conditioning or noise.
A significant proportion of the MPs in the survey felt that legislation was needed to regulate a wide range of issues, and ‘to set clear, universally agreed targets’ on many more.
If companies don't ensure that they understand and are understood, they have only themselves to blame.
Tom Lester is a specialist writer on business affairs 
David Livermore (above) is IBM's UK director in charge of environmental concerns
REGIONS PLUG INTO THE MARKET A big stone has been dropped into the placid electricity supply pool.
Tom Lester
Each of the 12 regional electricity companies is free, in theory, to compete for any business anywhere in the country, requiring 1MW
Large volume users, like British Steel and ICI, have complained that so far the market mechanism has not proved effective
With many electricity supply contracts coming up for renewal at the end of March, the first fruits of the Government's privatisation policy for the industry are ripening, much like the olives growing in the Department of Energy's new atrium at the centre of its London offices.
But like the olives, it is probably genetically impossible for the fruit to appeal to all tastes.
More than most utilities, electricity supply, and the prices charged, represent an uneasy compromise between the interests of individual consumers, the public at large, the Government, the distributors, the generators, etc.
The sharp reductions in prices to the middle-sized customers that have occurred in the 12 months since the new market system came into effect have naturally been greeted by the beneficiaries with satisfaction, but the strategists worry over the implications for the long- term health of the industry and the economy.
The lower prices have had a dampening effect on innovative schemes to make better use of the natural resources consumed, and will do nothing to stimulate necessary investment by the generators on modernising their capacity.
More immediately, they did nothing to help Secretary of State for Energy, John Wakeham, in deciding the final financing details for the flotation of the two principal generators, National Power and PowerGen.
But the essence of a market is to strike a balance between buyers and sellers, and if the pool price — the equivalent of the Rotterdam spot market for oil — currently favours the buyers, a Conservative minister should be the last to complain.
It seems the weakness has arisen not only because of the excess capacity built during the Central Electricity Generating Board's dying years, but also because the competition for business between the regional distribution companies, the generators, the Scottish companies, Nuclear Electric and the French is so strong, and also because of recession.
The industry is not quite sure what the strategy of the two generating companies is, but a number of observers are convinced that they area fighting for market share with scant regard for cost criteria.
One believes they are making the same mistakes as the oil companies made —‘giving away the product in the hope of buying customers’.
It is, perhaps, a tribute to the privatisation structure that the market is proving to be very volatile, and industrial customers will not be tied to their suppliers unless they so wish.
What renders the market even more volatile is the series of transitional measures put in place to ease the passage of the industry from a nationalised monolith to a group of independent market-led companies.
Theoretically, each of the 12 regional electricity companies (RECs) is now free to compete for any business requiring more than one megawatt (MW) of power anywhere in the country.
However, for practical reasons, most are concentrating only on the borders to their own territories, and for cultural reasons (say their customers) some are still not serious about competing at all, and retain the old, nationalised take-it-or-leave-itism.
In practice, up to 80% of the REC's profit is likely to come from the ‘use of system’ charge (for the wiring, etc) which they will retain whichever company supplies the electricity.
The IMW threshold was agreed by the industry as a way of limiting the negotiations, which they faced once they were free to compete after 1 April 1990, to manageable numbers — around 5,000 customers.
The level will be reduced to 100 kilowatts (KW) in April 1994, effectively putting on the market supplies to some 40,000 to 50,000 more industrial and commercial customers, and it will be abolished altogether by April 1998.
By that time, the RECs should have developed a better understanding of the market, and pricing policies to suit.
Until those dates, customers below the thresholds are confined to the published tariffs, based on the old legal obligation imposed on the suppliers to offer the same terms to all comers.
For customers who require more than 1MW — discounts of between 10% and 30% were available for the 1990–91 year, after some haggling.
This time round, thinks Aidan Mullaly, a negotiator for TM Energy Consultants, the RECs are better prepared for the negotiating process and are unlikely to panic as some did last year at the threat of a loss of business.
On the other hand, some customers then ‘were afraid to ask’, and are now armed with consumption data to press their case for preferential treatment on a more appropriate tariff.
TM is one of several consultancies that has found a lucrative new role in advising companies on their contract negotiations.
Managing director Brian Chamberlain asks his clients to negotiate the best terms they can, then ‘come back to us.
We will improve on that for half the gain.’
In a typical case, the supplier originally offered an 18% discount.
After TM examined the load pattern and ways in which it could be tailored to suit the supplier's constraints, and after comparisons with similar local deals, the discount was increased to 25% backdated by three months.
It was too early in the negotiating round at the time of writing to be confident about trends for the coming year, although most expectations for the 1–10MW bracket are that the new deals will merely take account of inflation.
Strong competition from the two big generators and from Nuclear Electric, as well as the recession and the continuing low pool price (around which the RECs negotiate for their own supplies) all indicate that the market will remain soft.
Chamberlain, however, expresses a widely held view that ‘some prices will probably go back up’, in the longer term if not immediately.
Companies using substantial amounts of power are finding that effective buying demands close and detailed management attention, often backed by significantly more electronic metering and statistical analysis than they have used in the past — in one instance, a prospective supplier demanded to see consumption levels taken at half-hour intervals throughout the year.
While such data should help to concentrate managers's minds on the need to improve efficiency, the paperwork generated by putting the business out to tender and negotiating on the replies is a significant additional burden.
One company that puts all its business out to tender is Ranks Hovis McDougall, which spends around £18 million per year on electricity supplies for its 60-plus production sites in the UK.
Group energy buyer Neil Tribick explains that around half the volume is consumed by plants requiring more than 1MW, with the rest in the 100KW to 900KW category.
For the former, he is dealing with 13 lots of discussions (including Scotland), although the contracts for some plants have a further year to run.
Negotiation has been well worth-while, he has found, particularly since many of the food company's plants have a higher demand in the off-peak summer period than in the winter.
‘Before, the tariffs didn't reflect our demand patterns, and the savings averaged have been up to 20% over what they would have been.’
At the smaller sites, in contrast, the trend is the reverse: prices have gone up by more than 20%.
Discounts are not the only subject of discussion.
One widely discussed topic is liability for power failure.
As nationalised suppliers, the electricity boards in the past were able to limit their liability for negligence to a trivial sum, but now, Tribick for one wants ‘them to accept normal commercial negligence clauses in the contracts’.
A further matter of dispute is what constitutes a single site for the purposes of the 1MW rule.
The suppliers see more of their captive business going out to tender if neighbouring sites are allowed to be aggregated.
On a number of cases under both headings, the director-general of the Birmingham-based Office of Electricity Regulation, Professor Stephen Littlechild, is being asked to adjudicate.
Decisions so far have steered a judicious and generally respected path between the opposite sides — in one case, BOC wanted a £35 million limit to possible damage to its equipment by Yorkshire Electricity.
Yorkshire thought £100,000 was quite enough.
Littlechild settled on £1 million.
A rather more serious issue, involving the Secretary of State, has been the treatment of the very large users of electricity.
Their complaint has been that, so far at least, the market mechanism has not proved effective for such large volumes — British Steel, for example, spends £100 million annually on electricity, and ICI accounts for 2%-3% of all consumption in the UK.
The Energy Intensive Users Group (EIUG) has claimed on their behalf that on such volumes, UK prices were raised prior to privatisation above the levels enjoyed by overseas competitors.
The Government allowed users a price cap as a transitional measure, but it has run only for a year, until March 1991.
The EIUG fears increases of around 25% thereafter.
Wakeham rejected its plea on the grounds that the market is now functioning reasonably well, and pool prices are already having a restraining influence.
Industry critics further point out that the EIUG's worries last year about sharp price increases didn't materialise, and such international price comparisons as there are provide little support for its case.
Much depends on overall volumes, load factors and the type of contract, but according to one source, UK prices for, say, an 80MW load with a 60% factor are lower than all the major EC producers except France.
With a different type of contract, only Germany is more expensive.
But significantly, both Germany and Japan manage to remain competitive in spite of carrying some of the highest prices.
Mike Gibbons, ICI Chemicals and Polymers' manager for energy policy and purchasing, and a prominent EIUG member, finds from experience that ‘other countries have ways of allocating costs and offering more advantageous terms’.
UK grid charges alone, he points out, are set to rise 16.5% in 1991–2, while the free market ideal for these quantities of electricity is still a long way off.
Discussions with the Energy department are continuing.
The problem for companies like ICI is that while the transitional arrangements last, the power suppliers frequently cannot bid for their custom because the suppliers are limited to a 15% slice of the REC's business, rising to 25% in 1994.
Exceptions have been made in four areas where the high incidence of large industrial users quickly took up the 15%, but attempts by the EIUG to have the concessions extended have been rebuffed by Littlechild.
One alternative for the very big consumers is to buy direct from the pool, but most managements will conclude that carrying the risks implied is not their legitimate business.
In any event, points out Gibbons, if the pool price rises sharply, as many predict, they are still faced with major discontinuity in very difficult economic conditions.
Eliminating the risk element in electricity prices is the most important benefit that ICI expects from the planned 1725MW Enron power station on Teesside.
Some 300MW of the output will be used in nearby ICI plants, and the waste heat in the form of steam will also be used either directly or to generate more electricity, lowering the effective energy costs.
Around 1300MW will be sold to four RECs at prices based on the pool, but the station's costs will be governed by the long-term contract for the gas to fuel it, so that the higher the pool price, the greater the revenues from the excess electricity to offset against higher costs elsewhere in the group.
Smaller scale combined heat and power (CHP) projects, are being widely considered, but in many cases are in abeyance because of the lower electricity prices in the medium demand bracket.
The more efficient use of energy which may be in prospect does not ensure economic viability, particularly when interest rates are so high.
One scheme which dates from before privatisation but which has gone ahead, is at Tate & Lyle's sugar refinery in Greenwich.
There, in a £9 million project, 14MW of electricity is being generated plus process steam by two gas turbines, achieving around 75% efficiency.
Savings in energy costs are put at £500,000 annually, although a 10% drop in electricity prices would cut the saving by £375,000.
The scheme was planned and is being managed by Emstar, a subsidiary of Shell which provided the finance.
Emstar chairman Richard Tinson claims there is a lot of interest in CHP schemes because ‘people don't believe in the low electricity prices’.
One of the more vigorous RECs, Midland Electricity plc, has decided to enter the CHP business itself, at the small end of the market.
It has linked with Leverton, the Unilever subsidiary that holds the UK Caterpillar distributorship, to offer generating plant in the 50KW to 1MW bracket, based on a diesel engine converted to burn natural gas, with the waste heat used wherever possible.
‘Some can use the heat, some can't,’ admits Midland's engineering director Mike Hughes.
If they can, customers will pay ‘a little more on the gas bill, and a lot less on electricity’.
The reduction won't hurt Midland much because the connection to the grid will still be necessary, and it will make a profit from the schemes installed, not just in its own area but throughout the UK.
Whatever the trend for electricity prices, it seems that the Government has achieved its aim of dropping a large stone into a once placid pool.
It will be some years yet before the ripples die out, and a lot more analysis and thought by managements will be required.
Lower cost, whether from raised efficiency or lower prices, look a certainty — the catch is, that can only mean lower than they would otherwise have been.
Tom Lester is a specialist writer on business affairs 
Ranks Hovis McDougall spend around £18 million per year on electricity.
The group's energy buyer, Neil Tribick,(above) has 13 supply contracts under discussion
A lucrative role for Brian Chamberlain (below) and his consultancy, TM Energy: advising firms on contract negotiations
The Government wants to avoid PowerGen and National Power (the latter's Rugeley power station, below) developing into monopolies
BEHIND THE IRISH TROUBLES The image of Northern Ireland has suffered greatly from the continual strife there, but the Industrial Development Board is successfully wooing overseas employers.
By Philip Beresford and Daniel Butler
One of the keys to the success of companies which settle in Northern Ireland is the large local pool of talented labour.
The supply of high quality graduates from the two universities keeps pace with demand
Both Harland & Wolff and Short Brothers, two of the traditional employers in Belfast, are now privatised and both have benefited from the transition.
Substantial debts were written off by the Government during the change
The ride from the airport passes through quiet and unspoiled countryside by way of a converted mill into a small prosperous market town.
As the car swings off the road into the technology park, the ducks rise from the man-made lake in the middle, while the surrounding buildings could be straight out of Silicon Valley, or a quieter version of the Thames Valley.
But hang on, this is the Antrim Technology Park, in Northern Ireland barely half-an- hour by car from the Falls Road and other familiar battlegrounds.
This is the hidden face of Northern Ireland well away from IRA violence, and it is an image that economic planners in the local Industrial Development Board (IDB) hope will play a key role in financial regeneration of the area in the 1990s.
Certainly the Antrim Technology Park is filling up with the sort of high technology software companies that any self-respecting Californian science park would like to have.
Take BIS Beecom International, founded in the mid-1970s by Paul McWilliams, a quietly spoken computer boffin (‘I like to think of myself as a guru’).
Originally called Beecom —‘it sounded better than Acom or Ceecom’— the company boasts 170 staff working as computer consultants for a range of blue chip clients.
‘The plan was to have 100 people working by the end of 1992 but we've been so successful that we achieved that by the end of 1989,’ McWilliams claims.
The current target is some 300 by 1992.
One of the keys to the success of software companies in Northern Ireland is the large local pool of talented labour.
The IDB may be desperate to lower the unemployment rate — currently around 14% and the worst in the UK — but it does actually have advantages.
‘Labour turnover here is virtually unknown.
We have an inquest when anyone leaves,’ McWilliams says.
Compare that to the South East, where even in recessionary times, turnover of software staff can be as much as 30% a year.
What's more, the supply of high quality graduates from the two universities, Queens and the New University of Ulster (NUU), does keep pace with demand, deliberately so.
A recent report on the Northern Ireland software industry proposed employment growth in the industry from just over 2,000 today to around 6,200 by 1995.
Queens and NUU worries about filling those posts with the right staff.
Certainly Frank Graham, managing director of Kainos Software, a joint venture between ICL and Queens University, does not have to worry about the supply of graduates he gets.
Based right in the heart of the university area in a lovingly restored old Georgian house, he says, ‘getting staff is the least of my problems.
I'm only limited by how fast I can get growth.’
In four years, he has grown from 16 staff to 40, and plans to add at least 10 a year for the next three years.
The familiar mainland gripe of skill shortages is rarely heard in Northern Ireland.
Its population is also growing and bucking the demographic trends, which are already resulting in a scarcity of young people in the rest of the country.
Such factors of course make Northern Ireland a prime site for locating computer operations which can be done discreetly with no eyeballing required.
A determined campaign to woo back office functions from the overcrowded and overpriced South East is under way.
ISB officials wonder how they can prise companies such as British Airways from the Heathrow area —‘they have 3,000 software people there — 3,000 — if we could get a fraction of them here…’ says one IDB official wistfully.
The one big problem in convincing any new employer to make the leap across the Irish Sea is Northern Ireland's image.
The bomb and the bullet of course provide more dramatic reportage than hard graft, the golf club and fishing rod.
But for the vast majority in Northern Ireland life goes on with little inconvenience from the depredations of the IRA.
A recent spate of firebombs in some stores, which caused £10 million worth of damage was met with a determination to rebuild as quickly as possible.
Retailers know that in the current economic climate, the Northern Ireland economy is a good bet, with its low house prices, low mortgages, relatively high disposable incomes and a public sector cushion pumping in nearly half of the GNP.
Indeed, the centre of Belfast, which 10 to 15 years ago, was devastated by IRA car bombs, now reverberates to the sound of the jackhammer in a huge shop building programme.
When the new shops open, they also have that all too rare mainland commodity — customers — and plenty of them.
In the last year, trade was up 30% in Belfast's main shops.
Little wonder that large mainland retailers like Dixons or Marks & Spencer are queuing up to open in Norther Ireland.
Blue chips such as British Telecom are realising that it makes sense to ‘take work to the people to overcome a permanent shortage of software engineers in the South East, says Malcolm Lees at BT's software centre.
Situated right in the heart of the city centre, the operation undertakes a host of software operations for BT nationwide.
‘We have a very good supply of graduates,’ Lees maintains.
To demonstrate that, he is happy to show off work on new City dealer boards devised in Belfast that allow a foreign exchange trader or the like to listen in to some 20 phone conversations at once via a sophisticated touch screen.
The blue chips are not all British either.
Du Pont, which already has a large complex in Northern Ireland, decided to locate a new software centre to service all its European needs in the Antrim Technology Park.
Like the others, it has experienced virtually no staff turnover.
‘They're not prima donnas and [they]simply roll up their sleeves and get on with the work,’ says one admiring Du Pont veteran.
Even the location, on what after all is the fringe of Europe, is no barrier.
‘Fifteen minutes after finishing a meeting, we can be at the airport and on a plane,’ he says.
It beats waiting at Heathrow every time.
But the future is also looking good for veteran companies like Harland & Wolff, which is teaming up with overseas firms to assure its future prospects.
No firm better exemplifies the problems of the Province's traditional industries and perhaps none better symbolises a ‘spirit of renewed optimism in the area's ability to deliver.
The company is now looking at a future that is brighter than for any time in the past 20 years.
John Parker, chairman and chief executive of Harland & Wolff, is the man given the credit for the about-turn.
A quiet, soft-spoken man, he arrived at the yards in the dark days of 1983 fresh from a difficult stint at British Shipbuilders and it was he who persuaded the Government to allow a management/employee buyout in 1988.
In common with the privatisation of Shorts, the Government wrote off substantial amounts of debt, but raising the necessary cash still represented a daunting task.
In the early days, he says: ‘We had to do a lot of nimble footwork to stay alive.’
Parker developed a formula that gave the employees and local community a substantial say in the new company, with 47% of the equity going to employees, and 6% to local banks, churches and interested parties.
For the remaining 47% he turned to the Norwegian shipping magnate Fred Olsen who coughed up a £12 million stake in the yards.
But it is in the employees that Parker places his faith: ‘This is a people-intensive business,’ he proclaims and points out that 77% of the workforce bought shares when the firm was floated in September 1989 and that 75% still hold them.
Eighteen months on from that flotation, Olsen has ordered five one-milliontonne tankers from the Belfast yard, which provides a much needed baseload of work.
Two have been built already, and work is continuing furiously on the third.
But far more significant is the up-turn in the world market.
As Parker points out, the average age of the world merchant fleet is now 16 years.
While, with recession looming, many owners may be reluctant to invest heavily in new vessels, few ships have a life expectancy of over 20 years.
Added to this is the Exxon Valdez effect.
New US legislation, attempting to avert another such environmental catastrophe, has introduced a requirement for tankers operating in US waters to be double-skinned in future.
Two of the five vessels being built for Olsen are designed to comply with this legislation, and this, says Parker, will give it a proven ability to fit in with the new requirements.
But in case the recession turns into a depression, Parker has set up a repair subsidiary to exploit the market for renovating old vessels.
In addition, Harland & Wolff has teamed up with the Japanese manufacturing giant Kawasaki, and so far has sent 60 people across to the Japanese yards to study their methods.
Harland & Wolff has yet to show a profit, but the future looks good.
Seven years ago the yards were losing £45 million a year.
When it was privatised, the prospectus projected a £10.2 million loss for the first year (which in fact was 16 months long to take its accounts to the calendar year-end).
Now, Parker predicts, it will show a profit of £1.7 million by June 1991.
Meanwhile, a few hundred yards away, across the harbour is Belfast's other traditional employer, Short Brothers, the engineering and defence firm.
Publicly-controlled since 1943, and a loss-maker for much of the period since, it came as little surprise when, Chris Patten, a junior Northern Ireland minister, announced plans for privatisation in 1988.
But its eventual sale, in 1989, was a jolt back to reality.
It emerged that the firm was to be sold, with massive government subsidies, to the Canadian Bombadier group.
The Government did however put in a £200 million investment programme over a four-year period (the previous annual average, apart from one missile development programme, had been £5 million).
Large amounts of debt were also written off and grants for training and predicted losses were included in the equation.
Short's managers welcomed the flight to the private sector.
‘Governments don't invest properly — unpopular job losses, even if commercially necessary, are likely to be resisted,’ was how one put it.
At the same time necessary, but expensive, investment on plant and equipment was lacking, and the firm's ability to remain competitive was severely hampered.
Much has changed since the sale went through in 1990.
Privatisation revitalised management's enthusiasm and allowed harder-edged business decisions to be taken.
But the company claims this did not come from Bombadier.
Although the Canadian parent did send an accountant over to Belfast, this was only to ensure that Short's accounting methods were harmonised with the group.
For the rest, investment and a careful appraisal of products and a division of the firm into five sub-sections was implemented.
Changes have occurred among the workforce too.
The number of unions that management have to negotiate with has fallen from seven to one and Short's claims much better labour relations.
It was also frequently criticised by the Catholic community for its failure to recruit Catholics.
The firm has been at pains to correct this recently, however, and points to a ban of all flags in the workplace (Union Jacks were seen to be intimidatory) and its monitoring of the composition of the workforce.
Although, at 12%, the proportion of Catholics employed is still out of step with the Northern Ireland population, Short's points out that it has more than doubled over the last 10 years, while the proportion of Catholic apprentices taken on has trebled to 20%.
‘We're now the biggest manufacturing employer of Catholics in the Province,’ it claims.
Currently Short's has a wide range of products, including the Tucano trainer (flown by the RAF and other airforces), the Javelin shoulder-mounted antiaircraft missile system, sections of the Fokker 100 airliner, as well as its own short haul passenger planes.
Since privatisation (and no doubt helped by the £200 million of public investment) the firm has expanded substantially and currently has about 1,000 more employees than at the beginning of 1990.
This year's annual report talks about becoming profitable ‘as soon as possible, to ensure growth and a sound future for employees and suppliers’.
While much of the UK is looking gloomily at the dark clouds of a major recession, it seems poetic justice that for at least some of Belfast's population, the future looks better than it has for many years.
Prospects good in the Province
‘It was said that this was the place where the tide came in first and went out last, but this recession has barely affected us so far’, announces Richard Needham, minister of state for Northern Ireland.
He was speaking at a lunch organised by the Industrial Development Board for leading businessmen in the Province, and his words went down well.
Sean O'Dwyer, deputy chairman of Desmond & Sons, has good reason to agree.
His family clothing firm used to be Marks & Spencer's 15th largest supplier.
Now it's the fifth.
He believes this is the result of a highly-educated and willing workforce with an excellent labour relations record.
He points to American chemical giant, Du Pont, which has lost the equivalent of only one working day in industrial action over the past 30 years.
His sentiments are echoed by Frank Lawrence, general manage of United Technologies, at whose factory, only 19 hours of production have been lost since 1976.
But all Northern Ireland's businessmen appear frustrated by the lack of interest from their mainland colleagues.
‘What do we have to do to convince people that this isn't a dangerous place?’ asked Alasdair MacLaughlin the CBI's regional director in the Province, pointing out that London suffers from a worse violent crime rate.
Northern Ireland has a lot to offer, both to business and the individual.
Ewan Rice, corporate services director for the Woolwich Building Society believes that there are openings there for the taking.
He has helped to construct specially tailored mortgage services to exploit the low cost of housing and he points out that after the Woolwich developed its property services division in Kent, its second area of development was in Northern Ireland.
But in general, British industrialists appear slow to investigate the potential of Northern Ireland, frightened, perhaps, by the image of bombings and kneecappings.
This contrasts with some overseas manufacturers who are more resolute.
Montupet, the French aluminium manufacturer, has recently opened a plant producing lightweight aluminium cylinder heads for Ford in the former DeLorean car plant.
And the Minister, Richard Needham, is certainly nothing if not ambitious about the future.
He wants growth on the scale of Korea and to ‘uncouple the Northern Irish economy from the mainland’— at the moment he fears that it may be dragged back by the South East.
But as he points out, the Province has much to offer: the most highly qualified school leavers in the country and — with wages on average 85% of the mainland, but mortgages at a third — potentially one of the highest standards of living.
With violence appearing to be on the wane at the moment, he may well be right that the future looks bright.
Paul McWilliams (right) chairman of Beecom which is based in the hightech Antrim Technology Park
Castle Court Shopping Centre (right) one of the new retail complexes which are profiting from a surfeit of eager customers
BY DESIGN Making a clear impression
For the users of products or services, clarity is the important aspect of corporate identity.
By James Woudhuysen
I found them in an old file.
There, in one place, were all the papers on my membership of six airline ‘frequent flyer’ clubs.
How many miles had I amassed?
Could I carry my miles over from one year to the next?
What would happen if and when Pan Am was taken over?
Was there anybody I could call apart from toll-free numbers in the USA?
It was impossible to say.
The bumf made no sense.
Now airlines, as everyone knows, are very keen on their corporate identity — on the liveries that cover their planes and refuelling trucks, on the trays of food they bring you, on their lounges and their check-in desks and on the way their staff look and behave.
When an airline unveils a new corporate identity the occasion tends to mark, as Alan Brew rightly observes, a fundamental turningpoint in strategy, structure, internal culture and external communications.
He should know: his company, Landor Associates, was responsible for the identity of British Airways.
Yet more is at issue here even than fundamental turning-points.
As Brew notes, what now matters is whether large, often arrogant companies want to be truly transparent to their varied audiences.
For as my yellowed boarding passes now attest, to be transparent is, as far as users are concerned, all that corporate identity is really about.
You would not think so from January's media furore on British Telecom's new identity.
Some said that what was leaked was bad, some said it was too costly, and others confused these things with their feelings about BT service.
There were questions about the durability of the logotype over passing years — and questions, too, over whether it properly expressed BT's international ambitions.
Here Tim King, of consultants Siegel & Gale (3M, Citicorp), had a special fear.
BT's pipes-of-Pan motif was, for him, somehow too British .
Graphically, it lacked what King calls the ‘world class’ of IBM, Apple Computer, Ford, Sony and Shell.
As it happens, I agree with the need to debate these points.
In particular, the international projection of nationally-headquartered firms' corporate identity is a vexed issue: Siegel & Gale's new survey of 50 leading Hungarian companies, for example , found that if all of them believed that a company's image was important to building sales, most would also rather do business with German's sharply-etched Volkswagen that with fuzzy French concerns.
At Wolff Olins, creators of the BT look, chairman Wally Olins (Bovis, Prudential) is equally convinced that even longstanding identity specialists still have lots to learn about how to make users — and employees — feel that they ‘belong’ to, say, Mobil in Malawi.
All that is fair enough.
But from where I stand, it is the wider issue of transparency that really counts.
We can for instance, endlessly discuss the need to maintain and reinforce brands, now that the service promise bound up with them has become so important.
We can also talk about identity as a preface to acquisition, diversification and the hiring of high-value recruits (1980s themes), or as a signal of social responsibility and reliability in a crisis (1990s stuff).
But my Mum, a reasonable representative of that vital retiree market we all hear about, cares little for brands: she worries about her tax form being opaque.
And my employers Fitch (Groupe Bull, Southern Electricity) lost more sleep over whether the colours in our new letterhead would allow it to make any sense coming off a client's monochrome fax machine than they ever did about the evocation of caring values.
Recent research by McGill University's Henry Mintzberg and the London Business School's Angela Dumas has shown that a lot of people in any large company are active in design, even if they do not know it.
Therefore the problem for us is not necessarily to get clients to install a new identity, but rather to find out which ‘corporate communications’ are unintelligible, and then to ask — in today's cost-conscious times — whether it is worth putting them out at all.
In short: identity may be more a province of information that the other way round.
If your frequent flyer brochures would outwit a genius, fix them…and worry about the logo that you put on your tailfins at a later date.
James Woudhuysen is managing director of the Exploratory Design Laboratory, Fitch RS 
Before installing a new identity, companies like Southern Electricity for example, should find out which ‘corporate communications’ are unintelligible
COMPUTING A time of technological turmoil
When information technology users are in doubt about what to buy, who to buy it from, and whether or not they can afford it, they are apt to buy nothing at all.
Di Palframan
Confusion and insecurity abound in today's information technology industry.
Users around the world are trying to assess the newer, cheaper and more open computers to decide when or whether to invest in them.
Some computer makers are going through a similar analysis but, in their case, the question is how to survive on the thinner margins these machines command.
Their uncertain future adds further complications for the users who now also have to consider which supplier to back.
Then some countries, notably the UK, are in the midst of a recession — yet another imponderable.
The result will be a slowdown in spending on computer hardware and software.
There is ample evidence to support this in Price Waterhouse's latest International Information Technology Review which tracks investment intentions in 10 countries around the world.
First, looking at hardware spending plans this year, the review shows cutbacks in the UK, the US, France, Canada and Spain compared with the year before.
But, as in 1990, Japan stands head and shoulders above the rest in hardware investment intentions this year.
The tighter hardware budgets in some countries could, Price Waterhouse points out, simply reflect the declining price/performance ratio of computers.
In other words, companies now spend fewer pounds to get a million instructions per second (mips) from their machines (see table).
For software the review shows a downward trend in the UK, Canada and Spain this year.
Japan, once again, is on the up, as are the US and Denmark.
The rest of the countries show little movement.
One obvious conclusion that could be drawn from the review is that the Japanese are steaming ahead with welldefined information technology plans.
Another is that the UK is abandoning its plans as it slides further into economic and technological turmoil.
Undoubtedly, there is a great deal of confusion in the UK about so-called open systems — computers that will use a common Unix operating system so that, in theory, an applications software package developed for one brand of Unix computer will run on all others.
Such hardware is very appealing.
It is cheaper than the proprietary machines most organisations use and it means that users have a wide choice of suppliers.
As yet, there is no single standard version of Unix, but an increasing number of application software packages are being developed for these computers.
Initially much of the Unix-based software was for technical applications but more and more commercial packages are emerging.
It is now more feasible than ever for organisations to switch from their expensive proprietary machines to lower-cost Unix computers.
Unfortunately, the cost of the equipment is not the only variable in the equation.
Keeping it up and running is probably a higher priority.
With Unix or open systems, where the hardware and software are often bought from several different suppliers, ‘information technology management is much more complex’, according to Roger Pavitt, Price Waterhouse consultant.
Weighing up the pros and cons of open systems is not easy and some information technology departments, are ill-equipped to do the job.
The UK's economic slowdown adds to the uncertainty.
Organisations are reassessing their priorities, says Price Waterhouse consultant Nick Cherrie, and, if they are not convinced that a project can offer a quantifiable and speedy payback, they are likely to shelve it.
The type of projects that are delayed will vary from industry to industry.
But, in general, they include systems for design, production control, distribution, electronic data interchange and so on .
While the consultant's review shows that all countries are planning to increase their investment in these competitive edge systems over the next five years, the UK's present level of spending (as a percentage of the total) is behind that in the US and Japan, as it was five years ago.
In the mid-1990s, Price Waterhouse believes the UK will have stolen a marginal lead on the US but still be a considerable way behind Japan.
It is not, stresses Pavitt, that the UK has abruptly ceased to invest in computer hardware and software in the current recession, it is rather that companies which invest prudently, for example, in a better accounts receivable system to improve their cash flow, are likely to outweigh the number of competitive advantage go-getters.
A report published by consultants A.T.
Kearney late last year showed that the success or failure of information technology applications does not depend on the absolute level of investment.
Indeed, it indicated that the companies deemed by Kearney to be unsuccessful users of information technology were investing at a higher rate that the successful ones.
Successful users comprised only 11% of the total.
When the economy picks up, some of management's uncertainties will disappear.
But the technological complexities of open systems today and of some other system in the near future will not.
Organisations will need to be technologically aware.
Cherrie advises against leading edge technology and even with what is regarded as a technological winner he recommends a trial run.
Only a pilot project, he insists, will determine whether or not the technology lives up to suppliers' promises.
Di Palframan is a freelance journalist
BOOK REVIEW
The framework of a fairly new machine Car Wars.
By John Butman.
Grafton; 224p; £16.99.
Review by Simon Caulkin
As a genre, the business documentary has a respectable literary parentage.
Tracy Kidder's The Soul of a New Machine , Joe McGinniss' earlier The Selling of the President combined ‘new journalism’(meticulous, participatory, eyewitness reporting) with an acute business eye to create best-sellers out of the development of a computer and Richard Nixon's use of advertising to get himself elected President.
Car Wars is in this tradition.
Subtitled ‘How General Motors Europe built The Car of the Future’, it is an account of the development and launch of the present Vauxhall Cavalier/Opel Vectra, currently the UK's best selling medium car.
You can see why it was a good idea.
On the one hand, J89, as the project was known, seemed to seal Vauxhall's return from the car manufacturers' junkyard — a good business story.
On the other, the author assisted at the launch (the most expensive in UK automotive history) as part of the communications production team —‘I was there.’
Since, as John Butman says, no new car can be considered without reference to its antecedents and successors, tracing the development process allows — mandates even — detours into company and industry history, economics, the principles of design, and much else.
And this is what we get, Butman promisingly lays out the place of the automobile industry in the world economy, GM, GM Europe and the place of Vauxhall and Opel within the last.
He describes the rise of the intermediate car sector, pioneered by the Cortina, then the lineage of the Cavalier itself.
There is much interesting, even useful, information here.
In the current Middle Eastern situation it's as well to be reminded, for example, that of the world's 10 largest companies, seven are car or oil companies, and that one-third of the latter's output is in the form of petrol.
Also that of the top 100 companies, 56 are directly or indirectly involved with the motor industry.
Car-making is the largest single manufacturing industry in the world.
Likewise, when it comes to design and development, there's some entertaining background to the showbiz aspects of American car design, and tantalising (although undeveloped) reference to the diametrically-opposed, Bauhaus influenced, European approach.
Butman is also interesting on the history of aero design and some of the bizarre episodes it led to — Opel's three fearsome rocket-powered cars of the late 1920s for example.
And he has some pertinent, if hardly startling, things to say about future constraints which car designers and manufacturers will be up against.
Nothing to quarrel with there.
Yet with all this incidental detail, the central story of J89 obstinately fails to come to life.
Why?
The most obvious reason is that the author only arrived on the scene at the end of the process, and has had to reconstruct the design and development phases from inevitably superficial interviews.
The Vauxhall top brass is conspicuously absent (which may say something about Vauxhall), and trivial PR flackery all too present.
The second problem is that, even when he is directly involved, Butman never gets under the skin of either characters or company.
Consequently the ‘I-was there-approach’ doesn't work.
None of the characters he meets comes alive (designer Wayne Cherry is the nearest), and the dramatic feel for the politicking, pressures and personal fears and obsessions that so enlivened Kidder's book is lacking.
Descriptions of offices, studios and wind tunnels, and an account of getting lost in Luton on the way to Vauxhall headquarters because of roadworks on the M1, are no substitute.
On the other hand, Butman is not a business or motor industry expert either.
So he fails to delve under the surface for answers to some pretty fundamental questions.
‘Successful’ though it is deemed to be, the new Cavalier took seven years from conception to launch — an extremely long time, and a year longer than planned.
Why?
Who screwed up?
Which factions won or lost as a result?
How profitable is the car?
What lessons did the companies (and rivals) learn from it?
Is it a final turning point for GM Europe, for long periods perhaps the most lack-lustre collection of American-owned subsidiaries in the world?
It's disappointing that Butman doesn't ask these questions, let alone provide answers.
It's not that Car Wars is a bad book.
It is breezy, reasonably written (apart from a grating tendency to treat a company as both singular and plural in the same sentence).
It has some well-chosen pictures — and an index.
But it needs either deep inside knowledge, or real writing skills to take it to a higher plane.
In Germany, Butman notes, the Vectra picked up a magazine award as Auto der Vernuft — sensible or rational car of the year.
Yes, well, the Cavalier is that kind of car.
Car Wars is that kind of book.
Simon Caulkin is a freelance writer
Japanese under the US bed Agents of Influence.
By Pat Choate.
Hutchinson; 281pp; £22.
Review by Charles Miller
Over 25 years ago, in Le Defi americain , Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber postulated the danger of US multinationals stealing Europe's commercial treasures.
Many found the idea credible.
Yet around the time that Servan-Schreiber was receiving his first royalty cheques, oriental faces could be seen popping up behind the walls at the Isle of Man TT races.
The Japanese studied the British motor cycle industry carefully, learned their lessons and became world beaters.
It was the start of Le Defi japonais .
Now it is an American political economist, not a French political journalist, who is sounding the alarm.
Pat Choate's book will be better received in the United States than in Europe, although it should certainly find French readers.
Choate parallels Servan-Schreiber, but his exposes are ostensibly more sinister: showing how the Japanese bought their way to excessive influence in Washington by hiring regiments of lobbyists, many of them senior former officials, in order to move Congress and the Administration their way.
Like the scouts at the TT races, it seems, the Japanese studied their subject, and now work the system rather better than the natives do.
Here's one example.
US tariffs distinguish between passenger cars and light trucks.
In the late 1980s, the Japanese, with their own US plants producing so many cars that they had little need to import more, and with voluntary quotas unfilled, decided to reclassify light commercial vehicles as cars.
The US Customs Service reviewed this loophole.
The Japanese started lobbying.
Congressmen were persuaded to meet and write to William von Raab, then Commissioner of Customs, supporting their case.
But von Raab refused to budge and Customs vetoed the reclassification.
Japan reacted swiftly.
At the following G7 meeting it persuaded the Germans and British to press Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady to reconsider.
Within days the ruling was suspended.
Japanese lobbyists then met officials from the office of the US Trade Representative, the White House and the Treasury Department.
They also mounted a nationwide campaign, alleging that the ruling would harm US consumers by raising truck prices.
Dealers flooded Congress with angry letters.
Japanese officials further threatened that, if reinstated, the ruling could damage US-Japan relations.
The Eagle responded.
The heads of Chrysler, Ford and General Motors jointly urged the President, officials and Congress to stand firm.
Their dealers, too, deluged Capitol Hill.
But their efforts were unavailing.
In the end Japan avoided $500 million a year in duties without making a single concession of its own.
Politics can often skew decisions that should be taken on their merits.
Yet, as Choate's account also shows, even wise men and their money can easily be parted by sharp consultants, who can pass through the green baize door knowing that their clients cannot peep through the keyhole.
Much of Japan's success, he unwittingly reveals, has been achieved by the diplomatic pressure used by all foreign states.
The slick programmes and vast fees may have contributed less than is apparent to those outside government, who cannot see how policy conclusions are actually reached.
Choate shows up the hypocrisy of former Administration members who oppose the Japanese publicly but take large fees for acting for them behind the scenes.
It is less the revolving door that the temptation placed in the paths of hitherto ethical men and women that he criticises.
Yet lobbying is not a peculiarly Japanese speciality.
Most foreign governments (remember Britain's lobbying over Concorde landing rights) and an enormous number of domestic interests also throw apparently blank cheques at Washington lobby agencies.
Choate catalogues the foreign clients of lobbyists but ignores their much longer US client lists.
Is it any better to act for the National Rifle Association than for the Cote d'Azur Development Agency, to take one name from his appendix?
While the book's premise is questionable, its conclusions are both clear and surprising.
‘Fewer than 30% of the CEOs of America's 150 largest corporations even try to affect the policies of their own Government,’ claims the author.
The Japanese take more trouble to find out how the US system really works, and who can make it work for them.
Choate argues that US corporations must learn to out-lobby the Japanese.
So what, therefore, is so reprehensible about the conduct of the latter?
There are usually two sides to any story.
Only the shortest of memories will have forgotten how declining Western industries successfully sought tariff and quota protection to counter the greater efficiency of Far Eastern competitors.
Perhaps efficiency has turned into dumping and state-aided advantages enjoyed by only a few industries here, but both sides should still be on the record.
This book should be read with caution.
Charles Miller is head of The Public Policy Unit, political and economic consultants 
Washington: infiltrated by Japanese agents, says Choate
Back to future once again Powershift.
By Alvin Toffler.
Bantam Press; 476pp; £16.99.
Review by Francis Kinsman
I am not enjoying this.
Alvin Toffler is an old hero of mine — a warrior in the cause of future thought — a role model to whom we mere mortal businesspeople could possibly aspire, and about whose bank balance we could certainly dream.
For years I have been excited by him, quoted him, relied on him.
But now this marvellous old war horse has run out of puff, and it is sad to see it.
Maybe it is a fact that trilogies never work:Future Shock was a brilliant exposition of new thinking;The Third Wave was a superb consolidation of it.
Frankly,Powershift has little to add.
Verdi wrote his opera Falstaff at the age of 81.
It is not within many of us to emulate such a feat in our anecdotage.
Toffler has failed to do so, in any event.
He may recover, and amaze us all with some brilliantly wise insight about the emerging human/economic condition.
Powershift is going to put him down more than a notch or two in the meantime.
Like many an American author, Toffler is completely intoxicated with his own jargon.
He actually defines ‘powershift’ as a new word, to be differentiated from ‘power-shift’.
One can see the publishers emerging from that smoke-filled room, slapping each other on the back: ‘Baby, we not only have a trilogy here, we have a thesaurus.’
But the substance of this particular endeavour is limited.
It contains nothing that was not identifiable, and abundantly flagged, in the previous two volumes.
In fairness, it has to be said that anyone who has not read those should go out and buy copies.
They could save their pennies as far as this one is concerned.
Aficionados may enjoy the vile sub-editing, in a masochistic way.
Bubble-gum sub- heads like ‘Material-ismo’, ‘The Beer and Sausage Minuet’, ‘Rusty Tracks and Hotel Love- Sounds’, may grab the millions who have already bought into the previous Toffler output.
Their appeal is unlikely to be universal, however.
And while the sugar coating is the same, the adrenalin content is not.
Toffler-junkies should be prepared for an intellectual placebo.
Futurists have several curses upon them.
The first of these is that, like Cassandra, they will be right but nobody will believe them.
The second is that their long-term view may be clouded by immediate short-term factors.
The third is that they may say things that seem absolutely correct at the time, but which are made ludicrous by the unfolding of events.
Toffler has no problem with the first.
He is in some trouble with the second.
And he may have to live a long time with the third.
Things have changed.
There is a central theme about information as a means to power.
But Machiavelli, who one gathers is a favourite source of the author, gave us the lowdown on this a few centuries ago.
Meanwhile, anyone who eulogises on the wit and wisdom of Michael Milken is in for a tumble.
The man is in the sin- bin.
This book, in other words, is an out-dated celebration of pre-slump 1980s values.
As this reviewer writes, it seems puffy and bloated.
The 1990s will be completely different from the implied Toffler scenario, as presented here.
His essential point, that those who hold information hold power, is absolutely correct.
What he fails to add is that nowadays information is as leaky as a fistful of sand.
The more there is, the more democratic it will be.
Events in Eastern Europe are surely proving that.
Openness is becoming universal, and will continue to do so, whatever political resistance there may be.
Francis Kinsman is author of Millenium 2000 and other prophesies 
BEST DEAL A sober judge of business
Nazmu Virani, although he never drinks alcohol, links his best deal to a brewery.
By Chris Blackhurst
Whenever people discuss the enterprise culture, they point to the Asian corner shop.
Long hours and hard work, they say, show just what can be achieved.
They may even point to Nazmu Virani.
Seventeen years ago, after fleeing from Idi Amin's reign of terror, Virani opened a supermarket in south London.
Today, his Control Securities group owns 24 hotels, 820 pubs and more that 5 million sq.
ft of commercial property space.
At 43, he is worth an estimated £110 million.
He has a chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce and lives in a sixbedroomed, five-bathroomed house complete with heated, indoor swimming pool.
Immaculately attired and unfailingly polite, he is the embodiment of the successful Ugandan Asian businessman.
Virani's life is consumed by three things: business, family and religion (he is an Ismaili Moslem).
‘We worked all hours God gave us.
I am more married to my business than my wife.
Determination, hard work, commitment and family unity got us where we are today.
But an eye for the main chance and a shrewd business brain have also pushed him along.
Making money comes naturally.
His father had built up a hotel and property business in Uganda.
Some of that fortune was put out of harm's way, overseas.
The family was able to buy first the supermarket in Lordship Lane — or as he calls it, ‘Hardship Lane’— then a string of other stores including a wholesalers business.
They were sold and replaced by cheap, bed and breakfast hotels.
Within three years of arriving in Britain, Virani and his two younger brothers were able to pay £2.7 million cash, for the Eccleston Hotel in Victoria.
The Virani empire kept on growing.
When British Rail put 21 of its hotels up for sale, Virani bought eight of them.
They have since been sold.
More often than not, when he sells, the buyer is a fellow member of the Asian community.
Virani has made a fortune from acting as middle-man, between the English property tycoon and the Asian shopkeeper.
‘The small man from the mosque or temple can't go to John Ritblat but he can come to Nazmu Virani,’ he says.
At present, he has a portfolio of 110 properties, each worth between one and £10 million.
‘I would sell any of them to a non-Asian but I don't know who they are.
I would love to go to someone like Scottish Widows and offload some but I can't.’
Deals are what drives him.
‘It's a sickness.
Obviously money comes with the deal.
A good deal gives me the feeling that I have been for a nice seven-day trip to the Bahamas.’
For his best, he chooses the buying back of a company at a bargain price.
Before the stock-market crash, shares in Control Securities were in huge demand.
Virani was able to issue more and more paper in order to finance bigger and bigger deals.
Then came what he calls ‘golden Monday’ when the shares collapsed.
Virani went into the market and bought up the company cheap.
Today, his family owns 47% of the business.
But that is not his best deal.
Instead, he chooses the buying back of another company, Belhaven.
In 1984, while negotiating the purchase of a hotel, he was introduced to Belhaven, a small Scottish brewery, by its chairman, Eric Morley of Miss World fame.
Shortly afterwards he bought out Morley and acquired control of the company.
Despite producing what he claims is ‘the Rolls-Royce of beers’, Belhaven was in deep trouble.
With just 12 tied houses, only a fraction of its output was being sold.
But by offering generous bank guarantees he was able to buy 200 new tied pubs and increase Belhaven's sales from 3,000 barrels a year to 30,000.
By the time he sold the brewery, for £25 million, in 1986, it was making a profit of £1.7 million a year.
Without Virani, Belhaven soon ran into trouble.
His successor, Raymond Miquel, moved away from brewing and into fast food.
In May 1987, in a £98 million deal, he picked up the Garfunkels restaurant chain.
Fifteen months later, following a boardroom row, Miquel was replaced by Garfunkels chief, Philip Kaye.
Virani seized his chance.
Kaye, he knew, was not interested in beer.
For £17 million, he bought back the brewery business.
‘It has to be my best deal,’ says Virani.
‘I sold for £25 million and bought back for £17 million.
It was the best Christmas present I've ever had.’
That deal was followed by further purchases — including 128 pubs from Grand Metropolitan for £21 million and 80 from Brent Walker for £16 million — to bring the total number of pubs in the group to the present 820.
The reason for Virani's euphoria can also be explained by his timing.
Following the recent Monopolies and Mergers Commission report into the brewing trade, no brewer is allowed to have more than 2,000 pubs and tied houses must stock ‘guest’ beers.
When they sell their pubs, Virani will buy — at knockdown prices.
At the same time, he reckons, in the pubs they keep, the big companies would rather sell the product of a small brewery like Belhaven than that of a major competitor.
He claims he cannot lose.
Based on his earlier assessment of what a deal is worth, Belhaven is probably worth a round-the-world cruise.
Chris Blackhurst is City editor of the Sunday Express 
Virani:Immaculately attired and polite, he is the embodiment of the successful Ugandan businessman 