

THE MESSIAH
SCHOLARSHIP AND PUBLIC UNDERSTANDING
…
This fell into my hands by chance a little while ago.
Until then I'd never had any intimation of what was being done nowadays in the field of biblical research, or of the attacks being launched by competent historians.
It was a shock to me — and a revelation!…
I learnt all sorts of facts that were entirely new to me.
That the Gospels, for example, were written between the years 65 and 100.
That means the Church was founded, and was able to carry on, without them.
Think of it!
More than sixty years after Christ's birth!
It's as if someone today wanted to write down Napoleon's words and deeds without being able to consult a single written document, only vague memories and anecdotes.
Apart from the reference to Napoleon, the above quotation, to judge from the letters and verbal declarations we received, might have expressed, almost verbatim, the reaction of a contemporary reader to The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail when it was published in 1982.
In fact the words are from a novel,Jean Barois by Roger Martin du Gard, published in 1912, and in that novel they elicit the response:
…
Before long all theologians of any intellectual  standing will have reached these conclusions.
In fact, they'll be amazed that nineteenth-century Catholics contrived to believe for so long in the literal truth of those poetic legends.
Yet even before the time of this fictional dialogue, set in the 1870s, Jesus and the origins of Christianity had begun to emerge as a burgeoning industry for researchers, writers and publishers.
In the early sixteenth century, Pope Leo X is on record as declaring: ‘It has served us well, this myth of Christ.’
As early as the 1740s, scholars had deployed what we would now recognise as a valid historical methodology for questioning the veracity of scriptural accounts.
Thus, between 1744 and 1767, Hermann Samuel Reimarus, a professor at Hamburg, had argued that Jesus was nothing more than a failed Judaic revolutionary whose body was removed from its tomb by his disciples.
By the mid-nineteenth century, German biblical scholarship had truly come of age, and a dating of the Gospels had been established which — in its approach and in most of its conclusions — is still deemed valid.
Today, no reputable historian or biblical scholar would deny that the earliest of the Gospels was composed at least a generation after the events it describes.
The thrust of German research was eventually to culminate in a position summarised by Rudolf Bultmann of the University of Marburg, one of the most important, most famous and most esteemed of twentieth-century biblical commentators:
I do indeed think that we can now know almost nothing concerning the life and personality of Jesus, since the early Christian sources show no interest in either, are moreover fragmentary and often legendary.
Yet Bultmann remained a devout Christian.
He did  so by insisting on a crucial distinction between the Jesus of history and the Christ of faith.
As long as this distinction was acknowledged, faith remained tenable.
If the distinction were not acknowledged, faith would inevitably find itself eroded and embarrassed by the ineluctable facts of history.
This was the kind of conclusion to which nineteenth-century German biblical scholarship would eventually lead.
At the same time, however, the bastion of traditional scriptural authority was also being challenged from other quarters.
The controversial contentions of German research remained confined to a rarefied sphere of specialists: but in 1863 the French writer Ernest Renan caused a major international controversy with his celebrated best-seller The Life of Jesus .
This work, which sought to strip Christianity of its supernatural trappings and present Jesus as ‘an incomparable man’, was perhaps the single most talked-about book of its age.
Its impact on the public was enormous; and among the figures it most deeply influenced was Albert Schweitzer.
Yet even Renan's treatment was to be regarded as saccharine and uncritically sentimental by the generation of Modernists who had begun to appear in the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
And the majority of Modernists, it should be noted, were working within the framework of the Church — until, that is, they were officially condemned by Pope Pius X in 1907 and an anti-Modernist oath was introduced in 1910.
By this time, the findings of both German biblical scholarship and of the Roman Catholic Modernists had begun to find their way into the arts.
Thus, in 1916, the Anglo-Irish novelist George Moore published his own fictionalised account of Jesus in The Brook Kerith .
Moore caused considerable scandal by depicting Jesus as surviving the Crucifixion, and being nursed back to health by Joseph of Arimathea.
In the years since The Brook Kerith was published, there have been numerous  other fictionalised accounts of the Gospel story.
In 1946, Robert Graves published his ambitious fictional portrait,King Jesus , in which Jesus again survives the Cross.
And in 1954, Nikos Kazantzakis, the Nobel Prize-winning Greek author, caused an international rumpus with The Last Temptation .
In contrast to the Jesus figures in Moore and Graves, Kazantzakis's protagonist does die on the Cross.
Before he does so, however, he has a vision of what his life should and would have been had he not voluntarily submitted himself to his final sacrifice.
In this vision — a kind of ‘flash-forward’ in fantasy — Jesus sees himself married to the Magdalene (for whom he has lusted all through the book) and fathering a family upon her.
These examples illustrate the extent to which biblical scholarship opened up new territory for the arts.
Two hundred years ago, a novel dealing with scriptural material would have been unthinkable.
Even poetry would not address such matters except in the more or less orthodox, more or less devotional form of Paradise Lost .
By the twentieth century, however, Jesus and his world had become ‘fair game’, not for luridly sensational purposes, but as valid points of enquiry and exploration for serious, internationally acclaimed literary figures.
Through their work, the fruits of biblical scholarship were disseminated to an ever-widening audience.
Biblical scholarship itself did not stand still.
Jesus and the world of the New Testament continued to be addressed by professional historians and researchers who, with increasing rigour and fresh evidence at their disposal, sought to establish the facts surrounding that enigmatic individual of two thousand years ago.
Many of these works were intended primarily for other experts in the field and attracted little popular attention.
A few, however, were pitched to the general reading public and engendered considerable controversy.
The Passover Plot (1963) by Dr Hugh  Schonfield argued that Jesus staged his own mock crucifixion and did not die on the cross; the book became an international best-seller, with more than three  million copies now in print.
More recently, controversy was provoked by Jesus the Magician , in which Dr Morton Smith depicts his protagonist as a typical wonder-worker of the age, a figure of a kind that thronged the Middle East at the beginning of the Christian era.
The Jesus of Morton Smith is not significantly different from, say, Apollonius of Tyana, or the prototype (assuming one existed) of the legendary figure of Simon Magus.
In addition to material devoted specifically to Jesus, there have been innumerable works on the origins of Christianity, the formation of the early Church and its roots in Old Testament Judaism.
Here, Dr Schonfield has again played a prominent role with a series of works addressed to the background of the New Testament.
And in 1979 Elaine Pagels attracted the world's attention, and an immense readership, with The Gnostic Gospels — a study of the Nag Hammadi Scrolls, discovered in Egypt in 1945, which offered a radical new interpretation of Christian teaching and tradition.
Biblical scholarship has made enormous advances during the last forty years, aided immensely by the discovery of new primary sources, material unavailable to researchers in the past.
The most famous of these sources, of course, are the Dead Sea Scrolls, discovered in 1947 in the ruins of the ascetic Essene community of Qumran.
In addition to such major discoveries, many parts of which have not yet been published, other sources have gradually been coming to light or, after long suppression, are being circulated and studied.
As a result, Jesus is no longer a shadowy figure existing in the simplistic, fairy-tale world of the Gospels.
Palestine at the advent of the Christian era is  no longer a nebulous place belonging more to myth than to history.
On the contrary, we now know a great deal about Jesus's milieu, and far more than most practising Christians realise about Palestine in the first century — its sociology, its economy, its politics, its cultural and religious character, its historical actuality.
Much of Jesus's world has emerged from the haze of conjecture, speculation and mythic hyperbole, and is clearer and better documented than, say, the world of King Arthur.
And although Jesus himself remains to a significant degree elusive, it is as possible to deduce plausible information about him as it is to deduce such information about Arthur, or Robin Hood.
The Failure of Biblical Scholarship
Despite all this, the hopeful prophecy which we quoted at the beginning of this book has not been fulfilled.
Theologians of intellectual standing have not — at least, not publicly — come to share those conclusions, nor to be amazed at the credulity of their nineteenth-century predecessors.
In certain quarters, dogma is, if anything, more entrenched than ever.
Despite the current problem of over-population, the Vatican can still impose its strictures on birth control and abortion — not on social or moral grounds, but on theological.
A fire, caused by a bolt of lightning at York Minster, can still be regarded as evidence of divine wrath at the appointment of a contentious bishop.
This bishop's ambiguous statements on aspects of Jesus's biography can still provoke outrage among people who refuse to believe anything but that their saviour was conceived by the Holy Spirit of a virgin.
And in American communities, major works of literature can be banned from schools and libraries — or even, occasionally, burnt — for challenging traditional scriptural accounts, while a new current of fundamentalism can actually influence  American politics through the support of millions eager to be raptured away to a heaven more or less interchangeable with Disneyland.
However unorthodox its presentation of Jesus, Kazantzakis's The Last Temptation is a passionately religious, passionately devotional, passionately Christian work.
Nevertheless, the novel was banned in many countries, including the author's native Greece, and Kazantzakis himself was excommunicated.
Among non-fiction works, Schonfield's The Passover Plot , despite immense sales, provoked much bitter hostility.
In 1983, David Rolfe, working for London Weekend Television and Channel 4, began work on a three-part television documentary entitled Jesus: the Evidence .
The series took no position of its own, endorsed no particular point of view.
It simply endeavoured to survey the field of New Testament studies and to assess the value of various theories proposed.
Yet even before the project got under way, British pressure groups were lobbying to have the enterprise suppressed.
When it was finished, in 1984, it had to be screened, in a private showing, to a number of Members of Parliament before it could be cleared for transmission.
And although subsequent reviews found it thoroughly sane and quite uncontroversial, clerics of the Church of England publicly announced that they would be on standby alert to deal with any members of their congregation upset by the programmes.
Jesus: the Evidence had sought to bring some of the advances in New Testament scholarship to the attention of the lay public.
Apart from The Passover Plot , virtually none of this scholarship has found its way into popular consciousness.
A few works, such as Jesus the Magician and The Gnostic Gospels , have been widely reviewed, discussed and distributed, but their readership has been largely confined to people with a particular interest in their subject matter.
Most of the  work done in recent years has impinged only on specialists.
Much of it is also written specifically for specialists, being virtually impenetrable to the uninitiated reader.
So far as the general public is concerned, as well as the churches which minister to that public, the works cited above might never have been produced.
George Moore's depiction of Jesus as having survived the Crucifixion followed on from a contention maintained not only by some of the oldest heresies, but also by the Koran, and thus widely accepted throughout Islam and the Islamic world.
And yet the same claim, when promulgated by Robert Graves, then by Dr Schonfield in The Passover Plot , attracted as much scandal and incredulity as if it had never been broached before.
In the field of New Testament studies, it is as if each new discovery, each new assertion, is swallowed up as quickly as it can be made.
Each must constantly be presented anew, only to disappear again.
Many people reacted to certain assertions in our own book as if The Passover Plot , or Graves's King Jesus , or Moore's The Brook Kerith — or, for that matter, the Koran itself — had never been written.
This is an extraordinary situation, perhaps unique in the entire spectrum of modern historical research.
In every other sphere of historical enquiry, new material is acknowledged.
It may be disputed.
Attempts may be made to suppress it.
Alternatively, it may be digested and assimilated.
But at least people know what has already been discovered, what has already been said twenty or fifty or seventy years ago.
There is some species of genuine advance, whereby old discoveries and contentions provide a basis for new discoveries and contentions, and a corpus of knowledge comes into being.
Revolutionary theories may be accepted or discarded, but least cognisance is at taken of them and of what preceded them.
A context exists.
Cumulative contributions by successive generations of researchers  create an increased and increasing understanding.
Thus do we acquire our knowledge of history in general, as well as of specific epochs and events.
Thus do we acquire a coherent image of such figures as King Arthur, Robin Hood or Jeanne d'Arc.
These images are constantly growing, constantly mutating, constantly being augmented by new material as it becomes available.
So far as the general public is concerned, New Testament history offers a striking contrast.
It remains static, unaffected by new developments, new discoveries, new findings.
Each controversial assertion is treated as if it were being made for the first time.
Thus the Bishop of Durham's theological pronouncements produce as much of a shock-horror reaction as if the Bishop's own acknowledged precursor, Archbishop Temple, had never lived, never presided over the Anglican Church between the wars and never made essentially similar pronouncements.
Each contribution in the field of biblical research is like a footprint in sand.
Each is covered almost immediately and, so far as the general public is concerned, left virtually without trace.
Each must constantly be made anew, only to be covered again.
Why should this be?
Why should biblical scholarship, which is pertinent to so many lives, be thus immune to evolution and development?
Why should the great mass of believing Christians in fact know less about the figure they worship than about historical figures of far less relevance?
In the past, when such knowledge was inaccessible or dangerous to promulgate, there might have been some justification.
The knowledge today is both accessible and safely promulgated.
Yet the practising Christian remains as ignorant as his predecessors of centuries ago; and he subscribes essentially to the same simplistic accounts he heard when he himself was a child.
A fundamentalist might well assert that the situation  bears witness to the resilience and tenacity of Christian faith.
We do not find such an explanation satisfactory.
The Christian faith may indeed be resilient and tenacious.
History has proved it to be so.
But we are not talking about faith — which must necessarily be an intensely private, intensely subjective affair.
We are talking about documented historical facts.
In the wake of the television series mentioned above, a panel discussion on the subject was transmitted.
A number of distinguished commentators, most of them ecclesiastics, were assembled to evaluate the programmes and their implications.
During the course of this panel discussion, several of the contributors agreed on one telling point.
In the last year, the same point has been echoed not only by the Bishop of Durham, but also by the Archbishop of Canterbury.
It was also a focus of debate at a subsequent synod of the Church of England.
According to several participants, the prevailing ignorance of New Testament scholarship is in large part the fault of the churches themselves and of the ecclesiastical establishment.
Anyone in the ministry, anyone training for the ministry, is, as a matter of course, confronted with the latest developments in biblical research.
Any seminarian today will learn at least something of the Dead Sea Scrolls, of the Nag Hammadi Scrolls, of the history and evolution of New Testament studies, of the more controversial statements made by both theologians and historians.
Yet this knowledge has not been passed on to the laity .
In consequence, a gulf has opened between ecclesiastics and their congregations.
Among themselves, ecclesiastics have become eminently sophisticated and erudite.
They react to the latest discoveries with blasé aplomb, remaining unruffled by theological controversy.
They may find contentions such as those we have made questionable, but not surprising or scandalous.
Yet nothing of this sophistication has been  transmitted to their flock.
The flock receives virtually no historical background from its shepherd — who is believed to be the definitive authority on such matters.
When, in consequence, such background is presented by writers like ourselves, rather than by the official shepherd, it can often produce a reaction amounting to trauma, or a personal crisis of faith.
Either we become regarded as gratuitously destructive iconoclasts, or the shepherd himself becomes suspect for having withheld information.
The overall effect is precisely the same as if there were an organised conspiracy of silence among churchmen.
This, then, is the situation at present.
On the one hand, there is the ecclesiastical hierarchy, steeped in what has been written in the past, versed in all the latest aspects of biblical scholarship.
On the other hand, there is the lay congregation, to whom biblical scholarship is totally unknown territory.
The modern, more or less well-read cleric is acutely aware, for example, of the distinction between what is in the New Testament itself and what is an accretion of later tradition.
He is aware of precisely how much — or, to be more accurate, how little — the scriptures actually say.
He is aware of how much latitude, indeed, of how much necessity, there is for interpretation.
For such a cleric, the contradictions between fact and faith, between history and theology, were personally confronted and resolved long ago.
Such a cleric has long recognised that his personal belief is not the same thing as historical evidence, and he has effected some kind of personal reconciliation between the two — a reconciliation which, to a greater or lesser degree, manages to accommodate both.
Such a cleric has generally ‘heard it all before’.
He is unlikely to be startled by the kind of evidence or hypothesis presented by us and by other writers.
It will already have been familiar to him, and he will have formed his own conclusions long ago.
In contrast to the learned shepherd, the flock has not had occasion either to familiarise itself with the evidence in question or to confront the inconsistencies between scriptural accounts and the actual historical backdrop.
For the devout Christian, there has been no need to reconcile fact and faith, history and theology, simply because he has never had any reason to believe that a distinction between them might exist.
He may not even have thought consciously of Palestine two thousand years ago as a very real place, precisely situated in space and time, subject to a confused welter of social, psychological, political, economic and religious factors — the same factors that operate in any ‘real’ locality, past or present.
On the contrary, the story in the Gospels is often utterly divorced from all historical context — a narrative of stark, timeless, mythic simplicity enacted in a sort of limbo, a never-never-land of long ago and far away.
Jesus, for example, appears now in Galilee, now in Judaea; now in Jerusalem, or on the banks of Jordan.
For the modern Christian, however, there is often no awareness of the geographical and political relation between these places, how far they might be from each other, how long a journey from one to the other might take.
The titles of various official functionaries are often meaningless.
Romans and Jews mill confusingly in the background, like extras on a film set, and if one has any concrete image of them at all, it generally derives from one or another Hollywood spectacular — Pilate complete with Brooklynese accent.
For the lay congregation, scriptural accounts are regarded as literal history, a self-contained story no less true for being divorced from an historical context.
Never having been taught otherwise by his spiritual mentors, many a devout believer has had no need to question the problems posed by such a context.
When these problems are suddenly posed by a book such as ours, they will quite understandably assume the form  of revelation, or of sacrilege.
And we ourselves will instinctively be perceived as ‘anti-Christian’, as writers engaged in a fully fledged crusade which pits us, as militant adversaries, against the ecclesiastical establishment — as if we were personally bent on toppling the edifice of Christendom (and so naive as to think such a feat possible).
Our Conclusion in Perspective
Needless to say, we harbour no such intention.
We are not engaged in any sort of crusade.
We have no particular desire to make ‘converts’.
We certainly are not deliberately trying to shake people's faith.
In The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail , our motivation was really quite simple.
We had a story to tell, and the story seemed eminently worth the telling.
We had been involved in an historical adventure as gripping as any detective tale or spy thriller.
At the same time, the adventure had also proved immensely informative, uncovering vast tracts of our civilisation's past — and not just biblical — which we and our readers might not otherwise have had occasion to explore.
It is a truism that a good story requires telling; it seems to have a life and momentum of its own, which demand expression.
We wished to share our story, in much the same way that one might tug a friend's arm and call his or her attention to a striking landscape, or a spectacular sunset.
Our conclusions about Jesus were an integral part of our adventure.
Indeed, the adventure itself led us to them.
We simply invited our readers to witness the process whereby it had done so.
‘These are the conclusions we reached,’ we said in effect.
‘They are our conclusions, based on our own research, our own predispositions, our own framework, our own lack of preconceptions.
We are not trying to foist them upon  you.
If they make sense to you, well and good.
If not, feel free to discard them and draw your own.
In the meantime, we hope you found your sojourn with us interesting, entertaining and informative.’
And yet it was inevitable, given our subject matter, that we should find ourselves caught in the inherent conflict between fact and faith.
A simple example should serve to illustrate the complexities and the paradoxes of this conflict.
In 1520, Hernán Cortés, advancing on the ancient Mexican capital of Tenochtitlan, was regarded as a god by the Aztecs.
Never having seen firearms or horses before, the Aztecs regarded these things not only as supernatural, but as confirmation of Cortés's divine status — of his identity as an avatar of their supreme god, Quetzalcoatl.
Today, of course, it is understandable how such a misconception can have  occurred .
Even to a Western European at the time, it would have been comprehensible.
It is quite clear that there was nothing in any way divine about Cortés.
And yet it is equally clear that in the minds of those who believed in his divinity, he was indeed a god.
Let us suppose that a modern Mexican Indian, perhaps with vestiges of an Aztec heritage, asserts that he believes in Cortés's divinity.
It might seem to us somewhat peculiar, but we could not presume to challenge his belief — especially if his background, his education.
his upbringing, his culture had all conduced to foster it.
Moreover, his ‘faith’ might entail something much more profound than a mere conviction of Cortés's divinity.
He might assert that he experienced Cortés within him, that he communed personally with Cortés, that Cortés appeared to him in visions, that through Cortés he approached oneness with God or with the sacred.
How could we possibly challenge such assertions?
What a man experiences in the privacy of his psyche must of necessity remain inviolate and inviolable.
And there are a great many  people, quite sane, quite balanced, quite worthy of respect, who, in the privacy of their psyches, believe in things far stranger than the divinity of Hernan Cortés.
But the times in which Cortés lived, like the times in which Jesus lived, are documented.
We know quite a bit about the historical context, the world in which both figures existed.
This knowledge is not a matter of personal belief, but of a simple historical fact.
And if a man permits his personal belief to distort, alter or transform historical fact, he cannot expect others, whether or not they share his belief, to condone the process.
The same principle obtains if a man permits his personal belief to derange dramatically the laws of probability and what we know of human nature.
We could not, as we said, challenge a man who believed in Cortés's divinity, or who, in some manner or form ‘experienced’ Cortés within him.
We could, however, challenge a man who asserted that, as a matter of historical fact, Cortés (like Quetzalcoatl) was born of an eagle and a serpent, or that Cortés was ordained to save the world, or that Cortés never died and now bides his time in some underground crypt awaiting a propitious moment to return and proclaim his sovereignty over Mexico.
We could challenge a man who asserted that Cortés, even without his armour, was immune to spears and arrows, that he rode a horse through sea or sky, or that he used weapons which in reality were not invented until two centuries later.
It is not that established records of Cortés explicitly deny these things.
They do not — for the simple reason that no such things were ever asserted about Cortés during his lifetime.
But such things fly so flagrantly in the face of known history, so flagrantly in the face of human experience, so flagrantly in the face of simple probability, that they impose an inordinate strain upon credulity.
As personal belief, they may be unimpugnable.
But presented as historical fact, they rest on too improbable and tenuous a basis.
Jesus poses a problem essentially analogous.
We have no desire to challenge anyone's personal faith, anyone's personal belief.
We are not dealing with the Christ or Christos of theology, the figure who enjoys a very real and very puissant existence in the psyches and consciences of the faithful.
We are dealing with a different figure, someone who actually walked the sands of Palestine two thousand years ago, just as Cortés trod the stones of the Mexican desert in 1519.
We are dealing, in short, with the Jesus of history — and history, however vague and uncertain it may sometimes be, will still often brazenly defy our wishes, our myths, our mental images, our preconceptions.
In order to do justice to the Jesus of history, one must effectively divest oneself of preconceptions — and especially of the preconceptions fostered by subsequent tradition.
One must be prepared to contemplate biblical material as dispassionately as one might contemplate chronicles pertaining to Caesar, or Alexander — or Cortés.
And one must refrain from a priori acts of belief.
Indeed, it can be argued that the wisdom of believing or dis-believing is itself questionable.
‘Belief’ may well be a dangerous word, implying, as it does, an act of faith which may often be unwarranted.
People are prepared to kill all too readily in the name of belief.
At the same time, to disbelieve is as much an act of faith, as much an unsubstantiated assumption, as belief.
Disbelief — as exemplified by the militant atheist or rationalist, for instance— is in itself another form of belief.
To say that one does not believe in telepathy, or in ghosts, or in God is as much an act of faith as believing in them.
It is preferable to think in terms of knowledge.
Ultimately, the issue is quite simple.
Either one knows something, immediately, directly and at first hand, or one does not.
A man who touches a hot stove does not need to believe in pain.
He knows pain; he experiences  pain; pain is a reality that cannot be doubted.
A man who receives an electric shock does not ask himself whether he believes in the form of energy known as electricity.
He experiences something whose reality cannot be denied, whatever the term one attaches to it.
But if one is dealing with anything other than empirical knowledge of this kind — if, in short, one does not personally know in the sense just explained — the only honest thing one can say is that one does not know.
So far as the theological attributes accorded Jesus by Christian tradition are concerned, we simply do not know.
Within the general spectrum of ‘things not known’, virtually all things are possible.
But on the basis of one's own experience, on the basis of human history and development, some of these are more possible than others, more or less likely, more or less probable than others.
If one is honest, one can only acknowledge this situation — that all things are possible, but that some are more possible than others.
It amounts to a simple balance of probabilities and plausibilities.
What is more or less likely to have happened?
What is more in accord with mankind's experience?
In the absence of truly definitive knowledge about Jesus, it seems to us more likely, more probable, more in accord with our experience of humanity, that a man should have been married and tried to regain his rightful throne than that he should have been born of a virgin, walked on water and risen from his grave.
And yet this conclusion, too, must, of necessity, remain tentative.
It is a conclusion acknowledged as a more likely possibility, not embraced as a creed.
Interpretation in the Service of Belief
As we have said, much is known today about the world in which Jesus lived, the Palestine of two thousand years ago.
But as far as Jesus himself, and the events  surrounding his life, are concerned, there is an absence of definitive knowledge.
The Gospels, indeed the whole of the Bible, are sketchy documents, which no responsible scholar would for a moment consider absolutely reliable as historical testimony.
Given this situation, one must perforce hypothesise, if one is not to remain mute.
Granted, one must not hypothesise wildly; one must confine one's speculation to the framework of known historical data and probabilities.
Within this framework, however, it is perfectly valid, and indeed necessary, to speculate — to interpret the meagre, opaque and often contradictory evidence that does exist.
Most biblical scholarship involves some degree of speculation.
So, for that matter, do theology and the teachings of the churches.
But while historical research speculates on the basis of historical fact, theology and clerical teachings speculate almost entirely on the scriptures themselves — often without any relation to historical fact.
People have argued and slaughtered each other, have waged wars throughout the course of the last two thousand years over the way in which particular passages should be understood.
In the coalescence of Christian tradition, this is one principle that has remained constant.
In the past, when Church Fathers or other individuals were confronted with one of the various biblical ambiguities and contradictions, they speculated about its meaning.
They attempted to interpret it.
Once accepted, the conclusion of their speculation — that is, their interpretation — would become enshrined as dogma.
Over the centuries, it then came to be regarded as established fact.
Such conclusions are not fact at all.
On the contrary, they are speculation and interpretation congealed into a tradition, and it is this tradition which is constantly mistaken for fact.
A single example should serve to illustrate the process.
According to all four Gospels, Pilate affixes to  Jesus's cross an inscription bearing the title ‘King of the Jews’.
Apart from this, the Gospels tell us virtually nothing.
In John 6:15, there is a curious statement, that ‘Jesus, who could see why they were about to come and take him by force and make him king, escaped back to the hills by himself.’
And in John 19:21–22: ‘So the Jewish chief priests said to Pilate, ‘You should not write ‘King of the Jews’, but ‘This man said: I am King of the Jews’’Pilate answered, ‘What I have written, I have written’.’
But there is no elaboration or elucidation of these passages.
We are given no real indication of whether the title was warranted or not, official or not, recognised or not.
Nor are we given any indication of how, precisely, Pilate intended the appellation to be understood.
What was his motivation?
What was his action intended to achieve?
At some point in the past, it was assumed, on the basis of speculative interpretation, that Pilate must have intended the title mockingly.
To have assumed otherwise would have been to raise a number of awkward questions.
Today, most Christians blindly accept, as if it were a matter of established fact, that Pilate used the title in derision.
But this is not established fact at all.
If one reads the Gospels themselves, with no preconceptions whatever, there is nothing to suggest that the title was not used in all seriousness — was not perfectly legitimate and acknowledged as such by at least some of Jesus's contemporaries, including Pilate.
So far as the Gospels themselves are concerned, Jesus may indeed have been King of the Jews — and/or been so regarded.
It is only tradition that has persuaded people otherwise.
To suggest that Jesus may actually have been King of the Jews, is not, therefore, to stand at variance with the evidence.
It is merely to stand at variance with a long established tradition — a long established system of beliefs based ultimately on someone's speculative interpretation.
If anything stands at variance with the  evidence, it is this system of beliefs.
For in Matthew's account of Jesus's birth, the three ‘wise men’ ask, ‘where is the infant King of the Jews?’
If Pilate intended the title to be derisive, what is one to make of the question of the magi?
Did they, too, intend it as derisive?
Surely not.
Yet if they were referring to a legitimate title, why should not Pilate have been doing so as well?
The Gospels are documents of a stark, mythic simplicity.
They depict a world stripped to certain bare essentials, a world of a timeless, archetypal, almost fairy-tale character.
But Palestine, at the advent of the Christian era, was not a fairy-tale kingdom.
On the contrary, it was an eminently real place, peopled by real individuals, such as one might find anywhere else in the world at any other time in history.
Herod was not a king of obscure legend.
He was a very real potentate, whose reign (37 to 4 B.C.) extends beyond its biblical context to overlap those of well known secular figures — of  Julius Caesar, for instance, Cleopatra, Mark Antony, Augustus and other personages familiar to us from schoolbooks and even from Shakespeare.
As we have said, Palestine in the first century, like any other place in the world, was subject to a complex welter of social, psychological, political, economic, cultural, and religious factors.
Numerous factions squabbled with each other and among themselves.
Cabals manipulated and machinated behind the scenes.
Various parties pursued conflicting objectives, often making tenuous alliances with each other for the sole purpose of expediency.
Deals were clandestinely arranged.
Vested interests jockeyed for power.
The populace at large, like the populace elsewhere and at other times, veered between apathetic torpor and hysterical fanaticism, between abject fear and fervent conviction.
Little, if any, of this is conveyed by the Gospels — only a residue of confusion.
And yet these currents.
these forces, are essential for any understanding  of the historical Jesus — the Jesus who actually walked the soil of Palestine two thousand years ago — rather than the Christ of faith.
It was this Jesus that we endeavoured to discern and comprehend more clearly.
To make such an endeavour is not to declare oneself anti-Christian.
The Context
In the wake of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail , when certain ‘Christians’ vehemently declared us to be anti-Christian, we could only shrug helplessly.
We ourselves, it must be repeated, had no desire to assume the role of iconoclasts; we were simply caught in the conflict between fact and faith.
Nor, for that matter, did we regard the suggestions we made about Jesus as in any way shocking or outrageous.
As the reader will have noted, virtually all the suggestions had been made before, most of them quite recently and in a well publicised way.
Moreover, we are not alone.
We were not concocting a cranky, hare-brained thesis calculated to produce an ‘instant best-seller’.
On the contrary, virtually all our suggestions were very much in the mainstream of contemporary biblical scholarship, and it was from precisely this scholarship that much of our research derived.
We consulted the acknowledged experts in the field, many of whom were not known to the general public; and for the most part we did little more than synthesise their conclusions in a readily digestible fashion.
These conclusions were already familiar enough to the ecclesiastical establishment, many of whom readily accepted them.
What they had failed to do was pass them on to the laity.
In private discussions, we met churchmen of many denominations.
Few expressed any hostility to the conclusions in our book.
Certain of them took issue  with us on one or another specific point, but most found our general thesis plausible, even in some cases probable, and in no way diminishing the stature of Jesus or the Christian faith.
Among lay Christians, however, the same conclusions seemed to entail blasphemy, heresy, sacrilege and almost every other religious sin on the register.
It was this discrepancy of reaction that we found particularly striking and instructive.
Churchmen, whom one would expect to be most militant about the matter, responded with anything from sceptical but unsurprised indifference to outright endorsement.
Their flock responded with anything from horrified disillusion to vociferous outrage.
Nothing could have made so apparent the failure of the churches to keep their congregations abreast of developments in the field of biblical scholarship.
All the same, there are signs that the situation is slowly beginning to change.
It may well be, of course, that these signs are misleading or illusory, and that the pendulum will once again swing back in favour of ‘simple faith’, with the fruits of historical scholarship continuing to be ignored or suppressed.
In that respect, the contagion of American fundamentalism certainly augurs ill.
Nevertheless, there are distinct signs of improvement in the air, so numerous as to amount, in their modest way, to a form of Zeitgeist — a spirit, or current, or movement, abroad in the world.
During the years of our research, numerous other publications were already in circulation, helping to create a favourable climate.
In the 1970s, at least two novels, one of them a serious and well reviewed work of literature, postulated the discovery of Jesus's mummified body.
Another popular novel called the Gospels into question by suggesting the existence of a new corpus of first-hand scriptural accounts — and this book was made into a television mini-series.
In his monumental opus Terra Nostra — certainly one of the  dozen or so most important novels to be published in any language since the Second World War — the respected Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes depicted Jesus as surviving the Cross by means of fraudulent crucifixion involving a substitute.
At least one novel,Magdalene by Carolyn Slaughter, presented the  Magdalene as Jesus's lover.
And Liz Greene, drawing on some of our own research, wrote of a bloodline descended from Jesus in The Dreamer of the Vine , a novel about Nostradamus published in 1980.
So far as more academic scholarship was concerned, the Nag Hammadi Scrolls appeared for the first time in English translation in 1977, and within two years had inspired Elaine  Pagels' best-seller The Gnostic Gospels .
Morton Smith had disclosed his findings about the early church in The Secret Gospel , following it with his controversial portrait in Jesus the Magician .
Haim Maccoby addressed himself to the historical Jesus in Revolution in Judea , as did Geza Vermes in such works as Jesus the Jew .
And Hugh Schonfield's on-going series of studies of first-century Palestine was appearing at regular intervals throughout the 1970s.
On a theological level, a number of Anglican clerics provoked considerable controversy by questioning Jesus's divinity in a collection of essays,The Myth of God Incarnate .
And it is also worth noting a curious, unsubstantiated but fascinating book,The Jesus Scroll , by an Australian writer, Donovan Joyce.
By 1982, then, when The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail appeared in print, the waters had already been disturbed by a fresh wave of material pertaining to the historical Jesus.
True, many people still did not know the extent to which, for example, the Gospels contradict each other .
Or that there are Gospels other than those in the New Testament, which were more or less arbitrarily excluded from the canon by councils composed of eminently mortal, eminently fallible men.
Or that Jesus's divinity had been decided by vote  at the Council of Nicaea, some three centuries after Jesus himself had lived.
True, too, fundamentalism is still rabid in America.
And, as we observed earlier, there are still people in Britain who can ascribe a fire caused by lightning in York to God's wrath at the appointment of a somewhat outspoken bishop — as if , amid the violence, hatred, prejudice, insensitivity and menace of the modern world, God had nothing more pressing on His mind, nothing better to do with His resources.
And there are still people who can shout blasphemy or heresy and demand the same bishop's resignation when he makes so self-evident, commonsense a statement as that the Resurrection cannot be definitively ‘proved’.
Nevertheless, there is something ‘in the air’, of which the bishop himself is a manifestation.
It would be disingenuous on our part to pretend ignorance of our book's impact, both in sales and controversy.
For the first time since Hugh Schonfield's Passover Plot in 1963, certain questions pertaining to the New Testament, to Jesus and to the origins of Christianity, were raised to the general reading public — to the so-called ‘mass market’, rather than to a cadre of academic specialists and theologians.
And it became apparent that the general reading public was not only prepared, but positively eager, to listen.
Neither television nor the publishing establishment were blind to the possibilities.
Since 1982, a number of new books have appeared.
In 1983,The Illusionist , a novel by Anita Mason, offered a controversial but historically valid perspective on the coalescence of the early Church; it was short-listed for the Booker Prize, Britain's most prestigious literary award.
In 1985, Anthony Burgess, perhaps even more controversially, explored much the same territory in The Kingdom of the Wicked .
An incipient storm was provoked by Michele Robert's novel The Wild Girl .
Drawing, as we did, on evidence in the Nag Hammadi Scrolls, Michele  Roberts depicts the Magdalene as Jesus's lover and as the mother of his child.
On its paperback publication in 1985,The Wild Girl provoked dire fulminations not only from the expected pressure groups, but also from a would-be Torquemada in Parliament; and, until rather more sane judgements prevailed, the book was threatened with prosecution under Britain's antediluvian blasphemy law.
In the meantime, Robert Graves's King Jesus , which makes assertions no less scandalous, was reissued for the first time since 1962, in a readily accessible paperback edition.
(Graves's book, presumably, was too opaque for the self-appointed custodians of thought who objected to Michele Roberts.
Or perhaps established literary figures enjoy a certain immunity from such cranky zeal.
It might reasonably be argued that the single most inflammatory portrayal of Jesus anywhere is in D. H. Lawrence's The Man Who Dies , published more than fifty years ago, a miniature masterpiece in which Jesus is depicted as having what used to be called ‘sexual congress’ with a priestess of Isis in an Egyptian temple.
At the climatic moment, he declares, ‘I am risen!’).
Among biblical studies geared towards a nonspecialist audience, two of Hugh Schonfield's books have been reissued, while a new one,The Essene Odyssey , appeared in 1985.
The works of Morton Smith and Elaine Pagels have all been released in quality paperback editions.
In television and cinema, there have been dramatisations (albeit glossy and uncontroversial) of the Siege of Masada and the dispute between Peter and Paul.
More significantly, Karen Armstrong, a former nun, challenged established Christian tradition in an intelligent, well researched and lucidly presented series on Saint Paul, entitled The First Christian .
As we have already noted, David Rolfe did likewise in his widely publicised series Jesus: the Evidence , which was followed by a book bearing the same title.
And in The Sea of Faith , Don Cupitt, Lecturer in Divinity and Dean of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, presented perhaps the most penetrating television study yet undertaken of Christianity today — a study containing statements far more contentious than those of the Bishop of Durham.
We would not presume to claim that The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail in itself necessarily influenced any of these works.
Indeed, some of the individuals cited above would unquestionably find themselves at odds with certain of our conclusions.
But we would like to think that the success of our book rendered both publishers and television producers more aware of the audience for material pertaining to the historical Jesus and the origins of Christianity — an audience whose appetite makes such books and films viable.
The emergence of this audience constitutes an extremely significant new development.
It also places a new and salutary responsibility on the churches, rendering increasingly untenable the kind of patronising censorship hitherto practised by churchmen with their congregations.
If, as in the past, shepherds withhold information from their flock, the flock will no longer acquiesce in the process.
It will turn instead to books and television.
If we are correct in this assumption, we do have a basis for feeling gratified.
Not, it must be repeated, because we are on a crusade.
Not because we have a vested interest, personal or impersonal, in challenging, compromising or embarrassing the ecclesiastical establishment.
But because we, too, live in the modern world.
We are aware of, and affected by, the pressures of that world.
We are vulnerable, like everyone else, to prejudice, and are conscious of how much havoc bigotry, the excesses of blind faith, and the tyranny which often accompanies it, can inflict on the world.
It is to our benefit, as it is to everyone else's, that some measure of perspective should be restored.
JESUS AS KING OF ISRAEL
Once, when traversing the United States by plane we were informed by the stewardess: ‘We shall be landing momentarily in Chicago.’
We quickly sought assurance that the aircraft would remain stationary long enough for us to get off.
Words are imbued with a meaning which can often be affected by context, culture and history, all of which are subject to change.
Our American colleagues do not understand the word ‘momentarily’ in the same way that we do.
Some words and their meanings may achieve impressive longevity.
‘Dog’ remains dog through centuries of time and cultural change.
(Though even so simple a word will conjure a variety of different images, depending upon the canine preferences of the reader.)
But the word ‘plane’ could not possibly have conveyed to our eighteenth-century ancestors the meaning which it carries at the top of this page.
We must, necessarily, interpret language.
We think we know what certain words mean, but the assumption can be dangerous.
It is especially so when we try to impose our twentieth-century interpretation upon a word which once conveyed a subtly, or dramatically, different meaning in the past.
Even more dangerous is it when we insist that a man of two thousand years ago meant what we mean in so  contentiously abstract a sphere as religious faith.
Many of our contemporary attitudes to our beliefs about Jesus stem from interpretation — or misinterpretation — of biblical material.
And biblical material is composed of words (themselves translations of other words) which attempt to convey ideas.
Perhaps one of the most important of these ideas is that of Jesus as Messiah.
In the words of a much loved hymn, Jesus is described as ‘prophet, priest and king’.
And these appellations are all to be inferred when the Christian speaks of Jesus as Messiah.
For most, indeed, the title, applying uniquely as it now does to Jesus, also implies God.
We must be cautious, though, in making the  assumption that such words as ‘king’, ‘prophet’ or ‘Messiah’still convey to us the meaning which they had at the time and in the world of Jesus.
We discussed evidence for Jesus as king in our previous book, but additional material must be presented and emphasised here.
For to say that Jesus was a ‘rightful king’ means far more than it might simply in today's world — far more than just a legitimate inherited position as head, symbolic or otherwise, of a secular state.
The ‘nation of Israel’ two thousand years ago was perceived primarily as a spiritual, rather than a secular, entity.
It represented an extreme example of a theocracy — of a body politic organised essentially around religious principles.
Not only were religion and the state virtually synonymous, as they might be today, for example, in Iran.
The state itself was a manifestation of religion.
Every other aspect of the culture was similarly absorbed within a religious framework.
The very landscape was regarded as uniquely and especially favoured by God.
Caves, valleys, mountains, rivers — all were invested with a profound reverential significance.
Although social, political and economic factors were obviously important, the administrative machinery of government  was geared ultimately towards creating a culture which earned God's endorsement and fulfilled what was deemed to be His will.
Taxes levied by Rome or by local secular authorities  might be grudged, but those claimed by the Temple were paid willingly, even eagerly.
The people considered themselves ‘God's chosen’, and the king of such a people was regarded as something more than other kings — more even than the Emperor of Rome.
He was a manifestation of God's will.
He was an embodiment of God's divine plan for the people as a whole.
He was a mouthpiece for God's intentions and wishes.
He was ultimately as much an oracle, a high priest, a pope, a spiritual leader, as he was a king.
All of this, of course, in the context of the age, is what the term ‘Messiah’ would have signified.
In a strictly literal translation ‘Messiah’ meant nothing more nor less than ‘the anointed one’.
In other words it denoted the duly consecrated and divinely endorsed king.
Every king of Israel was regarded as a Messiah.
The term was habitually applied to David and to David's successors, from Solomon on.
‘Every Jewish king of the House of David was known as Messiah, or Christ, and a regular way of referring to the High Priest was ‘the Priest Messiah’…’
Not only that.
Around the time of Jesus's birth, a militant, armed opposition to Rome was organised and led by a man who also claimed the title of Messiah.
He was recognised as such not only by his immediate followers, but also by a portion of the populace at large.
His son, in A.D. 66, ‘returned in the state of a king to Jerusalem’ and ‘adorned with royal garments’, visited the Temple to worship.
Needless to say, there was nothing intrinsically divine about such figures.
Indeed, to assert that any man was God, or even the son of God, in a literal sense would have been, for Jesus and his contemporaries, blasphemous in the extreme.
For  Jesus and his contemporaries, the idea of a divine Messiah would have been utterly unthinkable.
But if the Messiah was not divine, he would certainly have had God's particular and unique blessing.
He would have functioned as, so to speak, God's temporal viceroy, constituting the primary link between the Deity and ordinary humanity.
Thus although the term ‘Messiah’ simply meant ‘the anointed one’, or ‘king’, the concept of kingship it implied involved far more than concepts of kingship do today.
The status of the expected Messiah was augmented by the circumstances which obtained in Palestine at the period of Jesus's birth.
This period — which we shall have occasion to discuss in more detail later — was known, for those living in it, as ‘the Last Times’, or ‘the Last Days’.
The nation was believed to have fallen into a phase of cataclysmic evil.
The last dynasty of legitimate Judaic monarchs had been all but extinguished.
Since 63 b.c., Israel itself had become a territory of the Roman Empire, forced to acknowledge a secular ruler who — in blasphemous affront to every tenet of Judaism — dared to proclaim himself a god.
And the throne of the country was occupied by a puppet-king regarded as an iniquitous usurper.
Herod, who reigned over Palestine at the time, could not even claim to be a Jew by birth.
He was a native of Idumaea, the largely desert, and non-Judaic, region to the south.
At the beginning of his reign, Herod undertook to establish currency and legitimacy for himself.
He repudiated his first wife and married a recognised Judaic princess, thereby seeking at least a form of legal sanction.
In order to ingratiate himself with the populace, he rebuilt the Temple of Jerusalem on a hitherto unprecedented scale.
He proclaimed himself a devout servant of the God of Israel.
Such gestures failed dismally to ratify his authority.
He remained  reviled and hated by the people he ruled.
Even his most generous acts were received with hostility and scorn, and this encouraged a natural predisposition towards tyranny and excess.
That such a man should be placed in the role of ruler over God's chosen people was deemed a curse — an affliction visited by God upon His people, a punishment for transgression both past and present.
Whatever social and political abuses Herod might perpetrate, these were seen merely as symptoms of a much more profound dilemma — the dilemma of a people who had been abandoned by their God.
Throughout the Palestine of Jesus's time, there spread a yearning for a spiritual leader who would bring the nation back to God again, would effect a reconciliation with the divine.
This spiritual leader, when he appeared, would be the rightful king — the ‘Messiah’.
As king, he would rescue his people.
He would restore God's covenant with man.
Aided by God, suffused by God, sanctioned and mandated by God, performing God's will, he would drive the Roman invaders from Palestine and establish his own righteous regime, as glorious as that ascribed by tradition to Solomon and David.
The character of the Messiah is summed up by one historian of the period as:
…a charismatically endowed descendant of David whom the Jews…believed would be raised up by God to break the yoke of the heathen and to reign over a restored kingdom of Israel to which all the Jews of the Exile would return.
Christian tradition, of course, does not contest Jesus's claim to Messiahship.
It contests only what Messiahship entailed, simply because this, for centuries, was not made sufficiently clear.
To accept Jesus as a Messiah while denying his regal and  political role is simply to ignore the facts — to ignore the historical context, to ignore what the word ‘Messiah’ meant and implied.
Christians have regarded the Messiah as non-political — a wholly spiritual figure who posed no challenge to temporal authority, who had no secular or political aspirations himself, who beckoned his followers to a kingdom ‘not of this world’.
Biblical scholarship during the last two centuries, however, has rendered such an interpretation increasingly untenable.
Few, if any, experts on the subject today would contest that the Messiah expected in Jesus's era was a largely political figure, intent on redeeming Israel from the Roman yoke.
Judaism at the time acknowledged no distinction between religion and politics.
To the extent that the rightful king was mandated and sanctioned by God, his political activity was mantled in a religious aura.
To the extent that his religious function included freeing his people from bondage, his spiritual role was also political.
The Rightful King
The Gospels of Matthew and Luke state explicitly that Jesus was of royal blood — a genuine and legitimate king, the lineal descendant of Solomon and David.
If this is true, it would have conferred upon him at least one important qualification for being the Messiah, or for being presented as such.
He would have enjoyed a technically legal claim to the throne of his regal forebears — and perhaps, as had been suggested, the technically legal claim.
It is evident that certain people, from radically diverse backgrounds and with radically diverse interests, are quite prepared to acknowledge the validity of this claim.
As we noted, the three wise men came seeking ‘the infant King of the Jews’.
In Luke 23:3.
Jesus is accused of ‘…inciting our people to revolt, opposing payment of the tribute to Caesar, and claiming to be Christ, a king’.
In Matthew 21:9, on his triumphal entry into Jerusalem, Jesus is greeted by a multitude shouting ‘Hosanna to the son of David’.
There can be little question that, in this episode, Jesus is being hailed as king.
Indeed, the Gospels of both Luke and John are explicit on the matter.
In both of them, Jesus is hailed quite unequivocally as king.
And in John 1:49, Jesus is told bluntly by Nathanael: ‘You are the King of Israel!‘
Finally, of course, there is the inscription ‘King of the Jews’, which Pilate orders affixed to the Cross.
As we have already mentioned, Christian tradition ascribes this gesture on Pilate's part to derision.
Yet even as an act of derision, it makes no sense whatever unless Jesus really was King of the Jews.
If one is a tyrant and a bully, attempting to assert one's authority, to dominate people, to humble those in one's power, what does one accomplish by labelling a poor prophet a king?
If, on the other hand, Jesus were a rightful king, then one would indeed assert one's authority by humbling him.
There is further evidence for Jesus's royal status in the Gospel narrative of Herod's Massacre of the Innocents (Matthew 2:3–14).
Though highly questionable as the record of an actual historical event, this narrative attests to a very real anxiety on Herod's part about the birth of Jesus:
When Herod heard this he was perturbed…
He called together all the chief priests and scribes…and enquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
‘At Bethlehem in Judaea’, they told him, ‘for this is what the prophet wrote…’
However disliked Herod may have been, his position on the throne should in theory have been  secure.
Certainly, he cannot possibly have felt seriously menaced by rumours of a mystical or spiritual figure — a prophet or a teacher of the kind in which the Holy Land at the time abounded.
If Herod felt threatened by a recently born child, it can only have been because of what the child intrinsically was — a rightful king, for example, with a claim to the throne which even Rome, in the interests of peace and stability, might recognise.
Only a concrete, political challenge of this nature would suffice to explain Herod's anxiety.
It is not the son of a poor carpenter whom the usurper fears, but the Messiah, the rightful anointed king — a figure who, by virtue of some inherent genealogical qualification, might rally popular support and, if not depose him, at least compromise him on specifically political grounds.
The Privileged Background
The image of Jesus as a ‘poor carpenter’ from Nazareth can be challenged at length.
For the present, however, it is sufficient simply to note two points.
The first of these is that the word generally translated as ‘carpenter’ does not, in the original Greek, mean merely a woodworker.
The most accurate translation would be ‘master’, implying mastery of any art, craft or discipline.
It would thus have been as applicable to a teacher, for example, as to a practitioner of any manual skill.
The second point is that Jesus was almost certainly not ‘of Nazareth’.
An overwhelming body of evidence indicates that Nazareth did not exist in biblical times.
The town is unlikely to have appeared before the third century.
‘Jesus of Nazareth’, as most biblical scholars would now readily concur, is a mistranslation of the original Greek phrase ‘Jesus the Nazarean’.
This does not denote any locality.
Rather, it refers to Jesus's membership in a specific  group or sect with a specific religious and/or political orientation — the ‘Nazarene Party’, as certain modern experts call it.
There is notoriously little accurate information about Jesus's circumstances.
But what there is clearly indicates that his family was well-to-do, and that his upbringing was of a kind available only to those with status and financial resources.
All accounts, for example, depict him as a learned man — which was, one must remember, unusual in those largely illiterate times, when education was essentially an adjunct of class.
Jesus is obviously literate and well educated.
In the Gospels, he disputes knowledgeably with his elders about the Law, which presupposes some considerable degree of formal training.
From his own statements, it is clear that he is word-perfect in his familiarity with the prophetic books of the Old Testament, can quote them at will, can move among them with the facility and expertise of a professional scholar.
And if some of his entourage are apparently humble fishermen and artisans from Galilee, others are wealthy and influential people — Joseph of Arimathea, for example, and Nicodemus, and Joanna, the wife of Herod's steward.
As we demonstrated in our previous book, moreover, the wedding at Cana — which may in fact have been Jesus's own wedding — was not a modest village affair, but a sumptuous ceremony of the gentry or aristocracy.
Even if the wedding were not Jesus's own, his presence, as well as his mother's at such an occasion would patently suggest that they were members of the same social caste.
Public Recognition
Perhaps more significant than evidence of this kind is the simple fact that Jesus, on a number of crucial  occasions in the Gospels, acts like a king, and does so quite deliberately.
One of the most telling examples is his triumphal entry into Jerusalem on an ass.
Biblical scholars concur that this incident — manifestly an important one in Jesus's career and calculated to attract maximum attention among his contemporaries — served a very specific purpose.
It was intended, quite flamboyantly, to fulfil Old Testament prophecy.
Indeed, in Matthew 21:4, it is made explicit that the procession was intended to fulfil the prophecy in Zechariah 9:9, which foretells the coming of the Messiah:
Rejoice heart and soul, daughter of Zion!
Shout with gladness, daughter of Jerusalem!
See now, your king comes to you; he is victorious, he is triumphant, humble and riding on a donkey,…
Given Jesus's familiarity with Old Testament teaching, there can be little question that he was aware of this prophecy.
And being aware of this prophecy, he can hardly have fulfilled it unwittingly, or through ‘sheer coincidence’.
The entry into Jerusalem can only have been made with the calculated design of identifying himself, very specifically in the eyes of the populace, with the expected Messiah — in other words, with the rightful king, the ‘anointed one’.
What is more, Jesus had indeed been anointed.
The account appears in garbled form in the New Testament.
There has obviously been some attempt to alter and/or censor, but something of the truth can nevertheless be teased out of the fragments that remain.
Thus, both Matthew and Mark state unequivocally that a royal anointing occurred.
Both state that it involved 300 denarii of spikenard — the equivalent of perhaps £5,000 today.
John states that  the ritual was performed by Mary of Bethany, the sister of Lazarus.
And he gives the game away by specifying that the ritual occurred on the day immediately preceding Jesus's triumphal entry into Jerusalem.
And yet even before this there is evidence that Jesus was accorded some kind of official public recognition as Israel's Messiah, or rightful king.
John the Baptist's ritual at the Jordan would certainly seem to have entailed something of the sort.
It appears to have been roughly analogous to, say, the investiture of the Prince of Wales.
Having been baptised by John, Jesus had the ‘seal of approval’ of an accepted and established prophet, a revered holy man — just as Saul, the first King of Israel, received a ‘seal of approval’from the prophet Samuel.
If John had been of the same family as Jesus, moreover, his ‘seal of approval’ would have carried the additional authority of a royal warrant.
One thing, at any rate, would seem to be clear, and this is that Jesus, after his baptism in the Jordan, undergoes a significant change.
Prior to this ritual, he seems to have been incognito.
Certainly there is no record of any public activity on his part, any behaviour that might attract attention.
After his baptism, however, he moves suddenly towards the centre of the stage, not shrinking from the limelight, not shrinking from addressing large crowds, not shrinking from becoming the focus of public interest.
What is more, his attitude seems to have been affected by his meeting with John at the Jordan.
It is almost as if he has acquired something of John's own  tempestuous wrath, John's own dire, apocalyptic menace, John's own threatening ultimata.
In short, he begins to display precisely the comportment his contemporaries would have expected of their rightful king.
Having been recognised and ratified as the Messiah, he now begins to act as a Messiah should.
The Effect of Jerusalem's Fall
The Gospels became depoliticised and responsibility for Jesus's crucifixion was transferred from the Roman administration to the Jews.
In addressing ourselves to this process, we are not speculating.
On the contrary, we are drawing upon the consensus of unbiased contemporary New Testament scholarship.
And we are also drawing upon elementary common sense.
Why, for example, should the same people who throng to welcome Jesus on his entry into Jerusalem clamour only days later for his death?
Why should the same multitude who invoked blessings on the son of David rejoice in seeing him mortified and humiliated by the hated Roman oppressors?
Why — assuming there to be any accuracy at all in the biblical account — should the very populace which revered Jesus suddenly do a complete turnabout and demand, at the cost of his life, that a figure such as Barabbas (whoever Barabbas was) should be spared?
Such questions cannot be ignored.
But neither the Gospels nor later Christian tradition attempt to answer them.
As we explained in our previous book, and as virtually all serious biblical scholars concur, the Gospels, in treating such issues as these, were either drastically rewritten or, more likely, distorted the events they describe — which would have taken place at least thirty years before they were composed.
The Gospels date from the period after the Jewish revolt of A.D. 66 and the sack of Jerusalem by the Romans in A.D. 70.
They date from a period of cataclysmic turmoil, when Palestine was ravaged by war, the Holy City and most sacred shrine of Judaism was destroyed, all records were scattered and people's memories of events were blurred or modified by more recent occurrences.
The revolt of A.D. 66–73 was a watershed.
Previous events were transformed in the light of it, often by means of the wisdom of hindsight.
For the modern historian, the revolt warps all perspective: no testimony escapes being filtered through the dark, smoked glass of the upheaval.
But when Palestine erupted in A.D. 66, it was not a sudden or unexpected occurrence.
On the contrary, the country had been smouldering for some time.
The impending debacle was ‘in the air’.
Before the decisive revolt, which provoked the full-scale Roman backlash, there had been numerous abortive insurrections extending back to Jesus's time and, indeed, well before.
Since the beginning of the century, militant factions had become increasingly active, conducting a prolonged guerilla war, raiding Roman supply caravans, attacking isolated contingents of Roman troops, harassing Roman garrisons, wreaking as much havoc as possible.
Evidence exists for Jesus's association with the militant factions and for his own probable military activity.
It is there, and it will not go away, however hard the authors of the Gospels have tried to disguise it — and however embarrassing it may be for later Christian tradition.
But it would be a mistake, we think, to divorce such evidence from its context, as certain recent scholars have sought to do.
It would be a mistake to regard Jesus simply as a freedom-fighter, an agitator, a revolutionary in the modern sense.
An ordinary freedom-fighter or revolutionary — and there were a great many of them operating in the Holy Land at the time — might well have won popular support for his actions, but could not have been acclaimed as the Messiah.
And there are enough fragments in the Gospels — the baptism in the Jordan, for instance, and the triumphal entry into Jerusalem — to indicate that Jesus did indeed enjoy that title, at least during the years of his ministry.
If he was thus eligible for that title, there must have been something which qualified him — something which distinguished him from the numerous other leaders, both military and political, who at the time were themselves becoming thorns in the Roman side.
In order to be accorded the title of Messiah, and acclaimed as such by the populace, Jesus would have had to possess some legitimate claim.
In contrast to a conventional revolutionary, Jesus must be seen as what the Gospels themselves acknowledge him to be — a claimant to the throne of David, a rightful king, whose sceptre, like David's, implied both spiritual and temporal sovereignty.
And if he involved himself in military activity, he would simply have been discharging the martial duty expected of him as royal liberator.
Armed resistance to Rome was implicit in the title and the status he had assumed.
CONSTANTINE AS MESSIAH
The Messiah whom Jesus's contemporaries awaited was a variant of a familiar and long established principle.
He was the specifically Judaic equivalent of the sacred priest-king.
The principle underlying this figure obtained throughout the ancient world — not only in the classical cultures of the Mediterranean and the Middle East, but among the Celtic and Teutonic tribes of Europe and farther afield as well.
Among other things, kingship functioned as a kind of conduit through which man was linked to his gods.
And the social hierarchy culminating in the king was intended to mirror, on the terrestrial plane, the immutable order, coherence and stability to which the heavens seemed to bear witness.
Not infrequently, the priest-king was invested with a divine status of his own, becoming a god in his own right.
Thus, for example, Egyptian pharaohs were deified, regarded as avatars of Osiris, Amon and/or Ra.
In a somewhat similar fashion, Roman emperors promoted themselves to godhood, claiming lineal descent not only from demigods such as Hercules, but from none other than Jupiter himself.
In Judaism, of course, the prevailing monotheism of the first century A.D. precluded any deification of the Messiah.
Nevertheless, he was more than just royal.
He was also sacred.
If  he was not a god himself, he was intimately linked to God, a manifestation of God's favour and God's will.
He constituted the all-important connection between terrestrial and celestial order.
The principle of sacred kingship continues well into later Western history.
Needless to say, it underpins the doctrine of ‘divine right’ as that doctrine gradually evolved.
It also lies behind such developments as the medieval conviction that a monarch could heal by the laying on of hands.
Not surprisingly, this latter aptitude, which so closely echoes that attributed to Jesus himself, was ascribed with particular emphasis to the Merovingians.
From the Merovingians to the Habsburgs, European dynasties regarded themselves, and were regarded by their subjects, as enjoying a unique mandate from ‘on high’.
Although this mandate was frequently enough abused, it nevertheless rested on an ultimately selfless foundation — on something originally intended to foster the common good, rather than to foster autocracy.
Strictly speaking, the king was nothing more than a servant, a vessel, a vehicle, through which the divine will manifested itself.
And to that extent, the king himself was deemed expendable.
In many ancient cultures, indeed, the king was ritually sacrificed after a stipulated period of time.
The ritualised killing of the king is one of the most archaic and widespread rites of early civilised man.
Albeit with certain symbolic variations, Jesus himself conforms to this pattern.
And not only that.
In ancient cultures across the globe, the sacrificed king's body became the object of a feast.
His flesh was eaten and his blood was drunk.
Thus did his subjects ingest and incorporate into themselves something of their dead ruler's virtue and power.
A residue of this tradition is obvious enough in the Christian Communion service.
The Warrior Messiah
In the Europe of medieval Christendom, kings laid claim to ‘divine right’, but this right was conferred, ratified and legitimised only through the medium of the Church.
From the eighth century onwards, the Church arrogated to itself the power to create kings.
The Church, in other words, appropriated a prerogative previously reserved for God, and proceeded to install itself as God's mouthpiece.
In accordance with Old Testament practice, it did so by anointing with oil.
As in biblical times, the king became ‘the anointed one’, but only with the approbation of the Church.
For modern Christians, however, it would be surprising to find the Church according a secular ruler the other attributes ascribed by Jesus's contemporaries to their expected Messiah.
It is difficult to imagine, for example, the Church acknowledging a secular ruler as a ‘fullyfledged’ priest-king in the traditional biblical sense.
And yet that, precisely, is what the early Church did with the Emperor Constantine.
In fact, it did more.
Not only did it concur with Constantine's presentation of himself as Messiah.
It also concurred with his presentation of himself as a specifically warlike Messiah — a man who implemented God's will with the sword and whose triumphs bore testimony to God's favour.
In other words, the Church recognised Constantine as successfully achieving what Jesus had signally failed to do.
Constantine, who presided unchallenged over the Roman Empire from A.D. 312 until his death in 337, is rightly regarded as a major pivot in the history and development of Christianity.
But the position from which he is today assessed rests on precarious, even quaint, over-simplifications.
According to popular tradition, Constantine had always been tolerant, if  not sympathetic, towards Christianity — an intrinsically ‘good man’, even before he ‘saw the light’ definitively.
In fact, Constantine's attitude towards Christianity seems to have been primarily a matter of expediency, for Christians by then were numerous in the Empire and he needed all the support he could muster against Maxentius, his rival for the imperial throne.
In A.D. 312, Maxentius was killed and his army routed at the Battle of Milvian Bridge, leaving Constantine's claim to the throne unchallenged.
Immediately before this crucial engagement, Constantine is said to have had a vision — later reinforced by a prophetic dream — of a luminous cross suspended in the sky.
A sentence was allegedly inscribed across it: ‘In Hoc Signo Vinces’('By this sign you will conquer').
Tradition asserts that Constantine, in deference to this celestial portent, ordered the shields of his troops hastily emblazoned with the Christian monogram — the Greek letters chi and rho , the first two letters of the word ‘Christos’.
As a result, Constantine's victory over Maxentius came to represent a miraculous triumph of Christianity over paganism.
But tradition does not stop there.
It also presents Constantine as a devout convert to Christianity.
It credits him with ‘Christianising the Empire’ and making Christianity the official state religion of Rome.
And by virtue of a document that purportedly ‘came to light’ in the eighth century, the so-called ‘Donation of Constantine’, he was believed to have conferred certain of his own secular powers upon the Pope.
It was on the basis of this document that the Roman Church asserted its prerogative to create kings, as well as to establish itself as a temporal authority.
Saviour of the Church
We have already examined some of the traditions popularly associated with Constantine, and have endeavoured to disentangle the historical facts from a miasma of half-truths and legends.
What emerged was a very different picture from the one generally portrayed.
Since then, however, new material on Constantine has been forthcoming and this adds significant new dimensions to the picture.
In consequence, it is necessary to look at that picture again.
It is true, certainly, that Constantine was tolerant towards Christianity.
By the Edict of Milan, promulgated in 313, he forbade persecution of all forms of monotheism in the Empire.
To the extent that this included Christianity, Constantine became in effect a saviour, redeeming the Christian congregations from centuries of imperial harassment.
It is also true that he accorded certain privileges to the Roman Church, as well as to other religious institutions.
He allowed high Church dignitaries to become part of the civil administration and, by doing so, paved the way for the Church's consolidation of secular power.
He donated the Lateran Palace to the Bishop of Rome, and Rome was able to use it as a means of establishing supremacy over rival centres of Christian authority in Alexandria and Antioch.
Finally, he presided over the Council of Nicaea in A.D. 325.
At this council, the various divergent forms of Christianity were compelled to confront each other and, to whatever extent possible, reconcile their differences.
As a result of  Nicaea , Rome became the official centre of Christian orthodoxy, and any deviation from that orthodoxy became a heresy, rather than merely a difference of opinion or interpretation.
At Nicaea, Jesus's divinity, and the precise nature of his divinity, were established by means of a vote.
It is fair to state that Christianity as we know it  today derives ultimately not from Jesus's time, but from the Council of Nicaea.
And to the extent that Nicaea was largely Constantine's handiwork, Christianity is indebted to him.
But this is very different from saying that Constantine was a Christian, or that he ‘Christianised the Empire’.
Indeed, most of the popular traditions associated with Constantine can now be proved erroneous.
The so-called ‘Donation of Constantine’, used by the Church in the eighth century to establish its authority in secular affairs, is now universally acknowledged as a blatant forgery — a forgery which, in a contemporary context, would be regarded as unequivocally criminal.
Even the Church will today readily admit this, while remaining loath to relinquish many of the benefits obtained by the deception.
As for Constantine's ‘conversion’— if that is the appropriate word — it does not appear to have been Christian at all, but conventionally pagan.
He appears to have had some sort of vision or dream, or perhaps both, in the precincts of a pagan temple to the Gallic Apollo, either in the Vosges region or near Autun.
There may also have been a second such experience immediately prior to the Battle of Milvian Bridge, at which Constantine defeated his rival for the imperial throne.
According to a witness accompanying Constantine's army at the time, the vision was of the sun god — the deity worshipped by certain cults under the name of Sol Invictus, the ‘Invincible Sun’.
Just before his vision or visions, Constantine had been newly initiated into a Sol Invictus cult, which makes his experience perfectly plausible.
And after the Battle of Milvian Bridge, the Roman Senate erected a triumphal arch in the Colosseum.
According to the inscription on the arch, Constantine's victory was won ‘through the prompting of the Deity’.
But the Deity in question was not Jesus.
It was Sol Invictus, the pagan sun god.
Contrary to tradition, Constantine did not make  Christianity the official state religion of Rome.
The state religion of Rome under Constantine was, in fact, pagan sun worship, and Constantine, all his life, functioned as its chief priest.
Indeed, his reign was hailed by his contemporaries as a ‘sun emperorship’, and Sol Invictus figured everywhere — including the imperial banners and the coinage of the realm.
The image of Constantine as a fervent convert to Christianity is patently wrong.
He was not even baptised until he lay on his deathbed.
Nor can he be credited with the  chi  rho monogram.
An inscription bearing this monogram was found in a tomb at Pompeii, dating from two and a half centuries before.
The cult of Sol Invictus was Syrian in origin.
It had been introduced to Rome a century before Constantine.
Although it contained elements of Baal and Astarte worship, it was essentially monotheistic.
In effect, it posited the sun god as the sum of all attributes of all other gods, and thus peacefully subsumed its potential rivals with no need to eradicate them.
They could, in short, be accommodated, without any undue friction.
For Constantine, the cult of Sol Invictus was, quite simply, expedient.
His primary, indeed obsessive, objective was unity — unity in politics, in religion and in territory.
A state religion that included all others obviously conduced to this objective.
And it was under the aegis, so to speak, of the Sol Invictus cult that Christianity proceeded to prosper.
Christian doctrine, as promulgated by Rome at the time, had much in common with the cult of Sol Invictus anyway; and thus it was able to flourish unmolested under the sun cult's umbrella of tolerance.
Being essentially monotheistic, the cult of Sol Invictus paved the way for the monotheism of Christianity.
At the same time, the early Church had no compunction about modifying its own tenets and dogma in order to capitalise on the opportunity  afforded it.
By an edict promulgated in 321, for example, Constantine ordered the law courts closed on ‘the venerable day of the sun’, decreeing that this be a day of rest.
Christianity had hitherto held Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath, as sacred.
Now, in accordance with Constantine's edict, it adopted Sunday as its sacred day.
This not only brought it into harmony with the existing regime, but also enabled it to further dissociate itself from its Judaic origins.
Until the fourth century, moreover, Jesus's birthday had been celebrated on 6 January.
For the cult of Sol Invictus, however, the most symbolically important day of the year was 25 December — the festival of Natalis Invictus, the birth (or rebirth) of the sun, when the days began to grow perceptibly longer.
In this respect, too, Christianity aligned itself with the regime and the established state religion.
From that state religion, it plundered certain accoutrements as well.
Thus the aureole of light crowning the head of the sun god became the Christian halo.
The cult of Sol Invictus also meshed conveniently with that of Mithras, a survival of the old Zoroastrian religion imported from Persia.
Indeed, so close was Mithraism to the cult of Sol Invictus that the two are often confused.
Both emphasised the status of the sun.
Both held Sunday as sacred.
Both celebrated a major birth festival on 25 December.
In consequence, Christianity could also find lines of convergence with Mithraism — the more so as Mithraism stressed the immortality of the soul, a future judgement and the resurrection of the dead.
The Christianity that coalesced and took shape in Constantine's time was in fact a hybrid, containing significant skeins of thought derived from Mithraism and from the sun cult.
Christianity, as we know it, is in many respects actually closer to those pagan systems of belief than it is to its own Judaic origins.
In the interests of unity, Constantine deliberately  blurred distinctions between Christianity, Mithraism and Sol Invictus — deliberately chose not to see any points of contention between them.
Thus he tolerated the deified Jesus as the early manifestation of Sol Invictus.
Thus he would build a Christian church in one part of the city and, in another, erect statues of the Mother Goddess Cybele and of Sol Invictus, the sun god — the latter being in his own likeness, with his features.
In such eclectic and ecumenical gestures, the emphasis on unity is again apparent.
Faith, for Constantine, was a political matter; and any faith conducive to unity was treated with forbearance.
Yet Constantine was not simply a cynic.
Like many soldierly rulers of his time — like many soldierly rulers since — he seems to have been both a superstitious man and one imbued with a very real sense of the sacred.
In his relations with the divine, he appears to have hedged his bets — rather like the proverbial atheist who, on his deathbed, consents to receive the sacraments as a safeguard, ‘just in case’.
This led him to take quite seriously all the deities he sanctioned in his domains, to propitiate all of them, to accord all of them a measure of genuine veneration.
If his personal god was Sol Invictus, and if his official stance towards Christianity was dictated by expediency and the desire for unity within the Empire, the fact remains that Constantine accorded the God of the Christians a certain unique deference — a deference of a distinctly novel kind.
It had long been a tradition for Roman emperors to claim descent from the gods, and on that basis to claim godhood for themselves as well.
Thus, Diocletian had claimed a pedigree from Jupiter, Maximian a pedigree from Hercules.
For Constantine, especially after he had given Christianity a mandate in his domains, it was advantageous to establish a new divine covenant, a new ratification from the sacred.
This was all the more important, by virtue of the fact that he was, in some  sense, a usurper — he had toppled a descendant of Hercules and needed some rival god's support for his own assertions of legitimacy.
In choosing a god for his sponsor or patron, Constantine turned — on a nominal level, at least— to the God of the Christians.
He did not, it is important to note, turn to Jesus.
The god Constantine acknowledged was God the Father — who, in those days prior to the Council of Nicaea, was not identical with the Son.
His relation to Jesus was altogether more equivocal — and extremely illuminating.
The Denial of Jesus
In 1982, an important new book appeared on this subject,Constantine versus Christ , by Alistair Kee, senior lecturer in Religious Studies, University of Glasgow.
Kee establishes, quite convincingly, that Jesus in effect played no part whatever in the religion of Constantine.
Constantine chose the God of the Christians — God the Father — as his official patron, and simply ignored the Son completely.
For Constantine, of course, God the Father would have entailed nothing more than new nomenclature for Sol Invictus, the sun god who already commanded his personal allegiance.
But if Constantine ignored Jesus, he certainly acknowledged the principle of Messiahship — in fact, he not only acknowledged it, he took the role of the Anointed One upon himself.
For Constantine, in short, the Messiah was precisely what the Messiah had been for Jews in Palestine at the dawn of the Christian era — a ruler, a sovereign, a warrior leader like David and Solomon, who reigned wisely over a temporal realm, established unity in his domains, consolidated a nation and people with divine sanction to support him.
In Constantine's eyes, apparently, Jesus had attempted  to be precisely these things.
And Constantine saw himself as following, rather more  successfully , in Jesus's footsteps — achieving what Jesus had failed to achieve.
As Kee says: ‘The religion of Constantine takes us back to the context of the Old Testament.
It is as if the religion of Abraham…is at last fulfilled not in Jesus but in Constantine’.
And: ‘Constantine in his day was the fulfilment of the promise of God to send a king like David to save his people.
It is this model, so powerful and so pre-Christian, that best describes Constantine's role’.
Constantine's position was not so surprising in an essentially pagan potentate of warlike disposition.
What is significant, as Kee points out, is that the Roman Church assented to the role Constantine arrogated to himself.
The Roman Church of the time was quite prepared to concur with Constantine's conception of himself as a genuine Messiah, and a more successful Messiah than Jesus.
It was also quite prepared to acknowledge that the Messiah was not a pacific, ethereal, lamb-like saviour, but a rightful and wrathful king, a political and military leader presiding not over any nebulous kingdom of heaven, but over very real terrestrial domains.
In short, the Church recognised in Constantine precisely what Messiahship would have entailed for Jesus and his contemporaries.
Thus, for example, Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, one of the leading theological figures of his day and a close personal associate of the Emperor, says: ‘He grows strong in his model of monarchic rule, which the ruler of All has given to the race of man alone of those on earth’.
Indeed, Eusebius is quite explicit and quite emphatic about the importance of monarchy: ‘Monarchy excels all other kinds of constitution and government.
For rather do anarchy and civil war result from the alternative, a polyarchy based on equality.
For which reason there is One God, not two or three or even more’.
But Eusebius goes much further than this.
In a personal address to the Emperor, he declares the Logos to be incarnate in Constantine.
Indeed, he actually ascribes to Constantine a status and a virtue which should, in theory, be reserved for Jesus alone: ‘…most God-fearing sovereign, to whom alone of those who have yet been here since the start of time has the Universal All-ruling God Himself given power to purify human life’.
As Kee says, commenting on this address by Eusebius: ‘Since the beginning of the world it is to Constantine alone that the power of salvation has been given.
Christ is set aside, Christ is excluded and now Christ is formally denied.’
And: ‘Constantine now stands alone as the saviour of the world.
The scene is the fourth century, not the first.
The world, spiritual and material, was not saved until Constantine.’
Kee emphasises that there is no mention whatsoever of Jesus.
The implications are unavoidable: ‘…it is clear that the life and death of Christ have no efficacy in this scheme of things…the salvation of the world is now wrought by the events of the life of Constantine, symbolized by his saving sign’.
The Final Destruction of the Historical Jesus
Why should the Roman Church in Constantine's time have adopted such a position, theologically so scandalous?
For nearly three hundred years, Christians had defied the might of the Empire, had steadfastly refused to compromise their convictions, had allowed themselves to be martyred, had found solace in the prospect of a greater glory in heaven.
Why now should they be prepared to recognise as Messiah precisely the imperial authority which, three centuries before, had crucified Jesus — and which continued to practise execution by crucifixion on rebels against the State?
One answer at least is obvious and simple.
The Church, after all, was composed of human beings, who had suffered cruelly for their beliefs in the past.
Now they had an opportunity for acceptance, for respectability, for an official place in the social structure — in exchange for certain compromises and relaxations in dogma.
The transaction would have been difficult to refuse.
After prolonged persecution, the prospect not only of a respite, but also of power, manifestly appeared worth the concessions.
There may well have been another, more subtle, reason underlying the Church's position.
A secular power such as Constantine's, if aligned with the orthodoxy of the time, would have provided an effective bulwark against any attempt by Jesus's true heirs to assert their claim.
If we were correct in our hypothesis of Jesus's marriage and children, or even if it were believed true at the time, it would do much to explain the agreed rapport between Constantine and the Roman Church.
The existence, somewhere within the Empire or on its periphery, of a lineal descent from Jesus or his family would have represented a threat to the coalescing Church hierarchy — the propagators of specifically Pauline Christianity.
And the best defence against a new Davidic Messiah, advancing with his legions, would have been an established Messiah already presiding over the Empire — a pro-Pauline Messiah, who had effectively pre-empted the claims of Judaic rivals.
All the same it is extraordinary to find the Roman Church (1) acquiescing in Constantine's total indifference to Jesus;(2) deferring to Constantine's presentation of himself as the Messiah; and (3) acknowledging the definition of Messiahship — that is, a military and political figure — embodied by Constantine.
On the other hand, perhaps, in the fourth century, it was not so extraordinary after all.
Perhaps, in the fourth century, such attitudes were not as  incongruous with Christian belief as they would appear today.
Perhaps, in the fourth century, Christians recognised, far more clearly than their modern counterparts, how closely such attitudes conformed to the historical facts.
In Constantine's time, Christian tradition had not yet become immutable dogma.
Many documents, subsequently lost or destroyed, were still in circulation and intact.
Alternative interpretations were still prevalent.
And the historical Jesus had not yet disappeared completely under the weight of later accretions.
For the Church of the fourth century, there would almost certainly have been some rueful and grudging admission that Constantine was a Messiah who had succeeded where Jesus had failed, and that the Messiah as represented by both Constantine and Jesus was indeed a military and political figure — not a god, but a king with a mandate to govern.
It must be remembered that no complete version of the New Testament survives which pre-dates the reign of Constantine.
The New Testament, as we know it today, is largely a product of Nicaea and other Church councils of the same epoch.
But the Church Fathers who compiled the present New Testament were themselves aware of, and had access to, other, earlier and more historically reliable versions.
These versions had not yet been officially rendered ‘uncanonical’.
And yet even the New Testament as it is today bears witness, if one looks at it closely, to Jesus as a military and political Messiah — to Jesus, in other words, as a would-be precursor of Constantine.
It is worth examining some of this testimony.
JESUS AS FREEDOM-FIGHTER
Later Christian tradition has emphasised the image of a meek, lamb-like saviour, who eschews violence and bids one turn the other cheek.
As we have seen however, the Messiah — for Constantine and the fourth-century Roman Church, as well as for Jesus and his contemporaries — was a very different figure: a stern martial leader and liberator, quite prepared to assert his right by force and, if necessary, to employ violence against his enemies.
There is, of course, a solid enough basis for such an image in the Gospels themselves.
In A.D. 6, a few years after the death of Herod, Judaea was annexed and incorporated into the Roman Empire as a procuratorial province with Caesarea as its capital.
A census was ordered for purposes of tax assessment.
The Jewish High Priest of the time acceded to this and urged compliance from the populace.
Almost immediately, however, a fierce nationalist resistance erupted directed by a fiery prophet in the hills of Galilee.
This man is known to history as Judas of Galilee, or Judas of Gamala.
He is believed to have perished fairly early in the prolonged series of guerrilla activities he inaugurated against Rome.
But the movement he created survived him, and its adherents became known as Zealots.
The term appears to have first been used by  Josephus, writing at least three-quarters of a century later, between A.D. 75 and 94.
For Josephus, the Zealots acquired their name because they were ‘zealous in good undertakings’.
During the years of their operations, however, they were frequently referred to as Lestai (Brigands) or as Sicarii (Daggermen), the name deriving from the sica , a small curved dagger especially favoured by the Zealots for political assassinations.
It must be stressed that the Zealots were not a religious sect or denomination.
They were not a subdivision of Judaism, propounding one or another theological position.
They were not, in other words, like the Sadducees, Pharisees or Essenes.
They may have obtained support, in manpower, money and material, from all three; but they themselves were essentially political in orientation.
The Zealot position was straightforward enough.
Rome was the enemy.
No Jew should pay tribute to Rome.
No Jew should acknowledge the Roman Emperor as his master.
There was no master other than God.
God had conferred a unique birthright on Israel, had concluded a covenant with David and Solomon.
The patriotic and religious duty of every Jew was to fight for the reinstatement of this birthright, this covenant — the reinstatement of a rightful ruler presiding over the Kingdom of Israel.
In the name of these objectives, all means were sanctioned.
When circumstances permitted, the Zealots engaged in large-scale conventional military operations.
At other times, they waged an incessant guerrilla war, attacking isolated Roman garrisons, ambushing caravans, cutting supply routes.
They did not shrink from assassination and, in so far as the technology of the epoch allowed, they employed techniques which today would be associated with terrorism.
They were often ruthless.
And they displayed the kind of fearlessness that only fanaticism confers.
As Josephus says: ‘They also do not value    dying any kind of death, nor indeed do they heed the deaths of their relations and friends, nor can any such fear make them call any man Lord…’
To judge from what little evidence survives, there seems to have been a strong dynastic element involved in Zealot leadership.
Two of the sons of Judas of Galilee were killed as Zealot commanders in their own right.
Another son, or perhaps grandson, was responsible for seizing the fortress of Masada on the outbreak of the revolt in A.D. 66.
And during the famous siege of Masada, which did not end until A.D. 73, the garrison of the citadel was commanded by a man named Eleazar, who was also descended from Judas of Galilee.
Unfortunately, there are too few reliable records to indicate how centralised the authority of this family might have been over Zealot contingents throughout the Holy Land.
It is impossible to gauge whether Zealot activity originated from a single headquarters, or whether it consisted of a multitude of groups operating independently.
But certainly the family and descendants of Judas of Galilee seem to have been involved in many of the more ambitious, more co-ordinated, more professional Zealot enterprises.
The Zealots with Jesus
All through the centuries, theologians and biblical scholars have been plagued by problems of translation — or, to be more accurate, mistranslation.
By the time a name, a word, a phrase, a sentence, a statement has passed from spoken Hebrew or Aramaic, to written Greek, to written Latin, and then to one or another modern language, it has often become utterly divorced from its original meaning.
We have already commented on the corruption of ‘Jesus the Nazarean’ into ‘Jesus of Nazareth’.
A similar process of corruption can be discerned in a number of other New Testament  names, including Jesus's own.
‘Jesus’, it must be remembered, is not Judaic, but Greek.
Among his own people, Jesus would have been called ‘Yeshua’, which is simply the familiar biblical ‘Joshua’.
The figure of Simon Zelotes, who appears in the Gospel of Luke and in the Acts of the Apostles, we have already discussed in our previous work, and there can scarcely be further need to belabour the obvious.
Simon Zelotes is quite patently Simon the Zealot.
In some more recent translations of the New Testament, he is named as such, making it explicit, even to lay readers, that Jesus included at least one Zealot — one political extremist — among his immediate followers.
That this is still a source of embarrassment can be seen from the New English Bible, where Simon is introduced, with euphemistic caution, as ‘Simon the Patriot’.
But whatever circumlocutions are conferred upon him, Simon would appear to be rather more obtrusive than some translators might wish.
Thus, for example, in the King James versions of Matthew and Mark, there are references to ‘Simon the Canaanite’.
But while the sobriquet of ‘Canaanite’ might have meant something some two thousand years before, in Old Testament times, it makes no sense whatever in the context of the New Testament.
Once again, there has been a corruption in the process of translation.
In fact, the Aramaic word for Zealot was qannai , which was rendered into Greek as kananaios .
‘Simon the Canaanite’ thus becomes one and the same as ‘Simon Zelotes’or ‘Simon the Zealot’, appearing in Matthew and Mark under the former designation and in Luke and in Acts under the latter.
In John's Gospel, there appears to be yet another Simon, Simon Bar Jonas.
This is generally taken to refer to ‘Simon, son of Jonas’, even though the man's father is elsewhere identified as Zebedee.
‘Bar Jonas’ is, once again, a mistranslation of another Aramaic word,barjonna , which, like kananaios , means  ‘outlaw’, ‘anarchist’or Zealot.
Once again, it would seem clear that we are dealing with the same individual, whose militant nationalism it was deemed expedient to conceal.
Of all the Simons populating the New Testament, the most important is unquestionably Simon Peter, the most famous of Jesus's disciples and the one on whom Jesus allegedly founds his church.
The Gospels themselves make it plain that he is not ‘Simon Peter’ but, rather, ‘Simon called Peter’.
‘Peter’, in fact, is not a name but a nickname, another sobriquet.
It simply means ‘rock-like’, implying ‘tough’.
(A modern equivalent would, indeed, be ‘Rocky’.)
If Peter is actually a ‘tough’ whose nickname means ‘Rocky’, is it not possible to equate him with the fierce individual known as Simon Zelotes or Simon the Canaanite — to equate him, that is, with Simon the Zealot?
If Jesus's most important disciple, the one on whom he allegedly founds his church, was a Zealot, the implications become extremely interesting.
There is one more piece of the jigsaw to be inserted.
In John's Gospel, Judas is identified as the son of Simon.
In the synoptic Gospels, he is identified as Judas Iscariot.
For centuries, baffled by Greek appellations, biblical commentators believed ‘Judas Iscariot’ to denote ‘Judas of Kerioth’.
But as the late Professor S. G. F. Brandon of Manchester University has convincingly argued, ‘Judas Iscariot’ now seems more likely to be a corruption of ‘Judas the Sicarius’— or Zealot.
A Militant Jesus
If Jesus numbered such figures as Simon the Zealot and Judas the  Sicarius among his followers, those followers can hardly have been as placid and peaceable as later tradition maintains.
On the contrary, they would seem  to have been involved in precisely the kind of political and military activity from which Jesus, according to later tradition, is dissociated.
But the Gospels themselves confirm that Jesus and his entourage, in keeping with what would have been expected of the Messiah, were militant nationalists who did not shrink from violence.
It is not necessary here to discuss the Crucifixion; it is sufficient to note that, whatever Jesus's association with the Zealots, he was certainly crucified by the Romans as a political revolutionary.
This much is stated by the Roman chronicler Tacitus, and thus constitutes the one sure assertion about Jesus to issue from a non-biblical, yet contemporary, source.
There is no question but that the Romans perceived Jesus as a military and political figure, and dealt with him strictly according to that perception.
Crucifixion was a penalty reserved for transgressions against Roman law, and Rome would not have bothered to crucify a man preaching a purely spiritual message, or a message of peace.
Jesus was not executed by the Jewish Sanhedrin -which could, with permission, stone to death a man who had trespassed against Judaic law — but by the Roman administration.
And the two men allegedly crucified with him are explicitly described as ‘Lestai’, Zealots.
They are not, despite tradition, common criminals, but political revolutionaries — or ‘freedomfighters’.
Jesus himself, in the Gospels, displays an aggressive militarism quite at odds with conventional images.
Everyone is familiar with the famously awkward passage in which he announces that he has come not to bring peace, but a sword.
In Luke 22:36, he instructs those of his followers who do not possess a sword to purchase one, even if it means selling their garments.
When Jesus is arrested in Gethsemane, at least one of his followers is actually  carrying a sword and uses it to lop off the ear of an attendant of the High Priest; in the  Fourth Gospel, the man with the sword is specifically identified as Simon Peter.
It is difficult to reconcile such references with the tradition of a mild, pacifist saviour.
We have already mentioned Jesus's triumphal entry into Jerusalem on an ass, to the accompaniment of a throng waving palm branches, spreading their cloaks in the road before him and invoking blessings on the son of David, the rightful king.
This act, as noted above, had been foretold of the Messiah by the prophet Zechariah.
For Jesus to perform an act long prophesied and expected of the rightful Messiah certainly reflects no diffidence on his part.
He is quite brazenly staging a public spectacle — a spectacle for which he knew he would either have been stigmatised as an upstart and a blasphemer, or acknowledged as precisely what he claimed to be.
Significantly enough he is acknowledged by a populace fully aware of the symbolism of his action; and even the more sceptical of modern biblical scholars regard this incident in the Gospels as historically authentic.
But how could such an act not be fraught with political implications and consequences?
It is an act of explicit challenge to Rome, an act of deliberate, militant provocation.
The Messiah was regarded as a liberator.
For Jesus to have been accepted as the Messiah, he must necessarily have been prepared to wield the liberator's sword.
That Jesus's entry into Jerusalem was fraught with political implications becomes evident in the Gospels a few days later.
If the Old Testament had foretold the Messiah's entry into Jerusalem on an ass, it had also citied precedents for his cleansing and purifying of the Temple.
This, of course, is precisely what Jesus proceeds to do in his famous overturning of the moneychangers' tables.
The incident can hardly have been a minor affair.
Nor can it have avoided violence.
A simple consideration of human nature is sufficient to reveal the consequences (unrecorded in the Gospels) of Jesus's behaviour.
Neither moneychangers, nor bystanders, nor Jesus's own followers are likely to have stood idle, or engaged in theological debate, while loose coins rolled in all directions.
Given the size and importance of the Temple, and the prominent role of the moneychangers, Jesus's overturning of their tables must have resulted in a full-scale riot.
Nor can Jesus himself possibly have expected anything else.
Here again he is adopting a course of confrontation, a course of deliberate challenge to established authority.
In these two prominent instances — perhaps the two most public acts of his career — Jesus behaves in a way which must provoke violence.
It is in these two instances that the Gospels probably come closest to vouchsafing a portrait of the historical Jesus, a man who, in a flagrant, even flamboyant fashion stages public spectacles which implicitly assert his claim as Israel's foretold and rightful Messiah.
And these spectacles are acts of calculated provocation, which reflect an undisguised militancy, an obvious preparedness to countenance force.
What is more, both incidents make it clear that Jesus has a sizeable following.
It clearly includes more than the original twelve disciples.
Corruption in the process of translation has tended to obscure more than names.
Whether by accident or design, it has also served to conceal historical information of considerable importance.
A single word may convey a wealth of historical background; and if the sense of such a word is altered, the revelation it offers will be lost.
One of the most telling of such examples occurs in the account of Jesus's arrest in Gethsemane.
It revolves around a single simple question: how many men came to arrest Jesus in the Garden?
We have often posed this question in talks and lectures, and the answers from our audience have been fairly uniform.
For most people, a mental image of the scene in Gethsemane exists in the mind, implanted, so to speak, by both the Gospel account and tradition.
According to this image, somewhere between ten and thirty men came to arrest Jesus — a Jewish functionary or two, some representatives of the High Priest (one of whom has his ear injured by Simon Peter's sword), presumably a contingent of the Temple guard, perhaps one or more Roman officials and even perhaps a small unit of Pilate's soldiery.
Why do most modern readers tend to think in terms of ten to thirty men?
No doubt because the phrase in the Authorised Version —‘a band of men’— is non-specific.
Even in more recent translations of the Bible, the phrase is ‘a number of men’.
And yes, a ‘band of men’ or a ‘number of men’does indeed suggest not much more than thirty.
Catholic readers, however, do not read the Authorised Version of the New Testament.
Until recently, in accordance with strict Catholic dogma, they were obliged, on pain of punishment, to read the Vulgate.
And in the Vulgate, as in certain more modern translations, the term used for those who come to arrest Jesus is correctly translated — and considerably more precise.
Jesus, one learns, is arrested in Gethsemane not by an indeterminate ‘number of men’, but by a ‘cohort’.
Is this a pedantic inconsistency, or does it reflect something more consequential?
If one goes back to the Greek, one will find the term speiran , a precise translation of ‘cohort’.
In modern English, the term ‘cohort’ is vague, implying a fairly large but still non-specific number.
But for the writers and early translators of the Gospels, it was a very precise term, denoting a very exact figure.
Just as modern armies are organised into companies, battalions, regiments, brigades and divisions, so the Roman Army was organised into centuries, cohorts and legions.
A Roman legion was somewhat larger than a modern peacetime brigade in the British Army — six thousand troops.
A cohort was one tenth of a legion — six hundred soldiers.
If, that is, they were  regular Roman soldiers.
A cohort composed of auxiliaries, as those in the Holy Land were, would number at least five hundred troops, and sometimes as many as two thousand-seven hundred and sixty infantry and one thousand two hundred and forty cavalry.
At this point, one must ask some simple, commonsense questions.
Is it plausible that Pilate, or any other military governor in his situation, would have dispatched upwards of five or six hundred troops to Gethsemane for the sole purpose of arresting one man — a solitary prophet extolling love, who was attended by twelve disciples?
The suggestion is patently preposterous.
Not only would it have been a ridiculous example of ‘overkill’.
It would also have been an open invitation to civic disturbance.
Unless, of course, such a disturbance already existed, and the cohort had been mustered to quell it.
One must imagine five or six hundred soldiers swarming into the Garden of Gethsemane.
One must also bear in mind that Jesus, a short time before, had instructed his disciples to equip themselves with swords.
And one must bear in mind, too, the striking off by Simon Peter of the ear of the High Priest's attendant.
From these various details, a picture begins to emerge of something of considerable import  occurring in Gethsemane that night — something on a larger scale than is generally envisaged, and something involving rather more than ‘a band of men’.
It would seem clear that there was a civil disturbance of substantial size in the ‘Garden’.
There may well have been fighting.
But whether there was actual fighting or not, the situation was obviously perceived as a military threat by the Roman administration, who reacted to it with a large-scale military response.
Jesus's arrest in the Garden was clearly not a quiet affair in which a small ‘band’ of a dozen or two dozen men advanced, in furtive fashion, to arrest one prophet.
Certain theologians have on occasion, noted  the anomaly of numbers.
It has often caused them embarrassment.
One writer, commenting on a cohort of troops in Gethsemane, declares, rather lamely, ‘What a compliment to the power of Jesus!’
THE ZADOKITE MOVEMENT OF QUMRAN
Who exactly constituted Jesus's following?
Who constituted the throngs which, on his entry into Jerusalem, acclaimed him as the son of David, the rightful king, the anointed one, the Messiah?
Who, among the population of the Holy Land at the time, had a vested interest in seeing his enterprise succeed?
From whom did his support derive?
It is clear that even the named and identified members of Jesus's following represent a broad and diverse spectrum.
He seems to have elicited support from people of radically different social classes, radically different financial and educational backgrounds.
As we have noted, there were a number of political extremists.
There were also poor peasants from the hills of Galilee, and fishermen — perhaps poor, perhaps well-to-do — from the shores of Lake Galilee.
There were wealthy women whose husbands occupied important official positions.
There were important and influential citizens of Jerusalem, such as Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea.
There were people who provided him with houses — such as that in Bethany — which were comfortable and large enough to accommodate, at the very least, his immediate entourage.
There appears to have been a substantial number of ‘rank and file’ supporters scattered across  the whole of both Galilee and Judaea.
But where did these numerous individuals stand in relation to the context of first-century Judaism?
What, if anything, distinguished them from ‘the other Jews’, sometimes hostile, sometimes sympathetic, milling around as supernumeraries in the background?
How widespread was the preparedness to use force of arms, if necessary, to restore to Israel her rightful king?
The Sadducees and the Pharisees
The Holy Land, in Jesus's time, was literally swarming with different religions, different sects and cults, a great number of them imported from abroad as a result of the Roman occupation.
Roman rites — to Jupiter, for instance— were transplanted to Palestine, as well , of course , as the official worship of the emperor which constituted Rome's state religion.
Religions, cults, sects and mystery schools from other parts of the Empire — notably from Greece, from Syria, from Egypt, from Mesopotamia and Asia Minor — also found their way to the Holy Land, struck roots and flourished.
Thus, for example, worship of the Mother Goddess — as Egyptian Isis, as Phoenician Astarte, as Greek or Cypriot Aphrodite, as Mesopotamian Ishtar, as Cybele from Asia Minor — commanded the allegiance of many loyal followers.
Then, too, there were residues of polytheistic Goddess-worship within the framework of Judaism itself, cults, dedicated to the ancient Canaanite goddess Miriam or Rabath.
In Galilee Judaism had not even established itself until 120 B.C. and much pre-Judaic thought still survived.
There were also forms of Judaism which the Jews themselves refused to acknowledge as such — the schismatic religion of the Samaritans, for instance, who insisted that their Judaism was the only true form.
Finally, and to further compound the confusion, there were a  number of differing schools or sects — and even, apparently, sects within sects — that constituted the Judaic orthodoxy of the time, if, indeed, any such orthodoxy can be said to have existed.
Among these, the Sadducees and the Pharisees are familiar, if only by name, to Christian tradition.
The Sadducees — or, at least, the main branch of the Sadducees — must be seen primarily in relation to the official priesthood, the Temple and the ritual sacrifice which worship in the Temple entailed.
The Sadducees were the priestly caste.
They furnished the Temple with its dignitaries and functionaries.
They exercised an effective monopoly over Temple activities and Temple appointments.
The whole of Sadducee thought was oriented towards the Temple, and when the Temple was destroyed during the revolt of A.D. 66, the official Sadducees ceased to exist.
They exercised little, if any, influence on the subsequent evolution and development of Judaism.
For the rest, the Sadducees occupied many of the important civic and administrative positions in the land.
Of necessity, this entailed an accommodation with Rome.
And indeed, as long as their prerogatives in the priesthood and the Temple were left intact, the Sadducees were prepared to make such an accommodation.
They resigned themselves to the Roman presence in their country, made their peace with the Roman authorities.
In secular matters, they were worldly, sophisticated and cosmopolitan, adapting themselves to the Greco-Roman values, attitudes, manners and mores of the Empire.
To this extent, their enemies at the time perceived them as collaborators.
And although they emphasised purity and traditional observance in religion, their position in other spheres might justifiably be compared to that of, say, the Vichy regime in occupied France during the Second World War.
For the Pharisees, religion was rather more flexible, more subject to growth modification and development, less exclusively vested in the Temple and its rites.
For this reason, Pharisaic thought survived the fall of the Temple and provided the soil from which later Rabbinic Judaism eventually sprang.
If the portrayal of the Sadducees in the Gospels is not without some historical justification, the portrayal of the Pharisees is often viciously distorted.
No responsible biblical scholar today would deny that the Pharisees have been grievously slandered and maligned by Christian tradition.
The greatest names in Judaic thought in Jesus's time — the famous teacher Hillel, for example— were Pharisees.
According to most modern experts, Jesus himself was probably raised and trained in a Pharisaic context.
Most of his teachings, most of the words ascribed to him, conform to the tenets of Pharisaic thinking.
Indeed, some of his most famous pronouncements are paraphrases, even on occasion almost direct quotations, from Hillel.
For example, Hillel declares: ‘What is hateful to yourself, do not do to your neighbour.’
Jesus was perceived — justifiably, we maintain — as a threat to Rome, and was executed as such.
He is also on record as deifying the priesthood and challenging the institution of Temple worship.
In consequence, the Sadducees — having yoked their interests to Rome and enjoying unique prerogatives in the Temple — would have reacted to Jesus precisely as they are described as doing in the Gospels.
But the Pharisees would have provided him with some of his most loyal and fervent followers, and would have been among the first to regard him as the Messiah.
The Ascetic Essenes
The third major sub-division of Judaism at the time was that of the Essenes, about whom our knowledge is  much more ambiguous, much less clearly defined.
Until the middle of the twentieth century, most information about the Essenes derived from two contemporary historians, Pliny the Elder and Philo Judaeus, and from the late first-century Judaic commentator Josephus, who is often unreliable.
With the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls, however, a corpus of Essene material was made available for the first time, and it is now possible to assess the Essenes on their own terms.
In both their life-style and their religious teachings, the Essenes were more rigorous and austere than either the Sadducees or the Pharisees.
They were also much more mystically oriented, and had much in common with the various mystery schools prevalent in the Mediterranean world at the time.
In contrast to other schools of Judaism, they seem to have subscribed to some form of reincarnation.
They reflect both Egyptian and Greek influences, and have a number of points in common with the followers of Pythagoras.
They encouraged an interest in healing and produced tracts on the therapeutic properties of herbs and stones.
They were steeped in what today might be called ‘esoteric studies’, such as astrology, numerology and the various disciplines which subsequently coalesce into the Cabala.
But whatever they assimilated from other cultures and traditions, they applied in a specifically Judaic context.
Josephus at one point says of them: ‘[Some]undertake to foretell things to come, by reading the holy books and using several sorts of purifications, and being perpetually conversant in the discourses of the prophets…’
For our purposes, one of the most important characteristics of the Essenes was their apocalyptic vision — their insistence that the Last Times were at hand and that the advent of the Messiah was imminent.
Granted, expectation of the Messiah was rife throughout the Holy Land at the time.
But, as Professor  Frank Cross concludes: ‘The  Essenes proved to be the bearers, and in no small part the producers, of the apocalyptic tradition of Judaism.’
From the material that has come to light during our own century, it is clear that the Essenes were looser and more diffuse in their organisation, less centralised and less uniform than the Sadducees and the Pharisees.
Not all Essenes subscribed to, or practised, precisely the same things.
What they had in common was, again, an essentially mystical orientation — an insistence on a direct, firsthand, experiential knowledge of God, rather than a scrupulous adherence to dogma and law.
Such knowledge, of course, renders superfluous the priest's role as interpreter, as intermediary between God and man.
In consequence, the Essenes, like most mystical sects throughout history, were indifferent to, if not actively hostile towards, the established priesthood.
Despite recent discoveries pertaining to the Essenes, four long-standing misconceptions still cling to them.
They are believed to have resided exclusively in isolated, monastic-style desert communities.
They are believed to have been extremely few in number.
They are believed to have been celibate.
They are believed to have been non-violent, adhering scrupulously to an other-worldly pacifism.
Research since the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls has established each of these beliefs about the Essenes to be erroneous.
The Essenes resided not only in remote desert communities, but also in urban centres, where they maintained houses not only for themselves, but also for wandering brethren from elsewhere and for other itinerants.
Indeed, the network of Essene houses seems to have been both widespread and extremely efficient.
Such houses were well integrated into the surrounding community, and rested on a solid basis of craft-work, commerce and trade.
As this network of houses attests, the Essenes were rather more numerous than traditional accounts suggest.
And, indeed, the  sheer prevalence of Essene thought in the Holy Land at the time also bears witness to a congregation more numerous than a few conclaves of ascetics sequestered in the desert.
The notion that all the Essenes were celibate derives from Josephus.
But even Josephus contradicts himself and declares almost as an afterthought, that there were Essenes who married.
Neither in the Dead Sea Scrolls, nor in any other known Essene document, is there any mention of celibacy.
On the contrary, among the Dead Sea Scrolls found at the community of Qumran, there are rules applying specifically to members of the sect who are married and have children.
The graves of women and children have also been found in the nearby cemetery which borders the eastern walls of Qumran.
As for the Essenes' supposed non-violence, there is significant evidence to disprove it.
After Jerusalem was razed by the Romans in A.D. 70, Israel's organised resistance was systematically extirpated, except for the fortress of Masada on the Dead Sea.
Masada held out for two years.
Only in A.D. 73, decimated by starvation and threatened by the Romans with a large-scale general assault, did the defenders of the citadel commit mass suicide.
The defenders of Masada are generally held to have been Zealots.
Josephus, who was present at the siege, refers to them as Sicarii.
For two years, they managed to hold at bay a Roman army, with experienced commanders, well-disciplined troops and extensive siege equipment.
During the course of the action, they inflicted heavy casualties on their attackers and revealed themselves to be fierce and resourceful fighters — not amateurs, but professionals of a skill comparable to that of their Roman adversaries.
In his account of the fall of the fortress, Josephus describes how two women and five children were the only survivors of the siege, having hidden ‘in caverns  underground’.
From them, apparently, comes the report of the speech whereby the defenders were exhorted to their collective suicide.
Not surprisingly, this speech is partly nationalistic in theme.
In general, however, its tenor is explicitly religious.
And the religious orientation it reflects is unmistakably Essene.
The  archaeological record further confirms our viewpoint.
When Masada was excavated in the 1960s, certain documents were found identical to those discovered in the Essene community at Qumran.
The Qumran community was not pacifist either.
A forge for making weapons was found there.
And arrowheads and other debris excavated from the ruins indicate that Qumran, too, opposed the Romans by force of arms.
Jesus's teachings owe much to established Pharisaic thought.
But they owe, if anything, even more to Essene tradition.
There is little doubt that Jesus was steeped in Essene doctrine and practice — including, as Josephus says, that of ‘being perpetually conversant in the discourses of the prophets’.
He may even have been an Essene himself.
He certainly seems, at some point prior to embarking on his public mission, to have undergone a form of Essene training.
In this connection, it is worth noting the so-called ‘Messianic Rule’ of the Essenes found at Qumran.
According to this rule, all male members of the community were obliged to wait until the age of twenty to marry and sire children; at the age of thirty, they were to be regarded as mature and initiated into the higher ranks of the sect.
Is it just a coincidence that Jesus is said to be thirty years old when he embarks on his ministry?
The ‘Sons of Zadok'
In addition to the Sadducees, Pharisees and Essenes, Judaism, in Jesus's time, included a number of smaller, less well-known splinter-groups and sects, two of which have begun to figure increasingly in biblical scholarship during the last two and a half decades.
The first of them is the sect known as the ‘Sons of Zadok’, or Zadokites.
The Zadokites, at first glance, would appear to have much in common with the Essenes, indeed to overlap with them.
At least one eminent writer on the subject has maintained that Jesus and his followers were Zadokites, though others insist on a distinction.
The other important sub-sect to figure prominently in recent biblical scholarship has been familiar for a long time, but under a different name.
It has traditionally been called ‘the Early Church’, or ‘the Jerusalem Church’.
Its members referred to themselves as Nazareans.
Dr Hugh Schonfield uses the convenient appellation of ‘the Nazarean Party’.
This was composed specifically of Jesus's immediate followers.
The existence of sub-sects such as the Zadokites and the Nazareans has generated considerable confusion and uncertainty among biblical scholars.
Jesus was unquestionably a Nazarean.
He seems also to have been a Zadokite — but does this mean that the Nazareans and the Zadokites were one and the same?
If so, what about the conventional Pharisaic aspects of his teachings?
And what about the unmistakable traces of Essene training?
Were the Nazareans and the Zadokites offshoots or sub-divisions of the Essene?
Were the Essenes themselves perhaps but one manifestation of a single, broader movement?
Such questions have led to a bewildering muddle.
This muddle, and the apparent contradictions inherent in it, have obscured a clear perception of Jesus's political and military activity.
All the more so, because scholastic attempts to distinguish between the various religious denominations have deflected attention from the importance of the politically oriented Zealots.
In 1983, there appeared a new study of the issue by  Dr Robert Eisenman, Chairman of the Department of Religious Studies at the University of California, Long Beach.
Eisenman's work bears an unwieldy title —Maccabees, Zadokites, Christians and Qumran .
But it does much to dispel the prevailing confusion and, in our opinion, constitutes one of the most important treatments of the subject to date.
Although the specific evidence is complex, the conclusions are not only impressively convincing, but also beautifully simple.
Indeed, Eisenman seems to have focused a searchlight on the underlying simplicity of what has hitherto seemed a complicated situation.
Working from original documents, and questioning the reliability of second-hand commentators such as Josephus, Eisenman traces the various names by which the members of the Qumran community — the authors of the Dead Sea Scrolls — referred to themselves.
This leads him to conclude that the Sons of Light, the Sons of Truth, the Sons of Zadok, or Zaddikim (Zadokites), the Men of Melchizedek (the z-d-k ending reflecting a variation of Zadok), the Ebionim (the Poor), the Hassidim (the Essenes) and the Nozrim (the Nazareans) are ultimately one and the same — not different groups, but different metaphors or appellations for essentially the same group, or the same movement.
The primary objective of this movement seems to have been oriented towards the dynastic legitimacy of the high priesthood.
In the Old Testament the High Priest of both David and Solomon is called Zadok, either as a personal name or as an official title.
He is traditionally associated, very closely, with the Messiah, the anointed one, the rightful king.
More specifically, he is associated with the Davidic Messiah.
As Eisenman demonstrates, the legitimacy of the high priesthood — of Zadok or of the Zadok — was resuscitated by the Maccabeans, the last dynasty of Judiac kings, who ruled Israel from the second century B.C. until Herodian times and the Roman occupation.
(As we have already noted, Herod attempted to legitimise himself by marrying a Maccabean princess, then proceeded to murder her and her sons, thus extinguishing the Maccabean line.)
It is ultimately to the Maccabean dynasty that Eisenman traces the movement which gains increasing momentum during the lifetime of Jesus and the years that follow.
Eisenman also traced the Sadducees back to the same source, indicating that the term ‘Sadducee’ is in fact a variant or perhaps a corruption, of ‘Zadok’or ‘Zaddikim’.
In other words, the original Sadducees would have been a devout dynastic priesthood closely associated with at least the principle of an expected Davidic Messiah.
But with the accession of Herod, Eisenman argues, most Sadducees — the Sadducees whom we know as such from biblical sources and from Josephus — betrayed their original loyalties and aligned themselves with the usurper.
This betrayal appears to have provoked a large-scale opposition — as it were, an alternative ‘fundamentalist’ priesthood, militantly at odds with the established one which had prostituted itself to an illegitimate king.
On the one hand, then, there would have been the so-called ‘Herodian Sadducees’, who clung to their Temple privileges and prerogatives under Herod's reign and, after his death, accommodated themselves to the Roman administration.
On the other hand, there would have been a ‘true’ or ‘purist’Sadducee movement, consisting of Sadducees who wanted no part of such collaboration and remained loyal to the principle of a Davidic Messiah.
It is these latter Sadducees who become known as Essenes, Zadokites or Zaddikim and the various other appellations that have hitherto confused researchers.
But this is not the whole of Eisenman's argument.
On the contrary, it extends further to include the Zealots as well.
The Zealots adopted or acquired their name to denote those who were ‘zealous for the law’.
This  phrase is a clue, becoming a means whereby adherents of the same movement can be identified.
It occurs in a number of quite precise and extremely crucial contexts, from the Maccabean regime on into the first century A.D. Thus the High Priest at the period of Judas Maccabeus (who died in 160 B.C.) is referred to as a Zaddik and described as being ‘a zealot for the law’.
Mattathias, father of Judas Maccabeus, commands ‘everyone who has zeal for the law’ to follow him and take a stand on the covenant.
Judas of Galilee, usually credited with founding the Zealots at the dawn of the Christian era, is also a ‘zealot for the law’— and is attended by a high priest called Zadok.
And in the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 21:20), the Nazareans in Jerusalem — the so-called ‘early Christians’— are again described, quite precisely, as being ‘zealous for the law’, The Greek text is even more revealing.
Here they are called ‘zelotai of the law’— in other words, Zealots.
What emerges is a kind of fundamentalist dynastic priesthood associated with the principle of a Davidic Messiah and extending from the second century B.C. through the period covered by the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles.
This priesthood is at war with the Romans.
It is also at war with the ‘Herodian’ Sadducees.
Depending on their activities, at a given moment, and on the orientation of the chronicler, this priesthood is variously called Zealot, Essene, Zadokite and a number of other things — including, by their enemies, ‘outlaw’ and ‘brigand’.
The Essenes are not passive mystics.
On the contrary, their vision, as Eisenman says, is ‘violently apocalyptic’, and constitutes a theological corollary to the violent action for which the Zealots are held responsible.
A similar violence — both theological and political — can be discerned in the careers of John the Baptist and of Jesus.
Indeed, Eisenman goes so far as to suggest that the families of Jesus and John the Baptist may even have    been related to that of Judas of Galilee, leader of the Zealots at the time of Jesus's birth.
If Eisenman is correct — and the evidence weighs heavily in his favour — then the confusion which has hitherto obtained is effectively dispelled.
Essenes, Zadokites, Nazareans, Zealots and various other supposed groups emerge as no more than different designations — or, at most, different manifestations — of a single movement diffused throughout the Holy Land and well into Syria, from the second century B.C. on.
The names which have previously confused scholars would in effect have been like the variety of names used for, say, a contemporary political party or, at most, for the spectrum of groups and individuals which coalesced into a single movement — the French Resistance, during the German occupation.
For Eisenman, there is no distinction at all between Zealots and Nazareans, Essenes and Zadokites.
But even if there had been, the groups would still have been unified by their joint involvement in a single ambitious enterprise, a single overriding endeavour — to rid their land of the Roman occupation and reinstate the old Judaic monarchy together with its rightful priesthood.
And if Jesus were the legitimate claimant of that monarchy, they would have been unified in their support of him, his family and his house.
The Nazareans or the Nazarean Party — the so-called (and misnamed)‘first Christians’ or ‘Early Church’— do not appear to have differed doctrinally from the groups generally known as Essene or Zadokite.
If they differed at all, the differences would seem to have resided only in their membership — in specific individuals or personalities.
We do not know the names of individual Zadokites or Essenes.
We do know the names of those who constituted the Nazarean party.
They are people who either knew Jesus personally or apprenticed themselves, perhaps at second or third remove, to those who did.
But apart from this, the  Nazareans are indistinguishable from the broader movement of which they were part.
The Nazarean Party must not therefore be seen as a separate unit, but rather as a nucleus — the equivalent of a general staff, a privy council or a cabinet.
We must now look more closely at this cabinet — at its activities, its prominent personalities, its eventual fate — and at the process whereby circumstance, history and Saint Paul conspired to consign it to oblivion.
THE FORMATION OF CHRISTIANITY
Apart from the Gospels themselves, the most important book of the New Testament is the Acts of the Apostles.
Indeed, there are certain respects in which Acts, especially for the historian, may be even more significant.
The Gospels, as we have said before, are unreliable as historical documents.
The first of them, Mark, was composed no earlier than the revolt of A.D. 66, and probably somewhat later.
All four Gospels hark back to a period long before their own composition — perhaps as long as sixty or seventy years.
They pay scant attention to the historical backdrop, addressing themselves essentially to the figure of Jesus and his teaching.
They are poetic and devotional works, rather than chronicles.
Acts, by comparison, although extremely biased in its point of view, nevertheless reflects an endeavour to preserve an historical record, an account of ‘what actually happened’ in its historical context.
It recounts a complex story in a more or less coherent fashion.
It seems to have been subjected to considerably less editing than the Gospels.
It reflects, often, a first-hand experience of the events it describes.
And it was composed either only a short time after those events by someone who played a role in them, or more probably by someone  with direct access to the testimony of an eyewitness.
The period covered by the narrative in Acts begins shortly after the Crucifixion and ends somewhere between A.D. 64 and 67.
According to most scholars, the narrative itself was composed between A.D. 70 and 95.
It is thus, roughly speaking, contemporary with the earliest of the Gospels, if, indeed, it does not pre-date all four.
The author of Acts identifies himself as a man named Luke, and modern scholars concur that he is identical with the author of Luke's Gospel.
Whether this Luke is the same as ‘Luke the Doctor’, who was with Paul in Rome while Paul was in prison (Colossians 4:14), is less certain, but most commentators are prepared to accept that he is.
Luke's account is primarily an account of Paul.
It is quite clear that Luke knew Paul personally, in a way that neither he, nor the authors of the other Gospels, knew Jesus.
It is from Luke that one learns of Paul's conversion and mission.
At the same time, it is from Luke that one also learns a great deal about the Nazarean Party.
Ultimately, Acts offers a more or less reliable historical account of Paul's dispute with the Nazarean Party, which would culminate in nothing less than the creation of an entirely new religion.
It is thus worth summarising the historical background covered by the narrative in Acts.
John the Baptist appears to have been executed by Herod Antipas some time after A.D. 28, but no later than A.D. 35.
Jesus's own crucifixion is variously dated between A.D. 30 and A.D. 36, and seems to have occurred after John's death.
It cannot have been later than A.D. 36, because Pilate, in that year, was recalled to Rome.
In A.D. 35, or early in 36, there occurred an uprising in Samaria, led by a Samaritan Messiah.
This uprising was ruthlessly suppressed and many Samaritans, including the leaders, were exterminated in the  process.
At the same time, persecution of Jesus's immediate following seems to have intensified.
In A.D. 36, for example, Stephen, usually hailed as Christianity's first martyr, was stoned to death in Jerusalem, and many Nazareans fled the city.
By that time — possibly as little as a year and a half after Jesus's death — they must already have been widespread and numerous, because Paul, acting on behalf of the established Sadducee priesthood and armed with warrants from the High Priest, undertakes to hunt them out as far away as Damascus.
In other words, there were already Nazarean enclaves in Syria, and these were regarded as enough of a threat to warrant extirpation.
Syria, of course, was no part of Israel.
Judaic authorities could assert themselves only as far north as Syria with the approval of the Roman administration.
And for Rome to acquiesce in such witch-hunts must indicate that Rome herself felt threatened.
If, moreover, at this early date, sizeable Nazarean enclaves existed as far distant as Syria, one cannot ignore the possibility that they had come into being prior to Jesus's death and were already established at the time of the Crucifixion.
By A.D. 38, Jesus was being openly proclaimed as the Messiah — not the Son of God but simply the rightful and anointed king — by Nazarean refugees, or perhaps established communities, as far away as Antioch.
It was here, in the Syrian capital far to the north of Damascus, that the term ‘Christian’ was to be applied to them for the first time.
Until then, they had simply been called Nazareans.
And they continued to be called Nazareans elsewhere — especially Jerusalem — for many years.
In A.D. 38, a centralised Nazarean authority was already well established in Jerusalem.
By later Christian chroniclers, this administrative hierarchy was to become known as ‘the Early Church’.
Its most famous member, was, of course, Peter.
Its official head, however, conspicuously neglected by later tradition, was Jesus's brother Jacob, known subsequently as Saint James, or James the Just.
By this time, the Magdalene, the Virgin and others of those closest to Jesus had disappeared, and there is no further mention of them in scriptural accounts.
It is certainly reasonable to suppose that later assertions are accurate and that they sought refuge in exile.
What is significant, however, is that it is not Peter, but Jesus's brother James who presides over the ‘Church’ in Jerusalem.
Quite clearly, some principle of dynastic succession is at work.
And it can hardly be coincidental that James is referred to as ‘Zadok’.
The Nazarean Party
Jesus himself, of course, had had no intention of creating a new religion.
Neither had James and the Nazarean Party in Jerusalem.
Like Jesus, they would have been horrified by the very idea, regarding it as the most appalling blasphemy.
Like Jesus, they were, after all, devout Jews, working and preaching wholly within the context of established Judaic tradition.
True, they were seeking certain renewed observances, certain reforms and certain political changes.
They were also seeking to purge their religion of recently acquired alien elements and to restore it to what they deemed its original purity.
But they would not have dreamed of creating a new system of belief which might become a rival of Judaism — and, worse still, its persecutor.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the Nazarean Party in Jerusalem was considered subversive, both by the Romans and by the official Sadducee establishment, for it was quickly in trouble with the authorities.
As we have already noted, Stephen was stoned to death within a short time of the Crucifixion, and Saul of  Tarsus was pursuing Nazareans in Damascus.
Around A.D. 44, Peter, then John, then all the others were arrested, flogged and ordered not to speak the name of Jesus.
In the same year, the disciple known as James, brother of John, was arrested and beheaded — a form of execution which only the Romans were allowed to perform.
By the following year, guerrilla activity on the part of the Zealots had intensified to such a degree that Rome was obliged to take vigorous countermeasures.
By A.D. 48–9, the Roman Governor of Judaea was seizing and crucifying both Zealots and Nazareans indiscriminately.
Nevertheless, the disturbances increased.
In A.D. 52, the Roman Legate of Syria — the immediate superior of the Governor of Judaea — had to intervene personally to prevent a full-scale insurrection.
In fact, the insurrection was simply delayed, not prevented.
By A.D. 54–5, militant activity had again assumed epidemic proportions.
The Sadducee High Priest, appointed by the Romans, was assassinated by the Zealots, and a major terrorist campaign was launched against other Sadducees who had aligned themselves with Rome.
During A.D. 57–8, another Messiah appeared, said to have come from the Jewish community in Egypt.
Having gained a substantial following in Judaea, he undertook to occupy Jerusalem by force of arms and drive the Romans from the Holy Land.
Not surprisingly, this enterprise was violently thwarted, but the disturbances continued.
At last, around A.D. 62–5, James, head of the Nazarean Party in Jerusalem, was seized and executed.
Once again, a dynastic principle of succession seems clearly to have obtained among the Nazareans.
On James's death, his place was taken by an individual named Simeon, who is identified as a cousin of Jesus.
For a short time, Simeon kept the Nazarean administrative hierarchy in Jerusalem.
But for him, as for everyone else in the capital, the course of events must  now have been discerned as inevitable.
Around A.D. 65, Simeon accordingly led the Nazareans out of the Holy City.
They are said to have established their headquarters at the town of Pella, north of Jerusalem and on the east side of the Jordan.
Modern scholars have found proof that from here they continued to withdraw north-eastwards, groups of them eventually making their way to the vicinity of the Tigris-Euphrates basin, the region which now constitutes the border between Syria and Iraq.
In this region, divorced from what had by now become the mainstream of developing Christianity, they continued to survive, and preserve their traditions, for centuries.
There has been some speculation that Mohammed's father was a member of a Nazarean sect and that Mohammed himself was raised in Nazarean traditions.
One of his wives is reported to have been Jewish and, by implication, Nazarean.
Certainly the treatment of Jesus in the Koran is essentially Nazarean in orientation.
Simeon's prudence in leaving Jerusalem was fully justified.
In the spring of A.D. 66, serious fighting broke out in Caesarea.
Shortly after, Roman troops ran amok in Jerusalem, murdering all Jews they could find, including women and children.
In the wave of revulsion that followed, priests in the Temple were coerced into abolishing the official sacrifices to Rome and to the Emperor — an overt challenge which rendered open war inevitable.
After a week of civil strife, Jerusalem itself was captured by the rebels.
In the meantime, Zealot contingents commanded by a descendant of Judas of Galilee seized the fortress of Masada on the Dead Sea, exterminated the Roman garrison and prepared defensive installations that would withstand their enemies'  siege until A.D. 73.
The Roman response was at first somewhat sluggish.
A legion dispatched from Syria, and reinforced by auxiliaries, was repulsed from Jerusalem.
Its retreat degenerated into a rout.
Encouraged by this success, the rebels proceeded to organise a defensive network throughout the Holy Land.
It is interesting to note that the commander of one region, extending from Jerusalem to the coast, is named as John the Essene — another indication that the  Essenes were not at all pacifist.
By A.D. 70, however, the situation was already hopeless.
A massive Roman army besieged Jerusalem, utterly destroying the Temple and razing the city to the ground.
It was to lie in ruins for another sixty-one years.
Most of the inhabitants were killed or died of hunger.
The majority of the survivors were sold as slaves.
For three more years, Masada continued to hold out, but its fall was a foregone conclusion.
Paul as the First Heretic
It is against this turbulent background that Paul's career, chronicled in Acts, must be placed.
Paul appears on the scene within a year or so of the Crucifixion.
Under the name of Saul of Tarsus, a fanatical Sadducee or Sadducee instrument, he actively participates in attacks on the Nazarean Party in Jerusalem.
Indeed, he participates so actively that he is apparently involved in the stoning to death of Stephen, officially regarded as the first Christian martyr (although Stephen would have seen himself, of course, as a pious Jew).
Paul is quite explicit.
He freely admits that he has persecuted his victims ‘to the death’.
Shortly after Stephen's death, Paul (still Saul of Tarsus at this point), prompted by a sadistic fanatical fervour, embarks for Damascus, in Syria, to ferret out Nazareans there.
He is accompanied by a band of men, presumably armed, and bears arrest warrants from the High Priest.
As we have already noted, the High Priest's authority did not extend to Syria.
For Paul to exercise a mandate there, he must have had the  endorsement of the Roman administration, which indicates that Rome had a vested interest in eradicating Nazareans.
In no other circumstances would she have tolerated militant vigilantes operating with impunity so far beyond their own domains.
The midday sun at the time appears to have acted more dramatically than it subsequently does with mad dogs and Englishmen.
On the road, Paul undergoes something traumatic, which commentators have interpreted as anything from sunstroke, to an epileptic seizure, to a mystical experience.
A ‘light from heaven’ allegedly knocks him from his horse and ‘a voice’, issuing from no perceptible source, demands of him: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
Saul asks the voice to identify itself.
The voice replies: ‘I am Jesus the Nazarean, and you are persecuting me.’
It further instructs him to continue to Damascus, where he will be told what he must subsequently do.
When this experience passes and Paul regains a semblance of his former consciousness, he finds he has been stricken temporarily blind.
In Damascus, his sight is restored by a Nazarean.
A modern psychologist would find nothing unusual in such an incident.
It may indeed have been caused by sunstroke or by an epileptic seizure.
It could also, as readily, be ascribed to hallucination, hysterical or psychotic reaction, or perhaps nothing more than a guilty conscience.
Paul, however, interprets it as a visitation from Jesus, whom he never knew personally; and from this proceeds his conversion.
He abandons his former appellation of Saul and becomes Paul.
And from now on, he will be as fervently fanatical in his promulgation of Nazarean thought as he has hitherto been in trying to suppress it.
Around A.D. 39, Paul returns to Jerusalem.
Here, according to Acts, he is officially admitted to the Nazarean Party.
According to Paul himself, however, in his letter to the Galatians, his reception into the  Nazarean Party was rather less than enthusiastic.
He admits that they did not trust him and avoided him.
But he is accorded some sort of grudging acceptance by ‘James, the brother of the Lord’, who dispatches him to Tarsus, to preach there.
From Tarsus, Paul continues his missionary journey, which lasts some fourteen years and takes him across virtually the whole of the eastern Mediterranean world — not only throughout the Holy Land, but to Asia Minor as well, and across the sea to Greece.
One would expect such energy to earn him the approval of the Nazarean hierarchy in Jerusalem.
On the contrary, however, he has earned nothing but their displeasure.
James and the Nazarean hierarchy send their own missionaries in his wake, to undo his preaching and compromise him with his own converts — for Paul, by now, is preaching something very different from what the Nazareans themselves, under Jesus's brother, have sanctioned.
Harassed by James's emissaries, Paul at last returns to Jerusalem, where a full-scale dispute ensues.
Eventually, after considerable friction, an uneasy agreement is concluded between James and Paul, but Paul, soon after, is arrested — or placed in protective custody.
Taking advantage of his status as a Roman citizen, Paul demands that his case be heard by the Emperor personally and is sent as a prisoner to Rome.
He is believed to have died there some time between A.D. 64 and 67.
In terms of miles covered and energy expended during his missionary travels, Paul's achievement is stupendous.
There is no question that he acted with the dynamism of ‘a man possessed’.
Yet it is clear that things are not as straightforward as later Christian tradition would have one believe.
According to that tradition, Paul is depicted as ‘faithfully disseminating Jesus's message across the Romanised world of his time’.
Why, then, should his relations with Jesus's own brother have been so awkwardly strained?
Why should  there have been such friction with the Nazareans in Jerusalem, some of whom had known Jesus personally and were certainly closer to him than Paul ever was?
Why should Paul's preaching have so provoked the Nazarean hierarchy that they sent their own emissaries in his wake to discredit him?
It would seem clear that Paul was doing something of which Jesus himself would have disapproved.
As we have said, neither Jesus nor the Nazarean hierarchy had any intention of creating a new religion.
They were promulgating a specifically Judaic message for Judaic adherents.
As Jesus himself says (Matthew 5:17): ‘Do not imagine that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets.
I have come not to abolish but to complete them.’
For James and the Nazarean Party in Jerusalem, what matters is Jesus's teaching and his claim to Messiahship in the established context of the time — as rightful king and liberator.
He is important less in himself than in what he says and what he represents.
He is not intended, in his own person, to become an object of worship.
He is certainly not intended to be regarded as divine.
When James dispatches Paul and others on missionary expeditions, he desires them to convert people to Jesus's form of Judaism.
The ‘Nation of Israel’, as Jesus, James and their contemporaries conceived it, was not just a geographical entity.
It was also a community, which encompassed all Jews wherever they happened to reside.
The process of conversion was intended to swell the ranks of the Nation of Israel.
It is even possible that James saw this programme as a means of creating a reservoir of manpower, from which — as in the time of Judas Maccabeus — an army might be created.
If organised revolt was simmering in the Holy Land, its chances of success would have been immensely augmented if it could be synchronised, say, with uprisings by Jewish communities across the length and breadth of the Roman Empire.
Paul either fails to see James's objectives or refuses to cooperate.
In 2 Corinthians 11:3–4, he states explicitly that the Nazarean emissaries of James are promulgating ‘another Jesus’, a Jesus different from the one he is promulgating.
Paul, in effect, betrays the commission entrusted to him by James and the Nazarean hierarchy.
For Paul, Jesus's teachings and political status are less important than Jesus himself.
Instead of making converts to Judaism, Paul makes converts to his own personal and ‘pagan’ cult of Jesus, while Judaism as such becomes incidental, if not irrelevant.
What matters is simply a profession of faith in Jesus as a manifestation of God, and such a profession of faith is in itself sufficient to ensure salvation.
The basic requirements for conversion to Judaism, such as circumcision, observance of the Sabbath and adherence to dietary laws, are abandoned in the process.
Jesus, James and the Nazareans in Jerusalem advocated worship of God, in the strict Judaic sense.
Paul replaces this with worship of Jesus as God.
In Paul's hands, Jesus himself becomes an object of religious veneration — which Jesus himself, like his brother and the other Nazareans in Jerusalem, would have regarded as blasphemous.
The irreconcilability of Jesus and Paul raises questions of considerable contemporary relevance.
How many ‘Christians’ today, for example, are aware of the discrepancy between the two men?
And in what, for them, does ‘Christianity’ reside?
In what Jesus taught?
Or in what Paul taught?
Except by sleight of logic and distortion of historical fact, the two positions cannot be harmonised.
The Cult of Paul
It is from Paul, and Paul alone, that a new religion begins to emerge — not a form of Judaism, but a rival  and ultimately an adversary to Judaism.
As Paul disseminates his own personal message, such Judaism as it contains undergoes a metamorphosis.
It is fused with Greco-Roman thought, with pagan traditions, with elements from a number of mystery schools.
Once Paul's cult began to crystallise as a religion in itself, rather than a form of Judaism, it dictated certain priorities which had not obtained in Jesus's lifetime and which Jesus himself would unquestionably have deplored.
In the first place, it had to compete with already established religions in regions where it was trying to gain a foothold — with the religions of Syria, Phoenicia, Asia Minor, Greece, Egypt, the whole of the Mediterranean world and beyond, the Roman Empire.
In order to do this, Jesus had perforce to assume a degree of godhood comparable to that of the deities he now, posthumously, was intended to displace.
Like many other such deities Tammuz, for example, the god of ancient  Sumerian and Phoenician mystery teachings, had been born of a virgin, died with a wound in his side and, after three days, rose from his tomb, leaving it vacant with the rock at the entrance rolled aside.
If Paul were to challenge successfully the adherents of Tammuz, Jesus would have to be able to match the older god, miracle for miracle.
In consequence, certain aspects of the Tammuz story were grafted on to Jesus's biography.
It is significant that Bethlehem was not only David's city, but also the ancient centre of a Tammuz cult, with a shrine that remained active well into biblical times.
One can trace numerous specific elements in the Gospels to their origin not in history, but in the traditions surrounding Tammuz, Osiris, Attis, Adonis, Dionysos and Zoroaster.
Many of them, for example, were supposed to have been born of a god and a virgin.
Mithraism exerted a particularly powerful influence on the coalescence of Christian tradition.
It postulated an apocalypse, a day of judgement, a resurrection of the  flesh and a second coming of Mithras himself, who would finally defeat the principle of evil.
Mithras was said to have been born in a cave or a grotto, where shepherds attended him and regaled him with gifts.
Baptism played a prominent role in Mithraic rites.
So, too, did the communal meal.
There is a passage in the Mithraic communion which is particularly interesting: ‘He who shall not eat of my body nor drink of my blood so that he may be one with me and I with him, shall not be saved.’
When Tertullian, one of the early Church Fathers, was confronted with this passage, he insisted it was the Devil, centuries in advance, parodying the Christian Communion in order to diminish the import of Jesus's words.
If this was indeed the case, the Devil must also have been very busy brainwashing Paul.
As one modern commentator observes:
Even with the comparatively slight knowledge we have of Mithraism and its liturgy, it is clear that many of Paul's phrases [in his letters]savour much more of the terminology of the Persian cult than that of the Gospels.
But Christianity had not only to compete — to offer a god who could match his rivals miracle for miracle, wonder for wonder, supernatural occurrence for supernatural  occurrence .
It had also to make itself respectable and acceptable to a world which was, after all, part of the Roman Empire.
Intrinsically, it was not so at all.
Jesus had been executed as a criminal for offences against Rome, in strict accordance with Roman law.
His original followers would have been regarded as subversives, if not overt revolutionaries, actively dedicated to breaking Roman authority over Palestine.
The Holy Land had long been a source of exasperation for Rome, and after the revolt of A.D. 66 Roman hostility towards Judaism  intensified.
No religion which contained vestiges of Judaic Messianic nationalism could hope to survive within the Roman imperium.
In consequence, all traces of this Messianic nationalism had to be eradicated or transformed.
In order to diffuse itself through the Romanised world, Christianity transmuted itself — and, in the process, rewrote the historical circumstances from which it arose.
It would not do to deify a rebel against Rome.
It would not do to exalt a figure who had been executed by the Romans for crimes against the Empire.
As a result, responsibility for Jesus's death was transferred to the Jews — not only to the Sadducee establishment, who undoubtedly had a hand in it, but to the people of the Holy Land in general, who were among Jesus's most fervent supporters.
And Jesus himself had to be divorced from his historical context, turned into a non-political figure — an other-worldly, spiritual Messiah who posed no challenge whatever to Caesar.
Thus, all trace of Jesus's political activity was de-emphasised, diluted or excised.
And, so far as possible, all trace of his Jewishness was deliberately obscured, ignored or rendered irrelevant.
Simon Peter
The course and the eventual magnitude of Paul's ideological triumph over James and the Nazarean hierarchy can be gauged by the slowly shifting attitude of Simon Peter.
Indeed, Simon Peter offers a kind of barometer of the situation.
His personal position almost certainly mirrors that of numerous others who gravitated from James to Paul, from a form of Judaism to the increasingly autonomous new religion subsequently called Christianity.
In our previous book, we described Jesus's immediate entourage as consisting of two more or less  distinct groups, ‘adherents of the bloodline’ and ‘adherents of the message’.
The ‘adherents of the bloodline’ would have constituted a relatively small circle of probably aristocratic or patrician caste, members of Jesus's own family and families related to it.
For them, the primary concern would have been dynastic legitimacy — the installation on the throne of Israel of her rightful king and, when that failed, perpetuation of the royal bloodline intact.
The ‘adherents of the message’ would have been considerably more numerous, constituting the ‘rank and file’of the movement.
Their priorities would have been quite different — more mundane, more limited in scope, more pragmatic.
They would have responded primarily to Jesus's message, which by its very nature, elicited emotions of, simultaneously, fear and hope.
On the one hand, they would have been frightened by the urgency of the situation as Jesus describes it — the prospect of an imminent apocalypse, a day of judgement, the distribution of punishments and rewards.
On the other hand, they would have been inspired by the promise that they, as loyal adherents of the Messiah, would be granted a unique recompense for their fidelity and for any suffering they had incurred.
This joint appeal to fear and hope would have exercised a magnetic potency.
From what we know of him, Simon Peter would have been a typical ‘adherent of the message’.
He does not appear to have been a particularly well-educated man.
He seems to have little sense of the broader issues involved, political or theological.
He is not privy to Jesus's inner council, and many decisions are made behind his back or above his head.
As we have already noted, he may well have been a militant nationalist who did not shrink from violence.
He may well have been a Zealot or a former Zealot — and may, in fact, be identical with Simon Zelotes.
For the whole of Jesus's public ministry, Simon Peter is at his master's  side, almost as a kind of bodyguard — a function in keeping with his sobriquet of ‘Rocky’ or ‘tough’.
Although not conspicuously courageous, he is unswerving in his devotion, at time almost abject.
By the time Paul becomes active, James may be official head of the Nazarean Party in Jerusalem; but it is Simon Peter, whether by virtue of the mission entrusted to him by Jesus or by virtue of his own charisma, who wields the greatest influence and commands the most fervent allegiance.
At the beginning of Acts, Simon Peter is unquestionably aligned with James and the Nazarean hierarchy in Jerusalem.
Gradually, however, he begins to gravitate towards Paul's position.
By the end of Acts, his orientation has become entirely Pauline.
Like James, Simon Peter is at first a devout Jew, who sees Jesus's teaching exclusively in a Judaic context.
By the end of his career, he is, like Paul, preaching a trans-Judaic message to the Gentile world.
Tradition anachronistically proclaims him as the first pope — the first ruler of the Church which was to enshrine Paul's triumph and constitute an edifice of Pauline thought.
In her novel The Illusionist , Anita Mason offers an impressive and poignant, imaginative re-creation of the personal ordeal through which Simon Peter, and many others like him, must have passed.
As a simple, untutored Galilean fisherman and bully, he must at first have taken Jesus's statements quite literally.
Thus does one see him in the Gospels — loyal, but something of a yokel, and certainly not thinking in any very sophisticated religious or political terms.
Jesus is attached to him, but can hardly be said to confide in him.
As Anita Mason shows, Simon Peter must at first have been thoroughly convinced that the world would literally end with Jesus's death — that an apocalyptic holocaust would consume the whole of creation, that upheavals such as those recounted by Old Testament prophets would sweep the earth, that God would  descend to pronounce stern judgement.
In the days immediately following the Crucifixion, Simon Peter must have been, as Anita Mason depicts him, increasingly puzzled — and still more than a little alarmed — to find the world around him still intact.
At the beginning of the period chronicled in Acts, his position has modified only slightly.
Like many other Nazareans, he still expects the dissolution of creation.
The apocalypse has been postponed, probably for obscure technical reasons unfathomable to mortals, but it has been postponed only temporarily.
Simon Peter has no doubt whatever that it remains imminent and will occur in the course of his own lifetime.
It is this conviction, this fervent hope, that constitutes his raison d'être .
But the years pass and nothing happens.
Not only is there no apocalypse, no cosmic cataclysm.
There is not even a significant change in the local situation.
Roman officials are installed, then deposed.
Puppet kings are placed on thrones, then removed.
Civic disturbances increase, but prompted as much probably by impatience as anything else.
Everything continues more or less as it had before, and it becomes increasingly evident that Jesus's death has accomplished nothing.
For a man like Simon Peter, this, of course, constitutes a terrifying prospect.
He has committed himself definitely to a belief.
After considerable dithering, he has pledged his life and his future to that belief, and now the validity of his belief has begun to appear more and more questionable.
To Simon Peter, the burgeoning weight of doubt.
the burgeoning suspicion that his commitment has been in vain, must, as Anita Mason depicts, have been an appalling psychological torment.
It must have threatened him not only with disillusionment, but with a despair verging on the suicidal; and if he persists in disseminating the message, he does so almost somnambulistically, as a means of distracting himself from his uncertainties.
Paul, of course, offers Simon Peter an irresistible opportunity, a means of rescuing his commitment, of vindicating everything to which he has devoted himself.
For Simon Peter, Paul's position is a viable alternative to despair.
At first, of course , he sides with James in regarding Paul's work as highly suspect, if not blasphemous.
Gradually, however, Paul's position becomes the only one whereby sense can be made of the situation.
Paul's position, in short, provides Simon Peter with a viable explanation for why the world has not yet ended, why it may not for another thousand or two thousand years, while at the same time still justifying one's allegiance.
Jesus becomes consubstantial with God.
And if Jesus is consubstantial with God, the Kingdom of Heaven need not be something that will be inaugurated on earth in the immediate future, but something external — another realm, another dimension, in which one can expect a welcome and a reserved place on one's death.
The apocalypse may have been postponed indefinitely, but there remains the assurance that it will eventually come, at the end of time; and, in the meanwhile, there are rewards to be reaped in heaven.
From this elaborate rationalisation, Simon Peter derives a new impetus, a new inspiration which enables him to continue his preaching and — according to traditional accounts — to go bravely to his martyrdom.
By virtue of this supposed martyrdom, he does indeed become the rock on which a subsequent church — a Pauline church — is founded.
And subsequent tradition,a posteriori , will proclaim Simon Peter the first Bishop of Rome and the founder of the papacy.
As we have said, Simon Peter's vicissitudes, as depicted by Anita Mason, cannot have been unique.
On the contrary, there must have been many fervent followers of Jesus who conformed to a similar pattern — teetering on the brink of shattering disillusion, then  finding a new justification in Paul.
It is thus not difficult to understand why Paul's essentially ‘pagan’ cult should have been so persuasive, nor why it should subsequently have triumphed over the less comforting position of the Nazarean dynasty — of James and ultimately of Jesus himself.
And with the fall of Jerusalem in A.D. 70, the Nazarean influence effectively disappeared from most of the Mediterranean world.
Pauline thought would still continue to have rivals, of course.
But none of them would be able to muster the authority, vested in dynastic succession, of James.
Judas Iscariot
In the course of its dissemination, Pauline thought revised much of the original story on which the Gospels are based.
It inserted new material.
It adapted itself to the world in which it was being promulgated.
In the process, certain individuals were made to pay a price, if only in the eyes of posterity.
Simon Peter, of course, is the best known and probably the most popular of Jesus's original entourage — the one whom tradition has established as virtually synonymous with Christianity itself.
In many ways, he is the most fully characterised of the disciples.
And, in his weaknesses, he is the most endearingly human.
But there is one other member of Jesus's first disciples who affords considerably more insight into what his master was really doing.
His significance has been obscured by Pauline thought.
For nearly twenty centuries, the figure known as Judas Iscariot — Judas the Sicarius — has been accursed and despised, cast in the role of most heinous of villains.
In relation to Jesus, popular tradition has imposed upon him one of the oldest and most archetypal of functions — that of the eternal adversary, the  dark opposite, the embodiment of all the vices and iniquities that the hero is not.
Symbolically speaking, Judas is the ‘evil brother’, the dark side of which Jesus is the light.
In Judaeo-Christian tradition, the antithesis between them is another manifestation of the conflict dating back to Cain and Abel.
One finds a similar conflict in other cultures, other mythologies, other cosmologies.
In Egyptian myth, for example, the same duality is reflected by the eternal conflict between Set and Osiris.
In Zoroastrian teaching — which, through its Mithraic vestiges, heavily influenced Christianity — it was dramatised by Ahura-Mazda or Ormus/Ormuzd and Ahriman.
One can find parallel rivalries across the globe, from Aztec and Toltec beliefs in Mexico to the myths of India, China and Japan.
And behind all of them lies the archetypal opposition between good and evil, light and darkness, creation and destruction, God and the Devil.
If Jesus, in later Christian culture, becomes synonymous with God, Judas — dragging ‘the Jews’ in general with him — becomes the very embodiment of God's adversary.
Judas appears as a false friend who, for purely mercenary reasons, betrays his master and brings about his master's death.
The picture is unmitigatedly black, and there are no extenuating circumstances.
But a closer reading of the Gospels reveals a much more complex drama being enacted.
As we have seen, Jesus was steeped in Old Testament prophecies — especially those of Zechariah pertaining to the Messiah — and acted repeatedly in close adherence to them.
Again and again, such prophecies dictate and determine his decisions, his attitudes, his course of action.
Indeed, a large part of his public life and known history would seem to be little more than an embodiment and re-enactment of the prophecies.
And, of course, the more of them he fulfils, the more substantial becomes his own Messianic claim.
‘This took place to fulfil the prophecy’ is a constant refrain  throughout the New Testament — the refrain of a polemicist triumphantly presenting his proof.
For centuries, and despite contrary evidence in the Gospels themselves, Christian tradition claimed that the convergence between Jesus's life and Old Testament prophecy was ‘coincidental’— not calculated on Jesus's part, but occurring spontaneously, in accordance with a divine plan.
Today, however, such an assertion is wholly untenable.
For modern scholars, there is no question but that Jesus was steeped in biblical teachings and especially those of the prophetic books.
He is not conforming to their pattern by ‘miraculous accident’.
On the contrary, he is carefully, deliberately, often methodically and painstakingly modelling his career and his activities according to the statements of the prophets.
He himself even says so.
There has obviously been a conscious decision and determination on his part to make his life a fulfilment of prophetic utterance.
As we have seen, Zechariah's prophecies concerning the Messiah are of particular interest and relevance to Jesus.
His triumphal entry into Jerusalem, for example, represents an attempt to conform to one of them.
But Zechariah also prophesied that the Messiah, descended from David, would be pierced and killed, and his followers scattered.
And, in a somewhat opaque passage, the Messiah was equated with an allegorical ‘good shepherd’, who would be sold for the price of thirty shekels of silver.
From the Gospels, it is quite clear Jesus has determined that these prophecies, too, must be made to occur — not spontaneously, but by contrived design.
In order to execute that design, a betrayer is necessary.
In all four Gospels, the Last Supper figures prominently.
And in all four Gospels, Jesus announces publicly, to the assembled company, that he will be betrayed by one of them — because ‘the time has come’, because his ‘hour is at hand’ and also, quite  explicitly , because ‘the prophecy must be fulfilled’.
In Mark and Luke, the betrayer is not named at the Last Supper itself.
In Matthew and John, however, he is.
In Matthew, for example, Judas openly asks, in front of all his comrades, ‘Not I, Rabbi, surely?’, and Jesus replies in the affirmative.
In John's Gospel, Jesus, when asked to identify the man who will betray him, answers, ‘It is the one to whom I give the piece of bread that I shall dip in the dish.’
Having dipped it, he then hands it brazenly to Judas, saying, ‘What you are going to do, do quickly.’
And John's Gospel, rather inconsistently, adds that no one else present knew precisely why Jesus said this to Judas.
The sequence, as it is described, inevitably raises questions.
Why, most obviously, if Judas is determined as his master's betrayer, is he allowed to depart on his mission of treachery?
Why is he not restrained — by Simon Peter, for example, who, only a short time later, is not only armed, but also sufficiently violent to attack an attendant of the High Priest?
Why are some other precautions not taken?
The answer to these questions is that Judas's mission is necessary.
As Matthew declares, ‘all this happened to fulfil the prophecies in scripture’.
And again, a chapter later: ‘The words of the prophet…were then fulfilled.
And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the sum at which the precious One was priced by the children of Israel…’
It is not that Judas is actually betraying Jesus.
On the contrary, he has been deliberately selected by Jesus, probably to his own chagrin, to discharge a distasteful duty so that the drama of the Passion may enact itself in accordance with Old Testament  prophecy .
When Jesus proffers the dipped morsel, he is in fact imposing a task upon Judas.
It is almost as if the man assigned the task has been chosen by lot, except that the drawing seems to have been fixed.
And when Jesus orders Judas to do quickly what must be done, he is not making a statement  of clairvoyant resignation, but issuing explicit instructions.
One thing clearly emerges from any close examination of the Last Supper.
There has unquestionably been some kind of collusion between Jesus and Judas.
The ‘betrayal’ cannot occur without such collusion, a voluntary participation on Jesus's part, a determination — not just a willingness — to be betrayed.
In short, the whole business has been carefully planned, even though the other disciples seem not to have been privy to the arrangement.
Judas alone appears to have enjoyed Jesus's confidence in the matter.
Doomed to be stigmatised and anathematised by posterity, Judas in fact proves to be as much a martyr, in his own way, as Jesus.
For the Greek writer Nikos Kazantzakis, Judas's role is, if anything, even more difficult.
In The Last Temptation , shortly before the Last Supper, the following dialogue occurs, in secret, between Jesus and Judas:
'I'm sorry, Judas, my brother,’ Jesus said, ‘but it is necessary.‘
'I've asked you before, Rabbi — is there no other way?’
'No, Judas, my brother.
I too should have liked one.
I too hoped and waited for one until now — but in vain.
No, there is no other way.
The end of the world is here.
This world, this kingdom of the Devil, will be destroyed and the kingdom of heaven shall come.
I shall bring it.
How?
By dying.
There is no other way.
Do not quiver, Judas, my brother.
In three days I shall rise again.’
'You tell me this in order to comfort me and make me able to betray you without rending my own heart.
You say that I have the endurance — you say it in order to give me strength.
No, the closer we come to that terrible moment…no, Rabbi, I won't be able to endure!’
'You will, Judas, my brother.
God will give you the strength, as much as you lack, because it is necessary — it is necessary for me to be killed and for you to betray me.
We two must save the world.
Help me.’
Judas bowed his head.
After a moment he asked ‘If you had to betray your master, would you do it?’
Jesus reflected for a long time.
Finally he said, ‘No, I'm afraid I wouldn't be able to.
That is why God pitied me and gave me the easier task: to be crucified.’
This dialogue, of course, is a fictional re-creation.
Yet it is clear that something akin to what Kazantzakis depicts must have occurred in actuality.
Commentators on the New Testament have long recognised how vital, how indispensable, Judas is to the entire mission of Jesus.
Without Judas, the drama of the Passion cannot be enacted.
As a result, Judas must be seen as something very different from the scurrilous villain of popular tradition.
He emerges as precisely the opposite — a noble and tragic figure, reluctantly consenting to play an unpleasant, painful and obligatory role in a carefully pre-arranged script.
As Jesus says of him: ‘I have watched over them and not one is lost except the one who chose to be lost, and this was to fulfil the scriptures.’
What remains indeterminate is whether Jesus was truly convinced that he himself had literally to die, or whether it was sufficient that he appear to die.
As we discussed in our previous book, there is a substantial body of evidence in favour of the latter alternative.
The truth, of course, is unlikely ever to be known.
But it is certainly possible, at least, that he survived the Cross — if, indeed, it was he who was on it in the first place, rather than the substitute claimed by the Koran and by many early heresies.
But if it was intended that Jesus survive the Cross, or never perhaps be crucified at all, one cannot help wondering whether Judas was privy to the plan.
Would he still have been in collusion with his master?
Or did he go to his death in the anguished conviction that he was responsible for his master's?
Jude
As we have seen, Pauline thought appears to have altered dramatically the attitudes and orientation of Simon Peter.
The traditions arising from Pauline thought blackened the name of Judas and obscured the role of Jesus's own brother, James, as head of the Nazarean hierarchy in Jerusalem.
There is yet another figure whose importance, in the eyes of posterity, was to be distorted and diminished.
In the canon of the New Testament, there is a single letter from James, who identifies himself as ‘the brother of the Lord’.
There is also a letter from an individual named Jude, who identifies himself as ‘a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James’.
It might seem from this at first that Jude, like James, was Jesus's brother.
In fact, modern biblical scholars concur that the letter ascribed to Jude is of too late a date to have been written by any contemporary of Jesus.
It is believed to have been composed early in the second century, very likely by an individual who was indeed named Jude and who, together with his brother James, presided over the Nazarean party at the time.
But according to the earliest Church historians, the James and Jude of the second century were the grandsons of another, older Jude, who was Jesus's brother.
The Gospels themselves make it clear that Jesus had a brother named Jude or Judah or Judas.
Luke's Gospel and Acts both speak of a certain ‘Judas of  James’, which is usually translated as ‘Judas, son of James’.
It is much more probable, however, that ‘Judas of James’ originally referred to ‘Judas, brother of James’.
If Luke is vague on the subject, Matthew and Mark are both quite explicit.
Both of them speak of Jesus having four brothers — Joseph, Simon, James and Jude — as well as at least two sisters.
The context in which they are mentioned is curious.
They are said to have reproved Jesus during his early days of preaching in Galilee.
No reason for the reproof is suggested.
Whatever it might have been, it was short-lived so far as James was concerned.
Within a short time of Jesus's death, he had taken his brother's place, had assumed the presiding role in the Nazarean hierarchy in Jerusalem and had attained status as a holy man himself.
There is abundant evidence to indicate that Jude followed suit.
And yet, curiously enough, there is no mention of Jude in Acts or in any other New Testament documents — at least not under that name.
In fact, it is under another name that he must be sought.
When found, he proves to have played an important role indeed.
THE BROTHERS OF JESUS
A number of seminal Essene and/or Zadokite texts speak not of one expected Messiah, but of two.
According to these sources, the nation's identity and integrity rest on two parallel dynastic successions with numerous links between them.
The two Messiahs are named specifically as the Messiah of Aaron and the Messiah of David.
The Messiah of David would be a royal figure, presiding over the secular administration of the new kingdom, which he would bring into being through his military prowess.
The Messiah of Aaron, descended from Israel's first high priest in the Old Testament, would be a priestly figure, an ‘Interpreter of the Law’ who would preside over the people's spiritual life.
Ironically, this principle of a dual secular and spiritual authority would subsequently find expression in Western Europe through the Holy Roman Empire, wherein the emperor wielded a temporal sceptre and claimed descent from David while the pope exercised spiritual authority as interpreter of God's law.
As we have repeatedly noted, however, politics and religion for Israel at the time were inextricably associated — were, in fact, essentially different manifestations of the same thing.
In consequence, the Royal Messiah and the Priest Messiah would have had  to be as closely linked as possible — which they were in Maccabean times, for example, when both were members of the same family.
It would have been unthinkable to allow the kind of schisms between spiritual and temporal power that later characterised the Holy Roman Empire.
It can certainly be argued that the twin-Messiah theme appears in the New Testament, albeit in drastically modified and probably garbled form.
Modern biblical scholars concur that among the most historically plausible incidents in the Gospels, among the incidents least likely to have been invented by later writers and editors, is Jesus's baptism in the Jordan by John.
Certainly this is the single most crucial event in what we know of Jesus's public career prior to his triumphal entry into Jerusalem; and Christian tradition reinforces John's importance to the story.
He is the pathfinder, the forerunner, the ‘voice crying in the wilderness’ who ‘prepares the way’.
Indeed, many of John's contemporaries were prepared to regard him as the Messiah.
Luke reports that ‘…a feeling of expectancy had grown among the people, who were beginning to think that John might be the Christ.’
And during the first three centuries A.D., there were certain Mandaean or Johannite sects, especially in the region of the Tigris-Euphrates basin, who honoured John, not Jesus, as their prophet.
Indeed, one of these sects still exists.
According to its thinking, John was ‘the true prophet’, while Jesus was ‘a rebel, a heretic, who led men astray, betrayed secret doctrines’.
Biblical scholars have seen no reason to doubt Luke's assertion that John and Jesus were first cousins.
It is now generally accepted that Jesus's mother was the sister of Elizabeth, the mother of John.
But Luke also makes it plain that John the Baptist, through his mother, was descended from the priestly dynastic succession of Aaron — which would mean, of course, that Jesus was too.
At the same time, Luke stresses  Jesus's descent, through his father, from David.
Thus, as a descendant of Aaron, John can lay claim to the title of Priest Messiah.
Jesus, descended from both Aaron and David, can lay claim to the titles of Priest Messiah and Royal Messiah.
This would seem to explain Luke's assertion in Acts (2: 36) that God made Jesus ‘both Lord and Christ’.
The kinship between John and Jesus would have imparted an added prestige, plausibility and credibility to their respective roles.
If, amidst the generally apocalyptic atmosphere of the time, devout Jews were anxiously awaiting the advent of two Messiahs — one royal from David, one priestly from Aaron — they would have had their eyes fixed on a limited number of families.
If the anticipated figures appeared as first cousins, how much more striking and persuasive this would have been.
Almost certainly, it would have been perceived as a sign, a portent, a palpable manifestation of God's hand.
If Jesus were the royal Messiah and John the priestly one, the baptism in the Jordan would have been all the more significant — the priestly Messiah conferring official status on his royal counterpart, who also, by the manifest workings of a divine plan, happened to be his close kin.
The dual Messianic and familial threads would have reinforced each other.
To the extent that spiritual and temporal functions were united in the same house, by the same blood, the union would be doubly consecrated, doubly sanctified, and the unity of the nation all the more hallowed.
This, as we mentioned, was what had occurred during the Maccabean dynasty, Israel's last monarchy.
And, as we noted, the movement of which Jesus and his followers seem to have been a part regarded the Maccabean regime as a prototype for their own aspirations.
If John were the Priest Messiah of Aaron, and Jesus the Royal Messiah of David, it is possible that Jesus, when John was executed by Herod Antipas, assumed  both roles, incorporating the dead prophet's status and functions within himself.
It may even have been that John, anticipating his imminent doom, ratified some such arrangement, perhaps in the ceremony at the Jordan.
There would clearly seem to be some significance in the fact that only on John's decease does Jesus embark in earnest on his ministry.
In any case, there is no question that Jesus's following included former devotees of John.
And if Jesus incorporated in himself the double role of royal and priestly Messiah, he would indeed have been a figure worthy of such adherence.
Thomas the Twin
There are, however, other, even more provocative implications attending the principle of dual Messiahs.
These implications involve not John the Baptist, but a much more elusive figure, whom later Christian tradition has been decidedly reluctant to accommodate.
To do so would have entailed considerable embarrassment.
In all four Gospels, and in Acts, mention is made of the disciple known as Thomas.
At the same time, however, little of consequence is ascribed to him.
One learns virtually nothing about him.
He is not in any way individualised from the rest of Jesus's following.
He seems to function as a wholly peripheral supernumerary.
Only in John's Gospel does he make one curious and profoundly interesting statement.
When Jesus receives news that Lazarus is ill, Thomas urges everyone back to the sick man's home in Bethany, ‘that we may die with him’.
Apart from this, Thomas neither says nor does anything of note until after the Crucifixion.
Then — in a passage of John's Gospel which is probably a later interpolation — he initially queries whether Jesus has indeed been resurrected in the flesh.
If one looks to sources other than the canonical scriptures, Thomas's role assumes larger proportions.
According to Eusebius, the Church historian writing in the fourth century, Thomas migrated north-eastwards, evangelising among the Parthians — the ‘barbarian’ people who occupied the region from the Tigris-Euphrates basin up through what is modern-day Iran.
According to an apocryphal work dating from the third century, Thomas's mission takes him even further.
He is said to die in India, pierced with lances, and the tomb in which he is buried is later found empty.
A similar tradition exists among a sect of Syrian Christians, who call themselves ‘Christians of St Thomas’.
According to them, they were converted by Thomas, who eventually died at Mylapore, near Madras.
If such accounts as these contain any veracity, Thomas emerges as one of the most active and influential of all the disciples.
If Paul is Christianity's chief apostle to Western Europe, Thomas, almost single-handed, would seem to be responsible for its dissemination eastwards.
What Thomas disseminated, however, was not Pauline Christianity.
It was a form of Nazarean teaching, such as one would expect to emanate from James and the Nazarean hierarchy in Jerusalem.
But who exactly was Thomas?
We know that Simon Peter and his brother Andrew, as well as the two sons of Zebedee, were fishermen from Galilee.
We learn something of the backgrounds of various other disciples.
About Thomas, however, we are told nothing.
And the question becomes all the more pertinent because ‘Thomas’ is not a name at all.
Just as ‘Peter’ is a nickname, meaning ‘rocklike’or ‘rocky’, for a fisherman named Simon, so ‘Thomas’is a sobriquet, the word being simply the Hebrew for ‘twin’.
In the King James version of John's Gospel, there might at first seem to be some slight clarification.
He is referred to there as ‘Thomas Didymus’ or ‘Thomas called Didymus’.
In fact, however, this only obscures  the issue further — because the word ‘didymus’ also means ‘twin’.
When translated, ‘Thomas Didymus’ yields the redundancy of ‘Twin Twin'.
‘Thomas called Didymus’ becomes even more grotesque —‘Twin called Twin'.
Nor do more recent translations, which speak of ‘Thomas called the Twin', offer any greater illumination.
Once again, we are left with an absurdity —‘the Twin called the Twin'.
What is it that is being so clumsily concealed here?
What was Thomas's real name?
And whose twin was he?
These questions are partially answered, quite explicitly, by the apocryphal Gospel of Thomas, a very early work dating probably from the end of the first century.
Here, Thomas is identified as ‘Judas Thomas’, which translates as ‘Judas the Twin’.
In another, slightly later apocryphal work, the Acts of Thomas, the issue is further clarified.
Here, too, Thomas is named specifically as Judas Thomas.
And when Jesus appears to a young man, ‘…he saw the Lord Jesus in the likeness of the Apostle Judas Thomas…the Lord said to him: ‘I am not Judas who is also Thomas, I am his brother.’’
The Apocryphal Testimony
Modern biblical scholars concur that the churches which evolved in Syria, in Asia Minor and in Egypt embodied a form of ‘Christianity’ no less valid than Rome's, different from Rome's though it was.
Indeed it can be argued that the churches in such places were heir to a ‘purer’ tradition than Rome's, because it was not diluted and distorted by Pauline thought; it was something closer to what Jesus himself, James and the original Nazarean hierarchy would have propagated.
Certainly the Church in Egypt, to take but one example, possessed texts at least as old and as authoritative as those in the canonical New Testament — texts which the  compilers of the canonical New Testament chose deliberately to exclude.
This point is stressed by Professor Helmut Koester of Harvard University Divinity School, who argues that in the ‘…vast treasure of non-canonical gospel literature there are at least some writings which have not found their rightful place in the history of this literary genre’.
Among these writings, Professor Koester cites specifically the Gospel of Thomas.
When interviewed in the television series Jesus: the Evidence , Professor Koester was quite unequivocal in his assertions.
On the basis of the most recent evidence, there could be little doubt that Judas Thomas was indeed Jesus's brother — the brother mentioned in the Gospels as Jude.
If Judas Thomas, or Jude the Twin, were indeed Jesus's twin brother, what would have been his status among his contemporaries?
In the Acts of Thomas, there is the following quotation: ‘Twin brother of Christ, apostle of the Most High and fellow initiate into the hidden word of Christ, who dost receive his secret sayings…’
And again, even more explicitly, in an invocation to the Holy Ghost (which, significantly enough, is feminine): ‘Come Holy Spirit…
Holy Dove that bearest the twin young.
Come, Hidden Mother…’
In a fragment from another apocryphal work, Jesus, approaching Simon Peter and Judas Thomas, addresses them ‘in the Hebrew language’.
There seems to have been some obfuscation, perhaps deliberate, in the translation of the original Coptic text, but what Jesus appears to say is: ‘Greetings, my venerable guardian Peter.
Greetings, Thomas [Twin], my second Messiah.’
From such references as these, the figure of Judas Thomas emerges not only as Jesus's twin brother Jude.
He also emerges as an acknowledged Messiah in his own right.
Cult of the Twins
The suggestion that Jesus had a twin brother was one of the most persistent and tenacious of the ancient ‘heresies’.
Nor did it ever completely disappear, despite repeated attempts to extirpate it.
During the Renaissance, for example, it surfaced repeatedly albeit in somewhat garbled form.
It is conspicuous in certain of Leonardo Da Vinci's works, especially ‘The Last Supper’.
The theme recurs in subsequent painters, including Poussin.
It also figures prominently today in the work of Michel Tournier, one of the most esteemed voices in contemporary French culture and probably the single most important novelist France has produced since Proust.
And in the decorations commissioned by Bérenger Saunière for the church at Rennes-le-Château, both Mary and Joseph are depicted, one on each side of the altar, holding a Christ-child.
To most contemporary Christians, of course, and even to most contemporary agnostics, the suggestion that Jesus had a twin brother will seem at best far-fetched, at worst blasphemous.
But it is important indeed vital, to bear one crucial fact in mind.
The texts in which Judas Thomas appears as Jesus's twin were at one time widely used by Christian congregations, not only in Egypt and Syria, but also, as we shall see, as far away as Spain and, it seems, Ireland.
They were accepted works of scripture, as legitimate as the canonical Gospels of the New Testament, or the Acts of the Apostles.
This can only mean that, at the time,the idea of a twin was perfectly acceptable to devout Christians .
There were, in short, pious men and women who not only failed to find it blasphemous, but regarded it as an integral part of their belief — as integral, say, as Peter's role is to the Church of Rome.
At this point, it is worth digressing briefly into wholly speculative territory — territory which will  yield no proof one way or the other, but warrants at least passing consideration.
In the ancient world, the processes of human procreation were not understood as we understand them today.
In many respects, ancient understanding of these processes was less than ours.
It is doubtful, for example, if the biological factors involved in the birth of twins were fully, or even adequately, appreciated.
For this simple, self-evident reason, the birth of twins, and especially identical twins, would have seemed to the ancients nothing short of miraculous — a phenomenon attesting to some intervention of divine origin.
The theme of twin brothers is among the most resonant, and among the earliest, of all cultural/religious motifs.
From the dawn of recorded history, the Mediterranean world in particular had made a cult of the Dioscuri, the Divine Twins.
Under the names of Castor and Pollux, these twins had played an extremely important role in the formulation and evolution of Greek mythical thought.
Romulus and Remus were revered as the pair from whom the foundation of Rome derived.
By its very nature, the birth of twins became an event which partook of the mythic, which linked man with some of his oldest and most potent mythic images and ultimately with his gods.
Although such twins, as we have seen, were often arch-enemies, they need not have been, Often, they complemented each other peaceably to form a single unity.
Thus, for example, Edessa, now Urfa in Turkey, had long been a centre of the twin cult, worshipping the pair under the names of Momim and Aziz.
This pair was supplanted by Jesus and Judas Thomas, and Edessa became a centre for the new cult of the twin Messiahs.
It is in Edessa that the Acts of Thomas is believed to have been written.
It was also in Edessa that the oldest known church was built, then destroyed in A.D. 201.
And there is persuasive evidence that Judas Thomas visited the town personally and brought his  teachings directly to the established king, Abgar.
The Jews of Jesus's time were waiting in anguished anticipation for the advent of the Messiah — and, so far as many of them were concerned, for the advent of two Messiahs.
Because Messiahship was regarded as something dynastic, something in part dependent upon a bloodline, people's attention, as we observed before, would have been focused on a relatively small network of interlinked families who could claim descent from both David and Aaron.
If a pair of twins were born into one of these families, would it not have seemed significant indeed — a divine sign, a portent, a confirmation of expectations?
Would not a royal and priestly Messiah, both issuing simultaneously from the same family, have seemed an eloquent testimony of God's favour?
The Descendants of Jesus's Family
In The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail , we spoke at length about the likelihood of a blood descent from Jesus.
Might there also have been a descent from Jesus's family?
Established sources concur that there indeed was.
Thus, for example, the historian Julius Africanus, who lived between A.D. 160 and 240 and maintained close links with the royal house of Edessa, writes:
Herod, who had no drop of Israelitish blood in his veins and was stung by the consciousness of his base origins, burnt the registers of their families…
A few careful people had private records of their own, having either remembered the names or recovered them from copies, and took pride in preserving the memory of their aristocratic origin.
These included the people…known as Desposyni [i.e. the Master's People]because of their relationship to the saviour's family.
Two quite different events, occurring some seventy years apart, appear to have been garbled or telescoped in this passage.
On the one hand, there would appear to have been Jesus's own aristocratic and royal pedigree, which, as we have discussed, Herod, as a usurper, deemed a threat to his legitimacy.
Among other things, this would have engendered the tradition of Herod's Massacre of the Innocents.
On the other hand, it has been argued that the burning of genealogies to which Julius Africanus refers was perpetrated not by Herod, but by the Romans after the revolt of A.D. 66.
They, quite as much as Herod, would have been threatened by the survival of a legitimate royal bloodline, around which the rebellious Jews might have rallied.
According to Paul's own statements, he himself had been married and, at the time of his conversion, was a widower.
Certainly there was no prohibition against marriage and paternity, either in Jesus's immediate entourage or in the so-called ‘Early Church’.
According to Clement of Alexandria, the disciple Philip, as well as Simon Peter, had married and sired families.
And in Corinthians, Paul seems clearly to indicate that Jesus's own brothers were married: ‘Have we not every right to eat and drink?
And the right to take a Christian woman round with us, like all the other apostles and the brothers of the Lord…?’
There is no specific mention of a descent from James, but James is described repeatedly as a fervent adherent of the law, and one of the dictates of the law was to marry, be fruitful and multiply.
Although no reference to them exists among surviving documents, it is certainly reasonable to assume that James sired children.
In Jude's — or Judas Thomas's — case, there is confirmation of a bloodline.
As we noted earlier, the Nazarean hierarchy, at the beginning of the second century, was directed by two brothers, James and Jude, who are specifically identified as grandsons of Jesus's  brother.
According to Eusebius, quoting a still earlier authority:
…there still survived of the Lord's family the grandsons of Jude, who was said to be His brother, humanly speaking.
These were informed against as being of David's line and brought…before Domitian Caesar…
Domitian asked them whether they were descended from David, and they admitted it…
 Eusebius reports that the Desposyni — the descendants of Jesus's family and possibly of Jesus himself — survived to become leaders of various Christian churches, according, it would seem, to a strict dynastic succession.
Eusebius traces them to the time of the Emperor Trajan, A.D. 98–117.
A modern Roman Catholic authority recounts a story which brings them up to the fourth century — the time of Constantine.
In A.D. 318, the then Bishop of Rome (now known as Pope Sylvester) is said to have met personally with eight Desposyni leaders — each of whom presided over a branch of the Church — at the Lateran Palace.
They are reported to have requested (1) that the confirmation of Christian bishops of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus and Alexandria be revoked;(2) that these bishoprics be conferred instead on members of the Desposyni; and (3) that Christian churches ‘resume’ sending money to the Desposyni Church in Jerusalem, which was to be regarded as the definitive Mother Church.
Not surprisingly, the Bishop of Rome rejected these requests, stating that the Mother Church was now Rome and that Rome had authority to appoint her own bishops.
This is said to have been the last contact between the Judaeo-Christian Nazareans and the coalescing orthodoxy based on Pauline thought.
From then on, Nazarean tradition is generally believed to have disappeared.
In fact, however, it did no such thing.
THE SURVIVAL OF NAZAREAN TEACHING
After the revolt of A.D. 66 and the fall of Masada eight years later, the politically oriented Messianic movement embodied by Jesus, his brothers and his immediate followers was seriously disrupted.
But although its thrust had been effectively blunted, it could still muster enough adherents to create large-scale upheaval in the Holy Land.
Thus, between A.D. 132 and 135, Palestine again rose in revolt.
The leader of this insurrection was one Simeon bar Kokhba.
There is evidence to suggest that he was descended from Judas of Galilee, leader of the Zealots a century and a quarter before, and from the Zealot commanders at the capture and subsequent siege of Masada.
Dr Robert Eisenman, whom we cited earlier, believes there may well have been close links between Simeon's family and the descendants of Jesus's — if, indeed, they were not one and the same.
Once again, the principle of dynastic succession is worthy of note.
When he embarked on his rebellion, Simeon turned to the now well established Pauline ‘Christians’ for support.
This is hardly surprising.
As we have already suggested, Jesus's brother James, and the other members of the Nazarean hierarchy in Jerusalem, seem to have regarded their evangelising as a form of recruitment — a means whereby an army for the nation  of Israel might be created.
For Simeon Kokhba, it would have been perfectly natural to expect the adherents of an earlier Messiah — the rightful king dedicated to freeing his country from the Roman yoke — to aid him in just such an enterprise.
But the Pauline ‘Christians’ had by now evolved their own doctrine of a non-political, wholly spiritual Messiah.
Angered by what must have seemed a monstrous betrayal, or a display of contemptible cowardice, Simeon turned upon them and persecuted them as traitors.
Simeon's revolt, like the one which preceded it sixty-six years before, was ruthlessly suppressed, but not before the Holy Land had once again been ravaged.
Once again, Jerusalem was razed.
When it was rebuilt, Jews were forbidden to return to it or establish residence within its precincts.
The survivors of Simeon's army fled, some north into Syria and Mesopotamia, some south into Egypt.
And it was in these places that Nazarean tradition was to continue.
In the wake of Simeon's revolt, the adherents of the old Nazarean hierarchy would have found themselves under increasing pressure from three quarters.
So far as Rome was concerned, they were, of course, rebellious outlaws, to be hounded, harried and ruthlessly extirpated.
By this time, too, they had begun to engender antipathy among Jews.
Although the old collaborationist Sadducee priestly establishment of Herod's and Jesus's time had disappeared, a new form of Judaism had begun to coalesce, oriented towards rabbinical teaching.
This rabbinical Judaism, the progenitor of Judaism in its modern form, had in its disillusionment, repudiated the Messianic movement, repudiated ambitious political enterprises and — to ensure its own survival — entrenched itself behind the cultivation of learning, scholarship and ritual observance.
For rabbinical Judaism, militant activity was perceived as more than just an embarrassment.
It was also a threat, which might ‘rock the boat’ and  provoke another disastrous onslaught of Roman wrath and retribution.
The Pauline ‘Christians’ adopted a similar attitude.
They, too, were intent on their own survival and, to ensure it, on propitiating Rome.
For them, too, military and political activity had to be scrupulously avoided.
Moreover, they had their own doctrines by now of who Jesus was and what the term ‘Messiah’ meant.
They were not prepared to have these doctrines shaken, even by descendants of Jesus or his family.
In consequence, the adherents of the old Nazarean hierarchy — of Jesus and his brothers — found themselves squeezed between diverse factions and relegated increasingly beyond the pale of recorded Western history.
It amounted, in effect, to a kind of ‘exile from history’.
Although they had formerly represented the true repository of Judaism, and although they provided Christianity with the very focus of its worship, they had now been disowned by Jews and Christians alike.
And their very definition of the Messiah had been hi-jacked and twisted into something radically different.
It is probably one of the cruellest ironies in the evolution and development of any major world religion.
By the second century, Nazarean thought was already being branded as a form of heresy.
Thus, indeed, would many ‘Christians’ regard it today.
But the very word ‘heresy’ is consistently misused, and must be restored to its correct perspective.
Among modern believers, it is generally assumed that once upon a time there was a ‘pure’ form of Christianity preached by Paul, from which various ‘deviations’— that is, ‘heresies’— subsequently occurred.
In reality nothing could be further from the truth.
If anything, the first real ‘heresy’ was Paul's.
Paul's preaching and Pauline thought constituted the ‘deviation’, while Nazarean tradition — which Paul defied and which Pauline thought supplanted — was the closest thing to  a ‘pure’ Christianity that ever existed.
But once Pauline thought had consolidated its own position, it automatically became the ‘established orthodoxy’, and from that point on anything that clashed with it became, by definition, a ‘heresy’.
The absurdity of applying this label to Nazarean thought — an absurdity comparable to calling Marx an ‘heretical Marxist’ or Freud an ‘heretical Freudian’— was conveniently overlooked.
Despite being repudiated, condemned and persecuted, Nazarean teachings continued to survive, for much longer than is generally suspected.
During the subsequent centuries, those teachings would surface under a bewildering variety of names.
Earlier writers often employed the term Ebionite.
Several scholars today refer to them as Zadokite, a name which appears periodically in the teachings themselves.
Other researchers use the designation Judaeo-Christian, which is in fact confusing, misleading and self-contradictory.
On the basis of the evangelising role of Judas Thomas, Dr Herman Koester speaks of a Thomasine tradition, in contrast to the Pauline tradition of what we today call Christianity.
There were also, of course, later accretions, later developments and modifications, later amalgamations with other doctrines, and these engendered a plethora of additional names — Gnostic, Manichaean , Sabean, Mandaean, Nestorian, Elkasaite.
For our purposes, and for the sake of simplicity, it will be easiest to retain the term ‘Nazarean’.
It will no longer imply a specific body of individuals, however.
Rather, it will denote a general mode of thought, an orientation — an orientation towards Jesus and his teachings which derives ultimately from the original Nazarean position, as articulated by Jesus himself, then propagated by James, Jude or Judas Thomas and their immediate entourage.
This orientation can be characterised by certain basic attitudes, chief among which are (1) a continued and strict adherence to the tenets of Judaic  law;(2) a recognition of Jesus as Messiah in the original Judaic sense of the word;(3) a repudiation of the Virgin Birth and an insistence on Jesus having been born by natural processes, without any divine intervention; and (4) a militant hostility towards Paul and the edifice of Pauline thought.
Where these attitudes appear together, one can discern vestiges of the original Nazarean position — the position of Jesus himself, of James, Jude and the hierarchy in Jerusalem.
Thus Justin Martyr, writing around A.D. 150, speaks of those who regard Jesus as having been the Messiah, yet at the same time still a man.
They adhere to Judaic law in such matters as circumcision, observance of the Sabbath and dietary restrictions.
And they are shunned by gentile — i.e., Pauline — Christians.
Approximately half a century later, Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, issued his violent and dogmatic attack on the prevalent heresies of the time,Adversus haereses .
Irenaeus was the voice of the coalescing orthodoxy, and his labelling of heresies, as well as his selection of canonical works, was to leave an indelible imprint on the Church of Rome.
In his opus, Irenaeus fulminates against a group whom he calls the ‘Ebionites’— a term used by the writers of the Qumran texts to describe themselves, which can be translated as, simply, ‘the Poor’.
According to Irenaeus, the Ebionites insist that Jesus was man, not God, and was not born of a virgin.
They claim that he became the Messiah only at the time of his baptism — that is, his anointment or coronation.
They use only the Gospel of Matthew and, like Jesus himself, as well as the Essenes or Zadokites of two centuries before, expound upon the prophetic books of the Old Testament.
They adhere scrupulously to Judaic law.
They reject the Pauline letters, and ‘they reject the apostle Paul, calling him an apostate from the Law’.
A century later, in Constantine's time, Nazarean teaching was still thriving and being disseminated.
As we have already noted, the Bishop of Rome, in A. D. 318, is reported to have had a meeting with Nazarean or Desposyni leaders directly descended from Jesus's family.
At the same time, the Church historian Eusebius was attacking the Nazareans (whom he, like Irenaeus, calls Ebionites) for being heretical.
They held that ‘…the epistles of the Apostle [Paul]ought to be rejected altogether, calling him a renegade from the Law; and using only the ‘Gospel of the Hebrews’, they treated the rest with scant respect'.
A hundred years later, in the late fourth or early fifth century, another Church writer, Epiphanius, launched a fresh attack on what he called heresies.
He uses the terms ‘Ebionite’ and ‘Nazarean’interchangeably.
Like Irenaeus, Epiphanius condemns the Ebionites or Nazareans for denying the Virgin Birth, teaching that Jesus was a man born of men, declaring that Jesus became Messiah only on his baptism and using alternative versions of the Acts of the Apostles.
They are ‘not ashamed’, Epiphanius writes indignantly, to denounce Paul, believing him to be pseudapostolorum — a ‘false apostle’.
In one Nazarean text, Paul is called ‘the enemy’.
The text maintains insistently that Jesus's rightful heir was his brother James, and takes great pains to argue that Simon Peter never in fact ‘defected’ to Pauline thought.
Simon Peter is quoted as issuing a warning against any authority other than the Nazarean hierarchy: ‘Wherefore observe the greatest caution, that you believe no teacher, unless he brings from Jerusalem the testimonial of James, the Lord's brother…’
In the 1960's, a medievalist scholar, Professor Schlomo Pines, found in a collection of Arabic manuscripts, dating from the tenth century and held in a library in Istanbul, a number of lengthy and detailed verbatim quotes from an earlier, fifth- or sixth-century, text, which the Arab writer ascribes to ‘al-nasara ’— the Nazareans.
The earlier text is believed to have been written originally in Syriac and to have been found at a  Christian monastery in Khuzistan, south-west Iran, near the Iraqi border.
It appears to reflect a tradition dating, without a break, back to the original Nazarean hierarchy which fled Jerusalem immediately prior to the revolt of A.D. 66.
Again, Jesus is stated to be a man, not a god, and any suggestion of his divinity is rejected.
The importance of Judaic law is again stressed.
Paul is castigated and his followers are said to ‘have abandoned the religion of Christ and turned towards the religious doctrines of the Romans’.
The Gospels are dismissed as unreliable, second-hand accounts which contain only ‘something — but little — of the sayings, the precepts of Christ and information concerning him’.
But this is not all.
The tenth-century Arab document goes on to assert that the sect from whom the Nazarean text issued is still in existence, and is regarded as an elite amongst Christians.
One of the primary repositories of Nazarean tradition was the ‘heresy’ now known as Nestorian Christianity.
It took its name from an individual named Nestorius, who, in 428, was appointed Patriarch of Constantinople.
Like the Bishop of Durham more recently, Nestorius lost no time in making his position clear.
In the same year that he assumed his appointment, he stated bluntly: ‘Let no one call Mary the mother of God.
For Mary was but human.’
Needless to say, this immediately provoked a scandal.
Three years later, Nestorius was condemned and excommunicated.
The letter informing him of the sentence pronounced upon him was headed derisively: ‘The Holy Synod to Nestorius the new Jew.’
In 435, Nestorius was exiled to the Egyptian desert, but his influence remained undiminished.
The Persian Church became Nestorian in its orientation.
And when, in 451, Nestorius was  officially classified as a heretic, the Egyptian Church, while not agreeing with him, refused to accept the ruling.
It, too, split with the Roman orthodoxy and eventually coalesced into the  Coptic Church.
In the meantime, Nestorian thought not only continued to survive elsewhere, but displayed an astonishing tenacity.
By the twentieth century, it was still active, maintaining a theological school at Nisibis in northern Mesopotamia.
More recently, the official Patriarch and many of his followers emigrated to San Francisco, where the Nestorian Church exists today.
But if the Nestorian Church provided one vehicle whereby Nazarean thought survived into a later epoch, there were also others.
We had encountered suggestions, in Prieuré de Sion sources, that certain of its early members, and of their offshoot, the Knights Templar, had established contact with certain Essene/Zadokite/Nazarean sects still in existence during the time of the Crusades, more than a thousand years after Jesus's era.
Although not implausible, these suggestions were not substantiated by any solid evidence, and we had therefore been reluctant to accord them credence.
The matter seemed to lie beyond the pale of any definitive confirmation.
Shortly after the publication of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail , however, we received a letter from Dr Hugh Schonfield, author of The Passover Plot and a number of other important works on the origins of Christianity.
In the course of subsequent meetings with him, what Dr Schonfield had to tell us was startling indeed.
Some time previously, he had discovered a system of cryptography — he called it the ‘Atbash Cipher’— which had been used to conceal certain names in Essene/Zadokite/Nazarean texts.
This system of coding figured, for example, in a number of the scrolls found at Qumran.
In Secrets of the Dead Sea Scrolls , Dr Schonfield offers a detailed explanation of how precisely the Atbash Cipher works.
In his most recent book,The Essene Odyssey , he describes how, after reading our    book in 1982, he became intrigued by the mysterious principle allegedly worshipped by the Knights Templar under the name of ‘Baphomet’.
Dr Schonfield applied the cryptographic principles of the Atbash Cipher to ‘Baphomet’.
The enigmatic word ‘decoded’ itself perfectly into ‘Sophia’— Greek for ‘wisdom’.
THE ANCIENT ATBASH ALPHABETICAL CIPHER
This could hardly have been coincidence.
On the contrary, it proved, beyond any doubt, that the Templars were familiar with the Atbash Cipher and employed it in their own obscure, heterodox rites.
But how could the Templars, operating in the early twelfth century, have acquired such familiarity with a cryptographic system dating from a thousand years before, whose practitioners had apparently long vanished from the stage of history?
There is only one really plausible explanation.
It would seem obvious that at least some of those practitioners had not in fact vanished at all, but still existed at the time of the Crusades.
And it would seem obvious that the Templars had established contact with them.
From the Templars' use of the Atbash Cipher, it is probable that some form of Nazarean or neo-Nazarean sect had continued to survive in the Middle East as late as the twelfth century, and had made its teachings available to the West.
The Nazareans of Egypt
So far, we have traced the migration and survival of Nazarean thought north-eastwards from the Holy Land, to Syria, Asia Minor, Turkey, Persia, parts of southern Russia and of the Indian subcontinent — the regions which tradition, and Dr Koester, believe to have been evangelised by Judas Thomas, Jesus's twin brother.
But these regions — divorced, for the most part, from the mainstream of developing Western ideas — were not the only refuge for Nazarean thought.
It was  also transmitted south-westwards, into Egypt and along the coast of North Africa, where it would come into much more direct contact with the coalescing orthodoxy of Rome — and, despite Rome's attempts to suppress it, exercise a more discernible influence on the evolution of Christianity in Western Europe.
Since Old Testament times, there had been constant traffic, in ideas as well as in commodities, between Palestine and Egypt.
In Jesus's epoch, Alexandria was the most eclectic, ecumenical and tolerant city in the whole of the Roman Empire — the single most important crossroads of the Mediterranean's trade-routes and, as such, a kind of central clearing-house not only for goods, but for modes of thought as well.
Mystery schools descended from ancient Egypt cohabited amicably with Greek mystery schools, with Hellenistic philosophy, with religious teachings from Palestine and Syria, with skeins of Zoroastrian and Mithraic tradition, with sects and cults from every quarter of the Mediterranean, even with offshoots of Hinduism and Buddhism imported from as far away as India.
The great library of Alexandria was the most famous and comprehensive in the known world and made the city a natural centre of study.
Not surprisingly, Alexandria provided a natural haven for Jews from the Holy Land — for commercial reasons during periods of stability, as a refuge in times of upheaval and war.
Indeed, it is estimated that as much as one-third of Alexandria's population in the first century was Jewish.
According to the Gospels, Jesus and his family, fleeing Herod's persecution, sought safety in Egypt, where there would have been no dearth of sympathetic supporters, like-minded in orientation.
And in fact, under the name of ‘Therapeutae’, Philo speaks of a Judiac sect or enclave whose attitudes and practices are identical with those of the Essenes or Zadokites in the Holy Land — identical, in other words, with those of Jesus's  subsequent following.
And after both of the major revolts in Palestine — that of 66–74 and that of 132–5 substantial numbers of defeated Judaic militants are reported to have fled to Alexandria.
If Judas Thomas did not travel to Egypt himself, Nazarean teaching of the kind he propagated in Syria unquestionably did.
It was in Egypt that the Gospel of Thomas was first found — along with the wealth of other Gnostic, Thomasine or Nazarean documents in the corpus of Nag Hammadi scrolls.
Nazarean thought left an ineradicable imprint on the development of Egyptian Christianity.
Even so esteemed a Church Father as Clement of Alexandria was actually, in many respects, closer to original Nazarean doctrine than he was to the Pauline orthodoxy of Rome.
The so-called ‘heresies’ which, in Syria and points north-eastwards, served as repositories for Nazarean thought, also existed in Egypt.
Other ‘heresies’— that of Arius who saw Jesus as man, not God, for example— arose there and also reflected Nazarean influence.
In the fifth century, the Pauline orthodoxy of Rome was still attempting to impose its hegemony over Egypt.
The great library of Alexandria was burnt by ‘Christians’ in A.D. 411.
The last great Neo-Platonic philosopher, a woman, Hypatia, was stoned to death as she returned from a lecture at the library — again by ‘Christians’— in A.D. 415.
Nevertheless, the heterodox character of Egyptian Christianity continued to survive.
In 435, as we have already mentioned, Nestorius was removed from his position in Constantinople and exiled to the Egyptian desert.
And in 451, the Egyptian Church refused to accept the growing authority of Rome.
Ultimately, however, Egyptian Christianity's most lasting effect was less its simple perpetuation of Nazarean thought than its development of an administrative system for housing and transmitting that thought.
This system was monasticism.
If Rome, during the time of Constantine, began to assume the characteristics of the old Herodian Sadducee priesthood, Egyptian Christianity beyond the city centres diverged increasingly towards the kind of framework that had served the Zadokites or Essenes of Jesus's time.
It seems clear that the Egyptian monastic system, with its network of desert communities, was closely modelled on prototypes such as Qumran.
The first Qumran-style desert community was established by Pachomius around 320 — at precisely the time that the Pauline orthodoxy of Rome was gaining official sanction for itself from Constantine.
Pachomius's monastery quickly generated a number of offshoots.
By the time of his death in 346, there were several thousand monks scattered about the Egyptian desert, and the principles underlying the monastic system were being transmitted elsewhere.
Perhaps the most famous exemplar of Egyptian monasticism is Saint Antony.
It is significant that both Antony and Pachomius avoided ordination.
The point is that the monastic system was not just a spontaneous occurrence.
It represented a form of opposition to the rigidly hierarchical structures of Rome.
It is true, of course, that there were Pauline bishops of Alexandria.
But despite the nominally Roman superstructure, the real thrust of Egyptian Christianity was opposed to the Pauline ecclesiastical hierarchy and administration of Rome, and found its truest expression through the monastic system.
In effect, the monasteries came to represent a kind of alternative administrative structure, which owed nothing to — and often clashed directly with — Rome.
They became repositories for a parallel, and often specifically Nazarean, tradition.
While Rome aspired ever more ambitiously to a new imperial ideal, the Egyptian monasteries prided themselves on a much purer, much more faithful and accurate record of Jesus himself, his kin and his  teachings.
And while the Roman Church organised itself into an elaborate chequerboard of dioceses or bishoprics, presided over by bishops and archbishops, the monastic system in Egypt allowed for a much looser, much more flexible development — as well as for greater emphasis on learning.
Although the abbot of a monastery exercised a certain administrative authority over his flock, he was ultimately no ‘higher’ spiritually than they.
Unlike the bishop or the archbishop, the abbot had no special prerogatives conferred on him by God, nor did he wield any civic power.
He was elected by his brethren for a purely utilitarian purpose, but in God's eyes he remained just another humble seeker.
The monastic system was essentially non-hierarchical.
And while the hierarchy of the Roman Church dictated the texts which were to become the canonical New Testament, the monasteries in Egypt embraced a much more diverse body of teaching, exemplified by the Gospel of Thomas and by the other texts found at Nag Hammadi.
The Spanish Heresy of Priscillian
From Syria and from Egypt, Nazarean tradition began to diffuse itself even further afield.
Most Mediterranean trade with both Gaul and Spain was Syrian controlled.
Ships from Alexandria sailed daily for the Atlantic coast of Europe.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that substantial vestiges of Nazarean thought found their way to this coast.
By the time that Pauline Christianity, moving overland from Rome, arrived, they had already consolidated themselves.
Probably the single most important figure in the development of early Spanish Christianity was the late fourth-century teacher Priscillian of Avila.
Born into a high-ranking family, Priscillian remained a layman, never receiving ordination from Rome.
Although it  began in southern Spain, his movement quickly spread west and north, eventually establishing its most tenacious roots in Galicia, which was to become its heartland.
In its location there, on the Atlantic coast of north-western Spain, it appears to have received a constantly renewed nourishment and impetus through the maritime trade routes from Egypt and the eastern Mediterranean.
Gradually, it filtered across the Pyrenees into Gaul and became the dominant form of Christianity in Aquitaine.
At the same time, Priscillian made an active attempt to acquire material that lay outside the province of the Roman Church.
Thus one of his leading disciples, a woman named Egeria, embarked, between 381 and 384, on a special journey to the Middle East.
She sought out uncanonical texts.
She visited Edessa, the centre of Thomasine teaching.
She undertook an extended tour of the Mesopotamian churches with their Nazarean and Nestorian orientation.
The importance of this must not be minimised.
It indicates the means whereby a form of Christianity which entirely circumvented the Pauline orthodoxy of Rome began to establish itself in Western Europe.
Priscillian's own teaching was characterised by a marked strain of Nestorian thought, as well as by skeins of Gnostic Manichaeanism.
At the same time, he also drew heavily on a strictly Judaic body of material, including numerology and other forms of early Cabalism — which, as we noted previously, were firmly rooted in Essene/Zadokite/Nazarean sources.
Priscillian seems, too, to have demanded adherence to at least certain tenets of Judaic law.
In contrast to Pauline Christianity, he observed the Sabbath on Saturday.
He denied the Trinity.
And he used a great many books of specifically Nazarean orientation, among them the Acts of Thomas.
Like his precursors in Egypt, Syria and Asia Minor, Priscillian taught that Judas Thomas was Jesus's twin brother.
In 386, Priscillian and at least five of his disciples became the first heretics to be executed.
The sentence was carried out at Trier, but Priscillian's body was carried back to Spain and buried in Galicia.
He was celebrated there as a martyr, and his grave became a shrine, a sacred site, a pilgrimage centre.
At least one authority on the subject, Professor Henry Chadwick of Oxford, argues that the shrine of Santiago de Compostela is in fact Priscillian's grave.
Santiago de Compostela bears testimony to how effectively Nazarean tradition established itself in Spain.
As we have seen, the Pauline Church of Rome found Jesus's brother James something of an embarrassment, and went out of its way, whenever possible, to circumvent him and his role.
Only one fragmentary letter of his survives in the canonical New Testament.
Apart from this, he figures only briefly, in passing, in the Gospels and as a peripheral background character in Acts.
Yet Santiago de Compostela — the Church of Saint James at Compostela — became, with the exception of Rome itself, the single most important shrine and pilgrimage centre in medieval Christendom.
It was from Santiago that the Reconquista — the crusade to reconquer Spain from the Moors — was launched.
Indeed, Santiago spawned its own military chivalric order, the Order of Santiago, modelled on the Knights Templar and Hospitaller.
According to Spanish tradition of the seventh century, Saint James actually visited Spain and preached there.
It was also claimed that his body, after his death, was brought from Jerusalem to Santiago and buried there.
Both of these assertions, though questionable, attest to the kind of currency James enjoyed in what is usually regarded as a purely Pauline sphere of influence.
Santiago de Compostela can legitimately be regarded as a shrine to the survival of Nazarean thought, in implicit defiance of Rome.
In the early ninth century, human bones were exhumed at Santiago.
At the time, they were believed to be the bones of James.
Much more recent excavations, between 1946 and 1959, uncovered a number of fourth- and fifth-century graves.
The tombs faced east, towards Jerusalem — as Nazareans did when they prayed.
It is now believed that the graves are those of early Spanish Christians, placed in proximity to the mausoleum of some established holy man.
As we have said, at least one modern authority maintains that the mausoleum in question is Priscillian's, and this is widely accepted by the local populace as well.
In fact the major pilgrimage route to Santiago is said to be that by which Priscillian's body was brought back for burial from Trier.
The Celtic Church of Ireland
Ultimately, however, Spain was a stepping-stone in the transmission and survival of Nazarean tradition, which continued its migration northwards, along the Atlantic perimeter of the Roman Church's authority, until between the mid-fifth and the mid-seventh centuries it found its fullest European expression in the Celtic Church of Ireland.
For the first few centuries of the Christian era, Ireland was largely isolated from the rest of Europe.
Geography and topography effectively ensured Ireland's immunity from the Teutonic invasions — from the Saxons, for example, who were to overrun England and pit Wotan and the Germanic pantheon against a still fledgling Christianity.
Insulated by the Irish Sea, Ireland remained a refuge, a haven.
During the peak (or nadir) of the so-called ‘Dark Ages’, it became the true centre of learning for the whole of Europe.
While the Continent, and even England, were wracked by turmoil and conflict, Ireland existed as a  bastion of study, of culture, of civilization.
Scholars in flight from upheaval elsewhere congregated there.
Vast quantities of manuscripts were transported there for safe-keeping and copying.
With their extensive libraries, Irish monasteries attracted students from all over the world.
Although missionary work was certainly undertaken, learning enjoyed a still higher priority.
Christians gravitated to Ireland not to impose their creed on others, but to immerse themselves in the teachings of the past — and to discover, in the seclusion and peace of the island, their own inner communion with their God, independent of hierarchical priesthoods.
Ecclesiastics from all over the Christian world trained in Ireland.
So, too, did members of various noble and royal houses.
In the mid-seventh century, Dagobert II, one of the central figures in the mystery of Rennes-le-Château, was raised and educated at the monastery of Slane, just north of what is now Dublin.
During this period, Ireland's contact with Rome was often difficult and tenuous.
She was never entirely cut off, as nineteenth-century religious historians sometimes claimed when trying to explain the heterodox character of the Celtic Church.
On the contrary, the orientation of the Celtic Church was voluntary and deliberate, not a consequence of enforced isolation and ignorance.
But Rome, separated from Ireland by a continent in upheaval, had little means of implementing her decrees or ensuring their enforcement.
Ireland remained free to absorb ideas which came to her, like her trade, from almost every quarter of the known world.
Commerce with Ireland was entirely by sea; and this maritime traffic derived not only from England and Gaul, but also from Spain and North Africa, as well as the eastern Mediterranean.
It is not known when Christianity first established itself in Ireland — or, for that matter, anywhere else in the British Isles.
According to the sixth-century  chronicler Gildas, there were ‘Christians’ in England during the time of the Emperor Tiberius, who died in A.D. 37.
This cannot be verified and seems somewhat early but, given the constant maritime traffic, not altogether impossible.
In any case, one or another form of ‘Christianity’ must have reached Britain within a few years of the time specified by Gildas.
By A.D. 200, the Church historian Tertullian makes it clear that there is some kind of well-established Christian community in Britain — not only in Romanised England, but also in regions ‘unapproachable to the Romans’.
This is unlikely to mean Scotland.
Almost certainly, it means Wales and, quite possibly, Ireland.
In any case, by 314, a century or so later, there were three British bishops at the Council of Arles, attesting to some kind of organised congregation.
At the Council of Arminium forty-five years later, there were four British bishops, one of whom apparently paid his own way — which would seem to indicate some degree of prosperity.
By this time, too, it was also being alleged that some of the original apostles had travelled to Britain.
By the early fifth century, certainly, Christianity had already established itself in Ireland.
So, too, had the Pelagian heresy which, among other things, queried the doctrine of original sin and credited man with a greater degree of free will than Roman orthodoxy would allow.
In about 431, Palladius became Ireland's first bishop.
A year later, Palladius was followed by the Northumbrian monk known today as Saint Patrick.
Palladius had presided over an already organised congregation, probably along Ireland's south-eastern coast.
Patrick's evangelical work is believed to have been chiefly in the north of the country, which was still largely pagan.
It is interesting that Patrick's activity seems to have been dictated as much by personal disillusion or disappointment as by religious fervour.
His ecclesiastical superiors had deemed him unfit to be  a priest.
Does this reflect mistrust of Patrick's competence?
Or of his thinking?
There is certainly evidence that Patrick was ‘tainted’ by the Arian heresy — which, among other things, insisted that Jesus had been born mortal, by mortal means.
Unfortunately, there is no indication of the precise degree to which Patrick embraced Arian thought.
It is significant, however, that nowhere in what survives of his writings and teachings is there any mention whatever of the Virgin Birth — a glaring omission for an evangelist in the circumstances.
Nor does Patrick appear to have accepted the pronouncements of the Church Fathers or the canons of the councils.
Indeed, he seems to have resisted mediation of any kind, whether by angels, saints or a priestly hierarchy.
He appeals solely to scripture for his authority.
In the wake of recent archaeological discoveries, there is now little question that Celtic Christianity, as it evolved between Patrick's time and the Synod of Whitby in the mid-seventh century, owed little to Rome.
For the most part, it effectively circumvented Rome, drawing its primary impetus and orientation from Egypt, Syria and the Mediterranean world.
In some cases, this impetus was filtered through Spain.
Thus, for example, Priscillianist texts were used in Ireland, despite their heretical status in Rome's eyes.
And from at least 569 the Celtic Church had its own See, the bishopric of Bretoña, centred upon Santa Maria de Bretoña near Mondoliedo in Galicia, the region of north-western Spain whose later capital was at Santiago de Compostela, and which had remained most loyal to Priscillianist teaching.
But if some of the Celtic Church's impetus derived from Spain, much of it derived directly from much older sources.
In the words of the Swedish writer Nils Aberg: ‘We are compelled…to assume a direct long distance influence between the Mediterranean world and Ireland.
Irish monks are known to have visited Egypt.
There are even travel journals, containing descriptions of the Pyramids, for example, and precise instructions on how to make one's way to the Holy Land.
At the same time, an Irish martyrology records that seven Egyptian monks were buried at Disert Ulidh in Ulster.
An Egyptian influence is discernible in Irish place-names for townlands and parishes — Desertmartin near Londonderry, for instance, or Desert Oenghus in Limerick.
There are no deserts as such in Ireland.
It is now believed that such names were used for monastic communities modelled on genuine desert prototypes in Egypt.
The evidence of Irish contact with Egypt is too extensive to review in detail.
A few examples will suffice to illustrate the point.
Thus a portion of the Irish text known as the ‘Salthair na Rann’ is an eleventh- or twelfth-century copy of the ‘Book of Adam and Eve’, composed in Egypt in the fifth century and not known to have found its way to any other European country.
Unmistakably Egyptian motifs and decorations have been found in Irish books and manuscripts.
The liturgy of the Celtic Church contained discernible Egyptian and Syrian elements.
Episodes in an Irish ‘Lives of the Saints’ derive directly from an Alexandrian source.
Masses and prayers from apocryphal works used in Egypt were also used in Ireland.
The Celtic Church celebrated the feast days of the Virgin at the same time as the Egyptian Church, rather than at the time decreed by Rome.
Glass chalices, identical to chalices used in Egypt, have been found in County Waterford.
The fifth-century ‘bell of Saint Patrick’ is a clear imitation of bells used in Egypt.
There are numerous additional examples of this kind, which thirteen centuries of Romanised Pauline orthodoxy have not been able to eradicate.
If Celtic Christianity drew heavily on Egypt, it also drew heavily on the more explicitly heretical traditions  of Syria, Asia Minor and Mesopotamia.
We have already discussed how Nestorian thought served as a repository for certain Nazarean traditions.
As early as 430 — the time of Saint Patrick — a book explaining the teachings of Nestorius was being circulated in the West.
Nestorius himself had studied at the theological school of Antioch, where his mentor was a man known as Theodore of Mopsuestia.
At the Fifth Ecumenical Council in 553, Theodore and all his works were officially anathematised and declared heretical.
In consequence, most of his teachings have long since vanished.
And yet much of what we know of him today comes from Ireland.
One of his major scriptural commentaries survives only in an old Irish manuscript.
Additional material from Theodore turns up in other Irish manuscripts, dating from the eighth century, the ninth century and, in one case, from the late tenth century — more than four hundred years after Theodore was condemned.
It has been suggested that Theodore's works were translated and brought to Ireland by no less a figure that Saint Columban.
The non-Roman, Eastern influence on the Celtic Church manifested itself most obviously in Irish monasticism.
Like the Egyptian church, the Celtic church was organised less around the diocese than around the abbey or monastery.
So great was the prestige of such institutions that a so-called ‘mitred abbot’ in Ireland was accorded unusually high official status — a status equal, in the ecclesiastical hierarchy to that of a bishop.
Indeed, it was not uncommon for Irish abbots actually to have bishops under their jurisdiction.
Irish monasteries were organised in close adherence to those in Egypt, Syria and elsewhere in the Mediterranean world outside Rome's sphere of influence.
In many cases, the physical lay-out and arrangement of the monastic community were identical.
The Irish ‘Rule of the Anchorites’ is essentially similar to the  rules which regulated anchoritic practice in Egypt, Syria and the Holy Land.
And like monks in the Middle East, Irish monks, under the auspices of the Celtic Church, appear to have married.
As we have said, Ireland, between the fifth and the seventh centuries, was a centre of learning and scholarship.
With the possible exception of Rome, there was no comparable place in Europe.
Indeed, in many respects, Ireland was equalled only by Byzantium.
In Ireland, as in the Middle East, learning and scholarship were an integral component of the monastic system, and Irish libraries became depositories for material from all over the world.
During the early seventh century, Irish monasteries exercised a virtual monopoly on the teaching of Greek.
Many pagan writers were studied as well.
Nor did the Celtic Church repudiate Ireland's own pre-Christian cultural heritage.
Bardic tradition, for example, found a refuge in the Celtic Church and was thereby preserved.
Saint Columban himself, after becoming a monk, lived and studied with a bard in Leinster.
Later, he championed the cause of the bards when their schools and teachings came under attack.
In its organisation, then, in its use of certain texts, in many of its outward aspects, the Celtic Church circumvented the Church of Rome and functioned as a repository for elements of Nazarean tradition transmitted from Egypt, Syria and Asia Minor.
But what was the doctrinal position of the Celtic Church?
Where did it stand in relation to Rome?
Was it indeed a form of heresy, which Rome, for reasons of her own, dared not openly stigmatise as such?
And what basis was there for the seventh-century maxim that ‘the Celtic Church brings love while the Roman Church brings law’?
In 664, the Synod of Whitby effectively dissolved the Celtic Church, and Ireland was brought into the Roman fold.
At Whitby, the Celtic Church relinquished its last  claim to autonomy and independence.
From then on, Christianity in Ireland was determined and defined by Rome, and any compromising documents would have been destroyed or sequestered.
In the aftermath of Whitby, Rome's was the only voice to speak about whatever differences had previously existed between the two churches.
According to that official voice, the differences were minimal enough, and easily reconcilable.
They are said to have disagreed on the ceremony of ordination for a bishop, Rome requiring at least three other bishops to be present while the Celtic Church required only one — a plausible enough position, given the difficulties Ireland posed to travel at the time and the small number of bishops in the country anyway.
They are said to have disagreed about the calendar cycles whereby the dating of Easter was fixed each year.
They are said to have disagreed about the shape of the clerical tonsure, Rome insisting on a variation of the tonsure familiar today while prelates of the Celtic Church shaved the entire frontal section of the head, from the temples to the middle of the scalp, and left long hair hanging behind — the stereotyped modern image of the Druid.
Finally, they are said to have disagreed about technicalities in the baptismal service.
The Celtic Church apparently deemed one immersion sufficient, while Rome demanded three.
And Rome insisted that the ritual occur in a consecrated church — which, given the relatively few churches in the country at the time and their tendency to be congregated in certain areas, was not always possible in Ireland.
Trifling though they may appear, these are the conventionally cited points of contention between the Celtic and Roman churches.
And yet the two were so different in so many other crucial respects that one cannot but suspect something else to have been involved — something which the four issues  listed above served to mask for posterity.
Indeed, later commentators have been understandably suspicious.
John McNeill, for example, asserts that the ‘…issue between Romans and Celts went far deeper than the recorded exchange of arguments indicates’.
He concludes that the ‘…ultimate issue was that of Celtic ecclesiastical autonomy against integration within the Roman ecclesiastical system’.
In fact, the ultimate issue was even more profound and more wide ranging in its implications.
A closer examination of the Celtic Church reveals a much greater deviation from Rome than is generally acknowledged or even known.
The Celtic Church, for example, had its own ordination rite for priests, and this differed markedly from Rome's.
It had its own liturgy and Mass, both of which incorporated distinctly Eastern, non-Roman elements.
It even had its own translation of the Bible — a translation which Rome deemed unacceptable.
In flagrant contravention of the Nicene Creed, the Celtic Church seems consistently to have glossed over belief in the Trinity, even on occasion to have queried it.
Later clerics of the Celtic Church seem to have followed Saint Patrick in circumventing the Virgin Birth.
And as late as 754, nearly a century after the Synod of Whitby, there were complaints to the pope that Irish missionaries ‘ignored the canons of the Church, rejected the writings of the fathers and despised the authority of the synods’.
But there is more still.
For Rome, the Old Testament had become increasingly incidental and the Mosaic Law superfluous; Jesus was believed effectively to have abrogated the Mosaic Law.
In the Celtic Church, the Old Testament continued to enjoy a status equal to the New.
And whenever Patrick consecrated a church, he was said to have left in it both the Gospels and a copy of the Mosaic Law.
Mosaic Law was actively propagated as a major component of Celtic Christianity.
Usury was forbidden, as it was not by Rome.
Sexual  relations were prohibited during the time of a woman's menstruation.
Women were deemed unclean during and immediately after childbirth.
Marriage laws adhered strictly to the tenets of the Old Testament.
The Judaic Sabbath was observed.
The Judaic Passover was officially celebrated.
The killing of animals for food was performed in accordance with Judaic requirements.
And surviving missals and other documents of the Celtic Church prove to be riddled with excerpts from Judaic apocryphal books and additional texts which had long and rigorously been forbidden by Rome.
Indeed, so marked was the Judaic orientation of the Celtic Church that it is on record as having been explicitly accused of Judaism, and its adherents of being Jews.
Not  surprisingly , no document survives — or, at any rate, has been allowed to come to light — which indicates that the Celtic Church might have differed significantly from Rome in its attitude towards Jesus.
After the Synod of Whitby, all such evidence would obviously have been suppressed or destroyed.
But, given the Judaic character of the Celtic Church, it is reasonably safe to suppose that attitudes towards Jesus were, at very least, extremely questionable in Roman eyes.
In almost every other respect, certainly, the Celtic Church appears to have been something more than simply a repository for Nazarean thought — as Nestorian Christianity was, for example.
The Celtic Church appears to have been Nazarean, in a purer, less diluted way than any other comparable institution of its time.
Rome's Quiet Invasion
By Roman standards, the Celtic Church was indubitably heretical.
Certainly other forms of Christianity elsewhere were branded as such for far lesser  deviations from Pauline orthodoxy.
Why was the  Celtic Church not so branded?
Probably because Rome had no alternative if she hoped to establish her dominion over Ireland at all.
To brand the Celtic Church heretical would have been tantamount to a declaration of war; and in the event of such a war, Rome would have had no prospect whatever of victory.
She had no army of her own.
And the secular armies which established her hegemony for her on the Continent were in no position to undertake a full-scale military campaign against Ireland.
In effect, there was no apparatus, military or political, whereby Rome could have imposed herself forcibly on Ireland.
Any attempt at forcible conquest — by the word or by the sword — could easily have been neutralised or repelled.
Nor was there any centralised political authority in Ireland itself — a ‘strong man’, for example, who could have done Rome's work for her.
It was thus impossible to make the kind of pact that had been made with Clovis in France.
Given these factors, any attempt to brand the Celtic Church heretical would only have entailed the complete loss of Ireland.
In consequence, Rome had recourse to diplomacy and negotiation.
Instead of being coerced or bludgeoned into submission, the Celtic Church was simply subsumed.
The process was not unlike that whereby, today, a large corporation might swallow up its smaller competitors.
As a result, Ireland was spared the kind of violence with which Rome established her sovereignty elsewhere.
By virtue of this, there does not appear to have been in Ireland any large-scale persecution of heretics.
Nor does there seem to have been any wholesale burning of books and manuscripts.
Most of the Celtic Church's sacred texts apparently continued in use for a time, after which they were gradually and quietly consigned to the libraries of orthodox Irish abbeys and monasteries.
The implications of this are potentially significant.
As we have noted, the Celtic Church drew upon a broad spectrum of texts beyond Rome's sphere of influence — Nazarean texts, Nestorian texts, Priscillianist texts, Gnostic and Manichaean texts, books of both Judaic and ‘Christian’ apocrypha.
In one instance, the Book of Cerne, a prayer is found ultimately deriving from a work in the corpus found at Nag Hammadi.
Other works are unique to Ireland, having survived only there.
Still others are named, are known to have been in circulation, but have never been seen.
Hundreds of such works are known to have been destroyed by the Vikings during their raids on the Irish coast.
But others are known to have been preserved.
A number are reported to have been smuggled out of Ireland during the period of the Viking depredations, and brought to safety in Welsh monasteries.
It is thus possible that there exists today, in some archive, library or monastery in Ireland or Wales, a corpus of material comparable in value to the texts found at Nag Hammadi, or to the Dead Sea Scrolls.