

How to Budget
For details of other leaflets in this range, please ask at any of our branches.
Introduction
The Budget, every March, is the Government's way of showing how it intends to balance the nation's books in the coming twelve months.
Individual domestic budgets are just the same, and every family should plan its finances following such a master plan.
The advantage of budgeting is that not only do you know exactly where you stand — or perhaps stagger?— today, but that you can make sensible judgements about, for , how much more saving you can undertake, or whether you can afford to increase your borrowing still further.
What's your income?
To budget sensibly you must first of all know how much income comes into the family coffers each month.
You'd be surprised how few people can immediately provide the answer.
The list of your sources of income should include:-
Your net salary if you are taxed under the PAYE system (you cannot spend or save money already in the tax man's hands)
Regular overtime
Other regular earnings, for example, from a second job a few evenings a week
Dividends, and bank and building society interest
State benefits, particularly child benefit
Income from pensions, annuities or trusts
Maintenance or alimony.
Any small inheritance, gift, premium bond prize or money from occasional jobs should not be included.
Ideally, you should look on such money as a bonus and should save or invest it.
OUTGOINGS
Detail your major outgoings first, adjusting them to their cost per month.
Your list will include mortgage or rent, rates, gas and electricity, insurance and maintenance for the house and car, clothing, school fees and telephone bills.
Any regular savings and loan repayments such as hire purchase or personal loans also belong here.
Absent from the list are food, travel and everything else it costs you to live.
The only way to discover exactly how much this all adds up to is to make a daily note of everything you spend, for a month.
And ‘everything’ means everything: cups of coffee, shoe repairs, evening papers, drinks after work, ice-cream and comics for the children.
The payments you should be making for life assurance, permanent health and any other insurance necessary to protect your family financially should be included in your budget too.
Ideally, you should also be setting aside a certain amount each month for a ‘rainy day’ or for any emergency, such as the car suddenly developing problems.
BALANCING THE BOOKS
How do the two columns of income and outgoings compare?
Are you in the black or in the red or, quite probably, pinkish at the edges?
If your outgoings regularly exceed your income, you have budgeting problems which may become serious.
To assess the problem, read ‘How to Cope with Debt’ another booklet in this series, which gives guidance on how to alleviate your problems.
For most of us, hopefully, the outlook is better, but that should not be a cause for complacency.
Examine whether you are spending — and saving — your money wisely.
ELIMINATING UNNECESSARY EXPENDITURE
Expenditure comes under several headings: unavoidable, important, variable and fun.
Saving on unavoidable costs: pay poll tax monthly (rather than let the Council have free use of your money for a year); use annual season tickets, which are substantially cheaper; check if you can economise on energy use — within sensible limits as far as your family's health is concerned.
Saving on important costs: eliminate bank charges through better budgeting; telephone during cheap rate periods; remember that the authorised overdraft interest rate is normally cheaper than bank personal loan rates.
Saving on variable costs: pay credit card bills in full to avoid interest, particularly store cards where interest rates are generally higher: ask for discounts; buy rather than rent, and use discount stores.
Saving on fun costs: over to you.
It is always possible to save money on entertainment, eating out, holidays and hobbies.
USING CREDIT WISELY
Borrowing money is not incompatible with sensible budgeting.
Indeed, it could be an essential component.
For example, even taking interest into account, it is nearly always cheaper to borrow, to buy an annual season ticket than it is to pay daily.
Getting a cheap company loan, if available, is better still.
Sometimes it can make sense to borrow short term to avoid unlocking well-placed savings or investments.
Borrowing can also enhance one's savings if the value of the asset bought with borrowed money — for example, your house — outstrips your loan costs.
If you want to look more closely at the do's and don'ts of borrowing, read another booklet in this series, ‘How to Borrow Money’.
BANK BUDGET ACCOUNT
Problems can arise when all the major bills seem to come in at once.
Several banks operate special accounts designed to smooth out the impact of these unavoidable and important bills, many of which arise quarterly.
These are added up, and the customer pays one-twelfth of the total into a separate account each month, which can be used to pay the bills as they arise.
By paying your bills in this way, you ensure you can pay the big bills, while retaining the use of the rest of your income to pay your living expenses each month.
KEEP CONTROL
Your budget plan will not only tidy up your current financial position, but will also give you some indication of how best to use the extra resources it has hopefully produced.
Budgeting should not be a one-off exercise.
Keeping the family's finances in good health requires keeping tabs on it.
Develop good habits like keeping records: cheque book stubs, credit card dockets, receipts, and a proper filing system so that you can see your outgoings at a glance — and take corrective action early by spending less if you find you're not sticking to your budget.
BORROWING FROM MIDLAND
MIDLAND GROUP'S CODE OF PRACTICE ON THE PROVISION OF CREDIT TO PERSONAL CUSTOMERS
This Code of Practice sets out the basic practices employed by Midland Bank and its subsidiary companies in connection with their lending to personal customers in the United Kingdom.
In all aspects of our personal lending business, we shall act fairly and responsibly.
In particular, we shall comply with the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and all other relevant legislation and judicial decisions.
We shall ensure that all staff receive proper training and are required to uphold the principles of this Code.
We shall use plain language in all our dealings with you and provide clear statements of terms and conditions.
All advertising and promotional literature will be written so as to avoid misleading you in any way.
Every advertisement will comply with the Consumer Credit Act Advertising Regulations as well as the Codes of Practice of the Advertising Standards Authority and similar organisations.
We shall comply promptly with all reasonable requests from you for information about your accounts.
The decision on whether or not we lend to you will normally be based on a credit scoring system supplemented with details of your financial position provided by you, or with information obtained from bankers' references of credit reference agencies.
Credit scoring involves the analysis of information provided by you (e.g. about your employment and residential status) to help us assess the risk in lending to you.
Under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 you have rights of access to data held about you by credit reference agencies.
In addition, more general rights of data access have been provided by the Data Protection Act 1984.
All our credit assessment practices, in particular our credit scoring techniques, are continually reviewed to ensure that they are prudent and reasonable in the prevailing social and economic circumstances.
In promoting our credit facilities we shall not put pressure on you to borrow money which you do not need or cannot afford.
Assessments relating to revolving credit facilities (such as current account overdrafts and credit card facilities) will be based chiefly on your ability to maintain payments.
In other cases assessments will normally also take account of the purpose of the proposed loan and the useful life of the asset being purchased.
Under revolving facilities (such as current account overdrafts and credit card facilities) you may borrow in amounts and at times of your choosing (subject to an agreed minimum withdrawal in certain cases), provided that the balance on your account remains within the agreed limit and that any agreed payments are made on time.
In the case of credit card facilities, increases in credit limits will normally be extended only once a year and you will be given the option to reject any increase.
The basic principles set out in this Code will apply whether or not the lending in question is secured.
The availability of security may, however, have a bearing on whether or not a particular loan will be granted.
Race, sex and religion will not be considered in assessing credit risk, and play no part in our credit scoring systems.
Wherever applicable, credit protection insurance will be offered on our credit products.
We take particular care when approached for facilities by young people and do not normally lend to minors.
You will be told if you are unsuccessful in your application and you will have the right to have your application reviewed.
The result of this review will be final.
Unless you have agreed that we may disclose information about your personal affairs (or we are required by law to do so), such information will remain confidential to us provided you have not failed to repay us any money properly demanded from you (see next bullet point b).
It is in your interest, ours and that of all our customers that we should apply responsible lending policies which include clear terms of repayment and which minimise the risk of borrowers becoming over-extended.
If, for whatever reason, you do find that you have a problem with your borrowing, it will be for your benefit and ours to establish the most appropriate way of resolving it.
In particular, we may ask you to:-a) make lists of sources of income and expenditure, and assets and liabilities, with a view to determining both the cause of the financial problem and its solution; b) seek impartial money advice or counselling from a solicitor or Citizens' Advice Bureau, a financial advisory service or other appropriate advisor; c) make proposals to us for the repayments of the debt by regular instalments which you can afford.
We shall give you reasonable time to prepare and present repayment proposals and will always carefully consider such proposals as well as other relevant factors known to us (e.g. your health and family situation).
If you cannot be contacted or do not make acceptable repayment proposals within a reasonable time, we may commence or continue procedures to enforce repayment.
The following procedures will be followed:-a) Where the Consumer Credit Act so requires, a written Default Notice will be sent to you.
b) In cases where a Default Notice has not been served because it is not required under the Consumer Credit Act, we shall send you a letter of demand, requiring repayment of a specified sum.
Failure to comply with the terms of a Default Notice will normally result in the default being disclosed to credit reference agencies.
We may also instruct a solicitor or debt collection agent.
c) We shall continually review our debt recovery procedures and those of solicitors, debt collection agencies and others whose services we use to obtain repayment of debts, so as to ensure that acceptable standards are maintained.
Comments or complaints on any aspect of our lending practices, or on the debt recovery procedures we adopt, should be addressed to:(address given)
FOOTNOTE
The principal businesses within Midland Group covered by this Code are Midland Bank itself, Midland Access, Forward Trust and Thomas Cook.
Lending includes credit and hire where applicable.
YOU AND YOUR BANK
Introduction
Probably the first contact between you and a bank is when you open a current account.
That is only the beginning.
Your bank is able to offer a comprehensive range of products and services to meet all your finance related needs.
This booklet briefly explains how your current account works, and introduces you to some of the other ways your bank can help you.
CHEQUE BOOKS
When you open a current account you will be issued with a cheque book that has your name printed on every cheque.
The cheques must only be used by you.
Once a certain number of cheques have been used, your bank may send you a new book automatically.
If this doesn't arrive in time, there is an emergency re-order form in each book which you can send to your branch.
They will then issue a temporary cheque book to keep you going until your new one is ready.
When you are writing out a cheque, be careful to minimise the risk of forgery and fraud.
Do not leave gaps between the words and/or figures.
If someone alters them cleverly you may have to pay the amount shown.
Never write out a cheque in pencil or one of those pens that can be rubbed out.
And, never sign a cheque before you use it.
Always fill in the record of the cheques you issue so that you can check them against your statement.
If you find a mistake, let your bank know and they will put it right.
If you ask another person to pay a cheque into your account for you, it is advisable to cross the cheque with the words ‘account payee only’.
This will stop the cheque being paid into anyone else's account.
If you issue a cheque and then decide you want to ‘stop’ payment you can, providing it has not already been paid or been guaranteed by your cheque card.
Tell your branch the date it was written, the number of the cheque, who it was made out to and for how much, and sign an authorization for them to stop payment.
They will do the rest.
There may be a charge for this service.
If your cheque book is lost or stolen, let your bank know immediately in order to reduce the risk of fraud on your account.
You will then be sent a new one.
STANDING ORDERS AND DIRECT DEBITS
Standing orders and direct debits are both ways of authorising the payment of regular sums from your current account to a specifically maned person or organisation.
With a standing order you tell your branch exactly how much is to be paid and when.
It is particularly useful for paying fixed amounts such as club subscriptions and insurance premiums.
But, you will have to notify your branch of any changes.
With a direct debit the person receiving payment tells your branch how much is due and when.
Paying regular bills such as gas and electricity is much easier this way.
Don't worry about unauthorised payments, these will be reversed immediately by your branch.
If you incur bank charges, some banks operate a slightly cheaper tariff for direct debits because they are more easily handled.
They pass on the saving to you.
PAYING-IN
Paying-in slips are available at all banks and are sometimes found at the back of your cheque book.
These can be used to pay-in at any branch of your bank, usually without charge.
If you pay-in regularly, you can ask your branch for a separate book of slips.
Always remember to keep your receipt to check against your statement.
If you pay-in at a branch of a different bank from your own you will probably have to pay a small fee at the counter.
If you want your salary or wages paid directly into your bank account, you will need to give your employer details of your branch number and your account number.
You will find you branch number printed on the top right hand corner of your cheques.
Your account number is the last set of numbers on the bottom of your cheque.
STATEMENTS
Most banks send their personal customers a free statement of their account every three months.
If you want an extra statement at any time just ask your branch but, remember, there may be a charge made.
You can ask at your branch for the balance on your account, or even find it out using one of your bank's automated machines.
CHARGES
With some banks, details of any charges your bank may make for operating your account and how they are calculated, will be shown on a separate statement.
you should ask your branch for a copy of the bank's tariff of charges.
Look out to see if there's any difference in the rate for different types of transactions.
For example, automated withdrawals may be cheaper than cashing cheques.
UNCLEARED CHEQUES
When you pay a cheque into your account no-one knows that it is definitely going to be paid.
In fact, it may take up to a week before your bank actually receives the money.
During this time, the cheque is ‘uncleared’ and money cannot be drawn against it, unless your bank agrees to let you do so.
If you withdraw against ‘uncleared’ cheques, you will have to pay interest — even though the balance on your statement may stay in credit.
OVERDRAFTS
If you want to borrow money on an overdraft, ask your branch before doing so.
where possible they will agree how much can be borrowed.
You will have to pay interest on any money you borrow and usually administration fees will be charged.
Remember, you'll find it a lot easier if you give all the facts to your bank when you want to borrow money.
Don't forget to advise them of any change in your financial affairs.
If you have not agreed an overdraft, your bank has the right to refuse payment of any cheque(s) you issue which cause your account to go overdrawn.
They will always try to avoid any embarrassment, but will use their judgement on whether or not to make payment.
You will find that you will be charged more for an unauthorised overdraft, as opposed one agreed with your bank.
Remember, overdrafts are repayable on demand.
LOANS
In addition to the overdraft, banks offer a number of pre-packaged borrowing schemes.
The most common is the Personal Loan.
You repay the money borrowed over a set period of time at a fixed monthly amount, which includes the interest.
Because the interest is added to the loan from the outset, you will pay off more interest in the early months than in the later ones.
Remember to take this into account if you are considering paying off the loan early.
REVOLVING CREDIT SCHEMES
With a revolving credit account you decide with you bank how much you want to save each month.
You can then borrow, multiples of the amount you agree to repay by regular transfers.
The account goes on from year to year, for as long as you want.
Interest is payable on the money owing, but you will be paid interest when the account is on credit.
You may be able to get free life assurance cover for the amount you owe.
And, you can usually arrange sickness or redundancy benefit to cover your monthly repayments, for a small premium each month.
MORTGAGES
The clearing bands are amongst the major providers of mortgage finance.
They will lend against most types of property and offer a choice of capital repayment, endowment or pension linked mortgages.
Each bank has its own separate leaflet about its mortgage schemes.
It is a matter of finding the best one for you.
So that you cab compare the cost of the different types of mortgages, ask for quotations.
Make sure you have arranged mortgage Protection Cover and, if possible, insure yourself against sickness, redundancy or accident.
If you're moving you may need a bridging loan.
Your bank may be able to help, especially if contracts are signed and exchanged and its only a matter of a problem with completion dates.
If contracts aren't exchanged, think carefully before you take a bridging loan.
If you own sale falls through you may face a hefty interest bill.
Your bank is the place for guidance.
SAVINGS
The clearing banks offer a wide range of savings schemes to suit all pockets, and to meet both short and long term needs.
You will find the various interest rates displayed in your branch.
Interest is paid to UK residents without further liability to basic rate tax.
This means that if you are a basic rate tax payer you do not have to pay income tax on the interest you receive.
If you pay tax at above the basic rate, there will be some additional tax to be paid.
If you do not pay any income tax at all, you cannot claim a refund on the tax that has been deducted.
When you sign up for a savings scheme check the clauses for giving notice.
It's no good tying up money for years unless you're certain you won't need it.
Equally, there's no need to go for a savings scheme which gives you a cheque book if you'll never use it.
OTHER SERVICES
There are many other products and services available from your bank, some of which you might never need, but some of which you probably will.
Amongst them are: business and travel services, including travellers' cheques and foreign currency; all types of insurance; investments including unit trusts, stocks and shares; and full executor and trustee services.
Some of these are very specialised.
Bank staff are professional and while they may have products to meet most needs, they won't sell you something you don't want.
If you are not satisfied, they will not be satisfied.
If you would like to know more about any of the products and services you bank has to offer, or would just like to talk ‘money’ generally, call at your local branch.
They will be pleased to help and advise you.
HOW TO BORROW MONEY
INTRODUCTION
‘Buy now while stocks last’ is a common and effective selling technique, ‘price goes up next Monday — buy now’is another.
But if you haven't got the money, what can you do about it?
No, you don't.
You can borrow the money from a bank easily and quickly and pay it back later as you can afford to.
You can borrow small sums for a short period of time or you can borrow large amounts for many years, such as a mortgage.
And you can borrow for any period in between.You can borrow money for any reason you want (as long as it is legal).
Provided the bank manager believes you can afford to pay the money back, he will lend it to you.
Sometimes it makes very good sense to borrow money for something.
In times of high inflation when prices are going up faster than you can save, it can be cheaper to pay interest charges than a higher price later on.
On other occasions, borrowing may be the only way you will ever be able to afford to buy something expensive like a house.
WHAT IS CREDIT?
Credit sounds as though it is something already on your side of the balance sheet.
After all, you ‘credit’ a sum of money to your account when you pay it in.
But in borrowing terms, credit is money owed to someone else.
The lender gives you some of its money to use for your own purposes — but in return you pay interest on the loan.
So, credit costs money.
But if you are careful you can keep the costs down to a minimum.
If you do not know what you are doing, you can pay out money unnecessarily.
There are many different ways of borrowing money and each one is appropriate to different circumstances.
You should make sure you are using the most suitable form of credit for your purposes.
CREDIT CARDS
These plastic cards are the most flexible way of shopping on credit and they are now used all over the world.
Each cardholder has a set limit, running to hundreds or even thousands of pounds that can be borrowed at any one time.
Each month cardholders can either pay off their whole bill, in which case they pay no interest charges and the credit is ‘free’ for up to fifty six days; or they can pay off at least the minimum amount, which is usually 5% or 5, whichever is the greater.
Cardholders pay interest charges on the amount left unpaid, and are regarded as having borrowed that money.
Credit cards are particularly useful when travelling and there are often insurance benefits if you pay for your travel through them.
OVERDRAFT
To get an overdraft, you first need a current account at a bank.
However, this does not give you the automatic right to go overdrawn.
you are only entitled to spend the amount of money that you have put into the current account: If you spend more, you are spending the bank's money.
If you ask your manager first and he agrees, then an overdraft is a convenient and economic way of borrowing money.
You will pay interest charges on any money that is overdrawn (which may be higher if the overdraft has not been formally arranged) and usually the bank will charge fees to cover administration costs.
It is worth remembering that interest rates will vary, and you may be charged for cashing cheques and other transactions, which can increase the costs.
An overdraft can be a cheap way to borrow if you have a regular monthly pay cheque which will take you out of the red so you can stop paying interest until you overdraw again.
PERSONAL LOAN
If you want money for a specific purchase, you are more likely to be offered a personal loan.
This is generally for a set sum, over an agreed period, during which you sill pay back the capital and the interest: the rate of interest is fixed at the time you take out the loan, so your monthly repayments never change.
Loans are usually available for periods of up to 5 years.
REVOLVING CREDIT ACCOUNT
This is a combined account for borrowing and saving which gives you the automatic right to borrow money.
You decide on the amount — generally between 10 and 120 — you want to save each month.
Whatever figure you choose, you can then borrow up to a given multiple of that amount whenever you like, either in a lump sum or in small irregular amounts.
You will pay interest charges.
BUDGET ACCOUNT
This smooths out the highs and lows of paying bills throughout the year.
You add up all the bills you know will come in over the next year — plus a bit more for contingencies — and divide by twelve.
This is the amount you pay into the account every month.
When the bills come in you pay them on the budget account cheque book and don't have to worry whether the money is there or not.
You will pay interest when you are in the red, plus a charge for cheques and an annual service fee.
MORTGAGE
The largest amount of money you are ever likely to want to borrow will be to buy a home.
Fortunately mortgages tend to be a little cheaper than other loans and you will receive tax relief on the interest you pay, up to a maximum of 30,000, at your highest rate of tax.
You can generally borrow up to 90% of the value of the new home, and you can borrow as much as three times you salary: the loan will usually be for a maximum of 25 years.
The choice is between a repayment mortgage which is a straightforward loan, an endowment mortgage which includes life assurance, and a pension mortgage.
BRIDGING LOAN
You may have to commit yourself to buying a new home before you have sold your existing one, in which case you may need to take out a bridging loan to tide you over until you sell.
These are generally expensive so you would only usually take out such a loan if you already know how long the delay will last.
HOW TO GET A LOAN
This is quite simple.
If you already have an account, you can talk to one of the staff in your branch or see the manager.
if you do not have an account, you can still ask about borrowing money, but you will probably be expected to open an account with the bank.
The branch staff will give you details of the best loan for your purpose and will tell you exactly how much it will cost you.
You will then be asked to fill out a loan application form with information such as your name and address, where you work, your income and outgoings, etc. banks don't always ask you to deposit security or collateral to back a loan: they generally rely on their assessment of your ability to repay.
Whether or not you get a loan depends on many factors including a credit assessment.
The details you give are assessed according to a points system and then the bank may check with a credit reference agency to see whether you have a previous record of not paying your debts.
If you are turned down, ask the bank whether or not they have used a credit reference agency.
If you believe your name may be on such an agency's list, you have the right to see a copy of your file, and to correct any mistakes you may find.
You will be charged to do this: it is worth doing before you need to borrow money.
TAKE CARE
The bank may reject your request for a loan because it thinks you are overcommitting yourself.
You must be careful not to borrow more money that you can afford to repay.
Before you take out a loan sit down and list all the money coming in and what you will have to pay out.
Then subtract the cost of the loan.
Will you be comfortable living on what you have left?
If not, do not take out the loan.
the bank will not mind, though they may charge you for a management fee.
Could you cope with repaying the loan if you were made redundant or lost your overtime earnings or were unable to work because of illness?
It may be possible to take out insurance against this.
If you get into difficulties repaying the loan, go straight to the lender and explain the problem.
They will come to an appropriate arrangement with you.
You may be surprised how helpful they can be.
It is usually unwise to borrow to pay off another debt.
POINTS TO WATCH
Compare the costs of different loans, but be sure you are comparing like with like.
Find out the APR (annual percentage rate) for the loan, which includes all costs and is the true charge for the credit.
Only sign agreements once you have checked how long the repayments continue and the total you will have paid by the end, as well as the amount you pay per month.
Remember the value of getting to know your lender and keeping them informed.
GLOSSARY
APR: annual percentage rate of the total charge for credit or the true cost of borrowing.
Credit Reference Agency: a company which keeps files on individuals' debt records.
Credit Scoring: a numerical system for assessing the eligibility of a loan applicant.
Default: failure to repay a loan.
Fixed Interest: the rate of interest will not change during the period of the loan agreement.
Credit Broker: a middle man who will find you a loan.
Mortgage Broker: a middle man who will get you a mortgage.
Revolving Credit: a credit facility with a pre-determined limit.
Security (or collateral): something of value acceptable to the lender, which can be sold if you fail to repay the loan.
HOW TO COPE WITH DEBT
INTRODUCTION
Whereas our grandparents and, perhaps, even our parents frowned upon buying anything unless they had saved all the money required, today we expect to own the luxuries of life now and are prepared to bridge the gap between our savings and the price with a loan.
Borrowing is looked upon as a natural part of everyday life so long as it is kept within bounds.
Problems arise only when we overstretch ourselves.
This booklet has been produced to help you identify potential dangers and correct them as soon as possible.
CREDIT
It's strange that two quite different words can mean the same thing.
‘I've got unlimited credit’ sounds a proud boast; ‘I've got the ability to take on unlimited debts’is far more ominous.
Credit in itself is not, of course, a bad thing; most of us get paid weekly or monthly, while many of the things we buy — from our house downwards — simply cost too much for us to meet the expenditure in one go.
So we look to organisations who will lend the money to us, on condition that we undertake to repay the loan from our income over a specified period of time.
As long as we do so, we're ‘credit users’: it is only when we fail that we become ‘debtors’.
WIDE CHOICE
These days there is a plethora of organisations willing and generally able to lend us money.
Building societies and banks, hire purchase companies and finance houses, credit and store card organisations all vie with one another to make money available.
They are willing to do so because they expect to be paid back and because they expect to profit from the transaction through the interest they charge on the loan — it would be a strange world if they didn't!
If lenders are not reasonably sure the loan will be paid back, they will understandably charge a higher rate of interest.
THE COST
It is important to realise that credit comes in many shapes and forms — and at different costs.
The latter depends on two factors.
Firstly, there is the general level of interest rates at the time the loan is made, which relates to the current base rate.
Then there is the lender's assessment of the risk it is taking.
The safer the loan appears to be, the lower, in general, the interest rate.
It should also be said that marketing considerations can come into the calculation.
For instance car manufacturers may offer exceedingly cheap credit, not because they believe their borrowers are uniquely low risk, but because they may want to sell more cars.
However, in such cases it is worth remembering that the product may be available more cheaply elsewhere and may thus reduce the credit needed!
Alternatively, store credit cards may offer more expensive credit — but buying a really cheap offer in a sale may justify use of more costly loans at the time.
When considering forms of credit, the different types that are available and the terms over which they are offered should be carefully evaluated as to how much you can afford.
One of the most important factors is the interest rate itself, which could give cause for confusion, were it not for something called ‘APR’— annual percentage rate — which is the figure you should concentrate on.
The APR takes into account any setting up costs of the loan, and is the best yardstick to use when comparing the costs of the different forms of credit.
The fundamental considerations in taking a decision on loans are laid out in another Midland Bank booklet called ‘How to Borrow Money’ by Margaret Dibben.
RECOGNISING THE DANGER
As a nation, we're all in hock to the tune of over 24 billion — and that's excluding mortgages on property.
We've all grown accustomed to using credit.
There can be a danger point, however, when the use of credit gets out of control, and unfortunately, with all the variety of credit available, it is sometimes too easy to avoid recognising the danger until it is acute.
If the amount outstanding on your credit or store cards seem always to creep up rather than down; if you put off paying the electricity bills because you have other commitments to meet; if you are seriously thinking of accepting the offer of a ‘consolidation’ loan which is secured on your house to mop up all your existing credit agreements and transform them into a once a month payment, then you could be on or near the danger line.
Many people who get seriously into debt do so through no fault of their own.
They may be made redundant or their marriage may break up; even the loss of regular overtime can have a disastrous effect on someone living to the limits of his or her income.
BE PREPARED
The first step in the battle to keep control of borrowing is to recognise that you might be in danger.
It can be very instructive to prepare a Financial Statement, setting out (with total honesty) your total weekly or monthly income, and your expenditure throughout the year.
As Mr Micawber said ‘If a man had twenty pounds a year for his income, and spent nineteen pounds nineteen shillings and sixpence, he would be happy, but if he spent twenty pounds on, he would be miserable’, On a temporary and controlled basis, some excess expenditure can be justifiable — but when excess expenditure increases regularly, the danger signs flash up.
The second step is to sort out your priorities and let your lenders know of any problem as early as possible.
Just because you receive more official letters about a particular payment does not mean that it should be first on the list to be paid off, if it means ignoring other important debts such as a mortgage, gas and electricity, or perhaps the taxman.
SEEKING HELP
There are ways of ‘suspending’ some debts — you can, for instance, arrange to pay only the interest on your mortgage for a while.
The earlier you discuss a potential or actual problem with the lender, the more chance there is of being able to arrange matters satisfactorily.
In the final analysis, they may recommend specific courses of action, including destroying all your credit cards and even your cheque book, if they believe this to be necessary.
In some areas of the country there are special Money Advice Centres which can help people in debt, particularly those who have saddled themselves with multiple debts.
Such specialist centres are fairly thin on the ground but Citizens Advice Bureaux can help, and some local authorities have their own consumer advisers.
PUTTING MATTERS RIGHT
The four basic steps on the road back to financial health are: To Maximise your income — which may mean, for example, exploring the possibility of a part time job, or checking you are getting all the state benefits to which you are entitled.
To deal with priority debts — rent and mortgage arrears, heating and lighting.
to sort out the non-priority debts, possibly entering into negotiation with the lenders.
To realise assets in order to pay off debts.
This must be done with open eyes.
Can you afford the car you bought with a loan?
Would your problems be solved if you had a smaller house?
Such questions should be approached honestly and in full awareness that terminating loan arrangements can cost money in the short term due to cancellation or other charges.
It's a natural response to keep your troubles quiet — especially from the people who've lent you money.
but unless you are absolutely certain that you will be able to get back on top of things within a very short period of time, don't do it.
All lenders would far prefer to know what is happening.
You will not be the first debtor they've had to deal with, and their experience and understanding could help you take the first step on the road to recovery.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
‘Assistance with Mortgage Repayments’ available from the Building Societies Association, ‘What To Do When Someone Has Debt Problems’by John McQueen, published by Elliot Right Way Books, ‘How to Cope with credit and Deal with Debt’by Ann Andrews and Peter Houghton,’Debt: A Survival Guide’available free from the Office of Fair Trading, Field House, London.
HOW TO COMPLAIN ABOUT MIDLAND BANK SERVICES
INTRODUCTION
Most people have experienced the sense of irritation and frustration which prompts a complaint about goods or services.
But, it is important to remember before making a complaint that the manner in which it is made may bear directly on the likelihood of achieving a satisfactory resolution to the problem.
Following procedures, carefully noting progress, and pursuing your complaint in a reasonable manner will assist your case considerably.
Midland bank has its own Customer Code and will always do everything it can to maintain the standards set out in the Code.
However, the Bank recognises that even in the best-run organisations, things may go wrong.
This leaflet is designed to outline the procedures through which you, the customer, can register your views or seek redress.
It is worth remembering that it is useful to the Bank to know what their customers think of the services they receive: it enables them to improve upon the services they offer.
The Bank welcomes customers' comments.
If you believe that you have not received proper service, the Bank will do all it can to investigate your complaint objectively.
PROCEDURES FOR COMPLAINTS You should first refer your complaint to the point of contact where the transaction took place, i.e. branch, Access, Midland Bank Personal Financial Services.
The Bank staff are there to help you, answer your queries or take details of your complaint.
If the matter cannot be resolved to your satisfaction by the branch staff, you should ask to see the branch manager.
The branch manager will ensure that the query is investigated objectively and hopefully be able to resolve the matter to your satisfaction.
If you are still dissatisfied, you should write to the local Area Manager.
Your letter should include an outline of the circumstances, details of your complaint and the redress you are seeking.
If this is not practicable, phone the Area Manager or a senior member of his team, and give him the details of your complaint.
They will endeavour to resolve the matter to your satisfaction.
Ask your branch for the Area Office address and telephone number.
Most queries should normally be answered within five working days.
If this is not feasible, your letter will be acknowledged immediately, accompanied by a commitment to respond to you as soon as possible.
Should the problem persist, or you cannot contact the Area Manager, the Regional Management Centre is the next point of contact for your complaint.
The same conditions regarding letters and response times as already given apply, and your branch will supply the address.
In the event that the problem is still not resolved to your satisfaction, refer your problem is still not resolved to your satisfaction, refer your complaint to: Customer Relations Department, Midland Bank plc, Head Office, Poultry, London EC2P 2BX.
The department is completely independent of the branch network and works with the office of the Chief Executive.
Your complaint will be fully investigated by them and they will generally respond within five working days.
If you are still not satisfied after all these steps have been taken, you can apply to the Banking Ombudsman for arbitration.
Any correspondence should be addressed to: The Banking Ombudsman, Citadel House, 5–11 Fetter Lane, London EC4A IBR.
Midland Bank is a member of the Ombudsman Scheme.
The Ombudsman is independent of the banks and is responsible to and independent Council.
He is there to help resolve complaints and disputes, and to act within the existing law as an impartial adjudicator.
The banks have agreed to accept his awards, although you yourself retain the right to take legal action if you do not accept his decision.
It is advisable to check that your complaint comes within the Ombudsman's Terms of Reference, and that he is therefore able to adjudicate in your case.
You should also bear in mind that it is only once you have reached the end of the road in trying to obtain satisfaction through the Bank's own complaints system that the Ombudsman will be able to formally consider your complaint.
MIDLAND PAYROLL SERVICES
INTRODUCTION
As your business grows, so does the size of your payroll and the amount of time you or your staff have to spend calculating and paying wages, salaries and pensions.
PAYE, National Insurance, statutory sick pay — all these have to be dealt with as well as the problems of year end returns and changes in legislation.
If you find that this is taking up too much of your valuable time, or causes disruption when your wages clerk is ill or on holiday — have a look at how Midland can help.
CREDO Mid-Pay, is Midlands new efficient, cost effective payroll service which removes all the hassle involved in paying your staff.
it gives you more time to get on with the job of managing your business.
SIMPLE, EFFICIENT, FLEXIBLE
To ensure that your staff or pensioners are paid the right amount on the day you specify, all you have to do each week or month is complete a special, easy to follow form with such variable payment details as bonuses and overtime, and send it to our computer centre.
We do the rest.
The information on the form is processed by our advanced computer system, which calculates all tax and National Insurance contributions.
Payslips are produced and sent to you together with a payroll report for management information and audit purposes.
Net payments are then made direct by us to your employees' or pensioners' bank or building society accounts.
Or alternatively, you can make your own arrangements for payments to be made by cheque or cash.
STATUTORY CHANGES
The headache of having to keep abreast of statutory changes from the Inland Revenue and Department of Social Security becomes a thing of the past.
When changes occur, they are immediately fed into our system and taken fully into account when your payroll is processed.
UP-TO-DATE RECORDS
We provide you with individual index cards for each of your staff, giving details such as names, addresses, tax codes etc.
Whenever you advise us of any changes to these details, you are sent new cards so your records are always up-to-date.
CONFIDENTIAL
CREDO Mid-Pay is a completely confidential service, since you alone determine who can provide us with payroll information, and who can receive it.
And all documents are sent in special bank sealed envelopes.
THE COST
It will cost £30 plus VAT each time you use the CREDO Mid-Pay service to process your payroll (for up to fifty employees).
There are additional charges for setting up the service, the production of year end returns, and for the optional statutory sick pay calculations.
YOUR NEXT MOVE
If you would like more information about how CREDO Mid-Pay can release you from payroll drudgery, simply fill in the attached coupon and take or send it to your local Midland branch manager.
We shall then contact you to discuss your requirements.
MIDLAND BUSINESS DIRECT
INTRODUCTION
Arranging business travel at home and abroad can be a headache.
Booking flights.
Ringing around hotels to book rooms.
Hiring cars.
It all adds up to a time consuming and often costly exercise.
But is it necessary?
Business Direct from Midland relieves you and your staff of all the hassle involved with travel booking and puts it in the hands of the world's leading travel organisation — Thomas Cook — a member of Midland Group.
all that is needed is just one telephone call each time there is a trip to arrange.
INDIVIDUAL SERVICE
Business Direct has been specially developed for independent business travellers — people who travel on business, but whose companies do not necessarily operate an in-house travel scheme.
The service is based on individual membership that can usually be obtained only by large companies.
WHAT WE OFFER
Business Direct is made up of a number of different services, each designed to smooth your way throughout the world.
These are all bookable through an 0800 freephone number.
Membership enables you to benefit from the Thomas Cook expertise in obtaining the best value for money deals.
Air bookings
Whatever your destination, we will make all your flight bookings and arrange to have your tickets delivered to your office or home.
In many cases, we will be able to offer you discounted air fares (up to 25%) through Air Fare Warehouse, a specialist low fare subsidiary of Thomas Cook.
Hotel bookings
From Blackpool to Bali, from Torquay to Tokyo, we can offer you corporate hotel rates through Hoteltech, a subsidiary of Thomas Cook.
They are the acknowledged experts in negotiating competitive rates at hotels around the world, and savings of up to 20% can be achieved on many properties.
Car hire
We have negotiated a special deal with one of the world's leading car hire organisations, that enables us to pass on to you the corporate rates and preferential service for car hire that they usually offer only to large companies.
Travel Money
Rushing around at the last minute trying to obtain foreign currency and travellers cheques is not the best preparation for a business trip abroad.
with business direct, we will deliver what you need, together with your travel documents, by registered post to your home or office.
Payment for any of the above services is made by credit/charge card, or direct debit straight to a bank account nominated by you.
Travel assistance
We provide every member of Business Direct with a travel assistance package that you can use any time you are travelling on a business trip arranged through the scheme.
The package includes insurance cover, emergency money, replacement of essential travel documents, medical help and legal advice.
Quarterly magazine
We will send you a magazine every quarter to keep you in touch with the latest travel news and issues around the world.
FREQUENT TRAVELLER PROGRAMME
The advantages of Business Direct do not stop the moment you have booked each trip.
The more you use the service the greater the reward.
For every £1,000 of international air travel booked through the service, each member will receive £20 worth of travel bonds, which can be used to offset the cost of future travel — business or pleasure.
THE COST
Membership of Business Direct costs just £20 a year — a sum that can be quickly recouped in the form of the discounts available to members.
Every member will be sent an enrolment package that includes a membership card, notification of the Business Direct Freephone number for bookings etc, and a selection of directories in an attractive and useful binder.
YOUR NEXT MOVE
If you are interested in enrolling in Business Direct, or wish any of your staff to enrol, please complete the attached application form and post it to the address shown or take it to your local Midland branch.
If you require further details please ring 0223 258478.
For more application forms, or details of our corporate membership terms, please tick the appropriate box overleaf.
MIDLAND BUSINESS OVERDRAFTS
INTRODUCTION
However large or small your business operation, whether you manufacture goods or provide a service, there may be times when you need to borrow funds for the day-to-day financing of your working capital or to tide you over an unexpected cash flow problem.
Business overdrafts from Midland are among the simplest ways of covering these short-term borrowing needs.
TAILORED TO YOUR BUSINESS NEEDS
Midland business overdrafts are arranged with a minimum of formality and fuss.
The amount of borrowing and the length of time you are likely to require it will be agreed in discussion with your Midland manager — according to the needs of your business and cash flow patterns.
Working capital finance
If you require an overdraft for working capital purposes, we will normally agree it for 12 months, with the amount based on your cash flow forecast for that period.
Towards the end of the 12 months, we will need to review your needs with you and, if appropriate, renew the overdraft arrangements at the same level or at a higher or lower figure.
The flexibility and cheapness of overdraft borrowing is possible because it is an ‘on demand’ facility, and we can therefore call it in at any time.
In practice, of course, we would not do so unless we thought the commercial circumstances warranted it.
Emergency needs
There may be occasions when a payment you are expecting is delayed and you suddenly need funds to cover the resultant cash shortage.
In such cases, contact us to discuss an overdraft for the amount of the payment and expected period of the delay.
INTEREST RATES
The rate of interest we charge will be linked to Midland Bank Base Rate, and will be determined by the size and likely duration of the overdraft and whether or not security is something your Midland manager will discuss when arranging your overdraft.
If you use only part of your agreed overdraft, you will pay interest only on the sum you have actually borrowed and not on the full amount agreed.
Please remember, however, that if you exceed the agreed amount or overdraw your account without prior arrangement, you will automatically be charged a higher rate of interest on the excess or on unauthorised amounts.
OTHER COSTS
You will be charged a fee equal to 1% of the amount of the agreed overdraft — minimum £25 — to cover our setting up costs.
If in subsequent years we renew this overdraft, the fee will be reduced to ½%.; If we ask you to provide security, the cost of completing the legal formalities, will be passed on to you.
We will be pleased to provide you with an estimate of these costs in advance, on request.
YOUR OTHER BORROWING NEEDS
In addition to a business overdraft, you will probably require some other form of finance as your business expands.
You may, for instance, need to move to larger premises, acquire an expensive piece of capital equipment of buy an extra van or company car.
Midland has a full range of business loans to meet these needs.
Please ask your Midland manager about them when setting up your overdraft.
YOUR NEXT MOVE
If you require a Midland business overdraft, please complete the application form attached to this leaflet, or contact your local midland branch.
If possible, enclose with your application form, your cash flow forecast and any other relevant accounting information, and send it to your Midland manager, who will arrange an interview with you.
Cash flow forms, together with advice on how to complete them, are contained in our brochure ‘CREDO-planning, The Business Plan’, available from any Midland branch.
Midland Business Overdrafts — tailored to your business needs.
MIDLAND SERVICES FOR IMPORTERS AND EXPORTERS
INTRODUCTION
Trading abroad as an importer or exporter can be highly profitable, but it often involves a greater degree of risk than operating in the home market.
Economic, political and commercial conditions in the country of your overseas supplier or customer can significantly affect the speed and security with which goods are delivered, and payments made or received.
A thorough knowledge of such conditions is essential when determining the most advantageous international payment methods for your business.
Other factors to be taken into account include the nature of the goods or services involved; the creditworthiness of the overseas trader; and the stability of the currency.
Midland Bank has vast experience in the field of overseas trade, and provides an extensive range of services, together with specialist advice.
This leaflet outlines the international payment services available through Midland, which are designed to remove some of the headaches associated with importing and exporting, and to help you trade more profitable.
DOCUMENTARY CREDITS
A documentary credit is the most secure form of international payment for both buyer and seller.
It is a written undertaking from a bank that it will pay the exporter provided that he meets the terms of the credit — i.e. supplies the bank with the shipping documents stipulated by the importer.
A documentary credit is issued by the importer's bank in favour of the exporter and forwarded to a bank in the exporter's country for payment.
It provides the exporter with the security that he will receive payment for goods which he has despatched, regardless of the buyer's ability or willingness to pay, since the bank takes over the payment obligation.
The importer, on the other hand, can be sure that no payment will be made until the exporter has provided documents as evidence that the goods have been shipped in accordance with the terms of the documentary credit.
This is the most expensive international trade payment method because of the high degree of security it provides for both importer and exporter.
BILLS OF EXCHANGE
A bill of exchange is a less secure means of payment, but is cheaper than a documentary credit.
It is a written order, drawn up by the exporter, requiring the importer to make payment upon receipt of the bill or at some agreed future date.
The exporter will send the shipping documents with the bill as a ‘documentary collection’, via his own bank to one in the importer's country.
The bank in the importer's country will only release the documents when the importer has paid the bill or agreed a date for future payment.
the payment is forwarded to the exporter through the international banking system.
As an importer, you are secure in the knowledge that the goods for which you are paying have already been despatched/ As an exporter, you retain control of the goods until the importer has paid or agreed to pay.
You may also negotiate cash advances from your bank, using the bill of exchange as security.
INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS
If you are importing, the cheapest and most straightforward methods of settlement are by international payments in currency or sterling, and Midland offers three options: Priority Payments, where speed of funds transfer is of paramount importance; Mail Payments, where there is less urgency; and Bankers Drafts, which are particularly appropriate for low priority, low value payments.
If you are exporting, we can process quickly and efficiently any sterling or foreign currency payments you may receive from overseas customers.
Such payments can be credited directly to your account with us provided we are asked to do so by your customer's bank.
Your overseas customer will need to provide the bank which is sending the payment with details of your branch and account number.
Special invoice stickers in five languages are available from Midland for this purpose.
FOREIGN CURRENCY ACCOUNTS
If your business regularly makes or receives payments in foreign currencies, or wishes to borrow in anticipation of receiving payments from abroad, you may find it convenient and cost-effective to open foreign currency bank accounts.
We can offer current accounts with overdraft facilities and deposit and loan accounts in any major international currency.
MULTICURRENCY CHEQUE ACCOUNTS
This type of account which may be held in US dollars or sterling, is especially useful if you are an importer regularly making small to medium, non-urgent payments in a range of foreign currencies.
You are provided with cheques which may be drawn in any currency, and mailed direct to your overseas supplier.
When the cheques are presented for payment at Midland, they are converted at current exchange rates and charged to your account.
MIDLAND STUDENT SERVICE
INTO YOUR FIRST YEAR
INTRODUCTION
Whilst you're a student, you may find that you're often thought of as a stereotype — hardworking, humourless academic, single-minded radical or easy-living perpetual partygoer.
But NEVER by Midland.
To us you're always an individual, with your own particular financial circumstances and needs.
Years of listening to students and helping them through their undergraduate years have taught us how varied those needs can be.
As a result, we have developed the Midland Student Service — a flexible, comprehensive range of products and services to help you when your finances are in a healthy state and when they're not — giving you real value for money and continuous help and guidance throughout your period of study.
And this year, to give those finances an extra boost during your first term you'll be given our special student CASH BONUS.
QUICK, EASY CASH SERVICE
Once you've opened your account, you'll want to be able to get to your money easily and quickly.
You can do this 24 hours a day, 7 days a week by using your midland Auto Cheque card at any of our self-service cash machines.
You can also draw money from NatWest Servicetills and TSB Speedbanks, giving you access to the largest cash machine network in the UK.
This means you'll never be far from your money — even on campus.
You can draw as little as £5 or £10, for your day-to-day needs, or as much as £100, when you want a larger amount — provided of course you have sufficient in your account.
To help you control your spending, the machines will check your balance before giving you cash.
But it's often difficult to see for yourself how much is in your account.
You can do this on Midland machines simply by pressing the appropriate button, And in some of our branches there are machines where you can use your card to see details of the last few account transactions or print out a short-form statement.
PAYING BY CHEQUE
You will also receive a cheque book which you can use with your Auto Cheque card to pay at shops, garages, restaurants etc.
Your card guarantees that any cheque you issue up to £50 will be honoured.
FREE BANKING AT ALL TIMES
As a member of our Student service, you are entitled to FREE banking, even when your account is overdrawn.
This means you can pay in and withdraw cash or cheques, at any of our branches or at our self-service banking machines; issue standing orders and direct debits to pay club subscriptions etc, at no cost — however often you use them.
And, so you can keep a close eye on your finances, we'll send you a full statement every month showing all the transactions on your account.
INTEREST ON CURRENT ACCOUNT
Whilst you're a student you will be living on a limited income so it's important to make your money work for you all the time.
Midland was the first bank to introduce interest on student current accounts, making sure that your money is always earning its keep.
It's surprising just how much that interest can be worth to you over the full period of your course.
Just consider for instance how much you'll have in your account at the beginning of each term.
INTEREST FREE OVERDRAFT
We're also there to help when you're having difficulty making ends meet.
Unexpected demands on your money can cause havoc with even the most carefully planned budgets — at least for a short while.
If this happens, let us know right away — we may be able to offer you an overdraft of up to £250 INTEREST FREE!
And if you find you need to borrow more, we'll charge you a special preferential rate on any overdraft we agree with you over £250.
Please remember though to ask us before going overdrawn.
If you don't, it can be very expensive.
Remember too that later, when you complete your studies, Midland will still be there to offer you preferential borrowing arrangements while you are looking for a job and getting established in your career.
MIDLAND ACCESS CARD
Another way of making your money go further is to take advantage of the credit available with a Midland Access card.
Depending on when you make your purchases, you can enjoy up to 56 days interest-free credit.
When the time comes to settle your Access account, you have the option of paying off the whole amount owing, without it costing you a penny in interest, or of repaying a portion of it and paying interest on what is left.
You can apply for a card with a spending limit of £250 at any time while you're a student — just ask for a copy of the leaflet ‘Whilst you are there — Midland Access’ at any of our branches.
FINANCIAL ADVICE
Life away from home, probably for the first time, can be both exciting and a little unnerving at times.
But if you are to make the most of your life as a student, both academically and socially, you certainly won't want to be worrying about your finances.
Quite often, all that is required is a friendly chat to put your mind at rest.
So, any time you want to ‘talk money’ come and meet one of our especially trained Student Advisers.
You'll find one at most of our branches near universities, colleges and polytechnics.
If there is a problem they'll do all they can to help you.
FREE TRAVEL SERVICES
One feature of student life that can prove expensive is the cost of travel between home and your place of study, and any trips you want to take during your vacations.
As part of our Student Service, we will issue with a voucher to claim a FREE Student Coach Card (normal cost £4.25) from National Express and Scottish Citylink.
This entitles you to claim substantial discounts on all standard adult coach fares, including Rapide and Cordon Bleu Services, for a full twelve months.
For those holidays abroad, we will sell you foreign currency, and buy back what you don't spend, FREE of our usual commission charges.
And finally, you won't have to pay any fees if you order Thomas Cook sterling or US dollars travellers cheques at any Midland branch.
PROTECTING YOUR BELONGINGS
Many students find it difficult to obtain insurance cover for their belongings whilst they're lining in digs or halls of residence.
As a member of the Midland Student Service, you can take advantage of our special insurance package for students.
It provides cover for all your possessions and is simple to arrange.
For full details, please ask for a copy of the leaflet ‘Midland Student Service — Insurance’ at any of our branches.
YOUR NEXT MOVE
Now you have read our leaflet, we're sure you'll agree that Midland has a lot to offer you — advice, guidance and direct financial assistance, where appropriate, from the day you start your course.
And after you have graduated, we have a comprehensive range of services and products to help you make the most of your life at work and home.
If you already have a Midland Current Account, please let us know when you will be starting your course and we shall transfer you to our Student Service.
If you do not already have an account with us, please complete the attached application form.
To make sure you qualify for the Midland Student Service, please check the eligibility terms on the reverse of this leaflet.
Further details, including written information regarding any of our savings or lending services, can be obtained from any branch of Midland Bank or alternatively, from the address shown on the reverse of this leaflet.
Midland Bank credit facilities are normally available only to persons of 18 years of age or over.
ELIGIBILITY FOR THE MIDLAND STUDENT SERVICE
To automatically qualify for all the offers and services described in this leaflet you must begin or be a first year student attending a full time DESIGNATED course of study for which a Local Education Authority MANDATORY award is available and be personally eligible for such an award.
DESIGNATED courses are those leading to:-
a University of CNAA first degree
the Diploma of Higher Education
BTEC Higher National Diploma Awards
initial teacher training including those for the Postgraduate Certificate in Education or the Art Teachers' Certificate of Diploma
a University Certificate of Diploma lasting at least 3 years.
Certain other degree equivalent courses may qualify — please enquire at your local branch.
The full MIDLAND STUDENT SERVICE is not available to those undertaking courses of non-advanced further education even when a Local Education Authority DISCRETIONARY award has been made.
examples of these are:— A levels and GCSEs, BTEC National Awards (as distinct from Higher National Certificates and Diplomas) and City and Guild courses.
Alternative midland accounts and services are available to students taking these courses — please ask at your local branch for further details.
BEYOND YOUR FINAL YEAR
INTRODUCTION
Now that you are well into your final year at university of college, you will be thinking ahead to what comes next.
You may be turning your attention to job hunting and all that entails, and wondering how you are going to pay your way until you start earning.
At Midland we are keen to do all we can to make the going easier for you.
There are a number of ways in which we can help relieve the financial strain and start you off in your chosen career with no unnecessary money worries.
And we have not forgotten those of you who are going on to post graduate studies.
BRIDGING THE GAP
It is surprising just how the cost of everything involved with interviews and settling down in your first fob can add up.
You may need new clothes and, perhaps, a briefcase; the price of travel can make a hole in even the deepest pocket; and depending on where your job is, you may need to pay advance rent on new accommodation.
Add to all this the price of a well deserved holiday from it all at the end of your final term, and it is quite likely that you could be stretching your finances to the limit.
If you think money is going to be tight, call at your Midland branch for a chat.
We should be able to arrange a temporary overdraft with a special low rate of interest on amounts up to £1,000.
Then is towards the end of 1989 you have not managed to pay it all back we will give you the option to switch your borrowing to a loan account.
That way, you can continue to enjoy FREE banking.
ACCESS CARD
Most students find cheques or cash the most convenient methods of payment, with bills settled ‘on the spot’.
After graduating, however, you may wish to broaden your scope and find yourself an alternative form of payment.
a Midland Access card does just that.
Accepted by thousands of shops, hotels, restaurants, garages etc, in the UK and throughout the world, you will find a Midland Access card lets you make the most of your new spending power.
You will receive a regular statement showing full details of each purchase made with your card.
You then choose to pay the amount owing in full with no interest added; or elect to pay back only part of the sum and pay interest on the amount left outstanding which you repay in the future.
TAKING A BREAK
After three or four years concentrated study, you may feel like recharging the batteries before having to adapt to the routine of a full-time career.
If you decide to take a break abroad, we can help smooth the way.
We will supply and buy back foreign currency and Thomas Cook US dollar and sterling travellers cheques FREE of our normal commission charges; and you will be offered a FREE eurocheque card.
You will find this card a real boon anywhere in Europe because it allows you to pay for goods and services with eurocheques, just as you do with ordinary cheques at home.
Both of these travel offers are available until the end of 1989.
MORE INSTANT CASH AT NO COST
Once you have started in your job, you may find it difficult to get to a bank during banking hours — even though we have extended opening hours on Mondays to Friday at many or our branches, and you will now find a number of them open on Saturdays until 3.30pm.
But don't worry, you can use any of Midland's extensive network of 24-hour-a-day self-service cash machines, as well as those of NatWest and, shortly, TSB Bank.
So wherever you are in the UK, you always have easy access to your money.
Any student who banks with Midland during their time at university or college, enjoys FREE banking even if their account occasionally goes overdrawn.
Cash machine withdrawals, cheques, standing orders, direct debits and deposits cost nothing.
After you have graduated, you will continue to benefit from these special terms until December 1989, even if you don't already bank with us.
TRANSFERRING YOUR ACCOUNT
Most graduates move away from the town where they've been studying when they start work, so may be looking to transfer their bank account to a more convenient branch.
No problem — whether you choose to move your account from another bank, we will be pleased to open an account for you at any of our branches.
Just complete the attached transfer form, call at the branch you have chosen, and we will make all the necessary arrangements with the minimum of hassle.
If you are a new Midland customer, we may ask to see your bank statements for the past twelve months.
And, don't forget that at all our branches we offer an unrivalled range of services to help you plan your finances over the years ahead.
Please complete the attached coupon for further information.
Further details, including written information about any of our savings or lending services, can be obtained from any Midland Bank branch, or from the address shown at the back of this leaflet.
POST GRADUATES
Achieving a degree is not the end of the educational road for all students.
Some professions require you to seek further qualifications which entail another period of full-time study.
We want to do all we can to help you financially during this time and have developed special loan schemes which are available to post graduates.
How much can be borrowed will depend on which course is being taken.
But, in all cases we defer repayment until you complete the course, and then agree a repayment programme that is based on your earnings.
Further details of these special loan schemes can be obtained by ticking the appropriate box on the attached coupon.
PERSONAL LOANS
PERSONAL LOANS
Introduction
Why is it that when the time comes to refit the kitchen or bathroom, replace the lounge suite, plan the family holiday, or an irresistible opportunity arises to indulge in one of your hobbies, you invariably find yourself short of money?
What do you do — put your ideas to one side and spend the next few months feeling deflated; or do you take out a Midland Personal Loan now and enjoy the benefits of your purchase, paying the money back in easy stages?
LOANS TO SUIT YOUR POCKET
We may lend you any amount from £500 to £10,000 (in units of £10) and, in certain circumstances, may advance 100% of the cost, although we normally expect you to make some contribution from your savings.
we will agree a repayment programme with you that won't put an undue strain in 6 monthly steps from 6 months to 5 years.
If, during the agreed period, you find yourself able to repay the money earlier than expected, that's fine with us.
(See ‘Earlier Repayment of Midland Personal Loans’.)
The choice is yours
There are no restrictions on the use of a Personal Loan.
But, if you want the cash buy a car or to make a major home improvement we have special tailormade schemes.
Please ask at your local Midland branch for full details.
Loan Certificate
If you want to pre-arrange a loan, call at your local Midland branch.
we can then issue you with a Personal Loan Certificate that shows how much you can borrow and how long you've got to repay the money.
Knowing exactly where you stand makes it much easier to ‘strike a bargain’ when you are shopping around.
You can also resist with confidence any point-of-sale finance offers that might be made.
Side by side
Many people believe that because they already have a Personal Loan running with us, they can't take out another.
That is not the case.
If we're confident that you can afford to take on the extra commitment, we're quite happy to agree a second loan.
So don't hesitate to call at your local branch and discuss matters if you want to increase your borrowing.
The cost
You will find a Midland Personal Loan is very competitive.
The enclosed table shows you just how much you will have to repay each month at the current rate of interest.
Because this rate remains fixed throughout the period of the loan, however long that may be, your repayments will always be the same.
This will help you budget your finances.
Written quotations are available on request from any Midland Bank branch.
Insurance protection
Some people fight shy of taking out a Personal Loan because they are worried about meeting the monthly repayments if they are unable to work because of sickness, accident or unemployment.
That is why we offer a special Protection Plan which ensures that the repayments are made for up to 12 months in the case of unemployment, and for up to the remaining period of the loan for accident and sickness.
The Plan will also repay any borrowing outstanding if you die during the period of the loan.
This peace of mind costs very little and will be provided automatically unless you tell us you don't want it.
full details of the Protection Plan are given at the back of this leaflet, and examples of the cost are shown on the insert.
ARRANGING YOUR PERSONAL LOAN
There's nothing complicated about applying for a Midland Personal Loan.
all you have to do is complete the attached application form and take it or post it to your branch.
If you are a non-customer, please take the form to the Midland branch most convenient for you.
If your application is accepted, we will ask you to transfer your Current Account to Midland.
If there is anything else you would like to know, just call at any Midland branch.
Our staff are there to help you.
(Midland Bank will not normally give credit to applicants under 18 years of age.)
Full written details of our other personal lending schemes are available from any Midland branch, or from Midland Bank plc, Customer Information.
PERSONAL LOAN PROTECTION PLAN
The Personal loan Protection Plan has been specially designed for Midland customers.
The life cover is underwritten by General Accident Linked Life Assurance Limited and Midland Life Limited, and the non-life cover by a panel of insurance companies led by General Accident Fire and life Assurance Corporation plc and provides the following benefits:-
In the event of death:-
An amount equal to the outstanding debit balance on your account less any arrears.
In the event of unemployment or disability:-
A benefit equal to your monthly loan repayment, or a proportion of it.
The benefit is payable monthly after 15 consecutive days absence from work, during the continued period of absence, for up to 12 months in respect of unemployment, and for up to the remaining period of the loan in respect of disability.
The person covered by the Plan is the person named on the Personal Loan Agreement Form, who on the date of agreement must be:•less than 65 years of age •actively in permanent and gainful employment (including self-employment) of not less than 16 hours a week, and not absent due to sickness or injury.
MAIN EXCLUSIONS
LIFE
Cover after age 65
Unemployment and Disability
Wilful acts.
Pregnancy or childbirth.
Attempted suicide.
War and similar risks.
Disability cover after age 65.
Unemployment cover after an Insured Customer has retired, become in receipt of State Retirement benefit or attained age 65, whichever occurs first.
Unemployment cover where employment is seasonal.
Unemployment believed to be impending at the start of the loan.
Unemployment due to resignation or voluntary redundancy.
A detailed Summary of Cover can be obtained from any Midland Bank branch.
EARLY REPAYMENT OF MIDLAND PERSONAL LOANS
If you wish to repay your Midland Personal Loan early, please read the explanatory notes below:
1.
You can repay your Personal Loan at any time, simply by writing to your branch and arranging to pay-off the amount outstanding.
2.
The interest payable on a Personal Loan is added to the capital amount you have borrowed.
The total amount (capital and interest) is repayable in equal monthly instalments over the agreed term of the loan.
If you repay the loan early, the interest outstanding is refunded to you.
3.
Each monthly instalment of your Personal Loan is made up of both capital and interest.
The amount of interest is related to the capital outstanding.
This means that because the capital outstanding is highest during the early months of the loan, the amount of interest payable each month is relatively high and the capital repayment low.
The opposite is the case towards the end of the loan.
4.
The refund of interest in the event of early repayment is calculated using the formula known as ‘The Rule of 78’ as required by the Consumer Credit (Rebate for Early Settlement) Regulations 1983.
These Regulations permit us to charge up to 3 months further interest beyond the date on which you repay the loan.
However, we only charge a maximum of one month's interest when a loan is repaid early.
MIDLAND FLEXILOAN
INTRODUCTION
Very few of us go through life without needing to borrow money at some time or other.
It may be only the occasional small amount for a short time, or it may be a larger sum over a lengthy period.
Whatever the amount, however, arrangements have to be made to borrow.
Wouldn't it be so much easier if money was ‘on tap’ for us to use whenever we like.
With a Midland FlexiLoan, a new way of borrowing has been developed which means money is always there for you to use when you need it.
FLEXILOAN PUTS YOU IN CONTROL
With a FlexiLoan you have the freedom to spend what you want, when you want, u[ to your limit.
There's no need to ask every time you'd like to borrow.
What's more, a FlexiLoan can be held in reserve until needed, but won't cost you a penny until you start to use it.
FLEXIBILITY IN BORROWING
Your first step in setting up a FlexiLoan will be to decide on a borrowing limit.
This can be any amount from £500 to £3,000 — the choice is yours and is based on what you think you will need.
Although you may select a borrowing limit of £3,000, for example, there is no compulsion for you to withdraw that amount at once , or at all — you take out just as much as you want.
But don't forget that you can keep on using your FlexiLoan until you reach your borrowing limit.
FLEXIBLE REPAYMENTS TOO
Not only is the amount that you can borrow flexible, but you can also choose haw to pay it back.
Whilst we ask you to make regular monthly repayments, these can be for any sum from 1/10th to 1/25th of your borrowing limit to suit your pocket, and you can change the amount at any time.
Obviously, the amount you choose to repay each month will determine how long it is going to take you to pay-off any borrowing on your FlexiLoan. but, you can also pay-in a lump sum at any time (eg. when you receive a bonus from work) to help reduce the amount outstanding, or to pay it off completely.
As a guide in setting a monthly repayment level that suits you, the enclosed table gives examples of how long different levels of borrowing will take to repay.
As soon as the amount you have borrowed is repaid in full, the monthly transfer from your Current Account will stop.
But that's not the end of your FlexiLoan — the borrowing limit stays available until you need it again.
When you do we'll automatically re-start the monthly payments.
BUY WHAT YOU LIKE
You can use your FlexiLoan to buy anything you like — hi-fi system, video camera, kitchen equipment, sports gear, or even a holiday.
Or, you can hold your FlexiLoan as an emergency reserve to take care of that unexpected expense, such as the inevitable car repair bill.
Other than using it for business purposes, there are no restrictions — except, of course, that you must not overstep your borrowing limit.
EASY ACCESS TO YOUR MONEY
When your FlexiLoan is arranged, we will give you a special cheque book so that when the time comes to spend some or all of your borrowing limit, all you have to do is make our a cheque for the right amount.
There is no delay — no hire purchase forms to be filled.
You can buy on the spot.
As an alternative you can also transfer funds directly from your FlexiLoan to your Current Account whenever you want.
PAY ONLY FOR WHAT YOU USE
A FlexiLoan is expenditure you control.
You only use what you need, and only pay for what you use.
Interest on your borrowing is charged to your FlexiLoan each month on the same day as the regular repayment is made from your Current Account.
You can choose the day of the month you want this to happen to suit your budgeting — we suggest you make it on or around pay day.
The current rate of interest is shown on the enclosed table.
Rates will vary from time to time in line with the general level of interest rates.
Written quotations are available on request from any Midland Bank branch.
There is no charge for issuing cheques on your FlexiLoan.
INSURANCE PROTECTION
To save you worrying about your monthly repayments if you are unable to work because of sickness, accident or unemployment, we have developed a special Midland FlexiLoan Protection Plan which covers your repayments for up to twelve months.
the plan also repays the outstanding balance in the event of your death.
This peace of mind will be provided automatically unless you tell us you don't want it.
Further details of this valuable cover are given at the back of this leaflet.
FLEXIBLE, ADAPTABLE, IMMEDIATE
FlexiLoan has been developed for customers who are looking for the freedom to spend, without the rigidity of a fixed loan.
By setting your own limit and deciding the size of your monthly payments, you have a very adaptable borrowing arrangement, which provides an immediate reserve for any purpose and continues for as long as you like.
APPLYING FOR A FLEXILOAN
Applying for a FlexiLoan could not be easier.
Simply complete the attached application form and post or take it to your local Midland branch.
If you do not already have a Midland Current Account, you will need to open one so that your monthly repayments can be set up.
Our staff are on hand to make the arrangements quickly and easily.
MIDLAND FLEXILOAN PROTECTION PLAN
The FlexiLoan Protection Plan has been specially designed for Midland customers in conjunction with London and Edinburgh Insurance Company Limited and London and Edinburgh Life Assurance Company Limited and provides the following benefits:
In the event of death:
An amount equal to the outstanding debit balance on your account, subject to a maximum of £3,000.
In the event of unemployment or disability:
A benefit equal to your monthly repayment PLUS the return of the monthly insurance premium.
The benefit is payable monthly after 30 consecutive days absence from work during the continued period of absence, for up to 12 months.
ELIGIBILITY
The person covered by the Plan is the person named on the Midland FlexiLoan Agreement Form who on the date of the Agreement must be: aged 18 or over but less than 65, actively in permanent and gainful employment (including self-employment) of not less than 16 hours a week, and not absent due to sickness or injury.
MAIN EXCLUSIONS
Life
Cover after attaining age 65.
Disability and unemployment
self-inflicted injuries, attempted suicide, alcohol and drug abuse.
Pregnancy or childbirth.
War and similar risks.
Disability caused by a pre-existing medical condition.
Disability cover after attaining age 65.
Unemployment which is seasonal, believed to be impending or due to resignation or voluntary redundancy.
Unemployment cover after the Insured Customer has retired, become in receipt of State Retirement benefit or attained age 65, whichever occurs first.
All cover under this Plan will be terminated in the event of non-payment of premium or cancellation of the Master Policy.
PREMIUMS
The premium for the Protection plan is 7p for every £1 of your monthly repayment.
Premiums will be debited monthly from your Midland Current Account.
However, because the Plan is linked to your repayments, premiums are only payable when there is any borrowing on your FlexiLoan.
A detailed Summary of Cover can be obtained from any Midland branch.
MIDLAND CAR LOANS
Introduction
Whether you are in the market for a new car, or are searching for a value-for money second-hand model, you may need to borrow money to help finance the deal.
Midland Car Loans have been specially developed to put you on the road as quickly and simply as possible.
ANY AMOUNT FROM £500 TO £10,000
With a Midland Car Loan you can borrow any amount from £500 to £10,000.
In practice, of course, the actual amount we lend will depend on your ability to make the regular monthly repayments without putting a strain on your finances.
In certain cases, we may advance the total cost of the car, but it is more likely that we will want you to make a contribution.
This may be the trade-in price of your existing car which means you won't have to dip into your savings.
REGULAR REPAYMENTS UP TO FIVE YEARS
When you take out a Midland Car Loan you have the choice of repaying the money over any period from 6 months to 5 years (in steps of 6 months).
Where possible, you should choose a period that is in line with how long you want to deep the car, so that when the time comes to replace it you can start again from scratch.
The rate of interest charged on the loan remains fixed throughout the term of the loan even if general interest rates rise before you have paid-off the money.
That means you know from the outset how much to put by each month.
By studying the enclosed repayment table you can see at a glance how much a loan will cost.
Select a monthly figure that you can comfortably afford, then work out how much you want to borrow and how long it will take to repay.
Written quotations are available on request from any Midland Bank branch.
If you want to repay your loan early that's fine with us.
Full details of how to go about it are shown on page 7.
LOAN CERTIFICATE
What comes first — the money or the car?
For many people it is a matter of looking around for the car they want and then frantically trying to arrange the finance, whilst the ‘offer’ still holds.
If you call and have a chat at your Midland branch before you start car hunting, we can issue you with a Car loan Certificate.
This will show the maximum amount you can borrow, and over how long you can repay the loan.
Then safe in the knowledge that you have the finance arranged you can start visiting car showrooms knowing exactly how much you have to spend.
NEW LOAN ANYTIME
One feature of the Midland Car Loan Scheme is its flexibility.
You can renew your loan at any time providing you've been meeting your regular repayments.
So, if you want to change your car before you existing loan has been fully repaid, you can.
Just call at your branch who will make the necessary arrangements.
REPAYMENT PROTECTION
To relieve you of any worries you may have about your monthly repayments if you are unfortunate enough to be off work for any length of time, or if you die unexpectedly, we have a comprehensive insurance Protection Plan.
Under the Plan, your repayments are covered for a maximum period of 12 months if you become unemployed, and for the remaining term of the loan if you are unable to work because of sickness or an accident.
Any outstanding balance on your loan, less any arrears, is automatically repaid in the event of your death: so there will be no nasty shocks for your dependents.
If you repay your loan early, the protection can be transferred to a new loan.
As you can see from the encloses table, this most valuable insurance costs very little and we provide it automatically unless you notify us that you do not require it.
Full details are provided on page 5.
KEEPING YOUR CAR ON THE ROAD
Buying your car is only the start.
Unexpected repair bills, road tax and insurance also have to be paid.
At Midland, we have our FlexiLoan and Home Management Accounts, to help ensure the money is always there.
Ask at your branch for details.
HOW TO APPLY
There is nothing complicated about applying for a Midland Car Loan.
All you have to do is complete the attached application form and take or post it to your branch.
If you are not already a Midland customer, take or post the form to your nearest Midland branch.
If we agree your application, we will ask you to transfer your Current Account to Midland.
Where possible we sanction Midland Car Loan applications right away.
we like to think of them as the high-speed, high-performance loans.
There are no hidden costs with a midland car Loan.
But if there is anything else you would like to know, just call at any Midland branch.
Our staff are there to help.
Full written details of our FlexiLoan, Home management Account or any other personal lending schemes are available from any Midland branch or from Midland Bank plc.
LOAN PROTECTION PLAN
The Loan Protection Plan has been specially designed for Midland customers.
The life cover is underwritten by General Accident Linked Life Assurance Limited and Midland Life Limited, and the non-life cover by a panel of insurance companies led by General Accident Fire and Life Assurance Corporation plc and provides the following benefits:-
In the event of death:-an amount equal to the outstanding debit balance on your account, less any arrears.
In the event of unemployment or disability:-a benefit equal to your monthly loan repayment, or proportion thereof.
The benefit is payable monthly after fifteen days absence from work, during the continued period of absence, for up to twelve months in respect of unemployment, and for up to the remaining period of the loan in respect of disability.
The person covered by the Plan is the person named on the Car Loan agreement Form, who on the date of the agreement must be:-less than 65 years of age actively in permanent and gainful employment (including self-employment) of not less than 16 hours a week.
MAIN EXCLUSIONS
Life
Cover after age 65 Cover after the loan is repaid.
Unemployment and Disability
Wilful acts.
Pregnancy or childbirth.
Attempted suicide.
War and similar risks.
Disability cover after age 65.
Unemployment cover after an Insured Customer has retired, become in receipt of State Retirement benefit or attained age 65, whichever occurs first.
Unemployment cover where employment is seasonal or part-time.
Unemployment believed to be impending at the commencement of the loan.
Unemployment due to resignation or voluntary redundancy.
A detailed Summary of Cover can be obtained from any Midland branch.
EARLY REPAYMENT OF MIDLAND CAR LOANS
If you wish to repay your Midland Car Loan early, please read the explanatory notes below: 1.
You can repay your Car Loan at any time, simply by writing to your branch and arranging to pay-off the amount outstanding.
2.
The interest payable on a Car Loan is added to the capital amount you have borrowed.
The total amount (capital and interest) is repayable in equal monthly instalments over the agreed term of the loan.
If you repay the loan early, the interest outstanding as at the next repayment date is refunded to you.
3.
Each monthly instalment of your Car Loan is made up of both capital and interest.
The amount of interest is related to the capital outstanding.
This means that because the capital outstanding is highest during the early months of the loan, the amount of interest payable each month is relatively high and the capital repayment low.
The opposite is the case towards the end of the loan.
4.
The refund of interest in the event of early repayment is calculated using the formula known as ‘The Rule of 78’ as required by the Consumer Credit (Rebate for early Settlement) Regulations 1983.
These Regulations permit us to charge up to 3 months further interest beyond the date on which you repay the loan.
however, we only charge a maximum of one month's interest when a loan is repaid early.
HOME MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT
Introduction
Running a home has both its pleasures and pains.
Most of the pains come in the form of bills for water, gas, electricity, rates/rent etc.
And, the discomfort is made even more acute when two or three of them arrive by the same post.
You then start worrying about how you are going to pay them all.
Stop worrying.
There is a simple answer to your problems.
Open a Midland Home Management Account.
DOING YOUR SUMS
As its name implies, the Home Management Account is geared to helping you control the household budget.
All you have to do is some simple, preliminary mathematics.
using last year's bills as a guide if you still have a record of them (try looking at old cheque book stubs), or trusting to memory, estimate how much you think you will have to pay in the coming year.
Don't forget to add a little for price increases.
Then fill in the estimated figures by the relevant items on the schedule enclosed with this brochure.
remember that it is up to you what you include on your schedule The more accurately you can assess your expenditure for the next year, the easier it should prove to keep on top of your finances.
It is always wise, for example, to include an amount under the section ‘Contingency/Emergency’, as unexpected items, such as car repairs, always seem crop up.
You will notice that there is also a section’ Other Items.’
This is for you to include other outgoings that you want to make sure you have catered for.
When you've entered all your calculations, add them up and put the total in the space provided.
Divide this total by twelve and that is the amount you will need to transfer from your Midland Current Account to your Home Management Account each month.
Try and arrange the transfer to coincide with your pay day, so that you know the money has been ‘committed’ and that what you are left with is, hopefully, yours to spend as you wish.
Spreading the cost
There will be some months when there are only a few, relatively small bills to pay, whilst other months — especially during winter — will find you having to pay our much larger sums.
Add to that the cost or annual holidays and season tickets, and you can see that your expenditure will go through a number of peaks and troughs.
That is when you will really appreciate the advantages of a Home Management Account.
The ‘lean’ months are covered by the ‘fat’months, and providing your initial estimates were fairly accurate, at the end of the year your monthly transfers and your bills will balance.
What's more, during those months when there is a credit balance on your Home Management Account, you will earn an attractive rate of interest on your money.
So, even if you have slightly over-estimated your commitments, you will still be obtaining full value from the Account.
Three ways to pay the bills
When your Account is opened, we will issue you with a special Home Management Account cheque book which you can use to pay each bill as and when you want.
Alternatively, you can leave payment to us by electing to use either our Standing Order or Direct debit services, under which we will automatically debit your Account with the amounts due as required.
Whichever option you choose, we will send you a statement every three months which will show all transactions on the Account and let you know just where you stand.
Future years
Every year you will have the opportunity to review your budgeting requirements for the next twelve months.
You may wish to leave your monthly transfer at the same amount; or you may want to amend it in the light of an increase in the cost of living or changes in your expenditure plans.
we will provide you with a new schedule for your guidance but you do not have to complete it unless you want to.
The only time we may ask you to make out a new schedule is, if at the end of a twelve months period, the amount owing on your Home Management Account is higher than one monthly transfer.
You can carry balances on the Account forward from year to year.
If, however, your Account is overdrawn we may require any amount outstanding in excess of one month's transfer to be repaid.
Insurance protection
Because the smooth running of your Home management Account depends on your payment each month of a fixed amount into the Account, we are anxious to do everything we can to help if you become unemployed, or are unable to work through sickness or an accident.
That is why we offer our special Protection Plan which ensures that your monthly transfers will continue for up to 12 months.
The Plan, which costs only 7p each month for every £1 that is transferred, also guarantees that in the event of your death, any amount outstanding on your Account will be repaid.
We will provide this peace of mind automatically unless you tell us you do not want it.
Further details of the Protection Plan are given at the back of this leaflet.
Interest rates and charges
Credit balances will earn you interest at a rate quoted in all our branches.
When you are borrowing from the Account interest will be charged at a rate of 2.1% per month (APR 27.6%).
Interest rates may vary from time to time in line with the general level of interest rates.
Any changes will be advertised in our branches and selected newspapers.
There is a monthly fee of £1.50 to cover the administration of your Home Management Account.
This is payable on the 10th of each month or subsequent working day.
Cheques, Standing Orders and Direct Debits will be charged at our published personal current Account tariff.
OPENING A HOME MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT
The Home Management account is a service for Midland bank current account customers.
There is nothing complicated about applying for a Midland home Management Account.
Simply complete the attached application form and schedule and post or take them to your local branch.
We will return one of the schedules to you when the Account is opened so that you've got a permanent record of your calculations.
If you want to include any existing Direct Debits or Standing Orders, that's fine by us.
Just let your branch know.
If you are not already a Midland customer, post or take the forms to the Midland branch of your choice, and the necessary formalities will be arranged.
Home management protection plan
The Home Management Protection Plan has been specially designed for Midland Bank Home Management Account customers by Midland Bank Insurance Services Limited — the Bank's insurance broking subsidiary.
The Plan has been arranged in conjunction with Phoenix Assurance plc (part of Sun Alliance Group) to provide the following benefits:
In the event of death:
An amount equal to the debit or credit balance on your Account will be payable, subject to a maximum of £400 per month, PLUS the return of the monthly insurance premium.
The benefit is payable monthly after 15 consecutive days absence from work, during the continued period of absence, for up to 12 months.
ELIGIBILITY
The person covered by the Plan is the person named on the Home Management Account Application Form, who on the date the Application is made must be: less than 65 years of age actively in permanent and gainful employment (including self-employment) of not less than 16 hours a week, and not absent due to sickness or injury.
EXCLUSIONS
Life
Cover after attaining age 65.
Unemployment and Disability
Self inflicted injuries, attempted suicide, alcohol and drug abuse.
Pregnancy or childbirth.
War and similar risks.
Disability cover after attaining age 65.
Unemployment cover after an Insured Customer has retired or attained age 65, whichever occurs first.
Unemployment which is seasonal, believed to be impending when the insurance is effected or due to resignation or voluntary redundancy.
All cover under this plan will be terminated in the event of non payment of premium or cancellation of the Master Policy.
A detailed Summary of Cover can be obtained from any Midland Bank branch.
Written quotations for any of our lending schemes are available from any Midland branch, or from Midland Bank plc.
Money Transmission
Introduction
The efficient movement of funds is an essential ingredient of successful business management.
Speed, accuracy and cost efficiency in collecting receipts and making payments are critical.
At Midland, we are committed to being market leaders in the provision of quality money transmission services.
We have made significant investments in developing an unrivalled range of services including a network of District Service Centres.
Unique to Midland, they offer a centralised cheque processing service manned by specialist staff using proven technology.
Whatever its market and size, a business will need to consider a variety of the services available.
These range from the handling of simple, yet administratively inconvenient, cash payments to sophisticated electronic payment schemes.
In this brochure we highlight many of the Midland money transmission services.
We believe that these provide innovative responses to those businesses seeking methods of collecting receipts and making payments, funds reconciliation and effective cash management.
Receipts
Monies are paid to a business in a variety of forms and all our services are designed to ensure that funds are received, processed, and credited to accounts as quickly and cost effectively as possible.
For many business customers the collection and processing of cash and cheques remain a fundamental corner-stone of their activities, despite the rapid advance in the use of credit cards and electronic payments.
CASH
The proportion of cash receipts will depend on the type of business.
For those businesses, such as retailing, where the proportion is high, it is often more cost effective for cash to be transported direct to our Cash Centres around the country to deal with the cash requirements of numerous business customers, including many major high street retailers.
Cash deposits may be made up by the customer into standard bank packets and transported by security carrier to Cash Centres, where the credits are checked and applied direct to the account.
Alternatively, a specially approved security carrier company may collect cash and bulk it before paying-in to Cash Centres (the Bulk Cash Deposit Scheme).
Again, funds are credited directly to the business account.
Cash Centres offer a convenient, quality service including greater security, reduced cash handling costs, and simplified administration through improved value dating and reconciliation.
CHEQUES
The processing of cheques has traditionally proved an expensive business for both bank and customer.
Realising that an individually tailored, quality service at a competitive cost could no longer be fully satisfied by a traditional branch network, Midland has taken the unique step of establishing 13 District Service Centres (DSCs) to process cheques centrally.
Strategically placed throughout the country, each Centre is equipped with the latest technical processing systems and is staffed by specialists to ensure an unprecedented quality of service.
District Service Centres will dramatically reduce processing costs and the price paid by business customers.
BACS LIMITED
In addition to simplifying payments (see page 7), BACS can also be used to process receipts.
Direct Debits are an ideal way of collecting large volumes of low value receipts and are greatly favoured by many institutions such as local authorities and building societies.
Details of monies to be collected can be transmitted in many ways — magnetic tape, floppy disk, telephone, or through computer bureau — depending on individual preference.
For example, a business can authorise us to collect both fixed and variable amounts on set dated from named payers by using MID-DEB.
HEAD OFFICE COLLECTION ACCOUNTS
For customers who receive credits on a daily basis, or who are physically remote from their Midland account holding branch or DSC, the Head Office Collection Account provides a fast, secure and simple method of receiving credits.
As credits pass through the clearing system, they are collected in a specially designated account and transferred to magnetic tape.
They can then be posted direct to the beneficiary's account.
The system offers customers savings in staff time, easier reconciliation, and greater accuracy as both vouchers and a detailed accounting sheet are provided on the day of credit for collection at a nominated Midland branch.
SWITCH
Switch is an electronic card based scheme that enables customers to pay for goods and services without the need to write cheques or carry cash.
The customer's card is passed through a terminal at the point of sale.
Once confirmed, transactions are automatically passed to Midland for allocation of funds to the relevant accounts.
Switch has many advantages, particularly for retailers and service companies.
It is a cost effective and secure method of obtaining guaranteed payment, simplifies numerous back office procedures including reconciliation, and can enhance customer service levels by reducing paperwork and increasing throughput speed at point of sale.
CREDIT CARD ACQUIRING
Midland can process both Access and Visa transactions, providing retail customers with an efficient and effective means of accepting payments from a substantial consumer market.
Major benefits include simplified sales procedures — every retailer is provided with a single floor limit and authorisation number — and improved banking and reconciliation arrangements.
Payment is guaranteed for all sales above a mutually agreed floor limit, providing authorisation is gained.
Midland also offers a comprehensive after sales package.
PAYMENTS
It was only a few years ago that cheques and cash were the only means of payment available.
Now, developments in technology have seen the introduction of a number of electronic payments schemes offering significant advantages to larger companies in particular.
Being able to select precise dates for payments allows businesses to manage their funds more effectively and maximise use of limited cash resources.
At the same time, considerable savings can be made in internal costs through reducing the amount of time spent on administration, paper handling and bank reconciliation.
Reliability, accuracy and security are all increased by the use of electronic payment methods and special safeguards against fraud are built into each of the schemes.
BACS LIMITED
BACS is undoubtedly one of the most important developments in payment systems and should be considered by all businesses.
One submission to BACS can initiate a number of payments to beneficiaries who then receive value two working days later, the same day that the company account is debited.
A simple means of submitting the relevant information to BACS is via telephone using our MID-TEL service.
This is based on a master file of regular payments being established on our computer and authorisation for payment being confirmed verbally over the telephone.
Alternatively, there is MID- CRED where details of all beneficiaries are established on our computer file, but authorisation is given in writing rather than over the telephone.
A major advantage of both MID-TEL and MID-CRED is that neither system requires customers to install expensive computer equipment.
A further Midland service using BACS is MID-PAY.
This payroll management service has been developed to enable us to convert salaries, wages and pensions from gross to net pay in accordance with statutory requirements.
The many advantages of MID-PAY to both businesses and their employees include reducing administration to a minimum, increasing cost effectiveness and maximising security when making payments direct to employees' bank accounts via BACS.
AUTOMATED PAYMENTS SERVICE (APS)
APS offers businesses a full range of options that allow them to have total control over when and how payments are made.
Same day or future payments can be initiated in sterling or currency to named recipients in the UK and abroad, via a business's own office terminal.
APS provides complete security, reliability and speed of payment, which in turn opens the door to improved cash management.
APS can decide the most appropriate and most efficient method of payment, and provide immediate electronic advice of funds received for crediting to an account.
CASH
The traditional methods of payment — cash and cheques — still play an important role for many businesses in the transfer of funds.
As one of the world's leading banks, Midland can offer a full range of cash and cheque payment services.
Through our branch network of some 2,000 retail branches we can deal with all cash requirements on both small and large scales.
For those businesses requiring substantial sums of cash it is often appropriate to provide these from our Cash centres.
This is done either on a direct encashment basis, or through a carrier-operated Bulk Cash Withdrawal Scheme, under which a selected security carrier arranges delivery from stocks held on our behalf.
Both direct encashment and the Bulk Cash Withdrawal Scheme offer cost benefits.
There is also enhanced security when a security carrier is employed as an alternative to over-the-counter encashments.
MIDLAND BUSINESS CARD
For many businesses the administration of employees' expense accounts can be an unwanted headache, both in terms of time spent and cost.
by issuing selected employees with Midland Business Cards this burden can be greatly reduced.
The cards are embossed with the cardholder's name and the business name, as required.
They offer a convenient, secure and widely accepted form of payment at more than 7 million outlets in the UK and overseas, displaying the Access, MasterCard and Eurocard symbols.
Each month we send the business a statement detailing all transactions on each card issued, together with a summary statement showing the total amount outstanding.
Settlement is made monthly by direct debit from the business current account.
The use of Business Cards removes the need for unproductive and costly cash floats which are necessary with traditional forms of expenses management.
Reconciliation
Another key element of any money transmission service is the reconciliation of bank account balances with sales and purchases ledgers to ensure the effective monitoring and management of funds.
Midland offers a number of electronic information services such as BankTrak, AirTrak and Mid-Tape, which enable reconciliation to be conducted simply and cost effectively.
In addition, our teams of financial specialists are always on hand to advise on and implement the most appropriate service for a particular business and to train their staff.
BANKTRAK
BankTrak gives a company access to detailed account information at any time in its own office.
As well as providing daily balances of all accounts, it gives details of all transactions to enable quick reconciliation.
It also offers other features such as a comparison of actual and forecast balances which can prevent expensive shortfalls or unproductive surpluses.
AIMTRAK
AimTrak is an ideal management information and reconciliation system for group companies, as it allows for the aggregation of funds from different member companies and provides a consolidated group figure, thus minimising individual bank charges.
In order that the parent company can maintain individual operational records for each subsidiary and determine which companies are operating most effectively, details of individual balances, and any bank interest they would have attracted, are provided.
MID-TAPE
Mid-Tape prepares a statement of any delegated account on magnetic media — tape or diskette — thus providing details of transactions posted to an account.
If required, these transactions can then be segmented into different forms of payment to facilitate identification.
Tailoring services to customer needs
At Midland we appreciate that businesses will only wish to draw upon a selection of our full range of Money Transmission Services and will require these to be tailored to individual requirements.
The following examples of real life solutions indicate Midland's determination to meet customer needs.
CASE STUDY A
A financial services organisation with 280 branches in the UK required the following money transmission services: collection of cheques, collection and supply of cash, direct debiting through BACS, and accurate and speedy account reconciliation.
THE MIDLAND PACKAGE
Midland worked closely with the customer to prepare an innovative package based on the following elements:-
Cash Handling.
Cash surpluses are delivered to carrier to Midland Cash Centres.
Cash for pay-outs, petty cash and coin are provided to the customer's branches by the carrier out of stocks held on behalf of the Bank.
Because these branches regularly advise their requirements to the carrier, a secure back-up system is in place to eliminate mistakes.
Supplies of quality sorted notes for use in Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) are included in the arrangements.
Cheques Collection.
Using the services of the security carrier when delivering cash, the customer arranges for cheques from branches to be collected and sent to Midland's DSC.
This enables us to offer a very competitive pricing structure.
BACS.
The customer collects high volumes of lower value payments from its clients and recognises the many advantages to be gained from encouraging those clients to pay by direct debits.
Reconciliation.
BankTrak is included to provide daily balance reporting, together with transaction details direct to a compatible computer on the customer's premises.
CASE STUDY B
A regional retailer selling clothes, food and household goods through 20 local outlets required effective, secure and prompt collection of cheques and cash, and was also interested in developing improved checkout procedures.
THE MIDLAND PACKAGE
Midland developed a tailored package based on the following central processing capabilities:-
Cash.
A security carrier, contracted to the retailer, visits the stores each morning to collect the cash takings, which have been packaged in standard bank packets before despatch, and delivers them to Midland's local Cash Centres.
Cheques Collection.
Together with the cash, the security carrier collects cheques and delivers them to Midland's local DSC for immediate processing.
Point of Sale.
Midland has worked closely with the retailer to introduce point of sale terminals which can accept Switch cards.
This has substantially reduced queuing times and processing costs.
CASE STUDY C
A major petrol distributor with a nationwide network of outlets, each processing high volumes of low value receipts consisting of cash, cheques and card transactions sought an assessment of its money transmission requirements.
THE MIDLAND PACKAGE
Midland carried out a free consultancy taking into account the particular nature of the customer's business and funds activity.
The following package based on our DSC and local branches was then designed:-
Cash.
The larger outlets use a security carrier to deliver cash to Midland's local Cash Centres, whilst the smaller stations use the counter service at their local Midland branches.
Cheques Collection.
Processing is split in a similar way to the delivery of cash with a price incentive given to the customer for delivery of high volumes to the DSC.
Cards.
Switch has been introduced to allow electronic payments.
This has greatly reduced the amount of paperwork involved and allowed individual outlets to improve standards of service.
Reconciliation.
Transaction reporting through BankTrak allows the customer to reconcile receipts from each of its outlets on the day following credit to the account.
A unique identifier is allocated to each outlet which enables the customer to pinpoint each receipt.
CASE STUDY D
A local authority covering a rural area, but also including several mediumsized towns, was keen to automate some of its more labour intensive and costly money transmission services.
THE MIDLAND PACKAGE
Midland's senior local manager worked closely with our money transmission specialists to devise solutions for both the authority's longstanding problems and future needs.
The following package was the result:-
Cash and Cheques Collection.
Midland's branch in the same town as the headquarters of the authority provides a high quality service on a daily basis.
Large volumes of cheques collected for rates payments are processed at the nearby DSC, with the advantage to the authority of lower processing charges.
Salaries and wages.
An employee package has been developed which has led to a large proportion of the authority's employees being paid by automated direct credit through BACS.
In turn, Midland's payroll service takes care of all administration.
Local Community Charge.
The full effects of the ‘community charge’ have yet to be judged, but the authority recognises the need to plan ahead.
together, we have developed a package to promote the use of direct debits by the local populace, which will greatly reduce the administrative burden on the authority.
Account reconciliation has been automated using our tape/disk service.
Your next move
If you wish to find out more about Midland's experience and expertise in money transmission, please contact your local Midland Corporate Banking Manager.
We offer a free consultancy service to advise on the most appropriate and cost effective ways of meeting your money transmission needs.
A comprehensive tender can be provided where appropriate.
Lifetime plan
Introduction
What would happen to your family if you or your partner were to suddenly die?
How would the bills be paid?
Would the children be provided for?
Frightening thoughts, but ones that serve as sobering reminders of the need to protect your loved ones with life insurance.
But how do you decide what is right for them and you?
The ideal solution is probably one that provides security for your family and, at the same time, invests for your future; one that you can adjust to suit your changing lifestyle.
welcome to the Midland Lifetime Plan.
A Plan That Grows With You
Midland Lifetime provides you with a balance between protection and investment, so that you can look after your family and save for the future.
And it is adaptable — you can adjust the balance to suit your needs at any stage of your life.
THE CHOICE IS YOURS
With Midland Lifetime, the choice is yours.
You decide on the amount of cover, and the balance between protection and investment that is right for you.
You can pay monthly or annually, the minimum payment being £15 per month, or £150 per year.
Our Lifetime Plan will provide a lump sum in the event of your death or the freedom to cash in, in the future, any value that the Plan has achieved.
What is Midland Lifetime?
A flexible Lifetime plan to suit your family's changing needs.
Cash lump sum on death, or the freedom to cash in your Plan.
Specially tailored Plan to suit your individual needs.
Midland's expertise in looking after the financial side of your family's welfare.
Your Next Move
If you are interested in finding out more about Midland Lifetime, just complete the attached form and either post or take it to your Midland branch.
We will send you an initial illustration, together with further product details and a proposal form, and arrange for one of our specialist staff to contact you to discuss your requirements, without any obligation on your part.
Take the first step to peace of mind, please act today.
Important notes
Full technical information relating to Midland Lifetime, including details of charges, will be sent to you with your illustration.
Please remember that, as Midland Lifetime is a unit-linked plan, the price of units can go down as well as up, and that it is possible that their value may fall below the amount originally invested.
PROFESSIONALS' MORTGAGE SERVICE
Introduction
You have worked hard for your qualifications.
You are beginning to make your mark in your chosen career.
Your salary prospects are good.
The only cloud on the immediate horizon is raising a mortgage — especially if you are a first time buyer.
Most mortgage lenders see you in the same light as everyone else and make no concessions to the lifestyle that lies ahead of you.
At Midland we recognise that your mortgage needs are likely to differ from those of many others.
That is why we have developed a special Professionals' Mortgage Service, with many features tailored to your requirements.
DO YOU QUALIFY?
Nothing is more infuriating than reading about something that appeals to you, only to find out at the end that you are not eligible.
So, right from the outset let us make it clear who qualifies for our Professionals' Mortgage Service.
You can apply for the service if you:-Are a fully qualified member of any recognised profession, e.g. Law, Medicine, Dentistry, Accountancy, Estate Agents, Veterinary etc; or
Have a degree or equivalent qualification directly relating to your employment, and have been in regular employment for at least two years; and
Are under 40 years of age; and
Are in receipt of a minimum annual income of £10,000 including guaranteed bonuses etc., and can expect this to rise significantly as your career develops.
The service is only available for endowment and pension linked mortgages.
THE SERVICE
£20,000 Minimum mortgage — no maximum
The minimum mortgage we will advance under the service is £20,000, but there is no maximum.
Our only concern is that you can afford the repayments without putting undue strain on your finances — especially in the early years.
To this end, you have the option of selecting a Midland Life Low Start Endowment Policy, under which your repayments are reduced over the first five years of the mortgage.
For full details of this scheme, please ask at any of our branches for a copy of the Midland Mortgage Endowment Plan leaflet and technical guide.
100% Mortgage for first time buyers
The need, or wish, to buy your first home may well happen before you are firmly established in your career and when your salary is at a relatively low level.
As a result, you may find it extremely difficult to raise the difference between the 85%-95% mortgage that many lenders advance, and the full purchase price.
We appreciate what a stumbling block this can be and will lend you 100% as a first time buyer.
If you are buying your second or even third home, we will still offer you improved terms with an advance up to 95% of the purchase price or valuation of the property concerned, whichever is the lower.
If you are granted one of our mortgages for more than 80% of the purchase price or valuation, then you will also be required to take out a mortgage guarantee indemnity policy.
Flexible repayment periods
The term of a mortgage repaid with the proceeds of an endowment policy or pension plan, can usually be arranged to suit your own individual circumstances.
In particular, we offer an extended term for pension linked mortgages, which is more appropriate to this type of loan.
In all cases, however, the mortgage cannot continue after your 70th birthday.
If you retire earlier, you must show that your income, from your pension an/or savings, is sufficient to cover your repayments.
Income criteria
If your mortgage application is in your name only, you can borrow up to 3½ times your gross annual salary.
A joint application allows you to borrow 3½ times the higher annual salary plus a sum equivalent to the lower salary; or 2½ times your joint income.
Mortgage certificate
It can be extremely frustrating spending many hours looking for a home, finding one you like and that you can afford, and then having your mortgage application turned down.
The Midland mortgage Certificate removes the possibility of such a disappointment.
Before you start home hunting, call at your local Midland branch, answer a few simple questions to our satisfaction, and we will give you a Mortgage Certificate.
This tells you how much you can borrow so that you can concentrate your search within a given price range.
From basement to penthouse
The type of property you choose to live in is entirely up to you — we don't impose any restrictions.
So, you can move into a basement flat, maisonette, bungalow, house or penthouse suite, and it can be freehold or leasehold.
If the property you select is leasehold there must be a minimum 99 year term on new premises, and at least 25 years to run beyond the period of the mortgage on existing premises.
Any property built within the last 10 years must be protected by a National House Building Council Certificate, or other acceptable evidence of construction supervision from a qualified architect or surveyor.
THE COST
Interest
The interest payable on your mortgage is charged at the Midland Home Loan Rate, regardless of the amount you borrow — we make no surcharges for larger amounts.
when the rate changes, up or down, your repayments are adjusted immediately.
Through the Mortgage Interest Relief at Source (M.I.R.A.S.) arrangement, you are entitled to tax relief — at the basic rate of tax — on the interest you pay, up to the statutory limit.
Details of the current Midland Home Loan Rate can be obtained from any of our branches, or from the address at the back of this leaflet.
Arrangement fee
You will have to pay an arrangement fee of 0.5% of the sum advanced on all mortgages, except where an endowment mortgage is agreed and Midland Life policies (see insurance) are taken out to cover the entire mortgage.
In this case the fee will be waived.
Other fees
The other out of pocket expenses you will have to pay include legal fees, valuation fee and land registry fee.
INSURANCE
Midland Bank provides a full range of insurances packages designed to protect you, your family and your home:
Midland Mortgage Endowment Plan is a combined investment and life protection plan (a low-start option is available)
Midland HomePlan offers a flexible range of household cover.
Midland Repayment Protector will safeguard your mortgage repayments for up to 12 months if you are unable to work because of unemployment, illness or an accident.
Pension mortgages
A mortgage can also be structured around a personal or executive pension plan.
Life cover will be arranged either as part of your plan or as a separate policy.
Full details of all these products are available through your local Midland Bank branch.
Your Next Move
If you wish to apply for a mortgage under our Professionals' Mortgage Service, please call at any Midland branch or write to the address at the back of this leaflet, and ask for a copy of our Home Buyers' Pack, including Midland's Guide to Home Buying.
MIDLAND CHECKOVER
Introduction
As the end of a month draws near, stretching your money until the next pay cheque arrives often becomes difficult.
Some unexpected expense always seems to crop up when you least want it to and throws your careful calculations out of the window.
You may think you have to cut back on the necessities of life for a few days or cancel a treat you had promised yourself and the family.
Now, however, there is another answer.
You can arrange a CheckOver through your Midland branch.
This is an overdraft facility and one of the most flexible and convenient ways of balancing short term overspending which you know you can put right as soon as you're next paid or, at the worst, within the next few months.
UP TO £3,000
A Midland CheckOver is normally available to personal Current and Orchard Multi Service Account (MSA) customers for any amount up to a maximum of £3,000. once the limit has been agreed, you can use your account without having to worry about overdrawing, provided of course you keep within your limit.
You can choose to have your CheckOver reviewed after six months or earlier, or annually.
However, we reserve the right for repayment to be made on demand by us at any time.
How much you arrange a CheckOver for, will of course depend on the extra cash you think you need.
But don't under-estimate your requirements because of how much you think it will cost.
The interest on your CheckOver will be calculated on the daily balance.
This means that you pay interest only on the amount you actually borrow and not the full amount of your limit if you don't use it.
FREEDOM TO SPEND — FREEDOM FROM WORRY
The great advantage of arranging a CheckOver is the peace of mind that comes from knowing that, provided you do not exceed your agreed CheckOver limit, we won't bounce your cheques or refuse you cash.
Also, if you are an Orchard MSA holder you automatically receive Insurance Cover for your CheckOver.
This means that in the event of your death under the age of 65, the outstanding balance on your CheckOver is repaid up to a maximum of £3,000 or your agreed limit whichever is the lower.
HOW MUCH IT COSTS
Arrangement Fee
There is a fee to pay for arranging and/or operating a CheckOver.
The actual amount you pay depends on the type of account you have.
Current Account
•Review six months or less The fee will be £5 for every
£500 (or part of your agreed limit, but with a minimum fee of £10, charged upon arrangement of the facility.
•Review Annually The fee will be £10 per quarter, charged only at the end of any quarter during which the CheckOver has been used/
Orchard Account
The fee will be £5 per month, charged only for the months in which the CheckOver has been used.
Interest
There is, of course, interest to pay on a Check Over.
Current Account Currently 1.8% per month (APR 23.4%) which is charged to your account every quarter.
Orchard MSA Currently 1.7% per month (APR 22.4%) which is charged to your account every month.
We may at our discretion vary these rates in line with the general level of interest rates, and any changes will be announced in branches.
But don't forget that you only pay interest on the amount you actually borrow.
Account Charges
Current Account With a Current Account you will have to pay certain charges when you use CheckOver for operating your account.
These are detailed in our Current Account leaflet, a copy of which can be obtained from any Midland branch.
Orchard MSA If you arrange a CheckOver with an Orchard MSA you simply pay the monthly fee when your account is overdrawn.
If you do not arrange a CheckOver and go ‘into the red’, or borrow more than your agreed CheckOver limit, it is more expensive as there may be a management fee to pay in addition to the Current Account and interest charges.
LONGER TERM BORROWING
If you have an Orchard MSA and want to borrow on a more permanent basis, you can simply use your Orchard Reserve to cover the cost of major purchases such as a car or a holiday.
If you do not already have a Multi Service Account you may find it useful to switch to Orchard, Vector or Meridian.
Each account offers a full current service with credit interest plus a range of other features including a readymade Reserve from which you can borrow at any time.
What's more, you choose the repayments depending on how much you can afford.
Alternatively we also have a range of Midland Personal Loans.
Full details and written quotation of credit terms available can be obtained from any Midland branch or by writing to the address shown on the back page.
HOW TO APPLY FOR YOUR MIDLAND CHECKOVER
All you have to do is complete the attached application from and take or post it to your branch.
If you have arranged a CheckOver with your branch during the last twelve months and completed and application form similar to that attached, simply contact your branch direct and ask them to review it.
In most cases your CheckOver application will be considered in a matter of minutes.
If we do require further information or feel that security will be needed, we may ask you to call in for a chat.
(Midland Bank will not normally give credit to applicants under 18 years of age.)
MIDLAND eurocheques
Introduction
Sampling the local cuisine, enjoying the atmosphere of foreign hotels, shopping for souvenirs or for that special gift for a loved one — these are among the pleasures of travelling in Europe on holiday or business.
But carrying large amounts of foreign currency to settle the bills is anything but a joy.
There is the fear that it may be lost or stolen, or that you simply haven't enough with you.
If only you could pay by cheque, as in the UK!
Midland eurocheques offer you the best of both worlds — the convenience and security of cheques and a cheque card, wherever your travels take you in Europe.
HOME FROM HOME
With your eurocheques and eurocheque card, you will find that paying at restaurants, hotels and shops in Europe and the Mediterranean is as easy as using your cheque book in the UK.
You simply write out the eurocheque in the appropriate currency and hand it over with your card.
Some time later, the amount of the eurocheque, together with any charges, will be debited to your Midland Current Account.
It will then appear on your next bank statement in both foreign currency and sterling.
£100 cheque limit
One important difference between eurocheques and ordinary cheques is that each eurocheque is guaranteed by your eurocheque card up to the approximate currency equivalent of £100.
And your can use any number of eurocheques to pay for a particular item or service.
so, if the bill comes to the currency equivalent of, say £500, you simply write out five separate cheques.
They are all guaranteed.
In some cases, there may be local restrictions on the minimum and maximum amounts for which eurocheques can be written.
these are detailed in your eurocheque book.
Instant money
Your eurocheque card is much more than just a support for your eurocheques.
It is your key to obtaining instant money from many cash machines in Andorra, Denmark, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain and West Germany.
A full list of where you can use the card is given in the booklet ‘Midland eurocheque Cash Machines in Europe’.
Please ask at your branch for a copy.
When you are at home, you can draw up to £200 a day at Midland cash machines, provided you have sufficient funds in your account.
Your eurocheque card works in exactly the same way as a Midland AutoCheque Card.
At the cash machine you key in your eurocheque Personal Number (PIN), which is noted to you when you receive the card.
Then you key in the amount of cash you want — and the machine does the rest, including debiting your Midland Current Account.
Widely accepted
Midland eurocheques can be used to pay for goods and services at more than 5 million shops, garages, hotels and restaurants in 28 European countries.
You can cash your eurocheques at over 210,000 bank branches in 40 Europe and Mediterranean countries.
Details are given in your eurocheque book.
THE COST
How much you pay for the eurocheque service depends on the number of cheques you issue, but there is an annual fee of £5 for your eurocheque card.
The card will be renewed automatically every two years, which means that you do not have to worry about re-applying each time you go abroad.
All you have to do is order your eurocheques, for which the following costs will then apply.
Abroad
•£1.75 for each eurocheque issues.
•£1.65 for each cash machine withdrawal made with your eurocheque card.
This fee, which includes the fee to be paid to the foreign bank, is added to the value of the transaction when we convert it into sterling.
The total sum is then debited to your Current Account.
Occasionally, some branches of banks abroad impose an additional charge for encashing eurocheques, contrary to the eurocheque Agreement.
If this should happen to your, please ask for a receipt and we will refund these extra charges.
Refunds will NOT be made where such charges have been levied by non-bank bureaux de change.
At home
All eurocheque and eurocheque card transactions made through any Midland branch or cash machine are conducted free of all charges, providing your Midland Current Account remains in credit throughout a quarterly charging period.
If your account does not remain in credit, charges will be deducted in accordance with our published personal Current Account tariff.
Other UK banks may impose a charge for encashing eurocheques.
YOUR NEXT MOVE
If you are planning a trip to Europe or the Mediterranean, on business or pleasure, and wish to apply for eurocheques and a eurocheque card, simply complete and return the attached application form to your Midland branch.
Current Account
Introduction
It is difficult to believe that fifteen to twenty years ago the majority of people in this country did not have a bank Current Account.
Their wages and salaries were paid in cash which they took home and split into differing amounts to cover the cost of food, clothing, household bills, entertainment etc.
All very well in its way, but not the most secure or efficient method of looking after money.
Today most employers prefer to pay their staff by cheque or by direct transfer to a bank account.
As a result, more than 70 per cent of the population now have a Current Account and are enjoying the many advantages it gives them — cheques, instant cash, Standing Orders and Direct Debits.
All of this and a whole lot more, is yours when you open a Current Account with Midland.
And, if you stay in credit, it is all FREE!
Cheque Book
Within a few days of opening your account you will be given your own cheque book.
There's no limit on the number of cheques you can issue, but do make sure you have enough money in you account to cover them.
You can keep tabs on how much is left by filling in the ‘prior balance’ and ‘new balance’spaces on each stub.
And, don't worry about running out of cheques, we will send you a new book automatically before your existing one is finished.
Paying-in
Any time you want to pay cash or cheques into your account, simply turn to the back of your cheque book and complete one of the paying-in slips you will find there.
Tear the slip out and hand it in at any Midland branch; or put it in one of the AutoDeposit machines that have been installed at a number of our branches.
Instant Cash
It happens to us all at times.
We find we've left our cheque book at home, or the bank is closed, and we want some cash urgently.
When you open a Current Account at Midland you usually don't have to worry about such inconvenience.
Many customers find it useful to have either an AutoBank or AutoCheque Card.
Both cards, when used with your Personal Number (PIN), let you draw cash from any of our nationwide network of AutoBanks, which can be used 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; and at all NatWest Servicetills.
You can also use your Card to call up the balance, print-out or order a statement, or look at the last few transactions on your account at one or more of the new AutoBanking machines we are installing up and down the country to help you.
If we issue an AutoCheque Card, every cheque you make out is guaranteed up to a maximum of £50.
Shopkeepers, garage owners, hoteliers etc., will happily accept such cheques knowing they will receive their money.
Let us pay your Bills
It is so easy to forget to pay those regular bills such as the rates and mortgage, and even more so those once a year commitments like club subscriptions and insurance premiums.
So let us settle them for you by Standing Order or Direct Debit.
With a Standing Order you tell us how much to pay and when.
Under a Direct Debit, you authorise us to debit your Current Account with the cost when each bill is due.
Whichever option you choose, we will put everything in hand.
Keeping Track
Every three months we will send you a statement showing all monies paid into and out of your account.
This lets you keep a weather eye on your finances.
The Cost
How much you pay for our Current Account service depends on the way you run your account, but the standard item costs and fixed charge shown below are payable each charging quarter.
•AutoBanking withdrawals and Direct Debits 27p each •Cheques and Standing Orders 30p each •Maintenance Charge £3 per quarter (issuing of cheque books, AutoBank/AutoCheque Cards, and quarterly statements etc.)
As you can see, it is cheaper to use our network of AutoBanking machines and pay your bills by Direct Debit.
These charges, and any interest payable on an overdraft, are calculated up to the first Friday in March, June, September and December, and deducted from your account 14 days later.
BUT IT IS ALL FREE IF YOU KEEP YOUR ACCOUNT IN CREDIT!
If you keep your account in credit through a charging quarter, the service is provided FREE.
You pay nothing for the cheques you issue, your Debits; and there is no Maintenance Charge.
Other Services
The only occasions on which you will have to pay anything are if you take advantage of some of our other services linked to the Current Account, which are subject to their own costs.
These services, which include ‘stopped’ cheques, travellers cheques, eurocheques, sterling and currency payments abroad, and safe custody of valuables and documents, have to be paid for by all our personal Current Account customers, whether or not their accounts are kept in credit.
Overdrawing your Account
Even the best laid plans sometimes go wrong and it may occasionally be necessary for you to overdraw your account.
You can usually foresee what is going to happen, so please let us know in advance and we will arrange the best deal for you.
You will find it far less expensive than if you let your account go ‘in the red’ without telling us.
We offer two standard overdraft schemes:
VECTOR is a specially designed bank account for those customers who expect to be overdrawn regularly;
CHECKOVER is a special service for one-off overdrafts.
Please ask at any Midland branch for details of both schemes.
If you overdraw your account without telling us, or if you exceed your CheckOver limit, there will be a £10 administration fee to pay for that quarter, for the additional work involved.
Also a higher rate of interest is charged for an overdraft we have not agreed between us, than for CheckOver or Vector.
Statement of Costs
If there are any costs to be paid on your account, we will send you a separate statement, with your usual statement, showing how they have been calculated.
Uncleared Cheques
Many people do not appreciate that when they pay a cheque into their Current Account which is drawn on a Midland branch other than that at which their account is kept, or another bank, we do not receive the money straight away.
This means that the money is not immediately there for you to spend.
However, we may be able to let you draw money from your account against such an ‘uncleared’ cheque.
In such circumstances, there will be interest to pay on the amount drawn out, even though your statement shows your account to be in credit.
However, you will not have to pay for your cheques, etc.
The Key
A Midland Current Account is the key that unlocks the door to a whole range of services we have to offer.
Savings schemes to suit all pockets.
Personal Loans.
Mortgages.
Holiday and business travel arrangements.
All types of insurance, investments and tax advice.
Full details, including written information, of these and the many other services available from Midland, can be obtained from any of our branches, or from Midland Bank plc, Marketing Department, Griffin House, P.O. Box 2, Sheffield, S1 3GG.
Midland Bank will not normally give credit to applicants under 18 years of age.
Deposit Account
Introduction
Now that free banking is available to everyone who keeps their Current Account in credit, there is nothing to be gained by keeping substantial amounts of money there.
All you need is a few pounds to meet unexpected and urgent costs.
Any spare cash is best put in a savings account where it will earn interest.
A Midland Deposit Account is the ideal home for those small sums that normally lie idle on your Current Account.
The interest rate is not as high as that on some of our other schemes, but you only need £1 to open the account and you can withdraw your money quickly.
ADD TO YOUR SAVINGS ANY TIME
You can pay money into your Deposit Account at any Midland branch.
there are no limits on how little or how much you pay-in, but once the balance on your account reaches £100 your should think of opening a Saver Plus Account which offers a higher rate of interest.
Please ask at your branch for full details.
Interest twice a year
The interest earned on your savings will be paid every six months in June and December.
The amount will be added to your savings to boost them still further, and we'll send you a statement twice a year that shows how much is on the account.
Withdrawing your savings
Any time you want to withdraw money from your Deposit Account simply complete a withdrawal form at your branch and hand it to one of the cashiers.
Providing you give us at least seven days notice you won't lose any interest on the amount withdrawn.
If an emergency arises and you need to dip into your savings immediately, you can make a withdrawal on the spot.
However, you will lose seven days interest on the amount taken out.
Regular saving
If you want to save on a regular basis you can arrange for a fixed amount to be transferred from your Current Account into the Deposit Account every month.
All you have to do is complete the attached Standing Order form saying how much you want to be transferred and on what date of the month.
OPENING A DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
Opening a Deposit Account is easy.
Simply complete the attached application form, making sure both parties sign if the account is to be in joint names.
Then take, or send, the form to your local Midland branch, together with your initial deposit (min. £1).
High Interest Cheque Account
Introduction
High interest savings accounts often have one major disadvantage.
In return for the high interest you earn, your money is tied up and cannot be withdrawn easily if you need some of it in a hurry.
But is always necessary to sacrifice one for the other?
With a Midland High Interest Cheque Account (HICA) you have the perfect combination of high interest and ready access plus a HICA card which offers even greater flexibility, 24 hours a day.
On the spot, no penalty withdrawals
There are two ways in which you can get at the money in your High Interest Cheque Account, whenever you want, without losing any interest.
Cheque Book
By using your special HICA cheque book you can withdraw a minimum of £100 in cash from the Midland branch where the account is held.
alternatively, if you are planning to spend more than £100 of your savings, you can pay directly for whatever you are buying by using a cheque from your HICA cheque book.
If you cannot get to your own branch, you can withdraw between £ 100 and £200 in cash from HICA by presenting your Midland Auto Cheque Card, which must have been issued on a Current Account held at the same branch as your HICA.
HICA Card
You can withdraw cash from your High Interest Cheque Account; transfer money to and from both your HICA and Current Account; find out the balances, or order detailed statements on your HICA Card, together with your PIN (Personal Number), at most Midland self-service banking machines.
These machines are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and we will notify you of your PIN shortly after the account is opened.
The maximum amount of cash you can withdraw from most of our machines is £500 per day, subject to there being sufficient money in the account.
By the way, we will give you complimentary leather wallets for your cheque book and card.
Money Market Related Interest Rates
The interest rates on a High Interest Cheque Account are related to those on the money markets, which means your money will always be earning an attractive return.
The prevailing rates are published daily in the Financial Times, and are also displayed on Prestel and in all our branches.
You need £2,000 to open a High Interest Cheque Account and as soon as your savings reach £10,000 we will pay you a higher rate of interest.
Balances over £50,000 receive the top HICA rate, which is credited quarterly in March, June, September and December, is paid on your total savings and not just the amount that takes you into a higher band.
It is up to you whether the interest is credited to your HICA or your Current Account.
Please indicate your choice under the ‘Interest Options’ section on the attached application form.
For the majority of HICA customers, interest is paid net of basic rate tax.
This means that unless you are a higher rate tax payer there is nothing else to pay.
Other arrangements may apply if you are living or working abroad, so please ask at your Midland branch for details.
Financial Advice
Safeguarding and making the most of your financial resource in these days of complex legislation can be an awesome task.
As a High Interest Cheque Account holder you are entitled to a free counselling interview with a representative from Midland Personal Financial Services.
At the interview all aspects of your financial affairs will be discussed, with the emphasis on minimising your tax liabilities, maximising your income and generally protecting your assets.
If we think it necessary for you to seek further specialist guidance, we will be pleased to arrange a meeting(s) with other Midland Group experts.
Unit Trusts Bonus Offer
Unit Trusts are becoming an increasingly popular form of investment and as a High Interest Cheque Account holder you are entitled to a 1% bonus allocation when you make a lump sum purchase of £500 or more of Midland Unit Trusts.
This means, for example, that you will receive £10 worth of free units for every £1,000 you invest.
Full written details of the Midland range of Unit Trusts can be obtained from any of our branches and Financial Services Centres.
Do remember, however, that in respect of Unit Trusts and Life Assurance, Midland Bank staff are only allowed to give advice on Midland Bank Group products.
Your Next Move
If you want to open a High Interest Cheque Account, simply complete the attached application form and then take, or post, it to your local Midland branch, together with your initial deposit (minimum £2,000).
Please remember that if the account is to be in joint names, then both parties must sign the form.
Premier Savings
Introduction
You can come into money in many ways.
You may be fortunate enough to benefit from an inheritance, or make a profit from the sale of a house or some other valuable asset.
Even putting by a relatively small sum on a regular basis can lead to a healthy nest-egg after a few years.
In any event, you could find yourself with a substantial amount to invest.
Instant access to your savings in unlikely to be your prime concern, but you will be looking to obtain an attractive return on your money over the longer term.
Answer — Premier Savings from Midland.
£5000 Earns Top Rate
You can open a Premier Savings account with just £5000 and in return we will pay you our top rate of interest that is linked to those on the money markets.
You will find the prevailing rate of interest shown daily in the Financial Times and on Prestel, and it is also displayed in all our branches.
The interest you earn will be paid half-yearly in June and December, and you have the choice of having it added to your savings, or paid directly to your Midland Current Account.
You let us know which option you have selected under the ‘Interest Options’ section on the attached application form.
Tax liability
If you pay income tax at the basic rate, then there will be nothing else for you to pay because the interest on Premier Savings is paid net of basic rate tax liability.
On the other hand, if you are a higher rate tax payer, you will have to pay the tax liability on the difference between your own rate and basic rate.
Other tax arrangements may apply if you are living or working abroad, so please ask at your local Midland branch for full details.
Topping Up Your Investment
Once you have opened your Premier Savings account with a minimum of £5000, you can add any amount to your savings at any time.
So, whenever you have some spare cash to hand, pay it into Premier Savings and watch it grow.
Alternatively, you can save on a regular basis by arranging to have a fixed sum transferred to Premier Savings from your Current Account on a given date each month.
If you wish to take advantage of this option, please complete the attached ‘Standing Order’ form at the back of this leaflet.
Withdrawing Your Money
Premier Savings is not the type of savings account for you to dip into every time you want a few pounds to spend.
It is designed to give you a good return on your money over the longer term.
But that does not mean your savings are ‘frozen’.
So long as you give us at least thirty days notice, you can withdraw a minimum of £500 without penalty.
You can also withdraw a minimum of £500 IMMEDIATELY without penalty, providing the balance on your account remains above £10,000.
If you do make an immediate withdrawal which leads to the balance falling below £10,000, there will be a small charge to pay.
However, this will be less than if your interest is forfeited, as happens with many other higher interest accounts.
(Please see attached Terms and Conditions.)
Your Next Move
If you are interested in opening a Premier Savings account, please complete the attache application form and take, or post, the form to your local Midland branch, together with your initial investment (minimum £5000).
Please remember that both parties must sign the form if the account is to be in joint names.
High Interest Deposit Bond
Introduction
You have been fortunate enough to build up a reserve of savings over the years, or you may find yourself in receipt of an inheritance.
You do not need to dip into this money at regular intervals, but wish to retain it for the future.
In the meantime, you are looking to earn a high return.
Investing in a Midland High Interest Deposit Bond could be the ideal solution.
Guaranteed Interest Rate
You can invest any amount from £2,000 upwards in a High Interest Deposit Bond for a fixed term of either 6 or 12 months.
Because you are agreeing to ‘tie up’ your savings for a comparatively long period, we offer an attractive rate of interest guaranteed throughout the term of the Bond.
This means that you have the peace of mind of knowing that whatever happens to general interest rates, your return will remain the same.
The choice is yours
You have the choice of having the interest paid in a lump sum at the end of the term of the Bond, or on a monthly income basis.
If you select the monthly income option you have the advantage of a guaranteed, regular source of extra income, but the interest rate we pay is slightly lower than that payable under the lump sum option.
The current rates of interest on our High Interest Deposit Bonds can be obtained from all our branches and are displayed daily on Prestel.
Whatever option you choose, the interest is credited to a bank account designated by you, as is your original investment at the end of the agreed term of the Bond.
We will write to you approximately one month before then, reminding you that the money will be available shortly, and offering you the opportunity to re-invest in a further Bond.
Tax liability
For the majority of High Interest Deposit Bond holders interest is paid net of basic rate tax liabilities.
This means that unless you are a higher rate tax payer, there is nothing else for you to pay.
The net rate of interest payable to you remains fixed even if the level of composite rate tax changes during th course of the Bond.
If the value of your Bond is £50,000 or more the interest will be paid gross, and your tax liability assessed through your Inland Revenue return.
If you are living or working abroad, other arrangements may apply, so please ask at your local Midland branch for guidance and full details.
Your next move
There is nothing complicated about applying for a Midland High Interest Deposit Bond.
All you have to do is complete the attached application form, making sure both parties sign if the Bond is to be in joint names, then take or post it to your local Midland branch, together with your investment (minimum £2,000).
We will then send you a Bond Certificate.
If you require any further information about our High Interest Deposit Bonds, or any of our other Meridian products, please call at any of our branches, or write to the address at the back of this leaflet.
MIDLAND
‘My accident left my whole family crippled for life’
Don't put your financial security at risk
Act now to secure cash protection of up to £80,000 tax free
A serious accident could happen to you at any time today, tomorrow, next year.
And if it did happen, your physical health could be just the first of many things you lose, that you take for granted now.
Next to go could be your salary, if you are unable to return to work to earn your living.
And with little or no income, your spouse or children could be the ones to suffer most from your accident.
How different the picture might be if you had the protection of the Midland Personal Accident Plan.
We recommend this Plan because it offers financial protection in no less than THREE important ways areas where you are likely to be most vulnerable should an accident strike.
It will pay you:
1.
A cash sum of up to £80,000 if you are permanently disabled as the result of an accident.
The amount paid depends on the disability the Plan features a wide range of payments, from £80,000 if your disability prevents you from ever working again, to £8,000 for the loss of a forefinger.
Benefits will also be awarded for permanent PARTIAL disabilities, according to the degree of the disability.
2.
Up to £40,000 payable to your estate if you should die following an accident.
3.
Plus up to £80 payable for every day you are in hospital due to an accident, for any length of time from one day, up to 100 days.
Plus two special benefits for Midland customers only.
To provide an even higher level of protection for our customers we will double the amount payable on death after an accident, if both husband and wife die as the result of the same accident.
And you will also receive a special Convalescence payment of up to £800 if you remain in hospital for 10 or more days after an accident.
Two levels of cover.
We realise that the degree of protection needed varies from one person to another, and so have introduced two levels of cover into the Midland Personal Accident Plan: Gold Cover and Silver Cover.
Whilst both offer excellent value for money, we strongly advise you consider Gold Cover, as this offers cash benefits DOUBLE those of Silver cover — for less than double the cost per month.
To maintain the value of your cover, both premiums and benefits will automatically be increased each year by 5% of the original sum.
However, your premiums will not increase because of your age.
And your Policy will never be cancelled because of the number of claims you make.
Cover is easily obtainable for customers who apply now and are eligible for the Plan.
Return the simple Enrolment Form before the close date shown and your acceptance into the Plan is guaranteed.
There are no health questions to answer, no medical examination to undergo.
You will be covered under the Plan from the day we receive your Enrolment Form.
Yet you pay nothing now your Direct Debit Instruction will be sent to you with your Policy document.
If anything within your Policy document does not meet with your full approval, you may return it within 15 days of receipt and your policy will be cancelled.
It will have cost you nothing.
So please take this opportunity to protect yourself and, if appropriate, your whole family too, with the Midland Personal Accident Plan.
It could make a world of difference to your future.
Please note that all the benefits quoted related to Gold Cover.
Personal Accident Insurance has helped them……one day it could help you.
A man was fixing some faulty wiring in his caravan when he slipped and knocked his head.
As a result he is now registered blind in one eye.
He received a large cash payment from his Personal Accident Policy.
Whilst cutting her garden hedge with a chainsaw one recent summer, a woman slipped and lost her grip.
The chainsaw took off thumb.
She also received a cash lump sum from her Personal Accident Policy.
In the process of overtaking a lorry, a woman crashed into another lorry reversing out of a side turning.
She suffered serious brain damage and was retired from her job on medical grounds.
She currently suffers from an impaired memory, partial paralysis on her right side, loss of control of her emotions and partial traumatic epilepsy.
In line with her injuries, her Policy paid out a benefit close to the maximum amount payable.
‘My wife now spends every day looking after me.
Can I really expect her to do that for the rest of my life?’
‘How can I tell my children they can't have the things their classmates enjoy, because their daddy isn't able to work again?’
‘We're having to leave our home because there's no-one to pay the bills.’
‘I thought my life insurance policy would pay out.
It never occurred to me that if I had an accident and SURVIVED, my life insurance would pay me nothing.’
Please note that, whilst the above are not actual statements made by a serious accident victim, they have been selected because we believe they give a fair representation of the kind of problems which may occur after an accident.
However you could avoid these situations happening to you, should you have an accident…if you join the Midland Personal Accident Plan now.
Your Questions Answered
Why do I need the Midland Personal Accident Plan?
Because none of us know when a permanently disabling accident may strike, it makes good sense to protect against the possible effects.
You may already have life insurance, but that will usually only pay out if you die.
On the other hand, this insurance will help provide a financial lifeline when it is most needed.
Will I be paid more than one type of benefit?
Yes, if you have to spend any time in hospital as the result of an accident which requires an overnight stay.
Then you will receive both the hospitalisation benefit and, if applicable, the lump sum benefit for your injuries.
Why do the Policy benefits increase?
Simply because we life in inflationary times.
So as time goes by everything will cost more.
Your protection increases by 5% of the original amount every year.
Thus in 5 years' time a benefit of £80,000 will have increased to £102,102.52.
Will my age count against me?
There is no age limit for acceptance into the Plan and once insured your cover will never be cancelled because of your age.
However, after the age of 65, the chance of an accident with serious consequences does become much greater and a recovery often takes longer to achieve.
Rather than increase the premiums from their current levels, the benefits have been halved for persons aged 65 or over.
Full details will be included in your policy document.
Is my acceptance really guaranteed?
Yes.
Provided you are aged over 18, resident in England, Scotland, Wales, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man and apply before the closing date shown, your acceptance is guaranteed without a medical.
Are there any exclusions?
Yes benefits will not be paid if you are injured as the result of hazardous activities such as diving, mountaineering, rock or cliff-climbing, pot-holing, cycling, motorcycling, parachuting, sport as a professional, rugby, racing other than on foot, or aviation except Air Travel.
Nor will your Policy cover self-inflicted injury, suicide, alcohol or drug abuse or war risks.
Members of the Armed Forces may apply, but will not be covered while on military duty; full details are included in the Policy.
Can I have more than one Personal Accident Policy?
Yes, but if you already have a Sun Alliance Personal Accident Policy, which was also offered to you with guaranteed acceptance, you will not be able to claim benefits under both Policies.
However, if you feel that the benefits of the Midland Personal Accident Plan are more suited to your needs, you may take advantage of this offer and cancel your existing Policy.
Am I covered for partial disability, such as permanently reduced vision?
Yes.
You would be paid a proportion of the amount stated in the Benefit Table.
This payment would directly relate to the disability.
For further help or information, please ring Lindsey Morgan on Plymouth (0752 604060.
She will be only too pleased to assist you.
NOTE: The brochure and other literature provide a broad summary of the insurance.
Only the Policy document, written in plain English tells you everything about what is and is not covered (we will provide you with a copy of the Policy if you wish).
This plan is underwritten by Sun Alliance and London Insurance plc.
Sun Alliance and London Insurance plc is registered in England No. 638918.
Registered Office: 1 Bartholomew Lane, London, EC2N 2AB.