

Restoration and Occupation
The islands which make up the nation of Japan lie in an arc off mainland northeast Asia.
There are four main islands — Hokkaido, Honshu, Shikoku and Kyushu — which stretch southwest to northeast for over 2,000 kilometres from the 31st to the 45th parallels.
Clustered around are a host of smaller archipelagoes and islands.
The northernmost tip of Hokkaido is less than 50 kilometres from the now Russian-owned island of Sakhalin.
The point on mainland Asia closest to Japan is the southern tip of the Korean peninsula over 200 kilometres from northern Kyushu.
The variation in latitude bestows considerable climatic differences on different areas of Japan; northern Hokkaido is subarctic, whereas southern Kyushu and Okinawa are near tropical.
For the most part the climate is temperate, with strong seasonal fluctuations, harsh winters in the central and northern areas, warm summers and abundant rainfall.
The total land area is less than 0.3 per cent of the world's total; little more than 50 per cent greater than that of the United Kingdom.
Much of the area is mountainous, with only around one-fifth permitting of cultivation.
The staple crop has for centuries been rice, and wet-rice agriculture has been of crucial significance in the evolution of Japanese society.
While the volcanic nature of the country means much of the arable area is intensely fertile, earthquakes, typhoons and other natural disasters are frequent.
Mineral resources are sparse, and the raw materials for modern industry particularly so.
Natural endowments are not such as to suggest the astonishing prominence achieved by Japan in the twentieth century.
The exact origins of the contemporary ethnic Japanese are unclear, but in prehistoric times the Japanese islands received  various waves of immigrants from the mainland, to which they were once joined.
Gradually members of these groups coalesced to form a dominant racial group; an elemental Japanese state appeared in the second —third century AD.
The Ainu people, a proto-Caucasian racial group driven ever further northwards by the ethnic Japanese, are thought to be the remnants of an earlier wave of immigrants.
Only a few hundred still survive on the island of Hokkaido.
Through the centuries Japan's proximity to Asia allowed for the absorption of Asian cultural influences, yet the distance proved sufficiently great to assist the emergence and maintenance of indigenous cultural traits and enable Japan to avoid a succession of invasions or new influxes of other peoples.
From just over 30 million in 1870, the number of Japanese grew to 44 million in 1900, 64 million in 1930 and 83 million in 1950.
By 1986 the population was 121 million.
Most of these people are packed into the small area of flat land; the coastal strip — running from the Kanto plain round Tokyo to Nagoya and then through to the Kansai plain, with its cities of Osaka, Kyoto and Kobe — has some of the highest population densities in the world.
Population pressure, along with vagaries of climate and terrain, and geographical location, have strongly influenced Japan's relations with the outside world over the last 150 years and have played a crucial part in shaping Japan's evolution for much longer.
Two epochal events have dominated the history of modern Japan.
The revolution of 1868, commonly called the Meiji Restoration, and the American-dominated Occupation of 1945–52 both proved major watersheds in Japan's development.
Each produced a significant shift in course and within a short space of time wrought a substantial transformation in the direction of national policy and popular attitudes.
Such is the importance of these events that none of the radical changes in Japan over the last 150 years can be properly understood without reference to them.
Yet modern Japan is also the product of much more than recent upheavals.
Japan has, for the last twelve hundred years and more, been reigned over by an imperial house which claims descent from the Yamato clan, whose control of the central part of Japan long predates written record.
The secular and religious authority enjoyed by this clan was recognized over the years in an ever wider area of the country, and during the seventh century the head of the clan used the title of emperor or empress on the Chinese model.
The family sought to legitimize its power by fostering a belief in its  divine descent, claiming the first emperor, Jinmu, as a descendant of the sun goddess; his reign was dated to 660 BC.
Although in the early years control did largely rest with the imperial family, others increasingly came to wield power in its name, and the years after 1185 saw hegemony pass to a succession of military rulers who achieved pre-eminent influence by virtue of superior military strength.
These rulers did not seek to usurp the position of emperor, or to abolish the institution.
Instead, they manipulated it to legitimize their own rule.
They exercised power in the name of the emperor, and the imperial family maintained its nominal supremacy and its role as the nation's highest religious authority.
For centuries Japan had a dual system of rule: a reigning emperor based at Kyoto and a military government whose seat was normally outside the capital.
Many of these military rulers were granted by the emperor the tide of shoguni, a designation according formal recognition as the emperor's military deputy.
This title often passed to successive members of the same family, creating military dynasties.
The shogun presided over a military administration known as a Bakufu, but there was considerable diffusion of regional power to local warrior-lords.
Bakufu control over the country was never absolute, but rested on the administration's ability to hold in check the ambitions of various provincial lords and play them off against each other.
Not until the late sixteenth century, under the warlords Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi, was the country unified under a single military hegemony, and this was only achieved by building on a series of successful military alliances.
In the military realignment which followed the death of Hideyoshi in 1598, power fell to Tokugawa Ieyasu, a lord from the Kanto area.
The decisive victory won by Ieyasu and lords allied to him at the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600 established his supremacy over rivals throughout the islands of Honshu, Shikoku and Kyushu.
He had himself declared shogun in 1603.
By 1614 he had eliminated Hideyoshi's heir and overcome the final military opposition to his hegemony.
leyasu sought to establish a system of rule that would ensure the continued dominance of his heirs.
His son, Hidetada, was an equally able administrator and politician, and by the time of his death in 1632 his family's position was unchallenged.
For over 250 years after Sekigahara the title of shogun was handed down through the males of the Tokugawa family.
The Bakufu administration that went with it was located in Edo (now Tokyo), the traditional seat of the Tokugawa family, and served de facto as the government of Japan.
The Tokugawa were essentially no more than primus inter pares .
Influence rested on the various branches of the family's directly controlling around one quarter of the total land area.
The Tokugawa confirmed their hold on power by a complex structure of physical, political and economic controls over the several hundred local lords (daimyo) whose domains (han ) made up the rest of the country, the samurai (warrior) class who constituted their followers and the populace who resided within their territories.
The system of rule is often referred to as the Bakuhan (Bakufu-han) system, and many historians, both Western and Japanese, use the term ‘feudalism’ to describe it.
The use of the term ‘feudal’ in relation to Japan is, however, a matter of some debate.
Defined by early translators as the equivalent of the Japanese term hó0ken used to describe the Tokugawa system, the finer points of distinction between ‘feudal system’ and hó0ken seido soon became obscured.
Further confusion was created by the inclination of many Japanese historians to adopt a Marxist framework.
Suffice it to say here that the word ‘feudal’ is used frequently and loosely in relation to Japan, and this use has been based either on the existence in Japan of certain features associated with European feudalism, such as a military code of honour, or on a specific interpretation of the relations of production in Japanese society before the late nineteenth century.
Under the Bakuhan system daimyo were divided into two major categories:fudai (hereditary vassals) and tozama , those whose families had submitted to the Tokugawa only after Sekigahara.
Disposition of territory and offices, public works, enforced residence in Edo, were only some of the means used to prevent daimyo from becoming too powerful.
Notwithstanding the arbitrary demands of the Tokugawa, domains enjoyed a certain amount of autonomy.
As long as daimyo did not contravene the rulings of their nominal liege lord, the shogun, they could handle their own territory pretty much as they chose.
Mechanisms of political control were backed up by a harsh system of regulation, which attempted to minimize all social, political and economic change among the population at large.
A rigid hierarchy of hereditary, occupation-related caste was presided over by the warrior (bushi ) or samurai élite.
An official orthodoxy based on Neo-Confucian doctrines emphasized the preservation of order and maintenance of social hierarchy.
Potentially damaging foreign influences were minimized after 1640 by cutting off the country from virtually all contact with the outside world.
While these careful measures succeeded in preserving Tokugawa rule for some two and a half centuries, they could never hope to prevent all social, economic and political change.
The Bakufu's position was fatally flawed by its having little economic or political status as a national government: it wielded political power as proxy for the emperor using only the income from its own lands.
The dynamic forces within society and in the economy eventually came into conflict with a national polity which sought to avoid change.
By the early to mid-nineteenth century, many of the realities of life were totally at odds with the prescribed system of rule.
Caste divisions became blurred; occupation, status, wealth and influence were no longer commensurate with each other or in accordance with legal stipulation.
Advances in commerce and the use of money were placing great strains on the rice-based economy.
The political control of the Bakufu was also weakened.
In the face of acute financial difficulties besetting the whole ruling class, the balance of economic power had shifted to powerful tozama lords traditionally hostile to the Bakufu.
The shoguns themselves lacked the personal charisma of their early predecessors and divisions within the Bakufu hierarchy and Tokugawa followers increased.
New intellectual currents began to question aspects of the status quo, demanding reconsideration of the relationship between emperor and shogun.
Lower status samurai, increasingly influential in domain or Bakufu bureaucracies, began to demand a greater say in the running of political affairs.
By the 1850s the tensions brought about by social, economic and political change were already beginning to pose a serious threat not merely to the rule of the Tokugawa but to the system itself.
The reopening of foreign contacts with the United States and the imperialist powers of Europe rapidly brought matters to crisis point.
From the early nineteenth century Japan had been approached on several occasions by Western nations active in Asian waters and anxious to initiate trading and other contacts.
Unable to maintain the seclusion policy any longer in the face of strong pressure and superior military strength, Japan concluded her first international agreement in 1854 with the US.
Agreements with other nations followed, and the extraterritorial, most-favoured-nation relationships adopted in China and Thailand were extended to Japan.
The development of foreign contacts posed a series of dilemmas for the Bakufu.
It showed the Bakufu to be militarily weak and ineffective.
It forced many Japanese to recognize the need for reform and a strong national government which might achieve for Japan a  better deal in external relations.
Yet reform could spell disaster for a regime whose very fundamentals rested on a resistance to change.
From 1853, when the crisis over US demands for formal relations led the Bakufu to solicit the opinions of all daimyo, a move quite without precedent, Tokugawa authority went rapidly downhill.
While the Bakufu administration had for several decades been subject to criticisms from within its own ranks, a more serious threat to its supremacy emerged from within domains traditionally hostile to it.
During the late 1850s radical samurai from powerful tozama domains, especially Satsuma in southern Kyushu, and Choshú0 at the western tip of Honshu, began to steer domain policy towards open opposition to the Bakufu.
At the same time the Bakufu was held responsible by the powers for attacks on foreigners by anti-foreign elements, over which it had little control.
The question of ratification of treaties with Western nations opened up a gulf between the Bakufu and an imperial court whose nominal supremacy Tokugawa enemies were beginning to realize could be fruitfully exploited to the regime's disadvantage.
Pressured on one side by nations willing to exert force to achieve satisfactory trading relations, the Bakufu was by its domestic opponents accused of usurping imperial authority by giving in to them.
Both the issue of imperial power and the question of foreign contacts became sticks with which to beat the Bakufu.
The Tokugawa's enemies took up the rallying cry of ‘revere the emperor and expel the barbarian’(sonnó0 jó0i ), and kept it long after their leaders realized the impossibility of bringing external contacts to an end.
At the same time the Bakufu's weakness was exacerbated by problems over the shogunal succession; the selection of the nearest blood heir, a young boy, to succeed to the title in 1858, highlighted the problems of Bakufu leadership at a time when the institution required all the strength it could muster.
The assassination of the Bakufu's foremost leader, Regent Ii Naosuke, in 1860 was a fatal blow to the regime's attempt to re-establish Tokugawa supremacy.
The re-emergence of the court onto the political scene and its collusion with many of the Bakufu's other opponents promoted an attempted rapprochement between the Tokugawa and imperial factions in the early 1860s, but this proved short-lived.
Divided among themselves over how far to adhere to the traditional policies and how far to adapt to a changing foreign and domestic environment, the Bakufu's members became incapable of decisive action.
More and more the sworn enemies of Tokugawa political power openly flouted Bakufu authority.
In 1866 an alliance between the Bakufu's  two leading opponents, Satsuma and Chó0shó0, was signed, ending disagreements which had hitherto prevented concerted action, and depriving the Bakufu of Satsuma support for a military expedition mounted to chastise the more radical Choshú0 for its insubordination.
The Bakufu's inability to demonstrate military superiority over Choshú0 late in 1866 made it apparent to all that the Tokugawa no longer possessed the force majeure on which their power ultimately depended, and with their opponents allied with each other under the banner of imperial rule the Tokugawa's fate was sealed.
Through late 1866 and 1867 conspiracy against the Bakufu mounted.
Many of its own supporters advised Bakufu leaders that concessions were the only way to forestall more radical action.
During 1866 Tokugawa (Hitotsubashi) Keiki, whose claims to the office of shogun had been rejected in 1858 on the grounds of precedent, succeeded to the headship of the Tokugawa family and subsequently to the title of shogun.
Keiki was an able individual, an astute politician prepared to take heed of the views of both advisers and enemies.
He pursued a programme of reform aimed at strengthening the regime and the Tokugawa's position within it, but was unable to stem the hostile tide.
Late in 1867, despite calls for resistance from among his more conservative supporters, he formally returned political authority to the emperor, but this move proved inadequate to appease his more extreme opponents, who argued that while the Tokugawa continued to control more than 25 per cent of the country they were bound to play the dominant role in councils of state.
Early in January 1868, forces from Satsuma and Choshú0 and other Tokugawa opponents  seized the palace in Kyoto, announcing an imperial restoration and the establishment of a new government from which the Tokugawa were excluded.
Shogunate lands were to be confiscated and the title abolished.
Keiki accepted this fait accompli and withdrew towards Osaka, but this acquiescence was not supported by some of his followers, who attempted to occupy Kyoto and clashed with troops mainly from Satsuma and Choshú0 fighting as the ‘imperial army’.
The Batde of Toba-Fushimi was a resounding victory for the imperial troops which, though outnumbered, were better equipped.
After this defeat the Bakufu's supporters gradually retreated towards Edo following the shogun's appeals not to offer resistance.
The imperial troops marched on the capital in pursuit of them, and the city fell with minimal resistance in May 1868.
An alliance of northeastern domains led by Aizu had been forced to capitulate by  the end of the year, and much of the country was little affected by the civil war.
Only a last remnant of Bakufu supporters held out on Hokkaido through to 1869.
The new government stripped the Tokugawa family of most of its land and Keiki was forced to resign its headship; many Bakufu supporters also lost their domains.
National power passed to a new group of court nobles and activists from the four leading domains of Satsuma, Chó0shú, Tosa and Hizen, who moved quickly to consolidate their power.
The dual system of rule which had prevailed for centuries was formally ended and national government brought under the aegis of the reigning sovereign whose authority was recognized throughout the country.
This transfer of power is referred to as the Meiji Restoration, or the Meiji Revolution, after the reign name now adopted by the young emperor who had succeeded to the throne the year before.
The years from 1868 until his death in 1912 are known as the Meiji period.
During these years Japan's new leaders embarked on a programme of radical reform aimed at transforming Japan into a modern industrialized nation capable of dealing on equal terms with the nations of the West, and throwing off ‘unequal’ treaties viewed as a national insult.
The new regime ruthlessly crushed all semblance of armed opposition which threatened national unity.
By the end of the Meiji period control was focused in a highly centralized state whose functions were carried out through Western style political, administrative and judicial institutions operating in the name of the emperor.
Western style armed forces upheld the position of the Japanese state at home and abroad.
Western style financial institutions, infrastructure and factory-based industry were promoted to provide the requisite economic foundations for international strength.
A highly efficient education system served the aims of the state.
Japan had already been victorious in two major wars, against China in 1894–5 and Russia in 1904–5; she was a world power and possessor of colonies.
Such was the speed of the changes in Japan at this time that it is easy to draw a somewhat misleading impression of unilinear progress, a clearly conceived plan of action from the beginning, logically carried out step by step.
While motives may have been broadly consistent and widely shared, progress was in fact often erratic and haphazard, disagreements were many and the early Meiji leaders could scarcely have foreseen some of the longer term consequences of their policies.
The course of this transformation, which followed on the events of 1868, and the degree to which it  was fundamental or superficial, will constitute a major part of the subject-matter of this book.
The interpretation of the events of 1868 has become a major topic of controversy among historians of Japan.
Even the term ‘restoration’ used in English has overtones of a return to the past; the revival of a hallowed Japanese tradition which accorded supreme power to the imperial family.
Japan's post-1868 rulers utilized this nationalistic focus and claimed throughout to exercise power in the name of the emperor.
Yet the Japanese term normally used for the transfer,ishin , is more correctly translated as ‘renovation,— a term which implies not retrospection but a sense of renewal and looking forward.
This terminological ambiguity symbolizes a basic contradiction embodied in the whole process of change which followed 1868, a running tension between those who looked back and sought to revive what they saw as the best in Japanese tradition in the face of a Western onslaught, and those who looked to the future and were prepared to accommodate the values and techniques of their competitors, if only to compete effectively with them.
In fact, of course, many of Japan's new rulers shared both aspirations: modern methods and Western techniques could be embraced as wholeheartedly by those who saw them as the key to a restored ‘traditional’ Japanese independence based on indigenous social structure and values as by those who desired to embrace not only Western techniques but some version of Western ideology.
Interpretation of the restoration has broader implications for understanding Japanese history as a whole, particularly for the many Japanese historians who have sought to locate it within a Marxist historical framework.
Marxist — Leninist ideas became highly influential among the intelligentsia in the 1920s and have remained so ever since.
During the late 1920s to early 1930s conflict over the correct strategy for the Japan Communist Party generated an enormous amount of scholarly research aimed at substantiating the views of the main factions.
Debate focused on the question of whether the Meiji Restoration was a bourgeois revolution, albeit with remnants of feudalism persisting, in which case activists should work for a proletarian revolution; or whether it was an incomplete bourgeois revolution, necessitating a two-stage revolution in the future.
The debate was a major exercise in the application of Marx's framework to a non-European, late developing country, and continues to this day.
Among Western interpreters the Canadian, E. H. Norman, in  Japan's Emergence as a Modern State (1940) was clearly influenced by the Japanese dilemma.
Norman saw the Restoration as a revolution carried out by lower level samurai acting against the frustrations of their position.
The degree of capitalist development implied the momentum of a bourgeois revolution.
Other historians have seen the Restoration as a counter-revolution; a palace coup d'éat in which power passed from one part of the élite to another; and a transfer of power which was an integral part of the growth of national, and nationalist, awareness among a people faced for the first time in centuries by real threats from the outside world.
The Restoration is, perhaps, all of these things, and can only be understood in terms of the background of those who participated, the pressures for economic, social and political change and the context of the Western threat.
Clearly it was not a popular revolution in the sense of an uprising by the masses, although popular discontent was widespread, legitimate and frequently manifest: those involved in the transfer of power did not seek to exploit this discontent for their own purposes, either before or for many years after 1868.
The revolution was carried out by a small élite, as was the transformation that followed.
The results of the changes in the latter part of the nineteenth century were certainly dramatic.
By 1914 Japan had not only achieved revision of the unequal treaties, but also alliance with Britain and the beginnings of an empire.
Her modern industrial sector was growing rapidly; she was one of the world's leading exporters of textiles.
World War I brought an unprecedented economic boom and recognition of Japan's acquisition of Great Power status — the only Asian country able to compete with the West on its own terms.
The flourishing of more liberal trends during the latter part of the war and the early 1920s seemed to mark a shift from autocratic, oligarchic rule to representative party politics, giving the period the title ‘Taishó democracy’, after the Taishó emperor who came to the throne in 1912.
Yet this burgeoning proved short-lived, barely continuing into the early years of the reign of Hirohito, the new Shówa emperor, who succeeded his father in 1926.
Economic problems in the 1920s were compounded by the onset of the Great Depression, although Japan's recovery after 1932 was rapid, and a flourishing export trade helped the country to build up a substantial heavy industrial sector.
The ambiguities within the constitution and the sacrosanct elements of patriotism, nationalism and emperorism embodied in the orthodox ideology assisted other élites to wield national power with a considerable degree of freedom  and legitimacy.
The political role of the army became ever greater as the 1930s progressed, and the problems posed by population expansion, protectionism in international trade and agricultural impoverishment helped to unite much of the population behind an aggressive search for territorial expansion, Asian leadership and economic autarky.
The Japanese seizure of Manchuria in 1931 went relatively unchallenged by the Western powers as an intra-Asian affair, but as Japanese ambitions grew they aroused growing concern in nations further afield, notably the European powers with territories in Southeast Asia, and the US with its Pacific interests.
War with China from 1937 was followed by war with the US and its European allies, 1941–5.
It culminated in the total defeat of Japan and initiated the second major watershed in modern Japanese history, the reforms carried out under the Allied (de facto US) Occupation of 1945–52.
Occupation policy had two stated objectives: demilitarization and democratization.
A massive programme of institutional reforms was premised on a belief that certain elements in the economy, polity and society of Japan had been conducive to the rise of militarism in the country and the waging of aggressive war.
Many outside observers saw the events of the 1930s and early 1940s as the logical outcome not only of the policies adopted after 1868 but also of long-standing socio-economic factors.
For others, aberrant leaders and the socio-economic conditions of the interwar years had combined to deny the full fruition of democratic government aspired to by so many Japanese.
The Western allies shared a belief in the existence in Japan of a conspiracy to wage aggressive war, for which those responsible must be punished.
War criminals were charged and their supporters purged.
The militarist state was dismantled by disbanding the armed forces, the forces' ministries and munitions production facilities.
positive reforms to secure ‘democratization’ included a reorganization of the political system under a new constitution, a transformation of the system and content of education, anti-monopoly and deconcentration measures to extend ownership and control of big business and finance, land reform to widen land ownership and reduce tenancy.
The civil code was revised.
Sexual equality, freedom of belief, political activity, labour organization and other rights were guaranteed.
In effect a total institutional restructuring of Japanese society, economy and politics was imposed within the space of a few years.
Japan regained her independence in the spring of 1952, under the San Francisco Peace Treaty.
The US Japan Security Treaty which came  into force simultaneously tied Japan firmly to the interests of the United States and its allies.
For much of the population, numbed by defeat, the reforms were initially tangential to efforts to maintain a basic standard of life, but while the reforms themselves were accepted with considerable resignation, none could remain untouched by their effects for long.
At one extreme the Occupation changes were an unwelcome imposition of alien Western standards on the evolution of Japan's indigenous culture.
At the other they were an opportunity, perhaps the only opportunity, of breaking with institutions and attitudes which had led to disaster; an opportunity which had to be grasped because such radical change could only be imposed from outside.
After regaining autonomy some wished to strengthen the changes, others to reject them.
The Occupation changes, like the events following the Restoration, aroused in the people of Japan reactions which looked both back to the past and forward to the future, and which highlighted Japan's dependence on, yet difference from, the other cultures of the world.
In the 1980s we are still sufficiently close to the Occupation to make it difficult to assess some of the longer term significances of its reforms.
What is clear is that the degree to which the reformers achieved their stated aims was muted first of all by a partial backtracking on policy after 1947 under the pressures of worsening relations between the United States and the Soviet Union, and the burden which an economically prostrate Japan placed on the US taxpayer.
This shift in policy is often referred to as the ‘reverse course’.
Since the end of the Occupation Japanese authorities too, with or without American blessing, have sought to change some provisions of the reform and to circumvent others.
The effectiveness of the reforms has also been constrained by the resistance to change of many longstanding attitudes and patterns of operation of political, economic and social activity.
Theory frequently does not accord with practice.
Nevertheless, the pattern of Japan's postwar history owes much to Occupation policy.
Dispute may rage as to the effectiveness of this or that particular reform, but US policy 1945–52 has been a major arbiter of two fundamental axes of postwar development — the integration of Japan, economically and politically, into the Western capitalist camp and the extraordinary growth of the Japanese economy.
Historians, economists and other observers of Japan have devoted considerable efforts to locating the Occupation-initiated reforms in the context of Japan's phenomenal advance into the world economy.
However, while the policies of  the late 1940s were immensely important in providing an altered framework for economic and political activity, what becomes increasingly clear in the course of any serious investigation is the degree to which many factors in Japan's ‘success’ substantially predate the postwar reforms.
The importance of continuity has in some ways been underlined by the approach adopted in much of the Western, particularly US, scholarship on Japanese development.
In the frenzied atmosphere of the Cold War and its aftermath, historical research on Japan was strongly influenced by political imperatives.
The Pacific War was viewed less as a failure brought about by long-term institutional factors and class and other divisions within society.
Instead Japan's modern development was seen in more positive terms.
Japan was a country which had achieved ‘modernization’, which could offer a model to other industrializing nations; the militarism and aggression of the 1930s was an aberration, explicable largely in political terms, the ability of a small group to turn back the liberal trends of the twenties.
English language scholarship at this time failed to reflect the broad range of Japanese language scholarship, in particular the strong Marxist influence on interpretation and conceptualization.
To say that it has been the poorer for it is not to denigrate the work that was done.
Nevertheless, the broader range of perspectives reflected in recent scholarship has added immeasurably to our understanding of the pre-1950s era and the context it provides to postwar growth.
On the face of it, the postwar transformation of Japan appears even more astonishing than the prewar changes.
Japan is a ‘phoenix rising from the ashes’, whose postwar experience has been a ‘miracle’.
A single-minded commitment to economic recovery and growth has produced a dramatic rise in material standards of living and the world's second largest capitalist economy.
Economic growth has occurred within a framework of close ties with the US and membership of the capitalist camp.
At home a constitutional commitment to democracy has resulted in an almost unbroken dominance of conservative political parties.
Japan's pivotal role in the world economy has provoked a search for the reasons why Japan's economy has continued to prosper in the face of a lack of natural resources and a high degree of dependence on international trade.
Both developed and developing countries have sought to learn from Japan's experience.
Japanese society has changed substantially under the impact of material prosperity and international influences.
Yet many Japanese  consider their countrymen excessively insular for the contemporary world.
Calls for the increased ‘internationalization’ of the economy, of society and of political attitudes suggest that many of the postwar changes may be less substantive than are often imagined.
Such perceptions reinforce the need to view postwar Japan in the context of the country's earlier history.
Japan and the West
Japan's modern history is the story of a country in an international environment.
The active involvement between Japan and the Western world which began in the 1850s has been so important for both that a consideration of Japan's place in the world order is an appropriate starting point for any discussion of her recent history.
Yet geographical remoteness had earlier assisted the minimizing of contacts even with neighbouring states, and only 150 years ago Japan was one of the most isolated countries in the world.
The legacy of isolation remains of fundamental importance.
Japanese society has evolved singular features, which must be understood in the context of a very particular historical development, in which a profound sense of uniqueness, separateness and isolation has been a major element.
The shift away from isolation has been variously interpreted.
Was Japan recognizing herself as one country among many, balancing domestic priorities and concerns against the demands of the broader international order, opening up and adjusting her internal arrangements to effect a more cosmopolitan perspective?
Or was the change a more superficial one in which a crude, but no longer viable, form of isolation was replaced by a more subtle variant, in which the techniques of the West were adopted to preserve and strengthen an essentially unchanged sense of cultural uniqueness and social order, and ensure survival in an unpredictable and hostile world?
This ambiguity — not yet fully dispelled — has been of immense importance both to the international community and to Japan herself.
Japan experienced a brief period of European contact in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, but in 1639 the government of Japan, the Tokugawa (Edo) Bakufu, effectively  severed all contact with the West.
Its main motivation was a desire to exclude the potentially subversive influence of Christianity, which had proved impossible to divorce from trading contacts.
Foreign contact was seen as a threat to political stability.
All that was left of the previous Dutch, English, Spanish and Portuguese contacts was a small Dutch trading station restricted to the island of Deshima in Nagasaki, which remained the only formal Western presence for over 200 years.
Japanese nationals were cut off from personal contacts with Europeans and the import of foreign artefacts, books and anything which might convey Western knowledge was banned.
Japanese were prohibited from travelling abroad.
This ‘seclusion’ was not always as complete as the authorities might wish.
Some knowledge of Western scientific advances seeped in through ‘Dutch scholars’ based at Nagasaki.
In 1720 the ban on the import of foreign books was relaxed, and a series of encounters with foreign representatives from the late eighteenth century portended that seclusion could not permanently be maintained.
Nevertheless, despite these breaches in the policy, for a period of over two centuries Japan essentially developed in total isolation.
Despite sporadic contacts with China and Holland, when Japan was eventually forced to deal with the international environment she was almost totally ignorant of the intellectual, economic, scientific, technological and cultural advances made by the West during her seclusion period.
Of course Japan herself did not stand still during this time, but the substantial advances that did take place were not influenced by external models or ideas.
Herein lie the origins of a fundamental dichotomy that has dominated Japan's recent history; the simultaneous existence of both ‘indigenous’ and Western modes of thought and behaviour has resulted in acute cultural conflict.
Japanese attempts to change Japan in the last 150 years have been both imitative and derivative, but have been accompanied by conscious and unconscious retention of indigenous characteristics and the ‘simulation’ of traditional Japanese attributes, plus a fair measure of originality.
Although accommodation between the two cultural traditions is often achieved, the conflicts provoked have also been intense.
Reconciliation sometimes proves impossible, and continuing strains within Japanese society are the result.
That discord between indigenous and Western cultures would prove unremitting was suggested by the arguments of domestic political protagonists even before Japan was forced to reopen contacts with the West in the 1850s.
At one end of the spectrum of opinion were  xenophobic seclusionists who argued that relations with foreigners would be morally as well as politically disastrous.
At the other were those with some knowledge of Western technology who saw that Japan, like China, was militarily incapable of resisting Western force, and believed Japan had much to learn from Western culture.
Within Japan economic and social changes during the Tokugawa period imposed severe strains on the political system, but despite growing concerns over the implications for Japan of foreign advances in Asia, seclusion remained for many an article of faith.
Sporadic attempts by Western nations to penetrate Japan's isolation from the 1790s were all rebuffed.
During the 1840s official approaches increased, but were not pressed forcefully.
However, the growth of US interest in East Asia consequent on the opening of the American West and the expansion of US shipping and fishing activities in the Pacific produced more determined action.
In July 1853 Commodore Matthew Perry, officially commissioned by the US government to initiate relations with Japan, arrived in Uraga, at the southern end of Tokyo Bay, with a squadron of four ships.
He refused to make his approaches at Nagasaki, a customary means of diverting troublesome foreigners, and presented the Japanese with what was effectively an ultimatum, demanding that some agreement be reached to cover the provisioning of US ships, the treatment of shipwrecked American sailors and the development of formal relations.
He departed after announcing that he would return for his answer with a larger squadron the following spring.
The demands threw the Japanese ruling class into chaos.
The Edo Bakufu had dominated political decision-making for 250 years.
It now made open confession of its inability to cope alone with the crisis initiated by Perry's arrival.
Foreign relations now became a major factor in the final fall of the Tokugawa, whose impotence to resist foreign demands became apparent to all.
In the spring of 1854 Perry returned with an enlarged fleet of nine vessels.
He concluded with the Bakufu a convention opening Hakodate (in Hokkaido) and Shimoda as ports of refuge, permitting sailors to be returned and the appointment of consuls at a later date.
Consideration of trade was deferred.
Before long Britain and Russia had concluded similar treaties.
Further pressure was exerted for the establishment of full commercial relations.
In 1856 the first US consul, Townsend Harris, arrived in Japan, and it was largely due to his tenacity, and his use of the British as bogeymen, that the July 1858 US Japan Treaty of Amity and Commerce was concluded.
(It took as its model the Chinese treaty port system.)
This was the first  of several treaties concluded with the Western powers that year, known collectively as the Ansei Treaties, after the era during which they were concluded.
They are also frequently referred to as the ‘unequal’ treaties, since inequality was the essential keynote of their provisions.
Diplomatic representatives were to reside in Edo, and trade was to be free of official intervention, with more ports due to be opened in future years.
Western traders allowed into Japan were to be restricted to foreign settlements and other prescribed areas, but were to have the benefits of extraterritoriality, i.e. they were not to be subject to the laws of Japan, but any misdemeanour or problem (including those that concerned Japanese) was to be dealt with by a court presided over by the consul of the country of the national concerned.
Later agreements fixed tariffs for foreign goods coming into Japan at the low rate of 5 percent ad valorem ; and a ‘most-favoured-nation’ clause extended to each country new rights secured by any other.
Westerners in Japan were therefore virtually outside any control by the Japanese.
The rights Westerners enjoyed were not reciprocated for Japanese abroad.
This situation was defended on the grounds of Japan's relative backwardness in economic, social, legal and political terms.
The circumstances of Japan's opening to the West thus seemed calculated to reinforce rather than diminish a sense of separateness and need for security in the face of manifestly unequal treatment.
Admittedly the interaction of Western ambitions and Japanese response was such as to prevent Japan's becoming a European colony, or even suffering the impairment of sovereignty which befell China.
Nevertheless, an awareness that Japan was acutely vulnerable to threats of superior force, a resentment that Japan was considered inferior because she did not conform to Western standards and models, and a perception that other nations were prepared to act ‘unfairly’ to maximize the advantages that could be gained from any particular situation, made Japan determined to achieve equal status with the so-called Great Powers, or indeed, to surpass them.
Japan was both militarily and economically vulnerable and the lack of outside support for her resistance to great power domination reinforced a sense of national isolation which originated in national myth, grew in the seclusion period and was strengthened by an awareness of the cultural divide between Japan and the West.
Removal of this national vulnerability and dependence on other nations became the prime aim, and so compelling an aim was it that it came to be achieved by fair means or foul.
Diplomatic activity and international agreements became in a sense tactical, adhered to only when upholding the pursuit of the all-important ‘self-sufficiency’.
The first decade after the Ansei Treaties produced a rearguard action against a Western intrusion which Japan was powerless to resist.
Early foreign residents were exposed to sporadic physical attacks by extreme anti-foreign elements, and anti-foreignism continued to be exploited by the Bakufu's enemies to compound its political difficulties.
Most members of the ruling élite, though, were becoming increasingly aware that Western contacts were inevitable, and should not merely be passively endured but exploited to Japan's advantage.
Some knowledge of the West was encouraged and a few individuals travelled abroad.
The use of Western skills to strengthen Japan, often summed up in the slogan ‘Western technology, Japanese values’, was a course of action supported by many.
While the impact of renewed foreign contacts on both politics and the economy in these years was considerable, the growing power struggle within the country postponed any substantive attempt to resolve the issue of foreign relations on a long-term basis.
With the change of government in 1868, and the new regime's consolidation of its hold on power, attention was again brought to bear on the issue.
The new government's first thought was to attempt a revision of the treaties.
Various governments were approached, and in 1871 a top-level delegation was despatched to Europe and America in the hope of substantive negotiation.
Led by Prince Iwakura Tomomi, a court noble, the delegation included Okubo Toshimichi and Kido Kóin, two of the major architects of the Restoration, and Itó Hirobumi, who dominated the ruling oligarchy for much of the Meiji period.
Everywhere they were informed that treaty revision negotiation was premature.
The trip was to have beneficial results despite this.
Stunned to realize how very far and in how many aspects the West was ahead of Japan, the members of the mission made extensive observations on various aspects of the civilization of the nations of Europe and America.
Their return to Japan in 1873 saw the implementation of a strategy based on a realization that a repeal of the ‘unequal’ treaties could only be achieved by trying to bring Japan up to Western standards in the things Westerners considered important — legal system, political structure, economic legislation and a general level of ‘culture’and ‘civilization’.
Domestic reform had to precede any thought of international strength.
Competition with the West had to take place on the West's own terms.
The result of this realization was a massive programme of change along Western lines.
Changes had been partially attempted before the Restoration.
The last shogun, Tokugawa Keiki (Yoshinobu), had initiated tentative reforms under the aegis of the French representative Léon Roches.
Various domains had done likewise.
prior to the departure of the Iwakura Mission, the Meiji regime too had started a limited programme of industrialization and social change, much of it contingent on the dismantling of the political, social and economic structure that had prevailed under the Tokugawa.
The post-1873 programme, however, went far beyond the destruction of the old order.
The details of this programme are covered in greater depth elsewhere in this book.
It is enough here to note the span of its coverage and the scale of the undertaking.
Changes in political institutions culminated in cabinet government from 1885, the promulgation of a constitution in February 1889 and the opening of an elected assembly in 1890.
The haphazard bureaucracy of the early Meiji years was reorganized into a formal bureaucratic hierarchy, its entry governed by examination.
Radical reform of the legal system brought about the implementation of new civil and criminal codes modelled on European lines and Western-style judicial procedures.
A new state education system provided for universal basic education as well as vocational and higher education.
Powerful Western-style armed forces were built up.
The infrastructure of a modern state — for example, transport, post, banks — was created, and a variety of methods used to promote the building of a modern industrial sector and the exports to help pay for the undertaking.
The groundwork of this change was substantially completed by the turn of the century.
It was motivated in large part by the desire to rid Japan of the unequal treaties, which remained the arbiter of Japanese diplomatic activity almost to the end of the century.
No single country was taken as the model in implementing change.
The degree of eclecticism was considerable, and efforts were made to find the Western model, or the aspects of it, that would be most appropriate to the Japanese situation.
In the case of the constitution, for example, it was the German model that was the most influential, while in other spheres it might be the French, British, Dutch or American system that was most closely copied.
Nor was there any question of imposing an unadulterated Western model on Japan.
Western practices and ideas were modified to fit in with Japanese reality — though there were periods when ‘Westernization’ was very much the vogue.
Much emphasis continued  to be laid on the importance of Japanese tradition.
Not only did real or supposed elements of Japanese tradition — or simulations of such traditions — serve to focus national feeling and efforts, but a continuing assertion of the importance of ‘things Japanese’ also served to retain an element of self-respect in the face of foreign cultural pressures and the threat of cultural, economic and political imperialism.
The adoption of the programme for change served to accelerate and deepen contacts with the West.
As contacts came to comprise not just diplomatic intercourse, but a whole range of economic, military, social and cultural interests, the scope for both friendship and conflict became greater.
The opening of relations had largely been dictated by the powers' own interests in the East Asian region, but now the issues became far more complex; account had to be taken of factors as diverse as Japan's economic imperatives, the growth of Japanese military power and the emergence of national sentiment in response to foreign contact.
The unequal treaties did not provide for this growing complexity, but it was clearly reflected in a process of treaty revision negotiation which, despite its ultimate success, did little to reassure Japan regarding the benevolence of Western intentions.
By the mid 1880s the Japanese government felt that it could reopen negotiations concerning revision of the unequal treaties.
Some small successes had already been achieved; for example, by 1880 foreigners had agreed to entrust their mail to the Japanese postal system.
Between 1885 and 1887 Foreign Minister Inoue Kaoru, an ardent advocate of ‘Westernization’, negotiated with the Western powers.
Inoue reached an agreement on revision which provided for the legal system to be Westernized along approved lines, foreign judges to sit in cases involving non-Japanese nationals, and for tariffs to be raised without the achievement of tariff autonomy.
The agreement leaked out and Inoue was forced to resign in July 1887.
He was succeeded by Okuma Shigenobu, who re-negotiated to restrict the inclusion of foreign judges to the Supreme Court; foreign approval for the new legal code was also waived.
This agreement, too, was vigorously opposed, and was a major factor in a bomb attack on Okuma in 1889, in which he lost a leg.
The degree of hostility to these treaty revision proposals stemmed in large part from feelings that any continuing unsolicited Western involvement in the legal system was an insult to Japan, and that Westernization had in any case gone too far.
A few opposed the proposals on the ground that they gave international sanction  to an undemocratic regime, but it was the more nationalist elements which were particularly vocal, and there was a broad measure of support for their sentiments.
Even Japan's foreign legal advisers opposed any such agreement, so both efforts proved abortive.
As Japan's legal and political system conformed increasingly to Western models it became more and more difficult for foreign governments to refuse to entrust their nationals to Japanese jurisdiction.
The delay in conceding what Japanese considered legitimate sovereign rights brought a real danger of unilateral denunciation.
Most foreign nationals in Japan continued vociferously to oppose any change in their advantageous position, but their views had less and less weight with government representatives both on the spot and at home.
In summer 1893 another foreign minister, Mutsu Munemitsu, initiated a new round of negotiations with Britain which reached a successful conclusion in the Anglo Japanese Treaty of Commerce and Navigation of July 1894.
Under this agreement, British nationals in Japan would, after 1899, be subject to the prevailing Japanese laws.
The tariff problem was dealt with separately and a tariff convention was subsequently negotiated, but tariff autonomy was not achieved until 1911.
The other powers followed Britain in concluding new treaties.
In theory, at least, Japan was now the equal of the Western powers.
Before very long, however, it was to be made abundantly clear to her that legal equality was not enough; the ability to exert force was the key not merely to ascendancy, but also to genuine equality.
The nation that was to provide this salutary lesson was Russia, and it was a lesson that was to have a profound effect in Japan.
Japan's contacts with Tsarist Russia, the only Western power with which Japan shared a border, had remained relatively friendly while Japan was sufficiently weak to pose no threat.
There had been sporadic contact even before the 1850s treaties, and subsequent relations had been on the same unequal basis as those with the other powers.
In May 1875 Japan and Russia had concluded a treaty whereby Japan acknowledged Russian suzerainty over the island of Sakhalin in return for her own possession of the Kurile Isles, the archipelago running northeast from the coast of Hokkaido.
By the late 1880s, however, Japan had growing interests in mainland Asia, and there was a danger that Japan's attempts to assert herself in Korea and in Manchuria would bring her into direct confrontation with the expanding Russian empire.
Both countries claimed that in these areas of Northeast Asia their political and economic rights and interests were paramount to  national security.
Both wanted to extend their influence in the same region.
In 1894 war broke out between Japan and China over competing rights and interests in Korea.
Japan's newly modernized armed forces achieved a resounding victory, and the terms of the peace treaty exacted from the Chinese not only a massive indemnity, but also the cession to Japan of Formosa (Taiwan), the Pescadores Islands and the Liaodong peninsula, which lay off the Manchurian coast west of Korea.
The war marked Japan's acquisition of her first colonies, and made her a force to be reckoned with in East Asian affairs.
A Chinese victory had been widely expected, and many Westerners were shocked by the apparent totality of Japan's triumph.
For the first time the possibility of a serious non-white challenge to the nations of Europe or the United States was raised.
It was during these years that Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany enunciated his famous ‘yellow peril’ theory, the idea that the millions of China, led by Japan, would overrun Europe and destroy its civilization.
China was far from being in a state to overrun anyone, but the spectre had been evoked, and the West was now forced to note the existence of a non-white imperial power.
Yet Japan's gains in the war did not go uncontested.
Russia was vehemently opposed to cession of the Liaodong Peninsula which seemed to offer Japan a valuable foothold from which to extend her influence in Manchuria and northern China.
Within a week of the signing of the peace treaty, in April 1895, Russia, Germany and France had joined forces in what was known as the Triple (Tripartite) Intervention.
The three powers issued a joint ultimatum to Japan demanding retraction of the Liaodong cession on the grounds that it endangered Beijing and invalidated Korean independence.
The ultimatum contained the implied threat of military force.
Japan looked around for diplomatic support, but this was not forthcoming from either Britain or the United States.
Japan was in no state to risk military confrontation with Russia, backed up by France and Germany.
She was forced to concede, accepting in return an additional indemnity of 30 million taels, which China could ill afford to pay.
This tripartite intervention left a legacy of resentment in Japan, a bitterness at being unable to retain concessions fairly won in war except with the sanction of other powers.
This long-lasting resentment was far in excess of the significance of the Liaodong peninsula itself.
It served to stimulate further Japan's belief that she was highly vulnerable in military terms and that her only  course for survival as a strong and independent state must be the strengthening of her own military capacity.
This resentment was strengthened still further in 1898 when as part of the struggle for slices of the Chinese ‘melon’ Russia herself took out a twenty-five year lease on the southern tip of the Liaodong Peninsula.
Japan was powerless to stop her.
The threat of Russo-Japanese confrontation grew around the turn of the century.
Japan, bolstered by victory against China, expended considerable efforts and sums of money on the expansion of her armed forces.
Russia strove to complete the Siberian Railway and its opening to traffic in 1903 facilitated troop transport to the area.
A series of agreements from 1898 onwards tried to channel the tension between the two powers along ‘Manchuria for Korea’ lines, i.e. Russia was to have the dominant interest in Manchuria, while Japan dominated in Korea.
Yet the degree to which Russia tried to control Manchuria, as well as retaining Korean interests, seemed intolerable to many in Japan.
Following the eight-nation occupation of Beijing during the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 Russia failed to withdraw completely from Chinese territory, occupying a considerable part of the territory of Manchuria.
Representations and ultimata from Japan and other nations were ignored, and it was this Russian occupation of Manchuria that was to serve as the immediate casus belli of Russo Japanese confrontation.
The more fundamental causes of conflict lay far deeper — in the basic conflict of two powers anxious to expand their interests and influence in the same region.
Japan had for several years been building up her armed forces in anticipation of conflict with Russia, but many hoped that matters could still be settled amicably.
A sizeable body of opinion, led by the veteran statesman Itó Hirobumi, advocated alliance with Russia with a view to reaching a local settlement.
Mistrust of Russia was widespread, though, and discussions with Britain concerning a possible alliance were also carried on during 1901.
Britain was amenable to these approaches; alliance with Japan was seen as a means of containing Russian expansion in the East, avoiding a Russo-Japanese partition of Northeast Asia and preserving the treaty system in China.
The Anglo-Japanese Alliance was concluded in January 1902.
It recognized Japan's dominant interests in Korea.
Its main provision was that if either party were engaged in war with one other country in East Asia the other party would remain uninvolved, but should two enemies become involved the other party to the alliance would  join forces.
This provision was highly significant in terms of any Japanese — Russian conflict.
Russia was formally allied to France, and Germany too was keen to encourage Russian activity in Northeast Asia.
Any assistance to Russia in a struggle with Japan in East Asia would involve these powers in war with Britain, so the alliance effectively restricted any such conflict to Russia and Japan alone.
It thus encouraged the Japanese to adopt a firmer stance in negotiations with Russia.
The Japanese also viewed the alliance as a considerable accolade.
For several decades Britain's policy had been splendid isolation, and that Europe's most powerful nation should emerge from that isolation by concluding an alliance with Japan was seen in Japan as a triumph.
During 1903 relations between the two powers became increasingly strained as Russia failed to withdraw her troops on schedule from Manchuria.
On 6 February 1904 Japan cut off diplomatic relations.
Attacks were launched on Russian held territory and on 10 February war was declared.
The Japanese advanced rapidly, crossing into Manchuria in May, and moving up the Liaodong Peninsula, but the pace soon slowed.
Port Arthur (Lushun), at the tip of the Liaodong Peninsula, held out until early 1905, after eight months of a siege into which the Japanese threw everything they had.
A series of hard fought campaigns brought Russian withdrawal, but the Japanese victories were costly and Japan's resources to continue the war were fast being exhausted.
The Manchurian winter took its toll on both sides.
With ships of the Russian Far Eastern fleet based at Port Arthur badly damaged, or blockaded in port, the Baltic fleet was sent to the scene of battle.
Departing in October 1904, it eventually reached the waters between Japan and Korea in May 1905 (after a tortuous journey round the Cape of Good Hope), only to be virtually annihilated by a Japanese fleet under Admiral Tó0gó0 Heihachiró0 in the Straits of Tsushima.
Moves for peace had begun as early as summer 1904, when it was becoming apparent that the struggle would be long drawn out.
As the war progressed the two combatants became increasingly receptive to representations from non-involved powers.
While Russia had greater reserves of economic and military strength, revolution threatened at home.
Japan had few reserves to continue the struggle, though to have admitted this would have courted political disaster.
In August 1905, President Roosevelt of the US brought the two adversaries together for a conference at Portsmouth, New Hampshire.
The Portsmouth Treaty of 5 September recognized  Japan's dominant interests in Korea.
Russian troops were to be withdrawn from Manchuria.
Japan succeeded to all Russian rights in Manchuria and gained possession of the southern half of the island of Sakhalin.
Yet the victory failed to produce gains such as an indemnity, which the Japanese public had been led to expect.
Announcement of the terms in the late summer of 1905 led to a wave of resentment among a public which had constantly been informed that Russia was on her knees.
At an illegal rally opposing the peace terms in Hibiya Park, Tokyo, on 5 September, speakers fired chauvinist sentiments among crowds who then clashed with police.
This sparked off two days of rioting, with widespread looting and burning: it was put down only after the declaration of martial law.
Hundreds were wounded, including some fatalities, and over 2,000 arrested.
The riots demonstrated the ease with which public opinion in Japan was moved to chauvinism and nationalism where foreign policy was concerned, as well as highlighting a gap between reality and what the public was led to believe, which was recurrent up to the postwar period.
Although the treaty was ratified, Prime Minister Katsura was forced to resign.
Victory in her first war with one of the European powers had the paradoxical effect not of reassuring Japan that she was now a major power able to compete effectively with the others as at least an equal but, instead, of convincing her of her continuing vulnerability and the need to strengthen further her military capability.
The war and the domestic Russian situation together did, however, shelve for a while the problem of confrontation in Northeast Asia.
A rapprochement in Russo Japanese relations was marked by a series of agreements between the two countries in 1907–16 covering the apportionment of rights and interests in the East Asian area.
These agreements were renounced after the fall of the Tsarist regime in 1917, and Japan became one of the nations to intervene against the Bolshevik seizure of power.
In 1918 Japan announced that 12,000 soldiers would be sent to Siberia to assist anti-revolutionary forces, but the contingent eventually numbered over 70,000, the increase claimed necessary to protect Japanese interests in Manchuria.
In May 1920 Soviet partisans killed some 120 Japanese soldiers and civilians at the town of Nikolaevsk and Japan also occupied the northern half of Sakhalin to enforce a demand for compensation.
Unable to extricate herself despite the Soviet advance, Japanese troops stayed in Siberia after the remainder of the foreign contingent had been withdrawn, leaving only in 1922.
Northern Sakhalin was not evacuated until 1925, when a series of sticky negotiations between Japan and various Soviet authorities eventually culminated in recognition of the USSR and the restoration of diplomatic relations.
From then on the course of relations was again downhill; there was an inherent ideological conflict between the two governments, and the common border (with Japanese troops in both Manchuria and Korea) was a constant source of tension.
Each country regarded the other as a major military threat.
Thus for a time after 1905 alien influence in Northeast Asia became a less immediate question.
The problem which dominated Japan's foreign relations following the war with Russia was the highly sensitive one of Japanese emigration to the US, and the situation of the large immigrant community on the west coast.
Racial discrimination was widespread, most Americans showing an unwillingness to treat Japanese in the same way as white immigrants.
For Japanese to be discriminated against because of the colour of their skin, despite Japan's success in proving herself the military and political equal of other powers, implied the virtual impossibility of Japan's being accepted as a full equal by the industrialized nations of the West.
Japanese emigrants had been going abroad since the 1880s, the majority of them to Hawaii, then an independent kingdom.
From there many went to the mainland US, especially after the US annexation of Hawaii in 1897.
By 1899 California had a 35,000-strong Japanese community, economically successful, culturally discrete and less inclined to integrate into the ‘melting pot’ than most other national groups.
The arrival of increasing numbers of Japanese exacerbated the tensions.
By 1908 there were over 100,000.
Open discrimination against Japanese in California and a threat of total exclusion forced negotiations between the two countries, and the problem was temporarily dealt with by voluntary Japanese restrictions, but the emigration question remained a source of anxiety in Japan.
Many believed Japanese territory alone could not sustain the rapidly growing population, and the economic pressures for emigration, mainly to Manchuria, Brazil and the US, were considerable.
During the 1920s these pressures became, if anything, even stronger, but in 1924 US legislation effectively placed a ban on Japanese immigration.
The exclusion on the grounds of race of a people who laid as much emphasis on their own ethnic origins as did the Japanese, and who implicitly believed in their own superiority, appeared an unpardonable insult.
The immigration issue left a long legacy of US Japanese hostility  which surfaced in the injustices suffered by many US citizens of Japanese descent during the war with Japan, 1941–5.
The outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 brought a permanent change in Japan's position vis-à-vis the West.
Under the terms of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, Japan was not obliged to enter the war as a belligerent, but Foreign Minister Kató urged the benefits to Japan of joining in, including possible gains in East Asia.
Nor was a desire to retaliate for the Triple Intervention of 1895 totally absent.
Japan declared war on Germany on 23 August, seized German interests and territory in China, and the German Pacific colonies of the Marshall, Mariana and Caroline Islands.
She played little further part as a combatant, stalling later British requests for reinforcements and providing minimal naval assistance in the Mediterranean.
She was thus in a position to reap considerable economic benefits from the conflict.
Japan supplied export markets formerly dominated by the belligerents, as well as supplying the belligerents themselves.
The war years integrated the Japanese economy far more closely into the international economy, and made Japan a major competitor to the capitalist economies of the West.
The pressures of war also diverted Great Power attention away from East Asia, leaving Japan a freer hand to extend her interests there and bringing about a permanent weakening in the ability of Western powers to influence affairs in the area.
Formal entry into the war also entitled Japan to a victor's place at the 1919 Versailles Conference, with a vote equal to those of France, Britain and the US.
Japan was awarded former German interests in China, although China refused to accede to these concessions.
She participated in the founding of the League of Nations and was on the Council, though she failed to get a racial equality clause inserted in the League's charter.
The German pacific Islands continued to be held by Japan under a League of Nations mandate.
By 1919 Japan had secured for herself a formal position as one of the world's most powerful nations.
As such she became integral to international strategic thinking and power politics in subsequent years.
It became apparent that Japan was not to be viewed merely within the context of East Asia.
That the implications of her increasing influence were world-wide was demonstrated in the postwar disarmament conferences of the 1920s and 1930s with their emphasis on the naval balance between Britain, the US and Japan.
In a world where cooperative security and attempts to reach multilateral, international agreements were replacing formal alliances and balance of power diplomacy, Japan  did not seek to exploit unduly her new found recognition.
The growth of the economy — and the problems it caused — persuaded Japanese governments during the 1920s that it was in the country's interest to go along with the internationalist trend.
The Anglo Japanese Alliance was allowed to lapse, and Japan became a signatory to two multilateral pacts relating to East Asian affairs.
This peaceful strategy eventually failed not so much in the face of Western attempts to restrict Japan's military strength to a lower level than that of Britain or the US, but in the face of rising nationalism and militarism at home and the economic depression and protectionism on which they flourished.
Despite this, Japan's own perception of her relationship with the West remained one of insecurity.
This sentiment was based less on perceptions of military inferiority than on an awareness of economic vulnerability, and a sense that, because of history and geographical isolation, Japan's interests differed from those of other industrial nations.
Through the 1920s growing pressures were exerted by a rapidly increasing population, a growing industrial sector largely dependent on imported raw materials and fuel — for example, raw cotton, iron ore and oil — and a lack of self-sufficiency in basic foodstuffs such as soya beans and rice.
The course of agricultural and industrial development between 1919 and 1935 produced abundant evidence that Japan was closely tied to the fluctuations of the world economy and highly constrained in the resources at her disposal during a period of growing protectionism.
The pressure to safeguard by more than diplomatic or economic means external sources of supply, territories for emigration and markets for Japanese goods, coincided with growing nationalism and army influence from the late 1920s, crystallizing in efforts to secure control over large parts of East and Southeast Asia and build an autarkic economic sphere.
Within the 1920s cooperative framework Japan had sought to enhance her position in China, but as domestic conditions in China by the late 1920s increasingly undermined the rights of the powers there, Japan's interests in adjoining areas also seemed threatened.
In 1931 Japan resorted to force and occupied Manchuria, but the West, absorbed in its own problems, was able to turn a blind eye to such encroachments within the confines of East Asia.
The Lytton Commission's report to the League of Nations on the Manchurian incident in effect found Japan guilty of aggression and brought her withdrawal from the League, but the phrasing of the report was highly conciliatory and there was no further action.
In 1937 Sino-Japanese friction  erupted into full-scale war, but even this failed to rally much more than token support for China in the West.
However, as foreign ambitions and the dragging on of the war in China increased the threat of Japanese action in neighbouring territories, the implications for European colonies and nationals, as well as for the broader Asia — Pacific region, forced the industrialized West to take notice.
Apart from encroachments on Western-held territories, the trend in Japanese strategic thinking made it inevitable that the crisis in East Asia, resulting from the China War, would become closely tied up with the course of events in Europe.
Many Japanese identified with Germany and Italy in their resentment at the privileges of older established powers.
In November 1936 Japan and Germany concluded an Anti-Comintern Pact, in which they were later joined by Italy.
Mounting nationalist sentiment in Japan, admiration for the Nazi state and its military successes, concern about possible US involvement in the European and China Wars, and fear of Russian military build-up all concentrated pressure for a full alliance.
Delayed by domestic opposition, this was eventually achieved by the conclusion of the Tripartite Pact of September 1940, a time when few doubted the Axis powers would be victorious in Europe.
It pledged assistance for any signatory attacked by a country not currently involved in the European or China wars.
By this pact Japan ranged herself firmly against the European nations with colonies in East and Southeast Asia.
In autumn 1940 Japan moved into northern French Indo-China in an attempt to restrict supplies to the Chinese, and as a preliminary to creating a Japanese-controlled zone in Southeast Asia.
This was done through agreement with Vichy France.
In July 1941 she made further advances, which raised real fears for the safety of the oil-rich Dutch East Indies and other Southeast Asian colonies.
The US was no longer prepared to stand idly by.
Economic sanctions, including an embargo on oil and restrictions on other key exports to Japan, were introduced in the hope of pressurizing Japan into withdrawal.
These sanctions, depriving Japan of crucial imports, only served to reinforce Japan's feeling of vulnerability concerning raw materials and fuel supplies.
As stockpiles dwindled, the continuing impasse in negotiations rendered military conflict increasingly likely.
The decision to extend Japanese control to areas of Southeast Asia was not taken lightly.
A southern advance which risked conflict with, for example, the US, posed strategic difficulties for the defence of Japan's northern front in Korea and Manchuria against the Soviet  Union.
Frictions along this border were constant in the late 1930s.
Serious confrontations with Soviet forces on the Manchuria and Korean borders at Zhanggufeng and Nomonhan in 1938–9, in both of which the Japanese came off worse, heightened concern at the growing strength of Russian forces.
Concentration on one flank rendered the other one vulnerable, and priorities were disputed.
The army, which would bear the brunt of any Northeast Asian conflict, and the navy, with its dependence on Southeast Asian oil, were deeply divided.
In April 1941 Japan and Russia concluded a non-aggression (neutrality) pact, which appeared to offer both of them short-term security.
The German offensive on Russia only two months later shocked Japan, and many Japanese argued for the breaking of the non-aggression pact.
Instead, feeling more secure on the empire's northern borders, Japan's government resolved on a southwards advance in the autumn of 1941.
A Soviet spy network in Tokyo, led by the German Richard Sorge, revealed this information to Moscow, enabling vast numbers of Siberian troops to be released for the Western front and prevent the fall of Moscow.
Japan's advance into Southeast Asia was a calculated gamble.
While French and Dutch colonies might pose little resistance, and while the British were hindered by entanglement in Europe, provocation of conflict with the resource-rich US was potentially disastrous.
Strategists decided that Japan's only chance of victory was to deliver a pre-emptive strike against the US and hope for a series of lightning victories which would force the allies to the negotiating table.
A forlorn hope that the US might make concessions on its demands for Japanese withdrawal before dwindling stockpiles compelled Japan to engage in war to renew them, prolonged negotiations after the decision for a southward advance was reached in September 1941, but by November few were convinced there was any alternative to attacking the US.
On 7 December 1941 the Japanese launched a pre-emptive strike on the Hawaiian base of Pearl Harbor, putting much of the US air and naval force there out of action.
The attack on US territory revealed that the US was ill-prepared for conflict, but provoked united resistance to any thought of a negotiated settlement.
In the early stages of the war things went much as the Japanese had planned.
They mounted immediate attacks on European colonies by sea and by land from Indo-China and by mid-1942 were in control of much of Southeast Asia, including the Philippines, Malaya, Singapore and the Dutch East Indies.
Their empire stretched from  Manchuria in the north to New Guinea in the south.
Contrary to Japanese hopes, however, the fall of Britain and China apparently imminent in 1941 failed to materialize.
Gradually mobilizing the vast resources of the nation, the full might of US arms, backed up by British and Commonwealth contingents, was directed against Japan.
The Japanese advance was halted with the sinking of four Japanese aircraft carriers at the Battle of Midway in June 1942.
The final allied victory against Japan came only after a long and costly struggle.
Military casualties on both sides were substantial.
The hundreds and thousands of civilian casualties included citizens of Southeast Asian countries, interned allied citizens and Japanese caught in the allied advance and the bombing of the Japanese mainland.
Not until mid-1944 did a double offensive on the Philippines and the Japanese-occupied pacific islands begin to bring Japan itself within reach of allied forces.
These offensives enabled the bombing of the Japanese mainland and cut Japan off from the empire so crucial to any continuing war effort.
By mid-1945 the country was economically, militarily and psychologically on its knees, but unconditional surrender was still resisted.
Allied fears that mainland Japan itself would have to be invaded at the suggested cost of millions of fatalities on both sides, as well as a wish to pre-empt Soviet involvement, led to the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, respectively, on 6 and 9 August 1945.
On 8 August the USSR unilaterally renounced its 1941 non-aggression pact with Japan and invaded Manchuria and Sakhalin.
Japan agreed to unconditional surrender on 14 August.
There followed the first foreign occupation of Japan in its long history.
The Occupation brought to Japan a succession of radical institutional reforms.
It also brought prolonged exposure to the values and beliefs of the world's most powerful and prosperous capitalist nation.
In the circumstances of the Occupation, Japan experienced a growing emphasis on material advancement and a wave of foreign influences as great as, if not greater than, anything in the Meiji period.
The stress on material advancement was initially born of necessity.
Japan's pre-1945 attempts to achieve national self-sufficiency through being, to quote Peter Duus, ‘truculently self-assertive’, had been manifestly unsuccessful.
The Japanese ended the Pacific War penniless, starving and exhausted; the economy was in ruins.
The first priority of these years was the provision of the basic requirements of life.
For a while peace, work, food, clothing and  shelter were all that most people hankered after, and the basic rebuilding of the economy and their shattered way of life took some two decades.
The Tokyo Olympics of 1964 marked the end of this period.
For the Japanese they symbolized Japan's re-emergence onto the international scene and the effective rebuilding of Japan's economy and society.
Yet material prosperity is in no way guaranteed.
The desire for self-sufficiency and material security has remained a key arbiter of foreign relations.
In a world of conflict, tensions and national interests Japan can never be assured of the material base for economic prosperity and military strength.
The best she can do is to try to secure it by non-military, legal means, and this she has done with a fair measure of success.
Defeat followed by foreign rule paved the way for a new receptivity to foreign influences in general.
War between Japan and the nations of the West had been accompanied by a partial rejection of Western cultural influences.
The Japanese had always made an effort to preserve and emphasize domestic traditions, and such tendencies strengthened during the more nationalist 1930s.
As the nation became increasingly militarized under the pressure of fighting with China, Japan's leaders again turned to Japanese traditions and values as sources of national unity.
Despite an admiration among certain circles for National Socialism, for example, many aspects of Western culture met with disfavour, though Western economic, industrial and military practices were widely followed.
Japan had reverted to ‘Western technology, Japanese values,— or so, at least, many Japanese liked to think.
For a while it proved a highly successful combination, but eventually it became apparent that the Japanese spirit could not compensate for inferiority in industrial strength and natural resources in dispelling any sense of national insecurity.
One effect of the nation's defeat was that many of the elements of ‘Japanese spirit’, as well as the individuals who had most vocally espoused them, were discredited.
Something of a spiritual vacuum prevailed following the discrediting of the orthodoxy hitherto imposed, and the values that had been so obviously tied up with the victor's success and the material prosperity of the US seemed to be espoused with enthusiasm.
The Occupation years saw a spread of Western values and customs.
Along with democracy and equality came chewing gum and Christmas.
The influx of Western innovation has continued ever since.
The tendency was reinforced by the subsequent efforts of Japanese governments and of the US authorities to incorporate Japan into the framework of the Western  camp.
Yet acceptance of the Western ‘package’ was rarely total and frequently superficial, and, as the inevitable reaction against the Occupation changes set in, receptivity to what the West had to offer became far more selective.
Moreover, it would be a mistake to identify commitment to a close relationship with the US with a wholehearted acceptance of Western influences in general.
The conservatives who have been the most vocal advocates of alliance with the US and opponents of communist totalitarianism, have been at the same time among the most strident supporters of Japanese rearmament and the revival of ‘traditional values’.
Socialist parties have often rejected such a close connection with the Western alliance, but claimed a commitment to pacifism, neutrality and equality also found among left-wing parties in the West.
Japan regained her independence long before the period of rebuilding was over, but the terms of that independence dictated Japan's international alignment in later years.
Even while the Occupation was continuing the pressures of the Cold War and the conflict in Korea pushed US policy in the direction of rebuilding a strong Japan as a capitalist ally in East Asia.
When the Occupation formally ended in 1952 following the conclusion of the San Francisco Peace Treaty the previous year, a Mutual Security Treaty between the two countries also came into force.
Renewed in 1960, 1970 and 1980 with only slight modifications, it has kept Japan firmly within the US camp.
Under the treaty the role of Japanese troops is almost entirely limited to defence of Japanese territory and sea approaches, but the stationing of US troops on Japanese soil could embroil Japan in any conflict in East Asia.
While many Japanese have been in favour of close relations with the US, the opposition parties in the Diet have consistently opposed the Security Treaty.
The renewal in 1960 provoked a major political crisis and a storm of protest throughout Japan, not only from those opposed to the treaty per se , but from those who feared it might encourage Japanese rearmament and the placing of nuclear weapons on Japanese soil.
The treaty was eventually ratified but the crisis brought down the Kishi government and produced the most widespread political protests of the postwar years.
While similar agitation has not recurred, the government cannot take for granted universal support of its pro-US stance.
The Security Treaty, with its underlying motive of making Japan a strong ally in the Pacific area, has thus served to reinforce the close ties with the US that were forged during the Occupation period.
Japan remains tied to the Western camp partly because  the relationship has become integral to her economy and politics over forty years' association, and partly because it appears to offer the best defence against Soviet aggression and encroachment —a long-standing fear — in Northeast Asia, and the best hope of Japan's integrity overall in a world where she has been proved to be economically and militarily vulnerable.
The relationship with the US has remained the most important single arbiter of Japan's foreign relations.
It has provided the framework for the acceptance of Japan as a leading member of the top Western nations' club, on the basis of an apparent willingness to accept many Western political and cultural values and a devotion to the pursuit of economic activity within the parameters of the US-dominated international economy.
Japan seems again to have become an honorary Westerner.
Japan's growing influence as a member of the Western camp has encouraged a greater questioning within Japan of how far to accept what the West has to offer.
Japan's incorporation into the American sphere of influence, her military weakness, her lack of diplomatic room for manoeuvre and her concentration on domestic rebuilding for some twenty years after the war meant that major changes or developments in Japan's relations with the West were infrequently the result of positive action on the part of Japan.
Growing international influence since then has led to a reappraisal of earlier decisions and trends.
The exercise of new found autonomy has been more apparent in the cultural than in the diplomatic sphere.
As the country has become economically and militarily stronger, partially concealed ambiguities regarding interaction with the West have resurfaced.
While the appetite for knowledge of concrete scientific and technical advancement remains unabated, abstract values have come under closer scrutiny.
With the imported institutions and forms of organization acquired during the Occupation increasingly taking on a distinctive ‘Japanese’ look, a re-emergence of the ‘Western technology, Japanese values’syndrome seems on the cards.
In a world where communications are instantaneous and Japan is closely integrated into the international economy, an absolute distinction of this kind is clearly not feasible but the pattern highlights an ongoing dilemma.
Japan faces a fundamental problem in reaching an accommodation between those values and practices whose origins are primarily indigenous and those that are broadly termed ‘Western’.
The persistence of this dilemma is made more likely by the tendency of the Japanese to view themselves as unique and separate.
In Western Europe, unlike the US, physical distance, ignorance and the legacy of the war produced a strong reluctance on the part of many to interest themselves in Japan until forced to acknowledge her economic importance.
Although some Japanese still harbour a nostalgia for lost European greatness, the ‘Western’ package which formerly embraced all cultural, intellectual, physical and institutional characteristics with a source in Western Europe or the US has now come to mean almost exclusively the latter.
Neither in terms of practical diplomacy, nor as a factor in Japanese cultural or even economic relations, is Europe of remotely comparable importance to the US.
Japan's incorporation into the US sphere of influence brought with it hostility with the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union and its allies refused to sign the San Francisco peace Treaty in September 1951 on the grounds that it violated an agreement on ‘one peace’ reached in 1942, and condemned the Security Treaty.
Diplomatic relations between the two nations were resumed in 1955, but a peace treaty has yet to be signed, largely due to disagreements over possession of certain of the Kurile Islands taken by the Soviet Union at the end of the war.
This dispute is known by the Japanese as the ‘Northern Territories problem’.
Irredentism remains a powerful issue for many Japanese and can conveniently be used to fuel anti-Russian sentiment when required.
For the Soviet Union, the return to any nation of territory occupied during the war would create a dangerous precedent.
For the Japanese, the way in which the Russians gained possession of the disputed islands — by breaking the non-aggression pact which operated, and by an opportunistic advance into Japanese-held Northeast Asia when it was evident that the Japanese were already on their last legs — makes Japan doubly unwilling to allow Russia their possession.
The ownership of the islands was not clarified by the 1951 peace Treaty, and this problem has continued to obstruct close relations between the two nations.
With the rest of the non-Asian world, contacts have been less disputatious, comprising mostly cultural interchange, tourism and now business contacts.
Japan has become a leader of the Pacific area and to this extent cultivates close contacts not only with Southeast Asia, but also with Australasia, a valuable source of raw materials, where interest in Japan has become substantial.
Contacts with the third world nations of Africa and America are relatively sparse.
Countries which can neither supply raw materials nor offer  substantial markets play relatively little part in Japanese thinking.
Aid has been correspondingly low, and although amounts have increased since the mid-1980s, much is still in loans and benefiting Japanese business interests.
The main foci of international relations remain the American connection and the pursuit of trade and investment.
The relationship with the West, and since 1945 particularly with the US, has been the factor which sets the last 150 years of Japanese history apart from earlier centuries.
Apart from the obvious importance of this relationship on the world stage, it has been a decisive shaping influence on the nature of Japan herself.
The period has been marked by dramatic swings: from total isolation to wide-ranging programmes of Western emulation, from alliance with imperial Britain to alignment with Nazi Germany, from all-out war against the US to a seeming acceptance of American dominance in the political, military, economic and cultural spheres.
It is possible to detect underlying continuities in Japan's approach to international relations.
While the old policy of seclusion was proved non-viable, the opening to the West has never been total and unambiguous.
Some elements of what the Japanese termed ‘Western’ were accepted with enthusiasm and effectiveness — notably in technological modernization and economic development.
Others, for example social norms and cultural values, were little affected.
Everywhere there was a persistent tension between Western forms of organization and operation and the real modus operandi they often cloaked.
A continuous thread is also apparent in Japan's dealings with other countries.
Having accepted isolation as unfeasible, Japan's main concern has been — logically enough — to secure her needs from abroad.
These comprise raw materials, fuel and food, and the foreign exchange required to purchase them.
Methods have differed enormously, but the objective is clearcut.
Paradoxically, Japan's relations with Western countries have continued to be profoundly influenced by a sense of isolation.
The circumstances of the move — from seclusion and complete vulnerability to the position of one of the world's most powerful nations, both prewar and postwar — failed to dispel a feeling that, in the end, Japan stood alone.
Foreign relations and international involvement have never wholly lost their sense of being essentially instrumental in nature.
Japan and Asia
Long before Western contact Japan had contacts with other Asian nations.
Geographical proximity meant that these relations have continued to be of crucial importance through into the post-1945 period.
Japan's pre-1945 conflicts with the West, too, were largely sparked off by disputes over Japanese ambitions in Asia.
The events of the century up to 1945 convey an impression of Japanese domination and aggression in Asia, but in reality the nature of the relationships between Japan and her neighbours has been fluctuating and ambiguous.
Notwithstanding the significance of Japanese ambitions in continental Asia in the modern period, for many centuries Japan managed to maintain a substantial degree of isolation from the mainland.
A sea passage of over 200 kilometres from mainland Asia and hostile terrain enabled her to develop more or less free of some of the pressures encouraged by closer geographical proximity — for example, population movements and territorial aggression —and fostered cultural and racial homogeneity.
Only once before the twentieth century was Japan threatened with invasion; the Mongol invasions of 1274 and 128I were repelled with the aid of natural forces, when the original kamikaze (divine wind) annihilated much of the invasion fleet.
From the sixth century to the late nineteenth century Japan's only military involvement on the Asian mainland was Hideyoshi's short-lived and abortive invasion of Korea in 1592.
Diplomatic missions were received and sent from time to time, and during the sixteenth century Japanese traders and pirates dominated the seas of Southeast Asia, but both channels of contact virtually ceased in the seclusion period.
A small amount of trade with China, Korea and the Ryúkyú Islands remained.
Japan thus  remained isolated while yet being part of Asia, and the imposed seclusion after 1639 reinforced this degree of detachment.
Yet Japan was by no means immune from continental influences, and her historical development has been substantially affected by them.
Most important were those emanating from China.
The civilization of China is among the oldest in the world, and China has throughout Japan's history been the largest and most powerful of her Asian neighbours.
The earliest continental influences came to Japan from China, either directly or via Korea, and mutual attitudes between the two countries have been shaped over 1,500 years and more.
The Chinese and the Japanese call China ‘the middle country’, a term denoting a long-standing view that China was the centre of the civilized world.
Chinese influence on all aspects of Japanese society and politics was immense, and while this did not preclude friction between the two countries, nor the development of indigenous Japanese cultural traits, many of the institutions, ideas and attitudes important to Japanese history owe a great deal to China.
The eighth century saw the wholesale introduction of Chinese political institutions, religious ideas and legal theory, as well as Chinese educational practice.
From China, Japan obtained her first writing system, and hence much of her subsequent linguistic development.
The introduction of Chinese practices and ideas continued on a lesser scale for the next eight centuries.
While the Japanese often modified Chinese customs, and domestic developments frequently rendered Japanese practice far removed from the original Chinese model, Chinese-based cultural practices remained highly significant in Japan.
As late as the early nineteenth century, for example, formal education still consisted largely of study of the Chinese Confucian classics, which served also as the vehicle for achieving literacy.
Many letters and formal documents were written in Chinese rather than Japanese.
At the same time the orthodoxy upon which the political, economic and social status quo was based was a Japanese version of Neo-Confucianism.
A belief in Chinese superiority stemming from a closer approximation to the natural order of the cosmos governed China's relations with neighbouring peoples, which over centuries had been conducted on a tributary basis.
Under this system China's many satellites, including Japan, acknowledged the superiority of Chinese culture by making regular tribute payments.
Japan's payment of tribute had lapsed long before the modern period, and such payments had ceased to be the normal basis for trading contacts, but the tribute system and the superior — inferior relationship upon which it was premised remained the basic concept behind the conduct of formal relations between countries.
The long heritage of Chinese influence and superiority has remained a crucial factor in relations between the two countries throughout the modern period.
Before 1945 Japan was guilty of substantial imperialist ambitions and aggression in China, and China was often too weak to resist her neighbour's demands, but China retained a special position in Japanese sentiment and a certain pre-eminence in Japanese eyes.
The power of the Chinese empire also influenced Japan's relations with other Asian kingdoms.
In as far as they existed at all, relations with these countries were conducted as between tributaries of the Chinese empire.
Only Korea was close enough to Japan to command a formal relationship of any significance, but this, too, was virtually halted during the Tokugawa period, when the kingdom of Korea, like Japan, adopted a seclusion policy.
By the mid-late nineteenth century these three East Asian kingdoms were weak and divided, and the East Asian cultural area no longer possessed the might of earlier years.
China itself was riven with rebellion, and the ruling Qing dynasty was in decline, unable to withstand the depredations of Western traders and governments or to give the leadership it had been able to offer in former times.
Korea was small and impoverished, burdened by a highly reactionary ruling class which, unlike that in Japan, proved unable to adapt to a changed international environment.
So, as Japan re-entered the wider world and embarked on a programme of change to deal with it, in dealing with her neighbours Japan faced a mirror image of her relations with the West.
Where the West was far stronger than she was, the Asian countries were weaker.
To advance Japan had to learn from the West and drop at least some of her former respect for China.
Where the political imperative with the West was to avoid being conquered and dominated, the issue with Japan's Asian neighbours was whether Japan should participate in the new imperialist domination.
Following the establishment of treaty relations with the West in the 1850s Chinese merchants and coolies formed a sizeable contingent in the open ports, and many Chinese served as crew on the ships which used them.
Only after the revolution of 1868, however, did Japan concern herself with more formal relations with her Asian neighbours.
When she did so, disputes soon arose.
As Japan's strength grew, so did her ambitions on the Asian mainland  and her ability to advance them.
The motivations — both many and complex — behind Japan's desire to exert her influence in Asia have received considerable attention from historians.
Among the earliest was a desire to channel domestic discontent away from the regime of the time.
From the 1880s many Japanese also saw their strength on the continent as a strategic and military necessity for their defence against other powers.
As the economy grew its need for raw materials and markets expanded, and the Asian continent could offer both of these.
Ample territory suggested accommodation for Japan's mushrooming population.
Ideology, too, played a part.
The duty of Japan to lead Asia in resistance to the West was widely advocated.
Modernization and the prevailing orthodoxy encouraged the view that Japan was superior to her Asian neighbours and had a duty to promote change in them and fulfil her own destiny.
Last, but not always least, came a desire to emulate Western nations for whom the securing of concessions in East Asia and elsewhere was an indicator of Great Power status.
In September 1871 Japan concluded a commercial treaty with China, under which consular jurisdiction was to operate in both countries, tariffs were fixed at a low level and there was no most-favoured-nation clause.
Japan was too weak to impose an unequal treaty on China.
This treaty was the basis of Sino-Japanese relations until the Sino Japanese War of 1894–5.
The Chinese initially had no envoy or consuls in Japan and this made the resolution of diplomatic problems difficult.
Dispute with China soon arose over the Ryúkyú Islands, which lie southwest of Kyushu, and include Okinawa.
The Ryúkyús were an autonomous kingdom, but during the Tokugawa period their king had paid regular tribute to China as well as trading with the lord of Satsuma domain in southern Kyushu, who treated the Ryúkyúan king as a vassal.
From I87 1 the Japanese government made a series of moves aimed at incorporating the islands into the national administrative framework, but these unilateral steps were strongly contested by the Chinese, who also claimed suzerainty.
Not only was ownership of the islands in itself unclear, but the dispute highlighted the disparities between Japan's attempt to reorganize her administration and diplomacy along Western lines and China's adherence to the traditional tributary relationship as a basis of international dealings.
In late 1871 fifty-four Ryúkyúan fishermen shipwrecked on Formosa (Taiwan) were killed by Formosan aborigines.
The Japanese government, who claimed them as nationals, demanded that Beijing punish the offenders and pay compensation.
The Chinese  failure to pay an indemnity resulted in Japan's sending a punitive expedition to the island.
Assertion of Japanese ownership of the Ryúkyús was not the only reason for this expedition.
Military action also served as an outlet for widespread samurai discontent.
In May 1874 over 3,500 troops under General Saigó Tsugumichi landed on Formosa and suffered serious casualties in occupying the southern tip of the island.
It was October before negotiations reached any resolution and the troops were not withdrawn until the end of the year.
Japan's receipt of compensation and China's failure to condemn the Japanese action signified in Western international law an acknowledgement that the Ryúkyúans were Japanese citizens.
The islands became Okinawa Prefecture in 1879 and sporadic Chinese objections eventually ceased after the early 1880s.
The outcome of the Formosan expedition demonstrated the weakness of China in her external dealings, a lesson that was not lost on Japan.
Japan had long-standing territorial ambitions regarding Korea, her nearest neighbour, but these had been held in abeyance during the Tokugawa period.
The country remained a semi-independent kingdom within the Chinese orbit.
Sporadic trading relations with Japan were maintained through the intermediacy of the Só daimyo of Tsushima, and a small Japanese community dwelt at the Korean port of Pusan.
Infrequent official contact was conducted through the same agency, but for the most part Korea, like Japan, maintained a policy of seclusion.
Following the revolution of 1868 the new regime in Japan was anxious to establish formal diplomatic relations with Korea.
The Korean regime, determined to adhere to an exclusionist policy, ignored Japan's demands.
The perceived insult to their self-respect angered many Japanese and calls for the subjugation of Korea (seikanron ) increased; some, concerned about the decline of traditional martial values at home, sought also to divert the samurai into foreign campaigns.
During the absence of the Iwakura Mission, 1871–73, remaining government members, led by Saigó Takamori and Itagaki Taisuke, resolved on a military expedition to the peninsula.
Saigó himself volunteered to go to Korea as a special envoy, inviting an assassination that would provide justification, if any were needed, for a punitive expedition.
The expedition, they argued, would assist a samurai class demoralized by the loss of their status and, in some cases, of their stipends.
The decision to invade Korea was overruled when the members of the Iwakura Mission, now convinced that domestic development  had to precede foreign adventures, returned to Japan during 1873, but the disagreement split the government and brought about the resignation of several of its leading members, including Saigó and Itagaki.
Relations with Korea were not formalized until the conclusion (under threat of military confrontation) of the Treaty of Kanghwa in February 1876.
The imposition on Korea of an unequal treaty was the first stage in a sustained attempt by Japan to secure dominant influence in the peninsula.
The argument over formal relations was the first of a succession of Japanese disputes with Korea and with other countries concerning Korea, which have formed a very substantial part of the story of Japan's relations with both Asia and the West.
During the first two decades of the Meiji period the Japanese continued to take a strong interest in Korea.
Korea was ruled by a conservative and authoritarian monarchy.
Factional disunity, economic stagnation and Chinese dominance were further hindrances to change.
Japan, increasingly aware of the international rivalries at work in Asia as a whole and in Korea in particular, began to regard a weak, backward Korea as a liability.
Two other powers contested Japanese influence in the peninsula.
The expanding Russian empire was showing an increasing interest in Northeast Asia, and China was likely to challenge any attempt by Japan to intervene in the affairs of a country which for centuries had been her foremost tributary.
Though the Treaty of Kanghwa had stated Korea to be independent, the concept of a tributary relationship remained significant in thinking in both China and Korea, and during the early decades of the Meiji period China maintained a strong influence in the peninsula, being closely identified with the more conservative element whose dominance was resented by so many Japanese.
Factional conflict within Korea was extended to Japan and China.
Japanese nationals cooperated with Koreans wishing to change the status quo, and willingly offered them asylum.
In July 1882 an anti Japanese riot in Seoul (the so-called Jingo Incident) forced the Japanese minister in Korea and his staff to flee the country.
The 1882 troubles precipitated the sending of troops by both China and Japan and direct Chinese intervention in the internal affairs of Korea.
A further crisis after a failed pro-Japanese coup in 1884 highlighted the rivalry for domination of the peninsula.
Negotiations aimed at settling the problem resulted in the April 1885 Treaty of Tianjin.
Under the terms of this agreement both countries agreed to withdraw their troops and military instructors and in future to provide written  notification before sending any troops to Korea.
The agreement merely deferred armed conflict.
It failed to resolve the question of foreign influence in Korea, which a decade later led to war between China and Japan.
Meanwhile, the Japanese pressed unsuccessfully for international guarantees of Korean independence.
Japan believed that the weakness and conservatism of both China and Korea rendered Japan herself more vulnerable.
phrases such as‘Korea is a dagger pointed at the heart of Japan’ were commonly used to denote Korea's strategic significance, and of all the varying motivations governing Japanese policy in Asia it was the issue of national defence which was most crucial at this time.
By the early 1890s the view was widespread that Japan's own security could not afford a weak, Chinese-dominated Korea, which could offer no barrier to Russian advance.
This view received added impetus from the proposal to construct the Trans-Siberian Railway.
After victory over China in 1895 made territorial control a reality, the haphazard search for political and economic influence (direct or indirect) of earlier years became a systematic one, in which emulation of Western imperialism was seen as both practicable and desirable.
In 1894 Chinese troops were sent to Korea in response to the Korean king's request for help against domestic rebellion led by the powerful Tonghak religious sect.
Acting under the terms of the 1885 agreement Japan too sent troops.
Both parties then refused to withdraw.
The anticipated rejection of Japanese demands for radical reforms was used by Japan to provoke hostilities, and in late July the Japanese sunk a British ship chartered to carry Chinese reinforcements.
The fighting rapidly escalated.
Japanese land forces enjoyed numerical superiority and better preparedness, which provided them with an initial advantage.
At sea the larger Chinese fleet rapidly yielded dominance to a better trained and up-to-date Japanese counterpart.
By the end of 1894 Japanese troops had driven the Chinese from Korean soil and were advancing through Manchuria to threaten Tianjin and Beijing.
Korea itself was under effective Japanese control from the early stages of the war.
By the beginning of 1895 the Chinese navy had been virtually annihilated, and China's land forces convincingly beaten.
Japan, confident in her position as victor, agreed to requests for a peace conference, and representatives of the two belligerents met at Shimonoseki in southwest Honshu in March.
Such was the strength of Japan's negotiating position that it was only marginally weakened by an attempt on the life of the elder statesman Li  Hongzhang, leader of the Chinese delegation.
The terms of the Treaty of Shimonoseki concluded on 17 April included Japanese possession of Formosa, the Pescadores Islands and the Liaodong Peninsula in Manchuria, the opening by China of four more treaty ports and the payment to Japan of a sizeable indemnity.
A formal acknowledgement of the independence of Korea signified the end of Chinese domination there, but did not clarify Japan's position in the country.
A separate Treaty of Commerce and Navigation awarded Japan most-favoured-nation treatment in China.
In the early stages of the conflict the nations of the West concerned themselves little with the war.
It was widely assumed that China, with her vast size and resources, would be the victor, and that the status quo in East Asia would remain unchanged.
The unexpected course of events aroused considerable alarm, and the terms of the peace treaty provoked open opposition with Germany, Russia and France joining together in the so-called Triple Intervention to demand that Japan return the Liaodong Peninsula to China.
Bereft of international support, Japan had little choice but to accede.
This forcible intervention by the Western powers in relations between East Asian nations highlights the degree to which East Asia and Western power play were related, and the pivotal position of Japan in this interdependence.
Although Japan was for the first time in a dominant position vis-à-vis China, the problem of disputed influence in Korea remained.
Japan was in effective control of the country during the 1894–5 War, but her efforts to intervene in Korea's domestic affairs were clumsy in the extreme.
The proven complicity of Miura, the Japanese envoy, in the brutal murder of the Korean queen in October 1895 drove the Korean king, fearful for his safety, to seek asylum in the Russian legation.
His presence there for over a year was a useful lever for Russia, which therefore replaced China as a contender for dominant influence in the peninsula.
The inept policy had provoked the very Russian influence of which Japan was so fearful, and made Korea a potential flashpoint for conflict between the two powers.
The military victory did not end Japan's difficulties in dealing with China.
Japan now exercised sufficient influence in China to secure similar concessions and privileges there to those offered the powerful nations of the West.
Yet there were two main barriers to the exaction and enforcement of such concessions.
The first was that such privileges could be secured only with the sanction of the other powers; this had been clearly demonstrated by the Triple  Intervention.
The second obstacle was the nature of China itself; the geographical size of the country, the way in which it traditionally operated, and, above all, its disunity.
Chinese governments in the nineteenth century faced a succession of major rebellions, and the defeat by Japan in 1895 hastened the demise of the Qing dynasty.
Revolution in 1911 was followed by thirty-eight years of civil conflict during which control of the country was fragmented and China lacked any unified, stable national government.
The simultaneous emergence of popular nationalist sentiment meant that concessions extracted from one Chinese government could be flouted by the people and revoked by another regime.
Attempts at intervention in China's domestic affairs were the inevitable result of this turmoil.
The first instance of this came in the so-called Boxer Rebellion of 1900.
The ‘Boxers’ were members of a violent anti-dynastic, anti-foreign and anti-Christian religious movement which spread through northern China during 1899.
Fearful for its own survival, the imperial house skilfully diverted the frenzy and hatred away from itself towards the foreign presence in China and gave the movement tacit encouragement.
Outside Beijing dozens of foreigners and thousands of Chinese Christians lost their lives.
On 20 June 1900 the German minister was killed and the legations in the capital besieged.
Western attempts to meet force with force led to China's declaration of war on the foreign powers the following day.
Eight nations with legations in Beijing gathered together an international force and the two-month  siege was lifted on 14 August 1900.
The victory was not difficult; the rebels were ill-equipped to cope with Western weapons and forces.
Violent retribution followed.
Much of Beijing was laid waste, with many Chinese raped and killed.
punitive expeditions were sent to many other cities.
Only the Japanese —at 8,000 the largest single contingent in the initial force — were reported to have conducted themselves in an honourable fashion.
In settlement a massive indemnity and further punitive concessions were exacted from China.
The intervention also won for the powers the right to station soldiers in Beijing's legation quarter to protect their nationals.
It brought onto Chinese territory Russian forces whose reluctance to withdraw from the province of Manchuria sparked off the Russo-Japanese War a few years later.
Manchuria had for long been subject to encroachments by Russia.
The position of the territory, situated to the northeast of Beijing, bordered to the east by Korea and with a long frontier with Russia, was somewhat ambiguous, Home of the Manchu  Qing dynasty which ruled China from 1644 until its fall in 1911, it had a distinct status shared with no other part of the empire.
After 1911 Manchuria fell under the domination of the warlord, Zhang Zuolin, who effectively controlled the territory until 1928.
This semi-autonomous status, compounded by the administrative disintegration of China during these years, persuaded Japan that the future of Manchuria could be separated from that of China.
Japan's interest in Manchuria dated from the Meiji period.
Japan had a growing economic interest in the area, and considerable quantities of soya beans and minerals began to be imported from there.
Manchuria was known to be rich in raw materials, notably coal and iron ore, and capable of supporting a far larger population than dwelt there at the time.
After 1895, as shown by the dispute over the Liaodong peninsula, foreign interests in the area became a bone of contention between Russia and Japan.
Above all the territory was regarded as crucial to Japan's strategic line of defence, but in this respect Korea was a nearer and more immediate problem.
After the Sino-Japanese War both Russia and Japan sought to dominate Korea.
Conflict was deferred by the attempt to reach agreement along the lines of ‘Manchuria for Korea’(Mankan kó0kan )(i.e. Manchuria for Russia and Korea for Japan), but the two countries eventually came to blows in 1904 over the failure of Russian troops to withdraw on schedule from Manchuria.
The war served to consolidate Japanese influence in both Korea and Manchuria.
Korea was controlled by Japan almost from the outset.
The Japanese built railways to get their troops to the front, requisitioned supplies, and brooked no opposition to what was dictated by the exigencies of the war.
A series of agreements with the Korean government aimed at formalizing Japanese control culminated in a 1905 protectorate agreement which went unchallenged by other countries.
The protectorate established a Japanese residency in Seoul, deprived Korea of any independent foreign policy, stationed Japanese troops within the country and installed influential Japanese advisers at all levels of government.
The installation of the elder statesman Itó Hirobumi as resident 1905–9 marked the significance of the post.
Over the next few years Japanese took over much of the administration and established mechanisms for economic pre-eminence.
The resentment within Korea was intense.
Koreans who had formerly looked to Japan for help against a conservative, autocratic government and for encouragement to ‘modernize’ now found themselves subordinated to those self same Japanese, deprived of  an independent voice.
An attempt to contest Japan's control over Korean foreign policy at the Hague peace Conference in 1907 fell on deaf ears; whether Korea was, or was not, independent meant little to most of the nations of the West.
The same indifference reigned in August 1910, when Japan annexed Korea, transforming her into a fully-fledged colony.
Whether annexation was a long-term aim in Japan is debatable; what is clear is that Japanese believed that their nation's security necessitated a hold on power in Korea of a kind which could only be achieved by colonial status.
By 1910, therefore, expansionism had turned into overt and formal colonialism.
Japan had assumed control over Korea, Formosa, the Pescadores and the southern half of Sakhalin, which had been obtained at the end of the Russo Japanese War in 1905.
While there was an element of imitation of Western territorial imperialism, Japan essentially regarded control of neighbouring territories and resources as fundamental to her own safety and well-being, either for reasons of economic security, or because their weakness and backwardness rendered Japan militarily vulnerable and politically isolated, since such countries were easy prey to third party aggression.
The possession of colonies and interests in Asia was, for the Japanese, integral to Japan's immediate security.
Out of this fundamental rationale, and out of the geographical proximity to Japan of colonies or potential colonies, grew a distinct set of colonial policies.
The lack of systematic policy in Formosa in the late 1890s suggests that Japan was initially ill-prepared to cope with colonies.
The first stage, of direct military rule, sought merely to suppress opposition to Japanese control — a short-lived republic was declared in 1895 — and wipe out the widespread banditry and disturbances which had long plagued the island under Chinese rule.
The Japanese began actively to develop Formosa after the appointment of General Kodama Gentaró0 (1852–1906) as governor in 1898.
A massive programme of reforms had by the 1920s established law and order, infrastructure and a stable economy based on agriculture — notably the production of tea, rice and sugar — and some state sponsored industrial development.
Japanese rule did bring Formosa a certain prosperity.
The Formosans had for many decades suffered from imperial Chinese indifference and neglect, and a substantial minority of the island's non-Japanese inhabitants benefited from the new economic and educational policies and enjoyed rising living standards.
Nevertheless, although Formosa was in a sense merely exchanging one overlord for another, resentment at Japanese rule was never  stilled.
While geographical proximity, cultural affinities and the need to justify Japanese rule encouraged the pursuit of a policy aimed at integrating the interests of ruler and ruled, equality between the two was never a possibility.
Japanese in Formosa were mostly short-term residents who enjoyed the traditional privileges of a colonizing race and who, backed by Tokyo, implemented a colonial policy whose basic premise was that the colony existed for the benefit and betterment of mainland Japan, economically, politically and militarily.
Any benefit to the native inhabitants of the colony was incidental.
The same basic assumption lay behind Japanese policy in Korea, but the Formosan experience was hardly a useful precedent.
Korea had for centuries been an independent nation (though within the Chinese orbit).
As Japanese influence in Korea grew after 1895, so too did Korean nationalist sentiment.
The protectorate agreement came just as the Russo-Japanese War seemed to suggest new hopes of Asian independence, and Japan's claim to champion the cause of Korean modernization and Asian nationalism was rendered particularly insulting by the brutality with which all manifestations of anti-Japanese sentiment were suppressed under the protectorate.
The assassination by a Korean of the resident general, Itó Hirobumi, during a visit to Manchuria in 1909, marked the end of all attempts at conciliation and became the excuse for annexation.
For the initial years after 1910 Korea was under a brutal military regime which attempted to crush all anti-Japanese activity and sentiment.
Opposition movements were driven into exile.
What remained of the armed independence movement was based in Manchuria, where it later came under communist domination and was headed by Kim Il-sung.
The leading faction of the political independence movement was led by Syngman Rhee from Hawaii.
Pro-independence demonstrations were ruthlessly suppressed, notably that of 1 March 1919, which claimed a million demonstrators.
Political activity was banned and Koreans were subordinated to Japanese at all levels of administrative activity.
Koreans were frequently evicted from land and property to be replaced by Japanese, and poverty and homelessness increased, despite improvements in public health and some welfare provisions.
Many Koreans went voluntarily or forcibly to Japan, mostly to engage in the most menial of jobs.
Economic policy aimed at developing the Korean economy to serve the needs of Japan.
As a subject people regarded as inferior to Japanese, Koreans possessed none of the democratic rights enjoyed by Japanese.
They were increasingly  subjected to a programme of enforced cultural ‘Japanization’.
In the late 1930s Japanese became the official language and attempts were made to wipe out the indigenous Korean culture.
Japan's legacy in Korea was one of brutality, exploitation and suppression, traits which became even more marked in the war years.
Korea and Formosa provide the most durable examples of Japanese colonial policy.
Other territories were to be added to the Japanese empire but some were insignificant in terms of size, and elsewhere the occupation was short-lived and constrained by the exigencies of war.
With control over Korea and Taiwan secure, Japan's eyes turned to the territories of Northeast China and Manchuria, and Japan's search for the acquisition of control over greater portions of Asian territory governed the development of Asian Japanese relations during the four decades up to 1945.
While Japanese expansion in Asia was still influenced by a preoccupation with defence and strategy, Japan's need for security in terms of raw materials, trading opportunities and an outlet for her expanding population became of increasing importance.
The need for stable markets and raw material supplies became increasingly acute with the advance of industrialization, especially after 1918, when Chinese boycotts and world depression exposed Japan's vulnerability.
In these circumstances Manchuria was seen as a justifiable target for Japan's ambitions, and control over certain economic, political and military aspects of China was also sought.
Like other empire-builders, Japan justified her expansion by a public relations rhetoric aimed at making it appear as altruism.
Japan, it was said, sought the benefit of Asia as a whole and had a national mission to lead and coordinate the nations of Asia in resistance to the West.
A Japanese-led bloc of Asian nations would be militarily and economically secure, and able to stand up to the threat posed by the nations of Europe and by the United States.
Similar arguments were used in the case of Southeast Asia.
The concept that Japan's mission was to save Asia for the Asians, to reject the Western colonizers and influences and lead Asia to greatness was used to justify the idea of the Great East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere, developed out of prime Minister Konoe's calls in November 1938 for a ‘new order in East Asia’.
The scope of this mutually cooperative and self-sufficient economic and political sphere under Japanese leadership was initially Japan, Korea, Manchuria and China, but was gradually extended to include the whole of Southeast Asia, and even Australia and New Zealand.
However, Japan's colonial and expansionist policies were hardly such as to  strengthen the Asian nations.
A stable and egalitarian Asian military and economic alliance was bound to founder on Japan's inability to submerge her own interests for the benefit of Asia as a whole.
The Co-prosperity Sphere became an area whose resources were exploited for the benefit of Japan.
Blatantly selfish methods and policies and the degree to which Japan became entangled in the extremes of her own rhetoric inevitably resulted in the pursuit of a course devoted to Japanese, rather than Asian, nationalism.
The acquisition of Korea was followed by the 1911 Chinese revolution and the fall of the Qing dynasty.
The inconclusive nature of the revolution and the weak and divided government of the Chinese state in the years that followed appeared to make China easy prey to foreign encroachment.
The Western powers and Japan, who had long been attempting to secure rights and interests in China, were now faced with a series of regimes too weak to resist some of their demands, or to see that any concessions were adhered to.
The nations of Europe, increasingly taken up with their own military and economic problems, responded by increasingly withdrawing from any attempt to exact further concessions.
America, which had always held aloof from more active participation in the exploitation, became the strongest advocate of the 1899–1900 ‘Open Door’ policy, which maintained China's right to national integrity and the equal entitlement of all nations to economic opportunity in China.
For Japan the Western withdrawal and the disunity of China seemed to present a golden opportunity to advance her own interests.
The Formosan Expedition in the early 1870s, the Treaty of Shimonoseki (1895) and the Boxer Rebellion (1900) had already secured for Japan substantial political and economic concessions in China.
The division of China into spheres of influence gave the Japanese a non-alienation agreement concerning Fujian Province, although this claim was never fully exploited.
Japanese could engage in industry and manufacturing outside the open ports and, after 1905, possessed railway rights and territorial concessions in Manchuria.
The Japanese-controlled South Manchurian Railway acted as the major base for the expansion of Japanese interests in the province.
On the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914, Japan, acting under the terms of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, declared war on Germany.
Disregarding Chinese neutrality, Japan forcibly seized all German concessions in the Shandong Peninsula, as well as taking over German-owned islands in the Pacific.
In mid-January 1915 China was presented with what became known as the ‘Twenty  One Demands’, a call for China to make certain economic, political and military concessions.
Many of the demands related to Japanese control of substantial areas of Chinese territory; the fifth and final section included demands for the installation of Japanese ‘advisers’ at all levels of the administration, armed forces and police.
The presence of such ‘advisers’ would have constituted a severe infringement of China's political autonomy.
Stalling for time, China appealed to the West for support, but the response was so muted as to be useless.
The European nations were far too absorbed in their own conflict to give heed to China's concerns.
The demands were leaked to foreign journalists.
Beset by mounting criticism at home, and abroad, over the way the issue had been handled, the Japanese government agreed to defer the fifth group of demands and in May 1915 delivered the remainder in the form of an ultimatum.
The Chinese gave way.
While the concessions were not as damaging to China's integrity as the original list would have been, they did give Japan a far stronger base in China from which to conduct economic activities, confirming her dominance in Shandong, Manchuria and part of Mongolia.
The Versailles peace conference acceded to Japan's takeover of the former German concessions, but the Chinese refused to sign any treaty which did not return them to China, and Japan remained in occupation.
At the 1921–2 Washington Conference Japan agreed to restore Chinese sovereignty in Shandong, but only in return for Chinese confirmation of Japan's economic privileges there.
In the years after the Twenty-One Demands Japanese governments tended to adopt a more indirect approach in their attempts to exert Japanese influence in China.
In 1917–18, for example, a massive sum in politically-motivated loans found its way from Japan to China, nominally for industrial and infrastructural development, but in fact ending up as political and military funding.
The loans were criticized in both China and Japan and achieved little, but the consolidation of Japanese interests using diplomatic and economic means rather than force was pursued under Foreign Minister Shidehara Kijúró in the years 1924–27.
As Japan's interests in China and Manchuria became more embedded, internal strife and growing nationalist sentiment there increasingly threatened to undermine them.
The Twenty-One Demands were a particularly potent factor in the build-up of anti-Japanese feeling, and provoked a mass exodus of Chinese students from Japan.
The return of the Chinese students helped to spread wider resentment of Japan's actions and attitudes.
The  1919 Versailles Conference decision to award Shandong to Japan sparked off the nationalist eruption of the 4 May Movement in Beijing and a boycott of Japanese goods.
From being the Mecca of young Chinese who wished to ‘awaken’ their nation, Japan had, in little more than two decades, become an aggressor to be kept at bay.
Hostility towards Japan, s economic policies in China and the policies of Japanese firms operating there, as well as a wider opposition to Japanese attitudes towards China as a whole, led to a succession of anti Japanese demonstrations and boycotts of Japanese products throughout the 1920s.
They were widely supported: Shanghai, with its huge foreign settlement, became the centre of anti-Japanese popular protest.
These protests provoked not merely concern, but anger and a desire to retaliate, in Japan.
By the mid-1920s the disunity which had plagued China since the 191 1 revolution showed some prospect of ending as the Nationalist party, the Guomindang, consolidated its control over large areas of the country.
By the late 1920s the nationalist government had achieved tariff autonomy and an agreement in principle to give up extraterritoriality, yet enclaves of foreign settlers, foreign interests and foreign troops (nominally for protection of the first two) remained.
By far the biggest concentration of Japanese troops in mainland China were those in Guandong Province in Manchuria.
The Guandong Army's task was to guard the leased Liaodong Peninsula and Japanese interests in Manchuria, including the South Manchurian Railway and lands controlled by the Japanese adjacent to it.
The potential for conflict when Chinese and Japanese troops were in such close proximity was enormous, and became greater as China moved towards unity and greater strength.
Fear of Chinese unification and Japanese resentment at anti-Japanese protests in China combined with a division between military and civilian priorities at home to produce a shift in Japan's China policy away from the ‘conciliatory’.
When General Tanaka Giichi became prime minister and foreign minister in April 1927 the stance became more ‘positive’.
Tanaka convened a conference of top military and government officials to discuss Japan's continental policy; a conference statement called for greater Japanese intervention in Northeast Asia and strong moves to protect Japanese interests in China.
The conference was also the reputed source of the notorious Tanaka Memorial (Memorandum), a blueprint for continental strategy which Tanaka afterwards purportedly submitted to the emperor.
Highly aggressive in tone and content, the authenticity of the memorial has yet to be proved, but it was  widely circulated in China, where it was believed to be genuine, especially as the policies of the 1930s seemed to be fully in accordance with it.
The more ‘positive’ Tanaka approach was soon reflected in policy, as the Japanese attempted to acquire a greater say in Manchuria.
During the period of Chinese disunity the Japanese had supported the powerful warlord, Zhang Zuolin, who ruled Manchuria as his private province for much of the 1920s, but Zhang's position, like that of the other warlords, began to come under threat from the rise of the Nationalist movement under Chiang Kai-shek (Zhiang Jishe).
As the Nationalists consolidated more of the country under their control in a gradual northwards advance, Japan feared that Zhang would either join forces with the Nationalists or would be replaced by them.
On more than one occasion, Nationalist troops clashed with Japanese forces in China, as Japan, realizing the threat to Japanese interests of a unified China, sought to sustain Zhang in power and impede the Nationalist advance.
During 1927 Japanese troops were sent to Shandong, ostensibly to protect Japanese residents.
Fresh troops arriving in the spring of 1928 clashed with the Chinese, and continuing Japanese occupation of the Jinan area aroused international protest.
Agreement on withdrawal was not reached until early 1929.
Zhang himself was initially keen to retain his influence and resisted the Nationalist advance, but by 1928 was in danger of defeat in North China.
In the hope of forestalling this he was urged by the Japanese to retreat to his stronghold of Manchuria and establish himself as ruler of an autonomous Manchuria under Japanese tutelage.
Zhang was not totally opposed to the idea, but some members of the increasingly politicized Guandong Army felt that more radical action to extend Japanese control in Manchuria could be taken if Zhang, known to be somewhat recalcitrant and a far from willing puppet, were out of the way.
In June 1928, as Zhang retreated to his capital, Mukden, his train was blown up by members of the Guandong Army.
Zhang was killed instantly, although his death was kept secret for a few days.
In as far as the plotters hoped to engineer a state of affairs which might enable Japan to occupy substantial parts of Manchuria, the plot failed.
The Chinese kept the situation under control, and Zhang Xueliang, who succeeded to his father's position, harboured considerable resentment at those who had caused his father's death.
Regarding the Nationalists as the lesser of two evils he joined with them to resist Japanese encroachments.
The railway was also to play a focal part in a second, more successful, plot aimed at generating direct Japanese action in Manchuria.
In the three years after the murder of Zhang Zuolin Japanese — Chinese tension in Manchuria reached new heights as radical young officers from the Guandong Army urged Japanese occupation of the area.
On the night of 18 September 1931, an explosion occurred on the South Manchurian Railway line just outside Mukden.
The explosion was in fact caused by members of the Guandong Army, but the Japanese announced it to be the work of non-uniformed members of the Chinese army.
Claiming to act in self-defence, the Guandong Army occupied Mukden almost before the night was out ‘to forestall further disturbances’.
Reinforced by troops from the sizeable Japanese army in Korea, which crossed into Manchuria without obtaining prior permission from the Japanese government, the Guandong Army had extended its occupation to three of the four provinces of Manchuria by 1932.
The Chinese initially offered no opposition, and later resistance was scattered and ineffective.
In March 1932 Japan sponsored the establishment in Manchuria of the nominally independent state of Manchukuo.
In occupying Manchuria the Guandong Army effectively acted as an autonomous political decision-making body.
Attempts to restrict military advance were ignored on the grounds of operational necessity, and the government in Tokyo, incapable of stemming the advance, found itself forced to act as an apologist for the military's faits accomplis .
China appealed to the League of Nations for support against the Japanese occupation and in December 1931 a commission was set up under Lord Lytton to investigate the situation.
The commission carried out its enquiries during the first half of 1932 and presented its report in October.
Hoping to pre-empt censure by the League of Nations, Japan formally recognized Manchukuo in September 1932.
The report allotted some blame to both China and Japan, but much of Japan's case was rejected.
The formal acceptance of the report by the League early in I933 brought Japan's withdrawal from it.
The commission and the League, however, offered no real material help to the Chinese.
Manchukuo remained a Japanese puppet state.
Recognized by few states apart from Japan, Germany and Italy, it was a colony in all but name, with real power exercised by Japanese administrators ultimately responsible to the commander of the Guandong Army.
The authority of Chinese administrators and the head of state, Pu Yi, was purely nominal.
Political activity was prohibited and the  treatment meted out to non-Japanese was harsh and arbitrary.
As Manchukuo's raw materials were exploited for the benefit of Japan's industrial economy, the area became a centre for heavy industrial development.
No concern was shown for the standard of living of the population or the improvement of the primitive agricultural base.
Farmers were evacuated so that their land could be made available for Japanese immigrants or industrial concerns; labour conscription was widespread.
Anti Japanese guerilla activity was insufficient to shake the harsh military regime.
The Japanese takeover of Manchuria caused anxiety among major nations outside Asia, but faced with their own economic and political problems none was prepared to engage in military action or to use economic sanctions to assist China.
Japan's withdrawal from the League in any case demonstrated a clear willingness to flout world opinion.
China could only wait for a more favourable opportunity to recover her rights.
While any Japanese involvement in Manchuria remained there was no hope of a rapprochement between China and Japan, and the presence of Japanese interests and troops in China only made matters worse.
Tension was continuous, and it was only a matter of time before the two countries slipped into total war.
As Nationalist China became stronger under Chiang Kai-shek in the years after 1931 there were frequent clashes between Japanese and Chinese troops in mainland China; but on each occasion a local settlement was reached and the incidents did not escalate.
One reason was the continued disunity within China itself.
While the nationalists controlled much of the country they still faced internal challenges.
From the early 1920s Chiang devoted much of his attention to suppressing his communist rivals rather than forming a united front with them to resist the Japanese, but they established a strong base in the northwest following the Long March of 1934.
Increasing calls from both sides to end domestic feuding and make resistance to Japanese encroachments a priority were resisted by Chiang until 1936, when he was kidnapped and briefly detained by Chinese troops from Manchuria in Xian.
The nationalists eventually agreed to join forces with the communists against the enemy without.
On 7 July 1937 Japanese troops on night manoeuvres at the Marco Polo Bridge near Beijing clashed with Chinese troops.
Strengthened by the united front, the Chinese responded more vigorously than in any previous incident, moving troops to the area.
Reinforcements sent from Japan embarked on hostilities with the  Chinese at Shanghai.
This time the fighting escalated into full-scale war.
War was in fact never declared; the Japanese continued to refer to the ‘China Incident’.
At first Japan appeared to have the upper hand.
Japanese troops advanced rapidly to take most of the main cities of China — Beijing, Canton (Guangzhou), Shanghai and, in December 1937, Nanjing.
Here a Japanese orgy of murder, looting and other atrocities brought an estimated Chinese death toll of nearly 200,000.
Yet the Chinese refused to capitulate.
Chiang's Nationalist regime moved west to Chongqing in Sichuan, where it remained beleaguered.
It became increasingly difficult for assistance from outside to reach the nationalists, and their united front with the communists was no more than skin deep, but even so the Japanese could not extract a surrender.
With the main cities and lines of communication secured by the end of 1938, Japan's success waned.
She became bogged down by the very size of the country, the lengthy supply lines, her inability to have her army spread thickly on the ground, the increasingly effective guerilla warfare waged by the Chinese communists, as well as by debilitating rivalries within the Japanese army itself.
In March 1940 a puppet regime under the former nationalist Wang Jingwei was established in Nanjing in a belated attempt to increase Chinese support.
The regime never gained credence inside or outside China.
The lack of progress in China was a major cause of Japan's advance into Southeast Asia.
Japan's attempts to cut off China from the south provoked the US into sanctions which ultimately led to Pearl Harbor in December 194I.
Japan's seizure of Burma in early 1942 blocked the Burma Road, the last remaining major supply route for Chongqing, but the Chinese still held on.
The outbreak of the pacific War meant extension of fighting to a whole new area and made resolution of the Chinese impasse that much harder.
Japan had reduced the need for troops in Northeast Asia by the conclusion of a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union in 1941, but still needed troops in Occupied China, Korea, Manchukuo and Taiwan to forestall internal disturbances against Japanese rule, and fighting forces throughout China and Southeast Asia.
The sheer scale of military involvement was bound to place a major strain on her resources, and it was unlikely that a Japan that had been unable to achieve a Chinese surrender in four years when her military efforts were largely concentrated on that country would be able to secure a military victory now that many of her resources were diverted elsewhere.
The fusion of the Asian  and European conflicts was a gamble which could only come off if a successful blitzkrieg were to lead to negotiation.
Occupied China was under strict Japanese military rule, despite the existence of the puppet government.
It served as a military base for a foreign power still fighting to subdue the remainder of the country.
After Pearl Harbor, US, British and other nationals with whose countries Japan was now at war were interned or repatriated.
The Chinese population, for many of whom existing poverty was compounded by the effects of war, were treated with the utmost contempt and ruthlessness.
Torture and execution were the fate not only of those suspected of conniving with anti-Japanese activity, but of thousands of innocent Chinese.
In so-called Free China distress was acute; resistance was a priority, and even away from the war zone few escaped the effects of the spiralling inflation which beset the non-agricultural sector.
Unlike Manchuria or Korea, occupied China was not economically exploited, let alone developed, by the Japanese, except in the crudest manner.
The essentially transient regime left behind little but resentment and destruction.
The war with Japan, while weakening the Nationalist government, left the nation's internal conflicts essentially unresolved.
The defeat of Japan in August 1945 unleashed an all-out race for power in China.
In Southeast Asia one consequence of the Japanese invasion was to hasten the destruction of European colonialism in the area.
Following her early advances into French Indo-China, Japan occupied with astounding speed the remainder of colonial Southeast Asia, and took control over French Indo-China, Singapore, the Philippines, the Dutch East Indies and Malaya, as well as parts of Burma.
(Thailand concluded a treaty with Japan and retained nominal independence under Japanese military occupation.)
The nature of Japanese rule in these countries varied.
Some were allowed a relative degree of freedom, but others, like the Dutch East Indies, were kept under direct military rule, largely due to the importance of their natural resources.
Japanese policy everywhere was governed by one overriding consideration, namely the degree to which a country could be made to provide political and economic support for Japan's war effort.
Potentially anti-Japanese independence and nationalist movements were vigorously suppressed.
Where necessity demanded, as in French Indo-China, Japan cooperated with the colonial power, which was represented by the Vichy regime.
The utilization of established or collaborationist governments, as in Thailand or the Philippines, was little more than a façade for Japanese rule.
Everywhere Japanese military control used  the exigencies of war to subject the populace to harsh and often brutal treatment in what was clearly Japanese domination rather than Asian cooperation.
The rhetoric of the Great East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere still talked of Japanese altruism, but few took it at face value.
A Tokyo conference in November 1943 of leaders from nominally independent Southeast Asian countries was supposed to strengthen solidarity and cooperation, but had little impact either in Japan or in Southeast Asia itself.
As the Japanese mainland became increasingly cut off from its far flung empire in the later stages of the Pacific War, Japanese control in Southeast Asia weakened.
Moreover, any initial support for the Japanese as ousters of Western imperialism had for the most part been transformed into armed nationalist movements anxious to oust the Japanese in their turn and achieve real independence.
The legacy left by the Japanese was a bitter one.
The economies of these countries ended the war in ruins.
Countries agitated for reparations that Japan was too poor to pay.
The return of territories to European rule after Japan's defeat added dissatisfaction to distress.
The years of Japanese control had seen the growth of a whole series of independence movements of varying characters.
Some, such as the Provisional Government of Free India, had been promoted by the Japanese.
In the years after the war these countries sooner or later, peacefully or with bloodshed, achieved independence from Western colonial rule.
The Japanese, despite all pretences, had sought to replace European imperialism with their own, but their rhetoric had introduced the concept that total independence was an imminent possibility.
During the years of the Occupation of Japan relations with the rest of Asia were on ice.
Japan had no independent foreign policy capability.
Moreover, other territories were taken up with their own internal problems.
Until 1949 China was preoccupied with civil war.
The Southeast Asian colonies struggled for independence.
Even for most of the 1950s contact was minimal, although under the San Francisco peace Treaty agreements were reached with the countries of Southeast Asia concerning Japanese reparation payments.
The last of these payments was made in 1976.
Since the 1950s Japan has worked hard to build up contacts with the region, both economically and politically.
Japanese business has made substantial advances and much Japanese manufacturing is carried on there.
The area is a major source of raw materials for Japanese industry.
Marketing of Japanese products has been highly successful.
Japan also supplies substantial cultural, technological  and financial assistance.
The Japan — Southeast Asia relationship is one of the pivotal ones of the pacific area, but the balance remains unequal.
Although the relationship between Japan and the ASEAN nations is by and large cordial but cautious, considerable fears of a new Japanese imperialism, economic if not territorial, exist in Southeast Asia.
An explosion of anti-Japanese riots in the early 1970s meant that Japan and her businessmen have had to step carefully in dealing with the area.
Southeast Asia remains highly sensitive to Japan's actions, and this sensitivity is not always reciprocated.
Southeast Asia is not the only area where a legacy of hatred, bitterness and injustice has meant that Japan has had to tread very carefully in her relationships.
East Asia suffered from the Japanese presence for somewhat longer.
Japan's colony of Korea was occupied partly by Russian troops and partly by the US in 1945. prior discussion among the allies had agreed to aim at international trusteeship followed by independence, but superpower interests and conflict between Korean independence groups rendered agreement on unification impossible, and the two sides became increasingly polarized.
By autumn 1948 the split along the 38th parallel had been formalized.
The communist-controlled north under Kim 11-sung proclaimed itself the Democratic People's Republic, the capitalist south under Syngman Rhee became the Republic of Korea.
With Japan under US control, Japanese contacts were largely with the south.
Japan was not militarily involved in the conflict between the two Koreas and their backers during 1950–3, but reaped considerable economic advantage from US military spending.
At the end of the Occupation Japan, now firmly in the capitalist camp, established official ties with South Korea.
Thirty-five years later diplomatic relations with North Korea have yet to be established.
For much of the 1950s relations with South Korea were bedevilled by conflict over the territorial waters of the two countries.
The memory of the past, not surprisingly, has died hard, but contacts have gradually increased on the basis of certain shared interests, experiences and problems.
Japan's economic development has been followed by rapid growth in South Korea, sufficient to challenge Japan's preeminence in some fields.
Economic ties are close.
Both are Asian capitalist nations existing in close proximity to very different political and economic systems; the awareness of a shared threat, fostered in particular by South Korea, does as much as anything to bring them together.
The two states  have with difficulty reached a modus vivendi , though hardly friendship.
Koreans remain cautious of the Japanese, and the situation of Koreans in Japan does little to remove this suspicion.
Koreans, many of them second or even third generation residents, now constitute the country's largest racial minority, numbering some 700,000.
Official and personal discrimination is widespread and many Koreans are forced to take inferior jobs.
Even those who are successful are rarely accorded the full credit given to their Japanese counterparts.
Few are naturalized and most do not wish to be.
As aliens, they have to register with the authorities annually.
Anger at the fingerprinting this entails has become increasingly rampant in recent years.
In a country like Japan where citizenship and race are virtually synonymous, integration between the two races is particularly difficult.
The Korean community within Japan remains bitterly divided in its allegiance to north or south, and the ‘two Korea’ issue has plagued the issue of repatriation.
Japan's formal postwar relations with the People's Republic of China (PRC) are of more recent origin.
With the establishment of the communist People's Republic in 1949 remaining Nationalists under Chiang Kai-shek fled to the former Japanese colony of Taiwan.
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s the Japanese government followed US leadership in accepting Taipei as the locus of power of the government of China.
Trading and personal contacts with the PRC gradually increased over these years, but not until 1972 did a visit to Beijing by Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei herald Japanese recognition of the PRC.
Formal relations led to the conclusion of a Peace and Friendship Treaty in August 1978, which provoked some Soviet opposition.
Japan has worked to strengthen the relationship with Beijing, since close contacts with China offer support against the Soviet Union and chances of economic advance.
Nevertheless, Japan does not seek a total commitment that would restrict her and endanger contacts with others.
Japan's strong economic ties with Taiwan have largely withstood the shift in allegiance.
Japan has provided substantial economic and technological assistance to the PRC, but the Chinese have been wary of accepting all that Japan has offered.
In general, both sides have been keen to keep their options open.
Eighty years of Japanese aggression in China have left their mark.
A continuing sensitivity is demonstrated by Chinese protests over officially approved Japanese textbooks which appear to play down the iniquities of Japanese actions before 1945.
The  pre-modern relationship which prevailed for centuries has just as enduring an influence.
During the 1970s there was a China boom in Japan which seemed to evoke the old image of China as a source of civilization and ideas.
Sino-Japanese contacts of all kinds are still eagerly followed in the press and pursued by individuals, national and local organizations, officially and unofficially.
Despite the essential superficiality of much of this contact, the traditional empathy between the nations has assisted the Japanese to be on good terms with a regime whose political ideology is the antithesis of their own.
Despite identification with the ‘Western, camp, Japan is cautiously trying to build up her position as an Asian nation and as a member of the Pacific community.
To regain the trust wiped out by years of Japanese aggression and exploitation requires sensitivity and caution.
It requires Japan to demonstrate a genuine concern for the interests of her Asian neighbours which was conspicuously absent fifty years ago and which is made more difficult by Japan's long-standing sense of separateness and uniqueness.
Japan's strength in Asia and her existence as a powerful member of the Western camp mean that Japan's relations with Asia are no longer the mirror-image of those with the West.
Nevertheless, Japan's position as the pre-eminent capitalist nation of Asia still makes her a focal point not only for Asian/Western contacts, but also for the clash of differing, and sometimes irreconcilable, cultural traditions.
Individual and Community
Individualism was well established as one of the cardinal virtues of Western civilization when Japan reopened her doors in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
Yet despite nearly 150 years of Western contact Japanese people are still regarded by non-Japanese as group-oriented, lacking individualism and prone to authoritarianism.
This view is shared by many Japanese.
Although Westerners have invariably regarded a lack of individualism as a negative feature, an impediment to democracy and equality, Japan's recent history suggests that an overriding emphasis on the group and the community can produce considerable strength and may have considerable virtues.
Nor is it necessarily undemocratic.
Reconciling the desires of the individual and the cohesiveness of the community has not always been easy.
Over the last century or so there have been frequent conflicts between individual and group interests.
The failure of such tensions to overturn or revolutionize the social structure has rested in the way in which individuals have been socialized and the fundamental norms according to which the society operates.
Moreover, social values and structures have shown a remarkable ability to adapt to a rapidly changing environment.
The rulers o Japan from the early seventeenth century attempted to confirm their dominance by restricting all political, social and economic change in the country to within rigidly defined limits.
A natural process of development during the Tokugawa period, and the fluctuating pressures to which the regime was subject, meant that this was effectively impossible.
Changes over the course of 250 years meant that realities accorded less and less with formal appearances and official regulations.
Nevertheless, a rigid hierarchy of hereditary caste continued to prevail both in theory and, to a  large extent, in practice.
Society as a whole was subdivided into various strata, whose existence was the result not of any process of economic or social change, but of government decree.
The hierarchy was headed by the imperial family and court nobility, but these comprised a numerically small and socially insignificant group, largely detached from the rest of society.
The remainder of the population was strictly categorized into four groups.
These were, in descending order of status, the bushi (warriors) or samurai, who were the ruling class; the peasantry, which owed its second ranking to its fundamental role in the national economy and accounted for some 80 per cent of the population; the artisans; and the merchants and traders.
A samurai was publicly marked out from the rest of society by his appearance and his bearing of two swords.
He was permitted to exert his authority as a member of the ruling class over his inferiors at any time and in any situation.
Merchants were relegated to the bottom of the edifice in line with a long-standing Confucian contempt for money-making and commercial activities.
Japanese merchants shared this lowly status with their counterparts in China.
Outside and below the four official castes there existed the outcasts or untouchables (eta or hinin ), a sizeable group, who, while racially Japanese, had long since been strictly segregated from the remainder of society.
Many engaged in certain unclean occupations, such as slaughtering and leather-curing.
Throughout the Tokugawa period the lifestyles, customs, work practices and privileges of each caste were minutely regulated by a host of detailed sumptuary laws and other provisions.
Members of each stratum were not expected to deviate from certain prescribed occupations.
Within each caste there existed numerous subdivisions, which allotted members a ranking vis-à-vis each other.
The hereditary nature of social gradation offered little opportunity for social mobility.
While these various groups which went to make up the hierarchy were mutually interdependent, the basic principle on which society was organized was this formal system of ranking.
Social stratification was affected but not dictated by economic developments.
The rigid structure of Tokugawa society was beginning to break down by the early nineteenth century.
While the system of formal ascribed status largely held firm, the divisions between classes showed signs of blurring.
Wealth, influence and occupation became decreasingly commensurate with formal status.
Wealthy merchants purchased samurai rank and landholdings.
Impoverished samurai engaged in farming and other occupations to supplement their inadequate  stipends.
Peasants abandoned the land and fled illegally to towns, while prosperous artisans engaged in commercial activities.
The conventional morality and social operation of the various castes remained to a degree distinct from each other at the end of the Tokugawa period.
By the early nineteenth century, however, some social values constituted a significant part of the morality of more than one caste.
Racial, linguistic and cultural homogeneity in a nation virtually cut off from outside contacts, and the growth of national economic and political integration, in part counteracted the authorities’ attempts to perpetuate rigid status divisions.
In the years after 1868 the new regime attempted to manipulate selected facets of Tokugawa society to impose a uniform social structure and morality which could then be trumpeted as ‘traditional’.
For the cardinal virtues and family structure the Meiji ‘tradition’ drew on the ethos of the warrior class.
In some other respects it relied on centuries of evolution of peasant society.
It is difficult to know about the social morality of the peasantry in the early part of the Tokugawa period, but what is clear is that by the 1850s a relatively homogeneous set of social norms prevailed throughout the peasant class, and that their value system was strongly influenced by the agrarian experience.
In most peasant communities agricultural operations are of considerable communal significance, and this is likely to be particularly true of wet-rice agriculture where irrigation is the key to survival.
Patriarchy and the family are normally of pivotal importance in the social systems of such communities.
Japan remained a predominantly agrarian society up to the late 1930s, and the family and the village community are the keys to any understanding of Japanese society in the prewar years.
The Neo-Confucian influenced bushi value system of Tokugawa Japan emphasized the virtues of loyalty, filial piety, obedience to seniors, courage and self-sacrifice.
Chinese Confucianism enjoined these same virtues, but priorities differed in the two countries.
While it is therefore acceptable to talk of Japan as strongly influenced by Confucianism, the emphases of th Japanese brand of Confucianism are in many respects far removed from the Chinese original.
The persistent dominance of military society in Japan was crucial to this change.
In Japan the supreme virtues were loyalty to one's ruler, one's lord or one's immediate superior, and filial piety.
Within families filial piety was the keystone of morality and it led logically to an absolute obedience to the household head.
However, where the two virtues conflicted, loyalty tended to take precedence over filial piety.
In China the position was normally the reverse; family  and lineage took precedence over duty to the ruler.
In China perfect virtue, or benevolence, was of overriding importance; a ruler or master lacking this quality could legitimately be overturned.
In Japan, with its rigid status system, benevolence was rarely taken into account.
The imposed status system in conjunction with the emphasis on loyalty and obedience, whether to ruler, master, household head or parent, produced what the anthropologist Nakane Chie has called a ‘vertical’ society.
Hierarchical ranking operated within each social grouping as well as between members of different groups.
Within a group each individual had a prescribed status above or below the other members of the group.
This was particularly conspicuous in the basic social unit, the ie (roughly pronounced as ‘ee — e’).
Ie is normally translated as ‘family’, but is a more all-embracing concept than that normally signified by the English term.
The ie was more than a group of individuals; it was a continuing entity carrying on from generation to generation embracing people, property and reputation.
It often consisted both of a main line and of branch families.
By late Tokugawa inheritance of the property and headship of the ie , and the responsibilities this entailed, was among bushi determined by primogeniture.
This produced differential status between older and younger sons and between sons and daughters.
Males were above females and age took precedence over youth.
These practices had spread to many families outside the ruling class.
The persistent importance of hierarchy and status in no way negated the significance of the group in defining the position and behaviour of an individual.
Apart from their ‘vertical’ obligations individuals were tied together by belonging to the same group.
Small groups provided the context of day-to-day operation.
Ties which might provide a basis for group cohesion included regional origins (reinforced by the domain system), shared caste, family relationships or occupation.
For the peasant class, the strongest manifestation of group solidarity outside the family was the village.
A village essentially consisted of a group of ie sharing not only location of residence but often occupation.
In the Tokugawa period it enjoyed some autonomy, and was permitted a certain degree of self-reliance and self-government.
A cohesion originating in the needs of agriculture and a desire for group protection in times of uncertainty and danger was reinforced by this relative autonomy.
Within families, villages and larger social groupings a sense of solidarity prevailed.
Group members would  help each other in times of need and adopt a united front vi — avi the outside world, whatever their internal differences.
While a strict hierarchy of individuals and families operated within the village, villages also developed a kind of democracy and spirit of mutual reliance and assistance.
Decisions were made by reaching a consensus embracing every level of the hierarchy; this made possible a unanimous agreement among household heads.
While the village unit remained small there was less chance of a decision's being imposed by the community's more influential members, and in any case the imposition of status and ranking tended to reduce the passive acceptance of inferiority which might have attended its acquisition through achievement or wealth.
Nevertheless, in later Tokugawa the polarization of wealth and interest resulting from economic change and exposure to the market economy more and more broke the appearance of village harmony.
The combination of vertical and group ties was such that individuals tended to be viewed by others not as individuals, but as group members, and a network of reciprocal obligations and feelings between group members was the key to the maintenance of social order.
The categorization of individuals by position in the hierarchy and group membership made it impossible for an individual to divorce himself from his social role.
To that extent individual fulfilment lay in coping with the demands of society and the dividing line between the private and public domains was blurred.
This was a basis upon which later propaganda of community of interest between the individual and the state could usefully be constructed.
Thus in society at large the position and role of each individual was strictly prescribed by his or her position within the group or groups to which he or she belonged, and the position of that group in relation to other groups and society as a whole.
For most individuals the ie grouping and the village were of prime importance, but these might become overlaid by membership of other groups, for example, as a result of occupation or education.
Moral behaviour was behaviour that accorded with what was expected from a particular social role or situation, and could not be defined outside the social context.
Role-playing was crucial to preserve what is often called tatemae , defined by one author as ‘the presentation of an appropriate face for any particular situation’.
There were no moral absolutes as the moral order was equated to the actual order.
Morality then, as now, was determined largely by contemporary trends.
Behaviour was subject to the decrees of  custom and this led to a strong emphasis on pragmatism and the averting of any confrontation.
This avoidance of conflict became the key to the much-vaunted ‘harmony’ of the Japanese social system.
The contrast with the Western civilization Japan encountered after the 1850s, imbued with the virtues of individualism and laissez faire , absolute moral values and the righteousness of an individual's conduct in the eyes of God, seemed unbridgeable.
Japanese reactions to Western contact as a whole were widely varied and highly ambiguous.
Among Japan's leaders opinions of Western society ranged from utter condemnation of its values to defiant affirmations of its superiority.
While the majority of Japanese remained ignorant of Western social values and customs, and of the background which had given rise to them, the new Meiji government was already moving fast to demolish the formal apparatus of Tokugawa society.
Its prime aim was to consolidate its own power, but it also hoped to centralise and unify the nation and attain to Western standards required for a revision of the unequal treaties.
By 1872 the old caste system had been abolished.
Behaviour and occupation were no longer strictly controlled.
The designation warrior family (shizoku ) was no more than an indication of family origins although it continued to have social prestige.
Individual members of society were encouraged to work to the best of their abilities and improve themselves, and a translation of Samuel Smiles,Self Help became a bestseller.
Some Japanese flourished in this enthusiasm for individual improvement.
Others proved unable to cope with the rapidly changing conditions with which they were faced, but there is little evidence of a violent breakdown in social or moral standards.
The persistence of traditional patterns and of the conventional morality that had dictated behaviour and social structure in Tokugawa Japan proved a source of stability.
The way in which the majority of Japanese conducted their daily lives was not changed overnight by the upheavals at national level.
Nevertheless, the political, social and economic reforms undertaken by Japan's leaders, as well as Japan's new relationship with the outside world, were bound before long to have an impact on the lives of all Japanese.
Individual response to the altered conditions was, as might be expected, conditioned by conventional morality.
The Japanese historian Irokawa Daikichi has suggested that it was only when the economic plight of the early 1880s failed to respond to this conventional morality that some of the lower classes were forced to break out of their limitations in the violent incidents of the time.
In response to this threat, Irokawa argues, the ruling  classes moved rapidly to reinforce the conventional norms still adhered to by the vast majority of the people, but in a way which removed any spontaneous content and value.
The result was a code of morality and social behaviour demanded by the state and its henchmen, and later backed by a variety of legal means.
What is indisputable is that the Meiji government, having abolished the official status system of the Tokugawa, tried to impose a permutation of the Tokugawa social ethos, and this ideal sought a fusion of social structure and social morality.
This national policy was in part a semi-conscious response to an intense awareness of vulnerability, to the threat of cultural imperialism and loss of national identity.
Its implementation resulted in the enforcement of a social system which permitted little dissent and which could be, and was, used to aid and support a specific political system.
The reassertion and manipulation of ‘traditional’ values to maintain continuity in a time of rapid change and to preserve national identity and order have frequently been undertaken by countries facing an external (or internal) threat.
For Japan to react in this way at this time was not in itself culpable.
Government policy emerged after considerable in-fighting among ruling circles, and many of its long-term results were unforeseen.
The 1870s was a period of vigorous debate concerning the need to change Japanese society.
Groups such as the Meirokusha (lit.
Meiji Six Society), a group of enlightened scholars formed in 1874 to discuss and disseminate new ideas, were in the forefront of this debate.
Leading members of the Meirokusha included Fukuzawa Yukichi (1835–1901), Nakamura Masanao (1832–91) and Mori Arinori (1847–89).
Discussion of the need to introduce certain Western political, economic and social practices would appear to have taken place at many levels of society.
From the 1880s onwards, there was a reaction against what many considered excessive aping of Western practices and values.
This led to calls for the reassertion of the values and practices of the Tokugawa period, or rather of those that the ruling élite regarded as according to the needs of post-1868 Japan.
In the circumstances such calls were not totally unrealistic.
Early Western adoptions were often uncritical and foolish.
Many Japanese failed to appreciate the background of Western social customs or realize how ill-suited they were to Japan.
Social and intellectual imitation was often less eclectic than Japan's borrowing in the more concrete fields of technology, industry, education and defence.
problems raised by the non-transferable nature of social behaviour and structure  were compounded by a distinction between social conventions, which were adopted wholesale, and social morality, which could hardly be transformed overnight.
A reversion to older morality and convention seemed a safer course to adopt, and one that was not necessarily incompatible with the pursuit of political, legal and economic activities along Western lines.
The official imposition of conventional social forms and norms was achieved largely through the education and legal systems, but its strength lay in its manipulation of existing social values and a long-standing social system which enabled it to be internalized by the average Japanese.
patriotism was added to the warrior virtues of duty, obedience, loyalty and filial piety to become the attributes of morality.
The ie became more than ever the pre-eminent entity in society.
Calculated manipulation and the need for security in a rapidly changing society led to the family mode of operation being simulated in other institutions, giving rise in the early years of the twentieth century to many quasi-family organizations.
Parent — child relationships, and the boss-follower toyakata-kogata ) relationship widespread in the economy of earlier times, were fundamental axes of social interaction.
Employers made claims about the familial nature of their businesses and their warm relationship with their employees.
Such statements, though frequently unjustified, indicate the extent to which rhetoric of this kind had become widely acceptable.
During the Tokugawa period the position of an individual was governed by the various groups of which he or she was a member, and this remained true in the post-Restoration years.
Beginning with the family into which an individual was born, he or she contracted a series of group memberships in quasi-familial institutions or groups, such as school, college or company.
Within each group each individual had a specific ranking, but now the hierarchy was imposed by convention rather than being formally assigned.
The most important and all-embracing of these groups was the ‘family state’, which figured prominently in the official political ideology.
All Japanese belonged to this ‘family state’ purely by virtue of being Japanese; they were the emperor's ‘children’.
The structure and ethos of the village community remained pivotal to the whole system.
The enduring ties of many new urban residents with rural areas led to a simulation of village structure in the cities.
The village came to be represented as the source of all the traditional virtues, the heart of the Japanese tradition.
Notwithstanding the difficulties which many members of the agrarian  community faced in the new Japan, the continuing economic significance of agriculture and the numerical importance of the rural population made the maintenance of this reputation easier.
The inculcation of the new ‘tradition’ was backed up by two documents in particular.
The Imperial Rescript on Education was promulgated in October 1890 and thereafter read regularly in the schools of the empire until all children knew it by heart.
The rescript was a powerful exhortation to patriotism, loyalty, filial piety, obedience and duty within the political framework established by the Meiji Constitution.
A more direct influence on the social system itself was the new Japanese civil code of 1898.
An earlier civil code drafted in consultation with the French legal expert Gustave Boissonade had been rejected as too influenced by French natural rights theories.
The version implemented in 1898 was influenced more by German legal thinking.
It was designed to uphold rather than undermine older aspects of Japanese society.
This civil code remained in force up until the end of the pacific War, and provided the legal framework for the social system for nearly fifty years.
Family law was a codification of the patriarchal family system, which rested on the existence of the ie as the basic unit of operation.
The head of the household had privileged legal status, and the right of individual family members to autonomous activity was strictly limited.
Primogeniture was enforced and the majority of women became legal incompetents.
The emphasis on the family and quasi-family situations strengthened the concept of the individual as a group member performing a socially ascribed role.
Prominent individuals were often prominent by virtue of the groups of which they were leaders.
Disapproval was frequently the lot of individualists and non-conformists.
In the ‘family state’ the assertion of individualism was increasingly regarded as being incompatible with the demands of patriotism.
This is not to say that there were no outstanding individuals or charismatic heroes.
Japan was not a country of nonentities, in which no one stood out from the crowd.
Individual social mobility continued to be actively pursued, and many able individuals made the most of a rapidly changing environment and opportunities to rise above their origins, or, in some cases, to enjoy the luxury of non-conformism.
The motivation to achieve was strong.
For most Japanese there were no longer formal restrictions on mobility, and, especially in the Meiji period, social ranking was relatively fluid.
The restrictions which bound individual Japanese to conformity were less those laid down by law than the more pervasive ones  of social ethic and social convention which discouraged a ‘selfish’ individualist approach.
Government efforts to promote national unity and identity and improved communications contributed to Japanese society's becoming more homogeneous by the early twentieth century than it had been in the Tokugawa period.
Foreigners were small in number and for the most part temporary residents, but there were two sizeable minority groups in the country.
The ethnically Japanese burakumin (lit. ‘hamlet people’) were descended from the outcastes of the Tokugawa period.
In the mid-Meiji period there were over 400,000, a little over 1 per cent of the population.
By the late Taishó period the figure had increased to one million.
Although as a group they had been officially emancipated in 1871,burakumin became the sporadic scapegoats of popular resentment, and social discrimination persisted on a wide scale in spheres such as education, employment and marriage.
The early 1900s produced a movement for improvement through self-help, but the failure of this campaign to achieve any notable advance prompted the rise of a more radical emancipation movement.
Burakumin were conspicuous in the rice riots which erupted in 1918, and during the 1920s buraku leaders were drawn into the general upsurge of left wing activism.
Many were convinced that only a proletarian revolution could remove discrimination.
Their radical national organization, the Suiheisha (lit.
Levelling Society), founded in 1922, scored several notable local successes, but at considerable cost.
Large parts of the Suiheisha were subsequently caught up in the government's clampdown on radicalism after the mid-1920s.
The government started an assistance programme in the early 1920s, but it was totally inadequate to deal with the fundamental problems facing the buraku , which were particularly hard hit by the interwar slump.
Indications of tangible progress in the late 1930s were stifled by the constraints of war.
Immigrants from Korea were the other large minority.
Koreans flooded in from the new colony in search of work and livelihood.
By the early 1930s there were half a million, by 1940 over one million.
They were disadvantaged by colonial status, which did not permit them full citizenship or equal rights with ethnic Japanese, who looked down on them.
Most Korean immigrants were also unskilled labourers, the majority of them men.
They often worked for far lower wages than their Japanese equivalents, and turnover was very high.
They dwelt mainly in impoverished ghettoes in urban areas and many of their children went uneducated.
Success  for the few who achieved it was often bought at the cost of Korean ties and identity.
Koreans became, like the burakumin , an object of social prejudice.
They became scapegoats for crimes committed and were widely bruited as potential subversives.
They were considered uncultured, undisciplined and dangerous.
Japanese hostility towards its Korean minority reached a peak of violence in the unrest after the Great Kantó Earthquake of 1 September 1923, when rumours of organized Korean subversion, systematic rape, poisoning of wells and arson, led to the declaration of martial law and an officially approved anti-Korean witchhunt in which thousands were brutally massacred.
Substantial though both these minorities were, their presence had little impact on the way the majority of Japanese conducted their lives.
There was little social intermingling, and the subordinate position forced upon them enabled the ethnic majority to hold themselves detached and distinct.
Affinity of conduct and values among this majority did not always make for unity.
The persistent importance of the group, which had led to a strong sense of communal identity since the Tokugawa period, could also produce schism within society.
Group membership could promote ties which often transcended other loyalties.
Competing groups — for example, companies in the same line of business or different universities —engaged in intense and bitter rivalry in which manifestations of loyalty and dedication to the group sometimes went far beyond the bounds of what was normally acceptable.
Larger groups were prone to intense factionalism.
Membership of a specific group was often the product of a boss — follower relationship with one of its leading members, and thus very large groups were in danger of becoming no more than a coalition of personal factions.
The conservative political parties of the interwar years, with their amorphous ideologies, were a case in point.
One major factor acted to contain the divisive tendencies inherent in the prevailing group orientation.
This was the institution of the nation as a unifying group to which all ethnic Japanese belonged.
The establishment worked hard to ensure that allegiance to the nation transcended allegiance to any other group or individual.
The exploitation of this allegiance in the circumstances of the 1930s enabled an effective mobilization of society for common national cause and self-sacrifice.
Whatever the ‘social costs’ of political and economic development in Japan up to the 1940s, it is difficult to find widespread sustained resistance to, or non-cooperation with, the social value system.
Reaction even against the political system with which it was so closely  integrated was muted.
Many writers have therefore looked to pre-modern social patterns and economic relations in analysing Japan's path to authoritarianism and war.
It is all too simplistic to explain political developments in late 1930s Japan purely by reference to an inherent susceptibility to authoritarianism in socio-economic relations in the village.
No more is it possible to claim that the strict code of social morality and convention which helped to sustain the political system was held in place from outside against the will of most Japanese people.
What must be noted here is that much of the strength of the political ethos propagated in prewar years rested on its incorporation and distortion of concepts and assumptions whose origins were far back in Japanese history, and which were broadly unquestioned by the majority of the population; and that it was firmly integrated with the social system and standard code of morality and behaviour.
After 1931, and especially after the outbreak of full-scale war with China in 1937, social regimentation in Japan became more obtrusive.
Control over the behaviour of the individual was more overtly stringent, deviation from the norm far less tolerated.
Although external organs such as the police networks were used to enforce control, much of it was exercised through existing social institutions, for example, the family and the company, and through official organizations such as the reservists, youth leagues and women's groups, of which membership, where appropriate, eventually became compulsory.
An additional mechanism was provided during the war years by the neighbourhood associations (tonarigumi ).
In the Tokugawa period ‘five family groups’ had operated as instruments of social control by holding the household heads within the group mutually responsible for the misdemeanours of a member of any of the five households.
The neighbourhood associations were larger — up to twenty families, with associations organized in turn into larger village or block associations.
The neighbourhood associations were used for administrative functions, but members were also encouraged to spy and report on fellow members to minimize disloyalty and unpatriotic behaviour, encouraging an atmosphere of mutual suspicion.
The multiplicity of groups to which each individual was obliged to belong placed further external restraints on his or her activities, and discouraged the expression of independent thought even among close friends or relatives.
The growing economic and physical hardships of the later stages of the Pacific War, and the inability of the authorities  reformed with a view to providing equality of opportunity, in the hope that this would back up a new, genuinely democratic social structure permitting a high level of individual social mobility.
The strong achievement orientation of Japanese society and the degree to which it has become a genuine educational meritocracy have led many to assume that this aim has been achieved.
However, official statistics suggest that mobility has not recently been conspicuously higher in Japan than in other industrialized countries, especially since access to good education has too often depended on wealth and background.
Despite the educational and other changes, there remained after 1945 an influential hard core of élite families, many descended from the leading business, political or artistic families of the prewar years.
Such families have been well placed to secure the best contacts and the best education, and rising young stars have often married into them, so social prestige and heredity have continued to count for a considerable amount.
Even the most optimistic forecasters, though, never expected the Japanese to change their mode of social operation overnight.
Legal reform was a prerequisite for social change, but not automatically the immediate precursor of it.
While the constitutional and legal changes laid the foundations for a breakdown of the dominance of the household and for greater individual rights, especially for women, considerable importance still attaches to some of the characteristics noted in the prewar period, albeit with modifications.
Writings on postwar Japanese society suggest a consensus on the persistence of its ‘vertical’ element.
For example, the lack of a rigid division of labour such as is found in Britain reflects and reinforces the strength of vertical ties.
The ie has ceased to exist as a legal entity, but the family unit has remained highly influential.
Many families have continued to attach great importance to the family line, adopting their daughter's husband or another male as heir to the family name where there is no son to succeed.
The continuing emphasis on family relationships may well affect the way Japan copes with the rapid ageing of the population which faces her over the next three decades.
Within most families the roles of husband and wife have remained distinct, with the male the breadwinner and the female caring for house and children.
Inheritable property has still tended to go to the eldest son.
Changes in social attitudes in the postwar period have also, not surprisingly, been gradual.
Most Japanese have had no wish blindly to imitate Western social customs and attitudes.
Many believe  strongly in the need fo Japan to be different and to retain what they see as its own traditional modus operandi ; they are quite satisfied with the roles which society expects them to play.
Their major concerns remain their nation, their families, their work and their friendship groups.
Within the constraints of these traditional preoccupations the majority of the population adheres happily, or unhappily, to the roles which society expects of them, even though there is no legal compulsion to do so.
The major factors behind the change that has taken place are economic and industrial development.
More married women now work in activities incompatible with childcare and domestic duties, forcing some couples to hold a less traditional view of their relationship.
Even before the Occupation legislation, the rapid industrialization of the 1930s threatened to undermine the position of the ie and the authority of the household head.
Family ties have been further weakened by old people living apart from their children, and by the pressure on accommodation in urban areas, which has accelerated the decline in three-generation family units.
Yet to the outsider postwar Japanese society still seems to be striking not in its similarities to, but in its differences from, the West.
Japan is no exception to the tendency to sum up widely shared social characteristics and attitudes under the heading of ‘national character’.
Indeed, this predisposition has been reinforced in the Japanese case by the unusual degree of social uniformity which appears to stem from the homogeneity of the people and their customs.
Foreigners have too often seen Japan as a monolithic society where individualism is frowned upon and conformity all important, where the tendency is towards harmony and consensus and a healthy element of conflict decidedly absent, and where the role of the group is all-pervasive.
Yet this image, allowing for exaggeration, is not totally removed from the reality of prewar Japanese society, and the persistence of some of the same characteristics in the post-1945 period therefore means that such categorization still contains a measure of truth.
In Japan the relationship of the individual to other individuals and to society at large is still governed largely by his or her membership of various groups.
In any context an individual perceives him/herself as a member of a particular group, and this perception reinforces an us — them mentality.
These groups are the key to the moulding of an individual's identity.
They are not so much status-based as functional, but they have an all-pervasive influence on the individual's life far beyond the narrow functions  which are their specific object.
Conformity with the group is still a major objective.
The dependence of the individual on the group and on certain individuals within it has become a major theme in any analysis of Japanese society.
‘Harmony’ within and between groups is the ideal of Japanese social interaction.
Where a grouping is a sizeable one it becomes divided into smaller subgroups.
Potentially damaging conflict between these subgroups is avoided by channelling mutual competition into an avenue where it can benefit the group as a whole.
The other side of the coin has also persisted in the form of factionalism and intergroup conflict.
The hierarchical loyalty structure promotes intense schism and conflict within large organizations, as is abundantly clear in the case of political parties.
Before 1945 the overall unifying entity was the nation as expressed in the ‘family state’ to which all belonged.
The legal and constitutional foundations of the prewar state have been destroyed; the existence of the emperor as the symbol of the Japanese nation is almost the sole relic of the old structure, albeit an important one.
Yet postwar experience has shown that the formal foundations of the state were not the sine qua non of nationhood.
More significant in providing this national group membership has been the racial homogeneity of the Japanese people themselves, the culture, language and traditions common to them, and the shared history and society upon which the political system was constructed.
Now, as then, Japanese form a single social group by virtue of being Japanese.
This attribute separates them from the outside world and can be shared by no non-Japanese.
It is not a mere matter of citizenship; it is a birthright and a shared inheritance.
To this extent the nation still acts as the overriding social group whose existence serves to contain the most damaging effects of the conflict and factionalism which are daily occurrences at lower levels.
In the years since 1945, Japan, unlike many other industrial nations, has received few immigrants whose presence might modify this sense of ‘being Japanese’.
Even the presence of a substantial Korean minority has done little to weaken a sense of identity whose strength is indicated by the virtual denial of Japanese nationality to those who are not racially Japanese.
The largest minority group in Japan is still the burakumin , who comprise something over 2 per cent of the population.
Burakumin are still the object of severe social discrimination in all areas of life, although much of it is indirect or covert.
There is a reluctance on the part of any social group to engage in overt discrimination against the members of another.
A clear reluctance on the part of many Japanese even to discuss the problem suggests a reluctance to admit to the existence of the burakumin as an outcaste group, on the assumption that a problem that is not talked about is not a problem, or at least is one that will go away if it is ignored.
Sporadic attempts to justify discrimination by proving that burakumin are not Japanese have little credibility, but serve to emphasize the importance of race.
The Korean minority, now numbering over 600,000, have suffered from this racial prejudice.
Despite an increasing amount of intermarriage, few Koreans have wished to take up the option of naturalization, difficult enough to achieve in itself.
Most have remained registered as citizens of North or South Korea, aliens in their country of permanent residence.
In recent years an increasing number of second- and even third-generation Koreans have shown signs of rebelling against a system which has limited their job options and freedom of movement.
Members of the Korean minority have started to question the exclusivity of a Japan which has denied citizenship and certain basic human rights even to those born and brought up in the country.
This growing discontent has been symbolized by Koreans refusing to comply with the stipulation that all aliens resident in Japan for any length of time have to be re-registered as aliens and fingerprinted at regular intervals, and carry alien registration cards with them at all times.
For Korean residents who have known no home other than Japan these regulations are considered particularly insulting.
The non-Japanese community in Japan remains sufficiently small and discrete to highlight, rather than dilute, indigenous customs and attitudes.
The prospect of any substantial increase in immigration in the near future is unlikely.
Some observers have suggested that the decline of the village as the main social unit in Japan has produced a greater heterogeneity in the smaller groups which go to make up society as a whole.
For other commentators the continuing dominance of smaller group attitudes and the persistence of an ‘us’ and ‘them’mentality towards non-members, is no more than a repeat of the older village attitudes.
The increasing heterogeneity of the subgroup, it has been argued, means a greater homogeneity in the nation as a whole.
Some Japanese maintain that the way in which society operates has changed little since the 1930s.
Others call for a reassertion of ‘traditional’ Japanese values, saying that changes provoked by Western contact have gone too far, and that ‘traditional, Japanese values should be reasserted.
The question of what it is desirable  for Japan to be and do deeply divides the Japanese, but few fail to acknowledge that being Japanese sets them apart.
Town and Country
For much of the modern period Japan has been a predominantly agrarian country.
In the Tokugawa period agriculture served as the cornerstone both of the economy and of society as a whole.
The importance of manufacturing increased steadily from the beginning of the Meiji period but until the late 1920s agriculture accounted for over 25 per cent of net domestic production.
As late as 1930 over 50 per cent of the population — more than 30 million people — were still dependent on agriculture for a living, and it was not until two decades later that there was an absolute fall in the number of Japanese working in the agricultural sector.
The rapidity of Japan's economic and political transformation and the enduring influence of Tokugawa practices and ideas into this century mean that in Japan, as in other late industrializers such as the USSR, agricultural issues and the impact of the rural sector have been of crucial importance throughout the past 150 years.
Rice was introduced into Japan over 2,000 years ago.
It rapidly became a staple, and has remained the major crop throughout the modern period.
Wet-rice agriculture stimulates economic and social conditions very different from the dry land agriculture of, for example, Europe.
Paddy rice production can support a very high population density.
Environmental and climatic conditions have combined with agricultural techniques to produce in Japan exceptionally high yields.
Rice production is also very labour intensive, but in Japan the intensity of work is not even throughout the year, freeing the population for other work at certain times.
Wet-rice production also has considerable implications for the community engaged in it.
The building of irrigation systems and paddy fields is costly in terms of time and effort.
Construction and  cultivation require cooperation within the family unit and within the community.
The implications of the existence of wet-rice agriculture in Japan have an important bearing on the development of the rural sector over the past 150 years.
During the Tokugawa period (1603–1867), notwithstanding advances in the manufacturing and commercial sectors, agriculture remained the basis of the economy.
Over 80 per cent of the population consisted of peasants.
They lived in small villages scattered over the landscape in varying degrees of density.
The peasant caste's second ranking in the official status hierarchy below the ruling samurai caste, was a formal recognition of the degree to which the economy as a whole was dependent on the products of peasant labour.
The rice and other crops produced by the peasantry did not merely keep the population as a whole alive; rice was also the cornerstone of the formal political and economic organization of the country, at both national and local levels.
In this period the largest landholder was the ruling Tokugawa family.
The remainder of the land was subdivided into several hundred domains (han ), each ruled by a lord, or daimyo.
These warrior rulers had overriding rights over the land under their control.
Even when private landownership spread in the latter Tokugawa era it did so under this premise.
From the late sixteenth century the size of a domain was expressed in terms of the rice production it could command, and this assessment was made in terms of koku .
Fief size ranged from Kaga (present-day Fukui Prefecture), with around 1 million koku , to others with the bare minimum of 10,000 koku required for daimyo ranking.
Local lords had originally maintained their followers by allotting to each a specific area of land, rather in the nature of a mediaeval European king assigning fiefs to his followers.
Even before Tokugawa rule, however, there had begun a shift away from direct land entitlements towards a system of stipends payable by the lord to his followers.
In the 1580s an earlier warrior ruler, Hideyoshi, had sought to implement a formal distinction between warriors and farmers.
Farmers were deprived of arms and many of the warrior class were removed from direct contact with the land and brought into the castle towns as an urban ruling class with no independent power base.
Thus by the early years of the Edo period many samurai families were maintained by a fixed stipend rather than by the fluctuating harvest of a prescribed area of land.
By the mid-Tokugawa period this practice was almost universal.
To support himself and his followers a daimyo took as tax a specified proportion of the harvest in all areas under his control.
The tax obligation of each village was measured in terms of koku , as were the values of the stipends distributed by the daimyo to his followers.
Daimyo took most of their income in the form of rice, and warrior stipends, too, were normally payable in the same commodity.
This remained substantially the case despite an increasing monetization and diversification of the economy.
The degree to which an individual possessed rights over the rice crop thus defined his position in the whole socio-economic system, and became the major indicator of wealth and status for most of the population.
Peasant family members had no freedom to leave the land.
Their task was to maximize output and hand over the requisite tribute to local officials who acted as the daimyo's intermediaries.
Villages were normally assessed as a single unit and the distribution of the burden by the village hierarchy was often highly inequitable.
The proportion of output given up varied according to such factors as region, land quality and time, some allowance being made for the abundance of the harvest.
A further major arbiter was how long it was since the land had last been assessed for tax purposes (if ever).
Estimates suggest that the peasantry as a whole was giving up over one-third of its total rice output for much of the period, but in some areas it may have been much higher.
The removal of warriors from the land and the rapid urbanization that took place from the late sixteenth century indicate the availability of a substantial surplus in peasant production.
Owing to reclamation, technological improvements and urbanization, agricultural productivity and the level of production rose during the period.
Much of this increase in production went untaxed since cadastral surveys were often hopelessly out of date.
How much of the increase went to the peasantry is a matter of dispute.
While some members may have experienced a steady rise in their standard of living in the latter half of the period, others were in no position to benefit.
That the number of town dwellers grew and that such a large proportion of output could be made over to the ruling class without permanent and chronic nationwide famine or substantial evidence of huge tax arrears suggest that peasants continued to produce well above subsistence level.
However, in less prosperous areas the large exactions were, for many, such a burden that they still lived at subsistence level.
Members of the ruling class sought to increase agricultural production by land reclamation and other projects, and farmers diversified into alternative crops and non-agricultural by-employment to supplement their incomes, but the ruling class was not keen to allow Japan's farmers to reap the benefits of any increase.
Despite the attempt to impose a rigid status system, the division between farmers and warriors was never as clear cut as intended.
Nor could peasant society be kept unchanged over 250 years.
While the majority of samurai did live as retainers in castle towns, there were some marginal cases who continued to reside in the countryside, often cultivating the land.
This group, which included what are known as rural or quasi-samurai, was particularly numerous in a few important domains, such as Satsuma and Chóshú.
They often bridged a social and economic division, and held an ambiguous position vis-à-vis the daimyo and the hierarchy as a whole.
There also developed considerable disparities in wealth and status within the peasantry itself.
Such disparities predated the imposition of a rigid social hierarchy, but became more marked during the course of the Tokugawa period.
This was not always apparent due to the degree of autonomy enjoyed by villages within the domain.
In practice village elders were usually jointly responsible for the payment of the dues of village members as a whole, and as long as the correct amount was forthcoming, and the village itself reasonably peaceful and law-abiding, the domain authorities tended to concern themselves little with how this was achieved.
The inadequacies of individual villagers were frequently concealed by the aggregate.
If an individual peasant family was for one reason or another unable to produce its share of tax a peasant might borrow, do additional work as a paid labourer or craftsman or forfeit his land rights to another.
The number of landlord-peasants and landless or part-tenant farmers increased rapidly, and the growth of landlordism was accelerated by the ingress of merchants, entrepreneurs and moneylenders who saw in land a profitable and respectable locus for investment.
While peasants might in theory be tied to the land, many engaged in non-agricultural by-employment.
Others gave up their agricultural occupations and even left the rural areas together, migrating to find work and livelihood in the expanding urban areas.
These significant changes failed to be reflected in substantial changes in the system of rule.
Rice-producing peasants continued to be the workhorses of the nation and the economic support of the ruling class.
A major contributory factor to the polarization of wealth within villages and between regions was the growth of towns and the commercialization and monetization of the economy which accompanied it.
Despite continuing dependence on the  agricultural economy, the Tokugawa period was a time of rapid urbanization.
Towns in the pre-Tokugawa years had, except for Kyoto the imperial capital, been fairly small scale.
Patterns of late sixteenth-century warfare encouraged the building of huge castles as daimyo bases.
The move of bushi away from the land into the ‘castle town’ of each domain meant substantial concentrations of population.
The growth of service and artisan sectors to serve the needs of the élite expanded the urban population still further.
By the early nineteenth century there were dozens of towns with a population of over 10,000, many of which had originated as castle towns.
By far the biggest of these was Edo, the seat of the ruling Tokugawa Bakufu.
Edo mushroomed from the late sixteenth century and had an estimated population of around one million by the mid-eighteenth century, probably making it the largest city in the world at the time.
Apart from its strategic position as the seat of Tokugawa government, Edo achieved added importance from the system of alternate attendance (sankin kotai ).
This was one of the methods used by the Tokugawa to keep potential rivals in check.
Under it daimyo had to reside for one year out of every two in the capital, and leave their wives and families in permanent residence there.
The disproportionate population of samurai attracted vast numbers of retailers, craftsmen and servants to service the large and wealthy consumer market.
A further category of urban development was the growth of trading and financial centres.
Sometimes this function was performed by castle towns, but some centres of the commodity economy were separate from domain administration.
Osaka was by far the most important in this category.
Its existence as a commercial centre predated the start of the Edo period, but it grew rapidly from the early years of the seventeenth century and by the 1730s had an estimated population of over 300,000.
Osaka was a city not of samurai, but of merchants (chó0nin , lit. ‘townspeople’).
It owed its rapid expansion to its role as the chief supply centre for the growing metropolis of Edo, above all as the locus of sale and distribution of the rice income of the daimyo and their retainers.
Even in the early seventeenth century commercial transactions had advanced far beyond the simple barter level, and with an increasing proportion of the population not directly engaged in agricultural production, non-producers had to be supplied with the cash to purchase the necessities of life, as well as its luxuries.
By far the largest part of daimyo tax income, most of it in the form of rice, was shipped to Osaka.
There merchants would  undertake its storage, marketing, sale and distribution, providing the daimyo and their retainers in return with credit, goods or cash to finance their way of life.
Commodity broking functions led to the growth of financial and exchange business as well.
Osaka merchants became increasingly specialized in function and their number expanded rapidly.
powerful guilds were established.
As their wealth increased they, and the permanently resident warrior retainers with whom they dealt, attracted further tradesmen and craftsmen to the city.
The monopoly of Osaka merchants over the rice market, and Osaka's role as a supply source for the demands of Edo and elsewhere, brought substantial prosperity.
Osaka became the heart of the merchant culture which was a lasting heritage of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Japan.
Other commercial centres on a smaller scale were promoted by the increasing transport of goods up and down the country which accompanied the emergence of a national market.
Edo itself also acted as a major centre of commercial activity.
The growth of coastal shipping to compensate for the inadequacies of land transport encouraged the further development of ports such as Sakai, near Osaka.
Government policy and commercial development thus came together to make the Tokugawa period an era of rapid urbanization; estimates suggest that in the early 1800s around 15 per cent of the population could be considered as dwelling in urban areas.
This figure is high compared with most pre-industrial economies.
In Russia, for example, as late as 1914 the urban population was only 18 per cent of the total.
Japan did not, moreover, have a primate city that accounted for most of the urban population.
Large towns and cities existed throughout the country.
Along with the growth of towns went the rise of the merchant class.
Although still ranking lowest in the official hierarchy, merchants' expanding wealth and influence, and the degree to which the samurai ruling class was dependent on them, constituted a major anomaly within the system.
This anomaly became even more striking as the increase in merchant prosperity was accompanied by deterioration in the economic position of the ruling class.
Bakufu and daimyo administrations found themselves in increasing economic difficulties as their income failed to keep pace with rising expectations of consumer expenditure and other demands on their budget.
Successive coinage debasements promoted rampant inflation and daimyo borrowed extensively from rich merchants.
The price of rice, which was in any case subject to considerable  fluctuations, failed to keep pace with the increase in the prices of many other commodities purchased by samurai.
Instead of raising samurai stipends, daimyo, who were in straits themselves, shifted the burden to their followers by, in part, withholding the stipends.
Samurai retainers, too, borrowed heavily.
Warrior indebtedness to the merchant class became endemic until, by the late Tokugawa period, the ruling stratum was in thrall to those it purported most to despise.
The samurai response to the potential threat posed by the merchants was a reassertion of their lowly political and social position.
Moreover, the dependence of their prosperity on the status quo discouraged merchants from attempting to end their exclusion from overt political power and social pre-eminence.
Merchants sought outlets for their wealth and desire for influence within the system.
They found ways of evading the restrictive sumptuary laws.
They fostered the development of a new, urban, cultural tradition.
They evolved their own codes of conduct and social morality, in part modelled on those of the warrior class.
So while merchant prosperity was the reverse side of warrior impoverishment, the vested interests of merchants in the Bakufu- han structure meant that they had more to fear from change than from continuation of the system.
The rapid urbanization of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was closely integrated with the agricultural economy, and dependent on the manner in which the fruits of agricultural production were distributed.
The growth of towns was in large measure the result of an influx of migrants from the villages.
The flow was not purely one way.
Wealthy merchants often invested in land and rural industries.
By contrast, after the 1720s a levelling off of population growth and the increasing economic problems of the ruling élite led to an absolute decline in the population of many towns and cities.
A shift in emphasis back to the rural areas was manifested by what might be termed an urbanization of the countryside.
The expansion in the number and size of towns had already brought increasing numbers of villages within the urban orbit, stimulating them into commercial production for urban needs.
Villages began to engage in increasing specialization within the general sphere of market gardening, with those nearest the towns producing the most perishable or bulky goods.
Others engaged in the domestic production of handicrafts.
Many village economies became more and more market orientated, but much of this increasingly commercialized production went untaxed, or  was only lightly taxed.
Here, if anywhere, was the source of peasant prosperity.
As agricultural specialization increased and farmers became less self-sufficient they, too, had consumer needs to be catered for.
The division of labour in the towns spread outward to the rural areas.
It was a trend that rules and regulations were powerless to halt.
Landlords with money to spare and other entrepreneurs took advantage of such factors as space and improved communications to expand productive facilities to rural areas.
A new breed of rural merchants flourished.
Throughout the Edo period, though, the economies of town and countryside were closely interdependent.
The growth of rural manufacturing and commercial dealings served to reinforce the integration of both into a single national economy.
Such integration did not, however, mean identity of interest.
Mutual dependence also contained the seeds of conflict.
The economic base of Japan as a whole remained overwhelmingly agrarian.
Rural areas supplied not only agricultural products but also a considerable proportion of manufacturing output.
Yet a tradition of urban centres of political power had been clearly established, and the members of the ruling class who were to determine the course of revolution and change came largely from urban backgrounds.
The shift in the relative balance of economic and political power in later Tokugawa away from the Bakufu domains in the more urbanized centre of the country to its rivals on the peripheries, especially those in southwestern Honshu, Kyushu and Shikoku, did little to mitigate this urban emphasis among the national leadership.
The limited dispersal of authority that accompanied the decline of Bakufu control in the closing years of Tokugawa rule was ruthlessly reversed by the centralizing policies of the Meiji regime after 1868.
The interdependence of the rural and urban sectors remained as strong as ever, but under the impetus of new policies and the drive for industrialization a gulf between town and country, and in particular between Tokyo and the provinces, became increasingly marked.
For the new regime to achieve the economic and political status of a national government — unlike the Bakufu — meant the acquisition of undisputed political control over all parts of the country and the unquestioned right to tap its economic resources.
This necessitated the abolition of the whole Bakufu- han system and the economic structure on which it rested.
In 1871 the domains were abolished and all areas came under the control of administrators responsible  to Tokyo.
The new government also set about confirming the land ownership rights of individual members of the population, in order to establish the responsibility for tax payment.
Land ownership rights were investigated and recognized by tide deeds.
Most land fell to the peasants who had tilled it for decades and the landlords or rentiers who held large amounts of land, renting it out or tilling it by hired labour.
Prohibitions on transactions involving land were removed in 1873, and between 1873 and 1881 a large-scale reform of the land tax assessed all land for tax purposes.
The aim of the reform was to provide the government with a stable source of revenue, as agriculture still had to provide the major part of government income.
Whereas the old system had taken a percentage of the harvest, the new one levied tax on registered landowners as a percentage of the assessed monetary value of the land, 3 per cent in the first instance, plus a local government levy.
This new system took into account the widespread variations in land quality and fertility, and hence output, but failed to allow for scanty harvests as a result of climatic or other factors.
The land tax accounted for the lion's share of total government revenue throughout the 1870s and 1880s, and it was only towards the end of the century that it accounted for less than 50 per cent of tax income.
The land tax was thus the major source of funding for government activities during this period.
Much of this capital found its way directly into the non-agricultural sphere, funding administration, the provision of armed forces, the building of a national infrastructure and production capacity.
Some went indirectly to private industrial development by means such as subsidies.
Capital was not the rural areas' only contribution to the development of the industrial economy.
The agricultural sector managed to provide for the food needs of Japan's growing population.
Very little food was imported up to World War I, and even after 1918 imports of foodstuffs accounted for a much smaller proportion of total imports than in some other industrial nations, particularly Britain.
For much of the pre-1939 period agriculture was also a major source of exports, securing foreign exchange, which enabled Japan to purchase capital goods and raw materials from abroad.
Silk was most important in this regard.
From agriculture, too, came the labour force for Japan's expanding industries.
In many countries in the early stages of industrialization agriculture has been a major source of foodstuffs, exports and labour, but the degree to which agriculture in Japan contributed capital over a sustained period is unusual.
Tokugawa agriculture was highly productive, and the amount levied in tax suggests that production was well above subsistence level.
There is no reason to suppose that this changed after 1868.
The rate of growth of agricultural output in the Meiji period is subject to considerable dispute, but it is probable that a rate of around 1.8 per cent annual growth in output was maintained through to the early 1900s at least, far outstripping the rate of population growth in the same period.
Growth was not achieved by any wholesale revolution in agricultural techniques.
Central and local government worked hard to improve methods and disseminate new techniques.
Active landlords promoted improvements in their villages.
Fertilizers were more widely used.
The granting of individual landownership rights improved incentives, and facilities for credit and investment improved.
Most significant was an increase in working capital and an increase in labour inputs consequent on the technological changes introduced.
The expanding non-agricultural sector itself provided farmers with new opportunities and incentives.
Rice remained the main crop, but many farmers diversified.
Much of the benefit of this expansion accrued not to smaller farmers, but to central government or to large landowners and landlords.
The government made little effort to conceal a belief that the rural sector had to pay for the development of the urban/industrial one.
Violent peasant resistance led the government to reduce the tax rate in 1877 from 3 per cent to 2.5 per cent, but the rate of land tax remained high, accounting still for one-quarter to one-third of total production.
Large numbers were forced into tenancy or became agricultural labourers.
Others went off for extended periods as migrant (dekasegi ) workers or severed their ties with the land altogether.
For many of those who did remain life was very hard; family members frequently had to seek outside employment on a part-time or short-term basis.
The bleak accounts of life in the farming villages suggest that the majority of middle and lower peasants were little better off than hitherto.
Many lived in squalor and poverty, went short of food when times were hard and were kept from starvation only by the meagre income they gained from non-farming pursuits, whether sidework or the labour of family members working further afield on a temporary or permanent basis.
For many the income from agriculture alone could not support them.
Farming families worked hard and long for scanty remuneration, and it is difficult indeed to see them as beneficiaries of the government's development policy.
In the depressed conditions of the interwar period and the aftermath of the disaster of the pacific War, many commentators took the view that the economic, political and social costs to the rural sector of Japan's rapid industrialization were excessively high.
The influence of Marxism on Japanese historiography strengthened the feeling that Japanese agriculture had been mercilessly exploited for the sake of industry.
Yet we must be cautious in viewing the Japanese farmer as being on the losing end every time.
There is evidence of a rise in rural demand and in traditional consumption.
The obvious reluctance of many in the rural sector to seek work in the industrial sector, even on a temporary basis, points to an inclination to stay put far beyond what might be expected from a natural conservatism and apprehension of the unknown.
The rapid rise in tenancy in the mid-Meiji period and its maintenance at a high level thereafter may not necessarily mean a wholesale polarization of rural wealth, but a keenness on the part of those who were able to work more land to rent extra plots to take advantage of improved market opportunities.
Farmers actively responded to changing imperatives.
Recent work on the interwar period has disputed that the plight of the peasantry even at this difficult time was as disastrous as has been claimed.
These revisions do not ask us to view the prewar Japanese peasant as a prosperous and independent cultivator, but they suggest that at least part of the rural sector was benefiting from the course of development.
More significant for any assumptions concerning the long-term effects of rural suffering is the undoubted existence of a widely-held perception that the interests of the rural community were being sacrificed to those of the urban, industrial sector.
The economic hardship facing farmers worsened in the years after 1914.
Farmers now suffered from inflation caused by the industrial boom of the war years.
An increasing dependency on the market forced them to sell their crop cheaply immediately after the harvest and buy back later when speculation and other factors had increased its price.
Nationwide rioting in 1918 over the price of rice started in rural areas and threatened to reduce the country to chaos.
The government responded by promoting the expansion of cheap rice imports from the colonies of Formosa and Korea.
These imports reached on average over 10 million koku a year in the late 1920s, equivalent to over 15 per cent of annual domestic production.
They had a generally depressive effect on domestic rice prices, and threatened to undermine the prosperity of the majority of domestic farmers for whom rice was still a staple crop.
They became one of the factors that contributed to a degree of rural depression that persisted throughout the interwar years and was exacerbated by the deflationary policies pursued by successive governments.
Another was population expansion.
Between 1920 and 1930 the population of Japan jumped by 15 per cent to over 64 million; industrial sector growth was inadequate to absorb the increase.
In agricultural production, too, the limits of the changes in working capital and labour input which had brought improvements earlier on were being reached.
From the late 1920s, depression rapidly became crisis.
The interwar period was a difficult one for the world economy as a whole, characterized by widespread dislocation of, and fluctuations in, international trade.
Japanese farmers were closely tied to the vagaries of the world markets.
Many had long engaged in the production of cocoons for the silk industry, and as silk production rose dramatically in the interwar years more and more farmers engaged in this by-employment.
Although silk prices fell after 1925 the additional cash income still cushioned farmers against the effects of a simultaneous fall in rice prices.
Bumper rice crops in the late 1920s, however, combined with rice imports to produce a catastrophic fall in rice prices in 1930–1.
At the same time the collapse of the American silk market in 1929–30 following the onset of the Great Depression brought a fall in silk prices of cataclysmic proportions.
Many landlords found themselves in economic difficulties, and there was widespread impoverishment of tenants and small farmers.
In the northeast in particular, poor harvests in the early 1930s led to famine conditions in some districts and an atmosphere of growing desperation.
Conditions improved after 1933, but a measure of agricultural depression persisted through much of the 1930s.
Official moves to alleviate the worst conditions were little more than palliatives.
Rural depression was significant in two main ways.
It served to prevent the industrial and military expansion pursued during those years from becoming excessively inflationary.
It was also skilfully manipulated for political purposes.
Throughout the post-1868 years the rural — urban balance was shifting away from the countryside in the wake of rapid population increase and industrialization, although up to the Pacific War at least half the population continued to reside in small towns and villages, and there was little absolute fall in the rural population until the late 1930s.
The rate of urbanization increased after 1868, and by 1920 nearly one-third of Japan's population lived in towns of over 10,000 people.
By 1940 the figure was one-half.
In the same year 20 per cent of the population was concentrated in a few metropolitan areas each with a population of over half a million.
Many of the biggest cities dated back to the Tokugawa period.
They included Tokyo (Edo), Osaka, Kyoto and many old castle towns.
Other old foundations which were for locational or other reasons less well suited to the changing situation, stagnated or declined.
Some expanding cities were the creations of the new era; Yokohama had been a mere fishing village in 1853, and Kobe, too, owed its expansion to foreign trade.
Osaka maintained its importance as a financial, commercial and industrial centre, but despite a population of over 1.5 million in 1920 was still dwarfed by Tokyo, which was not only the locus of a highly centralized national administration but attracted financial, commercial, industrial, educational and cultural activities as well.
At the time the city was devastated by a huge earthquake in 1923, the population of Tokyo was in excess of 3.5 million.
In a period when the social, political and economic priorities of the rural community would seem to have been largely disregarded, the attention paid to the urban sector did not lead to huge improvements in the social, political and economic environment of the inhabitants of the towns and cities.
Many were little better off and little more contented than their rural counterparts, even during the years between the two world wars.
Cities and towns were, of course, sometimes able to offer material benefits not available to the residents of the countryside.
Drainage, street lighting, gas, public transport and a variety of shops created an aura of improved living standards attainable even by the poor.
The better off could avail themselves of banking and credit facilities, shops selling luxury goods, culture in the form of theatres and other entertainment facilities.
Educational opportunities might well be better than in the country, not to mention employment prospects outside the home.
Yet the disparities of wealth and poverty were, if anything, even greater than in the countryside.
While the rich could flaunt their wealth the numerous urban poor lived in a state of penury.
Moreover, they were largely deprived of the stability and continuity of traditional rural life.
While some city dwellers came from families long settled in urban areas, the vast majority of the swelling populations was the result of an influx from the countryside (temporary or permanent).
Efforts to reproduce village patterns of organization and values in urban areas, or the emergence of new ones, could not prevent dislocation in social structure and family life.
The appalling conditions in which some urban and industrial workers lived and worked were first brought to public notice during  the 1890s.
Intellectuals, journalists and activists in the labour and farmers, movement attempted to gain the attention of the public and force the government to take action on urban and rural poverty, but achieved little substantial change.
Despite the implementation of a Factory Act in 1916 and growing agitation in the early 1920s, many urban workers continued to work long hours for meagre wages in unhealthy and dangerous environments, and live on inadequate nourishment in slum conditions.
Some who failed to find work remained unemployed and dependent on family or charity; others resorted to domestic contract outwork, where the conditions were just as bad as anything in nineteenth-century Europe.
Yet villagers continued to flock in searching for work, lured by often misplaced hopes, discontented with their inability to secure a decent standard of living in the rural areas, or driven out by the impossibility of securing any living at all.
There was no famine and for most urban residents conditions of life improved during the 1920s — 1930s, but cities were by no means the havens of wealth and prosperity that hostile or covetous agricultural ideologues made them out to be.
The vast benefits many farmers saw as accruing to cities as a result of rural exploitation were no more than illusory.
The perceived polarity of the urban and rural sectors was equally false.
Industry was not a purely urban phenomenon.
While the industrial sector remained small in real terms, much industrial production continued to be located in rural areas.
Some employers took advantage of local workforces or environmental conditions.
Others built on traditional industries.
The all-important production of silk, for example, remained located outside the big urban centres throughout the prewar years.
Moreover, much of the growing industrial labour force was not of urban origin.
As the industrial sector grew, especially with the rapid post-1918 development of heavy industry, the concentration of industry in urban areas meant that members of the rural population could no longer maintain even a pretence of living off the land, and were more and more drawn away to the expanding cities.
There was an accelerated flow of labour from one sector to the other.
Some residents of the countryside, particularly younger sons, moved to urban areas on a permanent basis, but many were employed as dekasegi workers, away for anything up to three years or more.
These workers regarded themselves as temporarily relieving their parents of the burden of supporting them and perhaps contributing something to the overall family budget.
This is especially true of the female workers who constituted the bulk of the textile labour  force throughout the prewar period, at a time when textiles were the key to exports and industrial growth.
Yet other workers were employed in industry on a purely seasonal basis.
Even where workers moved away from their villages for good, most maintained contact with their places of origin and visited at regular intervals.
The identification with the ‘home town’(furusato ) was carried on into the next, urban-born generation.
When unemployment was bad those without alternative income returned to their native villages, where they might rely for support on family or communal networks.
Like most economies in the early stages of industrialization, Japan's industrial workforce could not be immediately divided from its links with the countryside.
The hardships in the countryside in the 1930s were given an added bitterness by official rhetoric on the virtues of rural life.
Since the Meiji period the farming community had been trumpeted as the guardian of the so-called ‘traditional’ Japanese virtues, the embodiment of all that was best in the Japanese family system.
At the same time the rural interest had for the most part been neglected by the political powers-that-be.
Industrialization had been seen as the key to international strength, and industrial development had been pushed forward regardless of rural and urban poverty, environmental damage and social and economic dislocation.
Calls for the promotion of agricultural development and welfare also dated from the Meiji government's emphasis on industrial and commercial growth.
In the 1890s a prominent establishment figure, General Tani Kanjó, had called for greater attention to be given to the interests of the farming population.
The mixture of agrarianist views put forward in subsequent years have tended to be lumped together under the heading of nó0honshugi , the concept of agriculture as the socio-economic base of society.
Nó0honshugi was a combination of physiocratic theories, support for the traditional values of village society and structure, and a belief in the spiritual values of rural life.
Agrarian thinkers shared a hatred of capitalism and urbanization, and sought to re-establish an owner-farmer based agriculture as the foundation of the national economy.
With the continuing preponderance of the agricultural population this aspiration was not then as unrealistic as it might seem today.
Innately more conservative than its urban counterpart, the rural community had not for the most part engaged in widespread and overt political protest in response to the strains that were placed upon it.
Radical agrarianism had little support.
Even after universal manhood suffrage was introduced in 1925, the ‘proletarian’ parties  gained most of their limited support from urban areas, and not, for all the poverty and discontent, the rural constituencies.
Spates of tenant disputes in the early 1920s and 1930s were largely provoked by local issues.
Tenants' unions were quashed as part of the suppression of left-wing movements.
Yet the size of the rural community gave it a potent voice in political affairs.
The diverging fortunes of the agricultural and industrial sectors during the 1930s gave added substance to agrarian ideologues, claims of rural exploitation.
The pro-agrarian rhetoric reached new heights and popular support for radical agrarianism increased.
Militant agrarianist leaders such as Gondó Seikyó wielded a growing influence in depressed areas.
More significantly, agrarianist sentiment became increasingly associated with extreme nationalist views.
Many right-wing thinkers since the late nineteenth century had seen the sufferings and sacrifices of the rural community as just one aspect of Japan's development along an undesirable path.
Advocacy of the agrarian community as the manifestation of the traditional Japanese spirit led agrarianist views to become more and more part of a broader nationalist ideology.
The aspirations of those who wished to improve the lot of the rural sector became tied to wider political issues, and extremist agrarianists were prominent in some of the violent incidents of the early 1930s.
Evidence of popular agrarian-nationalism is one reason why the rural community was later identified as being a major support of ultranationalism and aggression.
A second major factor in this identification was the link between the army and the rural community.
The army had strong ties with the agricultural population through the system of conscription.
Over the years a physical and emotional connection had been reinforced by the institution of army-sponsored organizations such as the reservists, through which the army established considerable control over village life.
As the army's innately conservative values became increasingly influenced by ultranationalist thought, the villages from which many soldiers came continued to be seen as fertile areas of support.
As the economic conditions in many areas became more desperate and the existing ruling élites seemed less and less able or willing to take corrective measures, radical domestic reform, external aggression and colonial possessions were seen by some of the rural poor as the only positively proposed solution to their ills.
The army put itself forward as the vehicle for such policies, and in taking radical domestic and international action the army could count on a measure of support from the rural community.
Although the unanimity of rural enthusiasm for army policies is open to question, it is clear that the rural community did not really turn to the left in its search for a solution to its problems.
There were active liberal or socialist-influenced tenants' and farmers' movements in the interwar period which sought to improve the farmers' lot.
Like other elements of the left-wing movement, however, activists in this sphere were subjected to extensive government oppression, which prevented almost all activity until 1918 and hampered it severely from the late 1920s.
The socialist movement as a whole was more preoccupied with the urban/industrial population.
The rural community in Japan, like those in many other countries, was disinclined to abandon the old ways.
Conservative values had been reinforced by the education system, by government policy, and by army activity.
Ultranationalist thinking on the rural sector seemed in many ways only a more radical version of official views.
All Japanese people were taught that the aggressive foreign policies pursued in the 1930s-1940s were Japan's destiny.
For the rural population these policies could also be seen as the direct answer to its immediate problems.
The right wing in Japan was wholly correct in its perception that the industrialization process imposed considerable new strains on society as a whole.
Nor did it remove the old ones.
Poverty was widespread in town and country, living standards remained low, and even the pollution commonly identified as a postwar phenomenon can be found causing a major uproar in the 1890s.
Yet the experience of other countries suggests that the agricultural sector often bears a disproportionate share of the burdens imposed by rapid industrialization.
Japan was not unique in the problems faced by her rural population, but her attempts to search for an external outlet for domestic discontent were unusually vigorous.
To that extent rural distress, the fate of the agricultural sector at the hands of the industrialization policy and the countryside's position in the official ideology were in a very real sense major contributory factors to the disastrous warfare of 1937–45.
Despite hopes to the contrary, the war gradually worsened rather than alleviated the problems of the rural population.
The human suffering resulting from war they shared with other Japanese.
The conscription of manpower into the armed forces and war-related industries deprived agriculture of the strongest and most able element of its workforce at a time when the production process was still relatively unmechanized.
Supplies of agricultural machinery dwindled, and with the chemical.
industries geared increasingly  towards war production the supply of fertilizers also decreased.
With the country more and more forced into self-sufficiency, land was exhaustively cultivated, and by the closing stages of the war, when supplies from abroad had completely dried up, domestic production had fallen far below the 1941 level.
The influx of children evacuated from the cities after 1943 meant extra unproductive mouths to feed, and by the time they were followed by adult evacuees in any number the dislocation of the agricultural sector was beyond rapid repair.
On top of this came the sundry  depredations of military and civilian authorities desperate to feed the armed forces and urban population in the face of totally inadequate harvests.
In as far as they were less likely to be increasingly forced to resort to bribery to obtain scant food supplies at a time when the official ration was totally inadequate, farmers were better off than their urban counterparts.
A few farmers even managed to do very well out of the exorbitant prices charged to urban residents for a few mouthfuls of grain.
However, the government's implementation of strict price controls and a rigid quota system hindered farmers from benefiting from the shortage or from the black market sales.
Some were barely able to support themselves, let alone provide for the urban sector.
War failed to be the hoped-for panacea for the afflictions of Japan's farmers.
Paradoxically the Occupation came much closer to being that.
In their efforts to pinpoint the causes of Japanese aggression and warmongering, the allies' experts on Japan had long before 1945 reached the conclusion that the structure of land ownership was a fundamental evil.
They believed that the conversion of Japan into a nation of prosperous owner-farmers was crucial if a democratic, peace-loving state was to become a reality.
A drastic reform of the land tenure system was thus a primary objective of the Occupation authorities and was implemented in late 1946.
Under the reform individual private landholding was restricted to an area of 3 chó0 for most of the country; of this area no more than a third could be rented out.
Any land in excess of this maximum was subject to compulsory purchase by the government.
Absentee landownership was prohibited.
The excess land was mostly sold to existing tenants.
The purchase and sale of the land was carried out at fixed 1945 prices at a time of rampant inflation, which meant that landlords were virtually expropriated and farmers were able to pay off the purchase price and own their land outright in a year or two.
The failure of the reformers to incorporate the all-important forest land into the settlement and the neglect of the landholdings of the  imperial family were criticized, but the effects of the land reform were far-reaching.
It succeeded at a stroke in reducing tenanted land from over 45 per cent of the cultivated area to under 10 per cent.
Remaining tenants were more secure than hitherto.
Absentee landlords and large concentrations of landholdings were virtually eliminated.
Most farmers were now independent owner-farmers with small holdings.
The transformation went far beyond the narrowly economic; it wrought a fundamental change in the structure and behaviour of village society and reduced rural discontent to a genuinely low level.
No reform could of itself guarantee immediate and lasting prosperity for individual farmers, nor would the pattern of landholding established by the reform necessarily last.
There was a growth in the concentration of landholdings from the late 1940s, but the limits remained restrictive, and agitation for their relaxation has increased.
Overall the patterns established by the 1946 land reform have been remarkably enduring.
Little over 15 per cent of farmers are now tenants, and fewer than 2 per cent own no land of their own, most tenanted land being rented to supplement existing holdings.
The agricultural sector has continued to be both the supporter and beneficiary of urban and industrial development, and the rural population has enjoyed a very considerable prosperity in the years since 1947.
The changes that have affected rural population and landholding patterns are due less to the profitability or otherwise of agriculture itself than to developments pertaining to the economy as a whole.
The conversion into owner-farmers of those who had hitherto been tenants or agricultural labourers provided many for the first time with genuine prospects of making a decent living, unburdened by debts, high rents or heavy taxes.
This proved an undoubted incentive for increased productivity and output.
Furthermore, despite the neglected state of agriculture at the end of the war, Japan's farmers were in a relatively advantageous position.
In the face of appalling shortages and rampant inflation after Japan's surrender, food supplies were at a premium and those fortunate enough to control any of the scarce agricultural output were able to charge high prices.
On the rampant black market prices were particularly exorbitant.
Farmers had purchased land at quite unrealistic prices at the time of the reform and were not burdened with long-term borrowing.
These benefits, which accrued from inflation, far outweighed its disadvantages, such as increased prices for equipment and other working capital.
One  factor of production that remained cheap in the early years after 1945 was labour.
The critical situation in the towns and cities in the closing stages of the war meant that much of the urban population had fled to the countryside.
The long-standing links between urban workers and their furusato in the countryside were exploited to the full as refugees from urban areas sought help from their country relatives.
With the repatriation of around six million Japanese military and civilian personnel from overseas in the years 1945–7, the rural population swelled to even greater proportions.
This labour supply was exploited to the full by farmers, though far from all the urban refugees could find agricultural employment.
Between 1940 and 1950 the proportion of the working population engaged in agriculture actually rose from 44 to 48 per cent.
Prewar production levels were not regained until the early 1950s, and not until even later were 1930s agricultural productivity levels exceeded.
From then on there was a sustained increase in output and productivity, which has continued through to the 1980s.
While earlier growth was more dependent on manpower and the recovery factor, increases in working capital and improved techniques played a major role subsequently.
The use of better fertilizers and seed strains became widespread.
The near universality of agricultural cooperatives for purchasing, marketing and savings activities made for more efficient organization and greater security for farmers.
Mechanization had always been difficult due to the dominance of wet-rice production and the small scale of cultivation, but from the early 1960s new forms of mechanization adapted to the conditions of Japanese agriculture were developed.
The increasingly urban nature of Japan as a whole after 1950 stimulated diversification of production.
By the early 1970s rice accounted for less than a third of production by value, with the biggest increase showing in market gardening and animal-based products.
Governmental support for the farming community through the medium of rice support prices has kept rice production well above the level required for domestic consumption and slowed the move away from rice production.
The maintenance of rural support is crucial to the continuation of the Liberal Democratic Party in power.
The growth and prosperity of the agricultural sector in the postwar years have stemmed not merely from the new institutional framework and advances in technology.
Agriculture has also been the beneficiary of rapid industrial growth and urban development, which have created expanding market opportunities.
In return, agriculture's contribution to the industrial and urban  sectors, though quantitatively less substantial than in the prewar years, has remained important.
Japanese agriculture is no longer a major source of capital and exports, but it has reduced Japan's dependence on foreign foodstuffs.
Certain leading commodities, such as soya beans and wheat, have long been imported, but other staple items of the diet are still domestically produced.
Imports of foodstuffs as a whole have grown rapidly in recent years.
Eating habits have changed under external influences, and it is not always easy for farming to adapt to such changes.
Agriculture has also provided the expanding industrial and tertiary sectors with their labour force.
Although much of Japan's population flocked to the countryside after 1943, as urban prospects improved many returned to the cities.
The rural sector had been dependent on external aid to support these people, and was in any case unable to employ all of them.
The post-1950 returnees were joined by some who had never before left the villages.
Right through the postwar decades there has been a steady flow of labour from the rural to urban areas, from agricultural to non-agricultural occupations.
By 1985 less than 9 per cent of the employed population was in the primary sector.
The flow of labour was sustained by the greater efficiency in farming.
The rapid rate of mechanization from the 1960s was particularly important in releasing male labour, and only a small proportion of farmers' sons now expect to follow their fathers on the land.
In 1985 only 2.4 per cent of farmers' sons finding employment were engaged in farming.
Even where a household is categorized as a farming household there is a high probability that family members will be employed outside the farming sector and much of the household's income will also be drawn from outside it.
There is a long tradition of by-employment, much of it non-agricultural in nature, in Japanese farming families, and the extension of this practice since 1945 —accentuated by the sharp decline of the previously all-important silkworm cultivation — has made part-time farming a dominant feature of the rural sector.
Farming, though still relatively profitable, employs few families on a full-time basis.
Of a total of 3.75 million farm households in 1985 over 83 per cent were part-time farmers.
With much of the labour flow into industry permanent, rather than of the temporary migrant pattern common in the prewar years, the population structure of many rural areas is distorted, with most agricultural work carried out by the elderly, women and children.
Rural depopulation is a matter of serious concern.
The mutual interdependence between rural and urban areas which characterized the prewar period is by no means completely gone, but it is waning fast.
Agriculture has fewer and fewer workers to give up to industry or the tertiary sector, and short-term migrant or daily labour has steadily declined from a peak in the 1960s.
Seasonal work is also on the decline.
Many of those who call themselves farmers because they still own land derive the major part of their incomes from non-agricultural occupations.
Some urban families do still look back to their rural roots; while they may never have lived in the areas from which their ancestors originally came, they may make regular visits to the furusato and bring up their children to do likewise.
This practice, however, is becoming increasingly difficult to sustain.
As the base of the Japanese economy becomes more and more industrial and commercial, less and less dependent on the support of the rural sector, and as the shrinking agricultural sector in its turn has less to offer to the rest of the economy, this mutual interdependence between the two sectors will diminish still further.
Moreover, following the discrediting of the official ideology after Japan's defeat, the concept of the farming family as the haven of traditional virtue and morality lost much of its influence.
The rapid decline in the number of such families has further undermined belief in this ideal.
The rural idyll remains strongly evocative in most industrialized societies, but the emotional hold it formerly possessed over the minds of most Japanese has been substantially weakened.
Calls for a revival of traditional values are not infrequent, but with so many Japanese now detached from the rural sector the farming community could no longer act as the main standard bearer of such a revival.
Its role could at best be a backward-looking one, symbolic and historical.
For many Japanese the rural areas are now more important for the welcome respite they offer to those seeking temporarily to escape the pressures of city life, for inevitably the mushrooming of industry and commerce has led to a massive increase in the rate of urbanization.
Population growth has slowed considerably, but by the early 1980s around 65 per cent of the Japanese population lived in towns of over 50,000 people, and half the population in what were categorized as ‘densely inhabited districts’.
In as far as there is an average Japanese, he or she is very much a town dweller.
The mountainous terrain predisposes the country to industrial and residential concentration, and a considerable proportion of the population is located in a narrow urban belt running from the Kantó plain round Tokyo down to Kobe.
With a population of 121  million by 1987 and limited habitable areas the population density of many Japanese cities was among the highest in the world, and is still increasing.
During the 1950s-1960s the growth of cities followed the growth of industry, but subsequently intense concern over overcrowding, pollution and transport congestion stimulated revived interest in locating industry away from residential areas, in particular establishing strategic industrial and processing centres on the coast where shipping facilities are convenient.
Prime Minister Tanaka's Plan for Remodelling the Japanese Archipelago published in 1972 symbolized a hope that a fundamental restructuring could be achieved to improve the quality of life in Japan.
For the most part, though, these aspirations regarding a new industrialization of the countryside remain unachieved.
The overwhelming dominance of the urban areas — in particular, the metropolitan regions around Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya — in most areas of national life is having a far more devastating effect on village life than might stem just from better employment opportunities.
The cities boast facilities for consumption, recreation and entertainment, with which rural areas cannot even hope to compete.
Although urban dwellers troop out to the countryside at the first available opportunity and nature plays a significant part in Japanese sentiment, the cultural and other attractions of the cities have a magnetizing effect in an era which has produced a strong emphasis on material rather than spiritual wealth.
The lure of urban life is especially powerful for the rural young, who may not be short of money, but who often have fewer outlets for spending it.
Authorities concerned over rural depopulation have attempted to provide for the consumer and cultural needs of rural dwellers, but the drift has persisted.
The political influence of the countryside remains disproportionately strong, but in other respects it is now the urban centres which dominate the economic, social and cultural life of Japan.
The perceived difference in interest and the rural hostility towards the urban sector that wielded such a powerful influence in the interwar years have not completely disappeared.
The depopulation and lack of facilities in rural areas indicates to a few that industrial expansion is detrimental to country life.
The concept of the rural sector being exploited by the urban one retains some potency in such a centralized nation as Japan, and rural resentment at some of the decisions of Japan's urban-oriented rulers is widespread.
The fight against the construction of Tokyo's new airport  at Narita, although led by environmentalist and anti-establishment groups, tapped this resentment.
As long as the country continues to enjoy prosperity sufficient to accommodate both agricultural and industrial sectors large-scale open conflict is unlikely.
Moreover, as the urban/industrial complex becomes ever more predominant agricultural resentment will become less vocal and the rural sector's capacity to oppose weaker.
The post-1945 years have produced a fundamental restructuring of the pattern of economic activity on a scale never achieved by the prewar industrialization.
Its political influence notwithstanding, the agricultural sector in Japan is no longer of substantial economic importance.
In 1984 it produced only 3.1 per cent of GNP.
Even a disastrous industrial slump would not now bring a major return to the countryside or substantial growth in the relative importance of agriculture.
Sooner or later the political balance, too, must be redressed to the disadvantage of the countryside.
Such a change would set the final seal on what is perhaps the most radical transformation Japan has gone through in the last few decades: the disappearance of the farming community as a fundamental axis of politics, the economy and society and the emergence of Japan as a fully-fledged urban, industrial society.