

1870–1900
POVERTY AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS
For most people living standards rose in the later nineteenth century.
The prices of essential goods were stable and those of food actually fell.
With this general pattern, however, there were major and persistent differentials among social groups and among geographical regions which barely began to narrow before 1900.
It is hard to give a precise picture of the extent of poverty in 1870, since no reliable statistics exist.
Dudley Baxter's statistics of income distribution in 1867 may help place the discussion in context.
This maldistribution of income had changed little by 1900.
How many of those at the lower end of this scale could be described as ‘poor’?
This only became clear when serious large-scale efforts to define and quantify poverty began in the 1880s.
Charles Booth between 1886 and 1902 surveyed, first, poverty in East London, and then in London as a whole.
He did not conduct a house-to-house survey, nor did he construct a clearly defined ‘poverty line’.
He collected systematically the impressions of school board visitors, who were closely acquainted with poorer families, as to the number of families living in discernible poverty.
This was not an unreasonable procedure at a time when poverty was startlingly evident in clothing, household goods — or lack of them — in undernourished faces or rickety legs.
Booth then cross-checked these impressions with those of other local people such as clergymen, and with the observations of his own investigators after a period of residence in a poor community.
Beatrice Webb, then Miss Potter, for example, lived among and observed the Jewish community of East London.
Booth also collected household budgets from thirty families.
The seventeen volumes of his survey provide a remarkable survey not only of poverty but of employment and religious observance in London.
On this basis, Booth classified the population of London according to their degree of poverty or affluence.
He found 30 per cent of the inhabitants of London to be living ‘in poverty or in want’.
Poverty, he defined as ‘having no surplus’, i.e. having the bare essentials much of the time, but nothing to spare to provide for a  crisis such as unemployment, sickness or death in the family.
According to Booth 8.4 per cent of the people of London lived in the worst condition of being ‘at all times more or less in want’, ‘ill-nourished and poorly clad’.
In East London where poverty was most heavily concentrated the figures were respectively 35 per cent and 13.3 per cent This level of poverty might be thought to have been peculiar to London, which was believed by contemporaries to have a greater concentration of poverty than elsewhere.
However, when Seebohm Rowntree carried out a study of York in 1899, defining and measuring poverty more precisely than Booth had done, his findings were startlingly similar.
Rowntree's family were the largest local employers in York.
The city was he believed, rightly enough, ‘fairly representative of the conditions existing in many if not most of our provincial towns’, providing a range of industrial and service employment with average pay and employment levels.
He investigated the city at a time ‘of average prosperity’.
Rowntree tried to devise an objective definition of poverty based upon the minimum income required to maintain individuals in a state of ‘physical efficiency’.
This included an amount sufficient to buy food adequate for energy needs at various ages.
This calculation was made possible by the recent discovery by nutritionists of the relationship between diet and health.
Rowntree's poverty line was drawn up, however, on the assumption that food was ‘all purchased at the lowest current prices.
It only allows for a diet less generous as regards variety than that supplied to able-bodied paupers in workhouses.
It further assumes that no clothing is purchased which is not absolutely necessary for health and assumes too that it is of the plainest and most economical description.’
Other essentials such as rent, light and fuel were included, also at minimum prices.
‘No expenditure of any kind is allowed for beyond that which is absolutely necessary for the maintenance of merely physical efficiency’.
On this basis, the minimum income necessary for a family consisting of father, mother and three children was 21s. 8d. per week.
Rowntree set investigators to survey every working class household in York (11,560) to establish family income and expenditure and to record their impressions of living conditions.
Rowntree's stringent poverty line produced remarkably similar results to those of Booth.
Ten per cent of the population of York lived in families with earnings below the poverty line.
Rowntree described these as living in ‘primary’ poverty.
Another 17.93 per cent he found to be  living in ‘secondary’ poverty, i.e. their income was above the minimum but Rowntree's investigators described them as ‘obviously living in a state of poverty, i.e. in obvious want and squalor’.
Comparing his York findings with Booth's in London, Rowntree concluded that ‘we are faced with the startling probability that from 25 per cent to 30 per cent of the town population of the United Kingdom are living in poverty’.
If this was so, and it was ‘probable’, what of the rural population?
Little public attention was paid to rural poverty before Rowntree undertook a survey in 1912.
Yet in some rural areas there were even greater concentrations of poverty, visible to fewer passers-by, hidden sometimes behind outwardly more picturesque facades than the urban slums, but just as grim to experience.
The proportion of the population living in the countryside had been declining throughout the century.
It fell still more sharply from the mid-1870s as a result of severe agricultural depression due to a decline in demand for British produce, and increased imports of cheap food from abroad.
The resulting fall in food prices was beneficial for wage-earners, but it caused unemployment in the countryside and emigration abroad and to British towns.
Unemployed unskilled rural migrants added to the already overlarge pool of labour in many towns.
Since this migration was primarily of young people, the age structure of many rural areas shifted towards a predominance of old people.
This in itself increased the proportion of rural poor.
The impact of agricultural decline varied regionally, but tended to hit hardest regions which were already poorest in the 1860s.
Throughout the period the lowest wages in the United Kingdom were in the rural areas of East Anglia, South-West England (where Cornwall was further hit by the decline of tin mining from the 1870s), the highlands of Wales and Scotland.
Much of rural Ireland remained desperately poor.
The rural poor were not compensated by lower prices or by the greater availability of jobs for wives and children.
There was perhaps compensation in the possibility of supplementing income by gathering firewood, poaching, or growing produce, although the real possibilities of this kind can be exaggerated.
In the rather fresher air of rural areas the poor were healthier and lived longer than the urban poor, who suffered from the ravages of urban atmospheric pollution, overcrowding and unhealthy working conditions.
Rural housing density was lower, but the houses themselves as overcrowded and unsanitary as in towns.
It is probably true that, indeed, ‘in this period there is no major occupational group more worthy of compassion than the rural labourer’.
Nevertheless, urban poverty especially in London, attracted more attention and alarm than that in the countryside, and poorer rural areas were last to receive adequate schooling, housing, sanitation or other services — not to mention adequate wages.
After Joseph Arch's short-lived attempt to organize agricultural labourers in the 1870s, they were also slow to unionize, and the countryside was politically more.
quiescent than the towns from the mid-1880s.
The overwhelming causes of poverty in rural areas were low pay and to a lesser extent old age and widowhood.
The latter was everywhere a cause of severe poverty.
Widowed mothers of young children had a poor chance of supporting their families adequately given the conventionally lower pay (by half to two-thirds) of women compared with men, even when a job could be found.
The causes of poverty were much the same in towns.
One of Booth's first discoveries from his study of East London was the extent of poverty in old age.
He found 38.8 per cent of all inhabitants over 65 to be recipients of poor relief.
However, his surveys as a whole suggested that ‘low pay’ and ‘irregular work’were the major reasons for poverty.
Rowntree, once more, was more precise.
He found that 51.96 per cent of those in ‘primary poverty’ were so because the chief breadwinner was ‘in regular work but at low wages’; 22.16 per cent of primary poverty was due, in modern terminology, to ‘child poverty’, i.e. the family had more than four children and insufficient income to support so large a family; 15.63 per cent to ‘death of chief wage-earner’; 5.11 per cent to the illness and old age of chief wage-earner; 2.83 per cent to ‘irregularity of work’; 2.31 per cent to unemployment.
Both latter categories suggest the relative stability of the York economy in 1899.
London, with its notoriously large casual labour market, for example on the docks, suffered more ‘irregularity of work’, and other towns at certain times experienced severe unemployment.
National unemployment figures for this period are seriously deficient but it was undoubtedly high at certain times, regionally and nationally, notably in 1867–69, 1878–79, 1884–87, 1893–94.
Rowntree made a further contribution to the analysis of poverty by pointing out that ‘the life of a labourer is marked by five alternating periods of want and comparative plenty’.
He or she was poorest when a child when the maternal family had most dependents, in early middle life after marriage and the arrival of young children and again in old age.
This implied that the proportion of  the population experiencing poverty at some point in their lives was higher than that suggested by the surveys.
Rowntree was less precise about the causes of ‘secondary poverty’.
This occurred, he believed, despite the household's ‘sufficiency of income’ and therefore could not be attributed to the same causes as ‘primary poverty’.
He asked why some families, but not others, lived in squalor on incomes which, although low, were sufficient for necessities.
He had no doubt that a major reason was drink or, sometimes, gambling.
He pointed out, however that these  Also important, he believed, were 
Hence a major factor predisposing urban and rural families to poverty was the low pay of men and the still lower pay of women, whilst they were in regular work.
Irregular employment and unemployment were also important, more at some times and places than others.
Statistically less significant but no less painful conditions were old age, disability, widowhood, or desertion by the husband, which was sometimes permanent, sometimes temporary if, like so many working men of the period, he tramped away in search of work.
There were significant numbers of one-parent, female-headed families in this period.
This was due not so much, as now, to divorce or separation (the former was expensive and rare, though not unheard of, among the labouring poor; the latter came into legal existence in 1876) as to death and desertion.
Men, especially poor men, had a significantly higher death rate than women in their middle years.
Most of these causes of poverty had, however, been broadly constant for generations, although the growth of towns and of industry and of urban service occupations had changed the conditions in which they were experienced.
In the last decades of the nineteenth  century certain new trends of long-term importance began to emerge.
A falling mortality rate led to a gradual increase in the proportion of the aged in the population.
At the same time increased competitive pressure on British industry from expanding economies, such as those of Germany and the United States, caused employers to seek means of increasing productivity.
One of these was a gradual trend towards laying off workers in their early sixties in the belief that age made them less efficient, and the introduction for the first time of fixed retirement ages.
Hence not only were there more old people, but more of them became unable to support themselves at earlier ages.
The birth rate also began to fall from the 1870s, initially among the professional middle class.
By the 1900s it was discernible though not yet dramatic among most working-class groups.
Also in the 1900s the infant mortality rate began to fall with the result that some poorer families faced the cost of raising more children until they were old enough to work.
The period of costly childhood dependency was further lengthened by the introduction of compulsory education from 1880.
ATTITUDES AND POVERTY
These causes of poverty were far from clear to observers in the 1870s.
They had been long debated, but it should be emphasized how few individuals at this time believed that poverty could actually be eliminated, except perhaps in the very long run.
Poverty had always been, and remained, the normal condition of a substantial proportion of the population in all known societies.
Almost certainly it was less severe in Britain in 1870, the most industrialized and urbanized society in the world, than in any other country, or in Britain at any previous time.
But it required a considerable imaginative effort to conceive even of Britain without a significant amount of poverty.
Hence thinking tended to be directed towards minimizing both poverty and associated problems, such as those of economic growth and public order, rather than towards its elimination.
The debate on these issues continued throughout the last three decades of the nineteenth century, but with certain changes of emphasis.
This change is often described as being from a general tendency to blame the fecklessness and idleness of the poor for their poverty, to recognition that the fault lay in the structure of the economy; from a ‘moral’ to an ‘economic’diagnosis.
From this  change, it is said, followed another change, from prescribing as the cure more self-help and hard work among the poor, to recognition of the need for government intervention to support the poor in an economic situation over which they had little control; from ‘individualism’ to ‘collectivism’as it is often put.
A change is also detected from a mid-nineteenth century optimism that a free economy left to itself would eventually generate sufficient wealth to solve many problems, to pessimism about whether the British economy was capable of such sustained progress.
These generalizations contain some truths but oversimplify and to some degree distort a complex process of change.
There was increasing recognition of the complexity of the causes of poverty and increased understanding of how the economy functioned.
But the belief that it was necessary not simply to lessen poverty but to improve the moral standards of labourers and also of capitalists remained central to the debate.
Most reformers in 1900 wished to achieve both, though they differed upon definitions of desirable behaviour.
Advocates of state ‘collectivism’ very rarely wished government action to take the place of self-help, philanthropy and the duty to work, but rather to supplement and reinforce these attributes.
Furthermore there was considerable pessimism among mid-century political economists about the future development of the productive forces of capitalism, and marked optimism among later economists and reformers about a future in which the economy was better understood, the population better educated, and greater co-operation among classes would emerge.
Since the beginning of the nineteenth century there had been voiced a range of analyses of, and solutions to, poverty.
Some, such as Robert Owen, among socialists, and conservatives such as Thomas Carlyle, had argued from the beginning of industrial capitalism in Britain that the source of the unequal distribution of wealth, income and power lay in the competitive, individualistic nature of the new economic system and the values it perpetuated and strengthened: the emphasis upon individual rather than co-operative effort, upon self-help for all rather than upon mutual obligation, such as the responsibility of the rich to help the poor in return for their labour.
In the 1830s and 40s alternative ideas such as those of Owen for the substitution of co-operation for individualistic competition lost the struggle for ideological hegemony to ideas of liberal laissez-faire , although they survived among groups of radical working  people and among some philanthropists.
The dominant view among those with economic, political and social power — employers, politicians, civil servants, clergy — was that embodied in the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834 — described vividly by Engels as ‘the most open declaration of war by the bourgeoisie upon the proletariat’.
In principle, after 1834, those who were physically capable of work were left no option but to support themselves.
Public aid was given only to those — the aged, the disabled, etc. — who could be supported neither by their own labour nor by that of their families.
Hence, it was believed, the economy would attain maximum growth, to the benefit of all: hard work, self-reliance and respectability — which were in theory demanded of all, including employers — would benefit both rich and poor, morally and materially.
This view rested on an optimistic assumption that there was employment enough in the economy for all if labour was sufficiently mobile, but it was impossible to test this assumption in the 1830s and 40s.
In addition it was assumed that if there were insufficient jobs in Britain, other economies, such as those of America and Australia, were waiting for labour for their own development.
The laissez-faire economy was conceived of as international, and indeed from the 1840s to the end of the century thousands emigrated from Britain.
This view left room for considerable differences of opinion as to the means by which the labouring poor should be encouraged to work — by coercion or persuasion; as to the degree to which those who worked could provide for all their needs, such as their children's education, housing, sickness, old age, widowhood, or required support from the state in some or all of these circumstances; and as to the degree of culpability of those who did not provide for themselves.
Between the 1830s and 1860s there was no unanimity on these issues.
Many employers and social observers recognized the existence of involuntary unemployment and inadequate pay.
Even those who believed that poverty was largely self-inflicted did not always adhere to policies strictly consistent with this view.
Poor Law administrators in practice operated with considerably varying degrees of harshness or generosity.
Some, contrary to the spirit of the Act of 1834, supplemented wages and gave outdoor relief to the unemployed, recognizing that on occasion jobs were not to be found; others offered only the workhouse.
Central and local government began on a small but growing scale to put resources into education, factory reform and public health.
Some employers were crudely exploitative, others offered their workers shorter hours, better  conditions, improved housing and medical care, from a mixture of philanthropy and conviction that the carrot was a more effective means of increasing productivity than the stick.
The rapid growth of private charity in these years also gave rise to institutions demonstrating a variety of approaches to the palliation of poverty.
Much of this philanthropy was fuelled by religious conviction, especially by the realization of evangelical Anglicans and Nonconformists that to save souls it was necessary first to remove the poverty which so consumed lives that the poor had no time for God.
Free market principles were not carried to their logical conclusion in the mid-nineteenth century.
They were not, however, modified according to any consistent principle, but by a variety of ad hoc remedies.
And, broadly, it continued to be accepted that the key to improvement lay in dedication to competitive enterprise, hard work and self-help, and that those unable to practice these virtues should be helped by their families or by voluntary charity.
From the 1860s, however, growing numbers of those who had no desire to question or to alter the nature of the economic system became uneasy about the prevailing diagnosis of the causes of and cure for poverty.
There was more persistent questioning of the assumption that the market could indeed provide enough work for all who deserved and sought it, either at home or in the colonies, at wages which enabled the worker to provide adequately for himself and his family.
Members, for example, of the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, the leading forum for the discussion of ideas concerning social reform, recognized in the late 1860s that the London labour market, at least , was overstocked leading both to low pay and irregular employment at the lower end of the working class.
This had been obvious to Henry Mayhew in his vivid survey of London Labour and the London poor in 1856.
The Lancashire ‘cotton famine’, due to the cessation of cotton supplies during the American civil war of 1863–66 which caused severe unemployment and poverty, demonstrated most clearly that unemployment could be due to causes over which workers had no control; it also demonstrated the peaceful fashion in which the labouring poor could behave in such circumstances.
Despite rare incidents such as the ‘Sheffield outrages’ of 1866 there were no riots or upheavals to match those of the 1830s and 40s.
The extension of the franchise to urban workers in 1867 was preceded by an agitation which was considerably more decorous than that before 1832.
Working-class  ‘self-help’ institutions such as Friendly Societies and savings banks proliferated.
Respectable workers were rewarded with the vote, and in 1868 the Royal Commission on Trade Unions recommended the extension of legal protection for trade unions, which was achieved in the Trade Union Act of 1871 which for the first time gave legal protection to Trade Union funds and the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1875 which legalized peaceful picketing.
The apparent social harmony of the mid-century could be attributed to Britain's economic success in these years.
However, from the early 1870s the British economy was beginning to face serious competitive pressure for the first time from the expanding economies of Western Europe and the United States.
The prospects for future economic growth sufficient to contain if not to solve mass poverty seemed less certain.
From the early 1870s discussion of provision for the poor was influenced by the new facts that some of them had deserved the vote and that the economy faced certain difficulties.
This did not automatically lead all in influential circles to conclude that there was a need for provision for the poor by the state.
Rather, many contemporaries were impressed by the growing capacity of some at least of the working class to practice self- and mutual-help and they sought ways of encouraging its further development.
They also wished and expected charitable effort to grow.
They identified two distinct social problems: the ‘low, loafing class’, the ‘residuum’ at the bottom of society, the very poor and irregularly employed who constituted a permanent problem; and the élite of respectable labourers who suffered occasional problems of poverty due to unemployment, sickness and old age.
These two sections of the working class were seen to require separate treatment.
Disraeli, much influenced by the desire to secure the support of the new working-class voters (mainly better-off skilled men), introduced measures during his conservative government of 1874–80 to improve the status of trade unions, public health, education and housing.
In doing so he emphasized that if leaders of society were to maintain the allegiance of the masses they must demonstrate their responsibility for them, sustaining the aristocratic tradition of obligation towards the poor.
His legislation, however, was designed to provide the conditions in which self-help and independence could be attained rather than to redistribute wealth and opportunities from rich to poor.
His ministry did little for the more difficult problem of the ‘residuum’.
Booth's conclusion from his great survey was, reassuringly, that  although poverty was severe it was diminishing, and the capacity for self and mutual help among the masses was improving.
He advocated state support only for the minority who could not be self-helping because they were too old or disabled for work or because there were insufficient jobs available; and he accepted the need for punitive treatment of the undeserving at the base of society.
Alfred Marshall, the leading economist of the last decades of the nineteenth century, provided new tools for analysing the economy and demonstrated that involuntary unemployment could occur.
He was deeply concerned about the need to improve social conditions; but he concluded that the economy had the capacity for recovery and expansion to create more and better jobs and argued that government intervention was more likely to harm than to assist that process.
Liberal politicians led by Gladstone remained convinced that state action posed a danger to individual freedom, and would rarely assist economic growth or social or moral improvement.
Liberal theorists such as T. H. Green argued in the 1880s and 90s that poor social conditions hindered the desirable growth of moral and communal responsibility among the poor, but Green also looked to improvement from increased voluntary exercise of responsibility and regarded state intervention only as a last resort.
Although opposition to state action to alleviate poverty remained strong to the end of the century, countervailing pressures were growing.
The findings of Booth, Marshall and Green in their differing spheres were susceptible of different conclusions, and the actions of the poor themselves began to force these to the surface.
In the 1880s there was agitation, though of a peaceful nature, for further extensions of the vote.
It was conceded for rural workers in 1884.
Economic depression in 1878–79 and 1884–87 was marked by demonstrations of the unemployed in London, the North East and elsewhere.
It was difficult in the 1880s to ignore the fact that some at least of the working class were becoming increasingly active on various economic and political issues, were less acquiescent than previously and that organizations were being formed to defend and further their interests.
In 1884 both the Fabian Society (favouring gradualist reform but for unquestionably socialist ends) was founded and the revolutionary Social Democratic Federation (SDF) adopted a more radically redistributive programme.
Both organizations added to the ferment of discussion about social problems, offering new ideas, reviving in new forms long muted arguments  that capitalism itself created poverty and hence that capitalism could not be ‘moralized’ but must be eradicated.
The Fabians, Sidney and Beatrice Webb in particular, devoted themselves to the analysis of social and economic conditions.
They were convinced of the incapacity of the free market significantly to diminish poverty and inequality.
They placed their faith instead in social ownership, economic planning and extensive measures by central and local government to provide institutional and other relief to prevent and cure poverty due to unemployment, old age, sickness and other causes of need.
The Webbs devoted themselves to pressing these ideas upon leading politicians and civil servants.
The SDF and others further to the left also argued that capitalism must be abolished, but by revolutionary means if necessary.
They were also, however, profoundly suspicious of proposals for state welfare, which they identified as a means of diminishing working-class control over their own lives and as palliative substitutes for the workers' just demands for control over the means of production, high wages and full employment.
Although the organized activists were not on the whole the very poor, the poorest joined the demonstration.
After the relative quiescence of the working class since the late 1840s these new manifestations engendered fears that respectable workers might become less co-operative if their real grievances were not palliated.
Working-class activity took a new form at the end of the 1880s.
A period of prosperity and relatively full employment gave unprecedented bargaining power to the chronically underemployed and brought successful strikes among this previously unorganized lower stratum of workers, including the semi-skilled gas workers, Bryant and May match girls, and the casually employed dockers of London.
These workers were of, or close to, the very poor, from the slums of East London; they were led by more secure workers and by intellectual socialists.
Well-organized, they achieved maximum publicity for their demands.
And in the face of some of their claims traditional assumptions were difficult to uphold.
The dockers demanded an increase in pay from 4d. to a still paltry 6d. per hour.
They paraded the smart streets of West London, displaying their meagre weekly rations.
Manifestly they were very poor.
Equally clearly they were workers, not loafers, and they conducted the strike and the demonstrations peacefully and respectably.
These strikes were successful in achieving their immediate aims and led to the formation of permanent unions of previously poorer workers, although as yet only a small proportion of them.
In the face of such evidence it was a little difficult for at least some of the non-poor to accept that such conditions should continue and that free enterprise could bring them to an end largely unassisted.
It seemed that Britain was wealthy enough for some redistribution to be possible, as, arguably, it had not been in the 1830s, and that voluntary effort had achieved little in this respect.
The events of the 1880s moved some, such as Charles Booth, to detailed investigation of poverty, others to philanthropy or to pressure for government action.
Concern about social conditions was both reflected and reinforced by a mass of polemical writing, in newspapers, such as the radical Pall Mall Gazette , in pamphlets, such as Andrew Mearns' Bitter Cry of Outcast London (1883), describing and attacking poverty especially in the London slums.
The Bitter Cry was a vitriolic, moving and widely publicized polemic against the ‘pestilential human rookeries…where tens of thousands are crowded together amidst horrors which call to mind what we have heard of the middle passage of the slave-ship’.
Writing about slum life for middle- and upper-class consumption was not a new genre in the 1880s.
Dramatic and colourful vignettes of urban ‘low life’, lacking any serious analytical purpose, had had a considerable fashionable readership in the 1850s and 60s.
However, the prevailing tone of the work of the 1880s was different, critical of slum conditions, whereas previous writing had been descriptive, detached, rather anthropological in tone, as though describing alien barbaric tribes whose life was remote from that of the readership.
It did not demand change.
On the whole the writing of the 1880s did demand change and assumed that the privileged readers had such change within their power.
The poor themselves were presented more realistically, whether as sources of threat or as objects of pity.
Among politicians Joseph Chamberlain, a successful Birmingham manufacturer, had throughout his adult life been involved in Nonconformist philanthropy.
Between 1873 and 1875 he was notable, as Liberal Major of Birmingham, for combining effective social reform with sound business principles.
Slums were cleared, water supplies improved, municipalized and made profitable, an impressive city centre built.
He was a Liberal Cabinet Minister until he left the Liberal party in 1886; he joined a Conservative Cabinet in 1895.
Chamberlain split from the Liberal party largely on the issue of Irish Home Rule, which he opposed, but also due to impatience with Gladstone's resistance to social reform.
From the early 1880s  he was conscious of the need for reform both for its own sake and to check the potential threat from labour to the political status quo .
He was ‘convinced that my fellow politicians unnecessarily exaggerate the influence of labour…it can easily be overcome by a political leader with genuine sympathy with the working class and a practical programme’.
The ‘programme’ he developed from 1883, though most fully during his years outside the Cabinet.
It included government-sponsored contributory old-age pensions, and eight-hour day and improved working-class housing.
Social and economic change and political and industrial movements had by the end of the century made ‘the social question, a more central political and intellectual issue than it had been in 1870.
In influential circles there was greater knowledge of the nature and extent of certain social problems and stronger demands, for a variety of reasons, for government action to lessen poverty.
But the new ‘consciousness of sin’ as Beatrice Webb called it, still affected relatively few of the sinful classes.
Political fear of the working class was not acute enough to bring about a widespread demand to conciliate the workers; rather the 1890s saw attempts to suppress trade unionism through the law courts, lock-outs and the use of ‘blackleg’ labour.
Trade union membership declined slightly in the depressed years of the mid-1890s, especially in the new general unions.
Despite the foundation of the small national Independent Labour Party in 1893, Labour did not appear to present an irresistible threat.
Sympathy with the conditions of the poor did not necessarily lead to a desire for reform by the state but for further voluntary action.
Strong opposition remained to the growth of state interference.
‘SELF-HELP’ AND SURVIVAL
How, then, did the poor survive?
In 1870 and still in 1900 support from agencies of either central or local government was the least sought and usually the last resort.
The family was almost certainly the first resort.
All members of poor families picked up work whenever possible from the earliest ages — a means of survival which was easiest in the big cities where the largest number of casual jobs could be found such as cleaning, running errands and childminding.
Mayhew gives a vivid picture for the 1850s of the variety of means by which the London casual poor scraped a living [doc 1].
When such means failed the extended family gave support most often in the form of food or of caring for some children of the  family until a crisis was over, or permanently if it was sustained.
This was done from affection or duty or in the certain knowledge that those who helped would someday need similar help themselves — as a form of insurance.
The family might be too poor to help, or not available due to death or emigration.
This was often the case with the aged who made up a high proportion of workhouse residents.
It was found, time and again, that they were not, as moralists feared, abandoned by unfeeling children, but either had had no children or the children were dead, far away, or too poor to feed another family member.
In cases of temporary distress there is much contemporary testimony that the local community could be an important source of support.
Eleanor Rathbone, for example, from her wide experience of charitable work in Liverpool pointed out:
The pawnshop also played an important role in enabling families to survive from week to week — setting their meagre possessions to work to provide some security.
Shopkeeping itself, often on a very small scale in the home, enabled some women to supplement family incomes.
Shopkeepers helped families out in bad times by giving credit.
When family and community resources were exhausted, application to charity was, as Eleanor Rathbone suggested, the next step.
The scale of private charity expanded remarkably in the mid-nineteenth century and offered considerable protection to the poor against the rigours of the Poor Law.
A very large sum indeed was thus redistributed from rich to poor annually.
Unfortunately it is impossible to say how much.
Charities were many and multifarious: some long-lived, some short, some financing institutions such as Dr. Barnardo's homes (founded in 1869) or old people's dwellings, agricultural colonies for unemployed workers, homes for fallen prostitutes, or hospitals.
Some charities combined pressure-group activity with practical action, such as the National Society  for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, founded in 1884.
Some tried to help the poor by removing them from their environment, others aimed to change that environment and to help families and individuals within it.
Some gave handouts in cash or kind, sometimes to specific groups such as widows, orphans, the unemployed or to Jews who converted to Christianity, sometimes to anyone in visible need.
Sometimes need had to be proved, sometimes not.
In London every magistrates' court and police station had a collecting box and proceeds were dealt out to the needy, often those appearing on charges.
In times of special crisis at home and abroad such as severe unemployment in East London, or famine in India, the Lord Mayor of London, and mayors of other towns, opened relief funds which often attracted large subscriptions.
Booth described the large number of charities established by religious bodies in London in increasing numbers from the 1860s.
From 1865 William Booth, founder of the Salvation Army, grounded his East End missionary work in the belief that to save souls it was essential to save bodies; he did not discriminate between ‘deserving’ and ‘undeserving’poor.
From the 1880s the richer members of the Jewish community made extensive and largely successful efforts to provide for the influx of destitute refugees from the Russian pogroms.
The Jews settled in fairly clearly defined areas of larger cities, especially in East London, Manchester and Glasgow.
They suffered considerable prejudice and criticism, adding as they did to the already excessive pool of surplus urban labour, though in practice they concentrated in trades, such as tailoring, in which there was relatively little competition.
Jewish charity, in particular the Jewish Board of Guardians which relieved the destitute, and Jewish schools, such as the Jewish Free School of East London, were designed to mollify criticism and anti-semitism by providing for Jewish needs without recourse to the funds of the host community.
Roman Catholic charity and the work of priests and nuns provided similar services for the large poor Irish communities which were especially numerous in parts of London, Liverpool, Manchester and Glasgow.
However, the largest single inspiration to charitable effort, also religious in character, was that of evangelicalism, following the evangelical revival in the British Isles in the mid-nineteenth century.
About three-quarters of voluntary charities established in the second half of the nineteenth century were evangelical in inspiration, including such charities as Barnardo's and the YMCA.
The bulk of financial support for evangelical charities came from  well-to-do middle-class families, although they also received much from lower income groups.
The variety of religious motivations was not always conducive to harmony among philanthropists.
The continuing conflict between evangelicals and Roman Catholics at times amounted to undignified scrapping over the souls of the proletariat.
Although Catholics in theory regarded poverty as a holy state, they recognized that too much of it was not conducive to spiritual contemplation.
Catholics and evangelicals indeed had much in common in regarding spiritual regeneration as the true end of philanthropy.
Conflict arose because each wished to convert the poor — indeed the whole of society — to different forms of Christianity.
Such disharmony at least stimulated competitive charitable effort.
Some places fared better for charity than others, the towns probably better than the countryside.
East London was especially fortunate due to proximity to the largest concentration of wealth in the country, the remainder of London.
In general the availability of charity varied with the existence or not of a resident bourgeoisie with a surplus to give, although a considerable amount was given by those with little to spare.
For example, the ‘Hospital Saturday’ or ‘Sunday’funds based on regular contributions of 1d. or 2d. collected weekly, on  Saturday or Sunday, among workmates or in working-class neighbourhoods contributed to the funds of voluntary hospitals.
However, charity was highly localized.
In Newcastle, which had a resident middle class, it was widely available; in nearby largely working-class Gateshead it was not.
There was a similar contrast between Manchester and neighbouring Salford.
Larger endowed charities were registered with the Central Charity Commissioners, many others were not.
Many left no records, hence the difficulty of assessing the importance of charity locally or nationally.
One summary of London charities in 1861 estimated that 640 existed, with an annual income of £2.5 m. — which exceeded Poor Law expenditure in London.
This survey omitted many small charities and individual gifts.
The size and variety of charitable effort and the absence of universal or consistent principles underlying such activities was a major reason for the foundation of the Charity Organization Society (COS) in 1869.
Its aim was to persuade charities to co-ordinate and concentrate their considerable resources so that they distributed systematically to those best able to make use of them, according to clear principles.
These were the encouragement of ‘selfdependence’ by helping only those who were deemed capable of  becoming self-supporting.
The COS pioneered in England the practice of ‘case-work’ operating in some German towns.
They enquired carefully into the backgrounds of their clients.
If they were found worthy they were given help, including cash and the tools to carry on a trade, help in finding a job and regular visitation and advice until they could ‘stand on their own feet’.
Those whose ‘condition is due to improvidence or thriftlessness and there is no hope of being able to make him independent in the future’ were left to destitution or the Poor Law.
The response of the COS to recognition that a proportion of poverty was due to the overstocked state of the labour market was to try to ensure that the available jobs went to the respectable and self-helping, who would serve as an example to others.
They had no solution to the possibility that even they might sometimes fail to find permanent employment at a living wage.
The ‘case-work’ approach had much to be said for it in that it entailed a serious attempt to analyse the nature of the problem confronting the individual or family and to achieve a lasting solution without removing the clients from their familiar environment.
Families who wished to emigrate and girls looking for domestic jobs were referred to two societies affiliated to the COS, the East End Emigration Society and the Metropolitan Association for Befriending Young Servants.
The difficulties of this approach were that it was slow, time-consuming and could help very few.
Between 1886–96 the COS assisted only 800 ‘cases’ in London to find jobs.
Also, the systematic scrutiny of an individual's character and private affairs was almost as objectionable to independent workmen as receipt of poor relief.
Not all of the ‘helpable’ were willing to be helped by such means.
These difficulties were the source of much of the conflict among philanthropists, between those who preferred to give thorough-going help to a few and those who believed that the scale of destitution was such that wholesale relief was necessary at least in times of high unemployment, to palliate serious destitution and to prevent social disorder.
The approach also diverted attention from the broader causes of poverty.
The Society was substantially unsuccessful in its aim of persuading other charities to adopt the same methods.
Their success was greatest, though very limited, in London, and far from complete elsewhere.
Leaders of the COS argued that many charities were encouraging the ‘demoralization’ of the poor by handing out benefits in cash and kind too readily and with no attempt to ensure long-term improvement in the client's condition.
The harmonizing  of charities already locked in theological conflict presented problems of its own.
Conflict between the COS and the evangelicals was almost inevitable given the view of the latter that any soul was worthy of salvation.
It was indeed waged at times with a bitterness and pettiness which did the COS no credit.
Many who subscribed to COS principles in theory found it difficult in practice to abandon to destitution or the Poor Law many who were in desperate and immediate need.
Dissatisfaction with the COS led to some new approaches in voluntary effort, such as the Settlement House Movement, which pioneered, in effect, modern ‘community work’ as distinct from the case-work approach of the COS.
In 1884 Samuel Barnett became warden of the newly established Toynbee Hall settlement in East London whose foundation he had inspired.
Barnett had been a founder of COS in 1869 but, largely due to his experience in a desperately poor Whitechapel parish, he had become convinced that the COS did not understand the meaning of poverty and the helplessness which it bred.
He came to believe that in order to help the poor and to achieve social harmony both the state and charity should work to improve living and working conditions.
He also believed, as did Green, Marshall and many others.
that it was equally essential for the rich to cease to patronize and exploit the poor.
As he put it, ‘not until the habits of the rich are changed and they are again content to breathe the same air and walk the same streets as the poor will East London be ‘saved’.
Only when the rich treated the poor as equally worthy human individuals would class harmony as well as material improvement be achieved.
Toynbee Hall was designed as a residential settlement to be inhabited by young university graduates, who were to work among the poor in their spare time — offering art, music and education as well as material help and advice — with the aim of achieving mutual knowledge and respect between the classes.
By the end of the century thirty houses had been established on the model of Toynbee Hall, almost half in provincial cities, notably in Liverpool, another centre of desperate poverty.
Recognition of the truth of criticism such as Barnett's, and fear of losing the initiative in the organization of charity, led the COS under C. S. Loch, its powerful secretary from 1875–1913, by 1890 into greater changes in its approach than it was always willing publicly to admit.
Members recognized the great difficulty of distinguishing ‘deserving’ from ‘undeserving’poor.
They began to recommend the development of new industries, and of temporary  work-creation schemes strictly for those capable of finding work in normal times.
They were opposed, however, to any such action by central or local government; it was, in their view, the work of charity.
The role of government, they believed, was to provide for the unhelpable residuum.
Loch's somewhat high-handed attitude towards many public or philanthropic efforts contributed much to the lack of harmony within the philanthropic movement.
He achieved for the COS, however, a degree of influence in government circles which was rather greater than the Society's contribution to philanthropy.
Throughout his period of office the COS was represented in government enquiries into social problems and pressed their principles upon government, often to the exclusion of others.
Conflicts of interest among philanthropic groups originating in differing social or religious theories frustrated constructive action in certain fields.
However, at the root of the conflicts lay the size or intractability of the problems concerned.
This perhaps was most evident in the approach of the charities to the problems of unemployment and housing.
A major source of charity for the unemployed were the ad hoc funds raised by public subscription, such as the Lord Mayor of London's Mansion House funds, opened regularly in times of exceptional distress.
In addition there were many, usually small and local, often ephemeral, societies for the relief of unemployment.
In the periods of high unemployment of the 1880s and 1890s the Mansion House fund, with COS support, introduced work-creation schemes for the London unemployed.
However, the largest of these in 1892 set to work only 253 out of 716 applicants in West Ham, converting wasteland to allotments at 6d. an hour for 45 hours work per week.
Similar charitable schemes outside London were equally ineffective, yet still the COS and its associates refused to co-operate with local authorities in establishing larger schemes, despite the capacity and willingness of the latter to put the charitable funds to more effective use in such necessary activities as road-building.
Another type of charitable relief of unemployment was ‘home colonization’.
Frequently this took the form of removing men, or sometimes whole families, from the towns for training in agricultural work in organized land settlements.
The aim was to transform them into permanent subsistence farmers or labourers.
This was not a new idea, but it attracted increasing support from the 1880s, due partly to the failure of alternative solutions to unemployment  and to the apparent unlikelihood of more work being generated in the towns.
During the 1870s agricultural depression had led to land and even rural jobs lying vacant.
There was an attractive simplicity to the notion of moving the starving from the cities to become self-sufficient on otherwise wasted agricultural land.
By this means some hoped that it might also become possible to reduce Britain's dependence upon imported food — similar colonies had been tried elsewhere in Europe with apparent success.
Not all proposals for land colonies embodied this rather idyllic hope of regenerating the long dead English peasantry from the bones of the urban residuum.
Sometimes they were envisaged as semi-penal institutions for the unregenerated poor.
Marshall, Charles Booth and Loch supported the less punitive form of colony.
Some were established: by the London Congregational Union in 1886, by the Salvation Army from 1891 (in addition to their workshops for destitutes within East London) in England and America for emigrant British workers, and by the Church Army.
Others were established under the Poor Law.
Once more, however, they provided only for small numbers and their success even in establishing this few in permanent work or independence appears to have been small.
Similar frustrations, though fewer conflicts, attended provision of working-class housing.
Much charitable effort was devoted to this cause on the assumption that improved housing conditions, by removing some of the degradation from the lives of the poor, would give them more hope and greater enthusiasm for the struggle for self-help and survival.
In general, housing was built by private enterprise, since local authorities were unwilling or unable to provide it from their income from rates.
Not until 1879 did the government offer local authorities low interest loans for housebuilding and little action followed until the 1900s.
Government subsidies for housing were introduced only in 1918.
A few philanthropic or canny employers provided housing — most notably, from 1888 W. H. Lever built a spectacular model village for his employees at Port Sunlight and from 1895 the Cadbury family developed Bournville as a garden suburb for Birmingham workers.
But such efforts touched few and generally better paid workers.
The problem of the poorest was that they could not afford such rents as would bring an adequate return for builders and property-owners, unless they were crammed at very high density in properly which received minimal repair.
The problem was worsened in the  big city centres by the inflation of land prices from the 1860s as demand for shop, office and factory building mounted.
City land available for house-building was further reduced by the building of railways and roads which often swallowed up not only building land but also existing working-class housing.
Resistance to road- and house-building in richer areas often diverted such developments to more vulnerable districts.
In addition local authorities such as the LCC in the 1890s drove new roads through notorious slums in order to demolish them.
New Oxford Street and Victoria Street in central London were built partly for this  purpose .
Many of those displaced were not rehoused but moved on to multi-occupy neighbouring districts.
Urban populations continued to grow.
The poorest could least afford to travel from homes in the suburbs to work in city centres.
Indeed those dependent upon casual labour had to live close to docks and factories if they were to be on hand for work as it became available.
All of these factors contributed to a major housing crisis in all cities and especially in London, Liverpool and Glasgow by the 1850s.
A pioneer of philanthropic attempts to solve this crisis was Octavia Hill.
For forty years from 1864 she initiated the building of low-cost apartments for poor families.
She was a founder member of COS and managed her property in accordance with similar principles.
Her tenants were poor but carefully selected in accordance with their apparent potential for self-improvement.
Once installed, tenants were regularly visited by voluntary lady rent-collectors whose task was to advise tenants on the management of the household or other aspects of their lives — how to sweep their floors, wash their children and clothing and to conduct themselves with propriety.
The result was indeed improved if, of necessity, very basic housing, at a rent low enough for the very poor to pay.
Residence therein entailed rather intensive supervision: outside doors were locked at night; those whose behaviour did not meet the strict standards of the lady visitors were evicted.
Many were unwilling to accept such intrusion in their lives even for the sake of better housing.
Others were more resigned or compliant, if only because clean low-cost housing in cities was otherwise almost impossible to obtain.
Octavia Hill was an energetic propagandist and played an important role in bringing the appalling problems of filthy, overcrowded slum dwellings to the attention of government and of philanthropists.
One result was a considerable amount of low-cost tenement building by philanthropic associations in the cities from the early 1880s.
Organizations such as the Peabody Trust and the  East End Dwellings Company designed and built tenement housing, which Nicholas Pevsner has rightly called ‘truly humanitarian in its pretensions, yet depressing in its results’— solidly built, but, for reasons of economy, ugly and providing shared water-supplies and sanitary facilities.
The buildings were subsidized by charitable donations but required rent-income for their upkeep, and the problem remained that the poorest could not afford the rent necessary for adequate housing.
Many of these housing companies were known as ‘5 per cent philanthropy’ companies.
Contributors invested in them as they would in any commercial building company and their philanthropy lay in accepting a return which, at 5 per cent, was lower than they would expect on the free market.
Efforts of this kind, considerable though they were, could not solve the immense housing problem.
Indeed, they were unable to get to the heart of providing for those who did not work regularly and hence could not pay regular rent or, often, any rent at all.
They continued to live in conditions of severe overcrowding, rent arrears, ‘moonlight flits’ from one insalubrious dwelling to another, usually within a small area of the town or city.
The problems of rural housing went almost untouched.
It was increasingly obvious that government action of some kind was essential for the improvement of the housing situation.
Charity could not solve fundamental problems of housing and unemployment.
Clearly, the motives for giving to charities of all kinds were as various as the gifts.
As Derek Fraser has suggested, they were of four main types: ‘a fear of social revolution, a humanitarian concern for suffering, a desire to improve the moral tone of the recipients and a satisfaction of some psychological or social need’, i.e. a desire for the confirmation of social status and superiority which came from giving to those poorer than oneself, and perhaps basking in their gratitude.
The growing numbers of underemployed middle- or upper-class women, for whom unpaid charitable work was one of the very few socially acceptable occupations, supplied a willing and almost endless supply of volunteers for such activity, such as has been available at no other period of British history.
Those with a surplus gave to the English poor with the same mixture of motives with which donations are now made to Oxfam.
As we have seen, a religious motive was more often important then than now.
The complexity of the charitable impulse led to the highly confused picture presented by nineteenth-century philanthropy.
The recipients also varied in their response.
‘Scroungers’ did exist, irresistibly when many were poor and charity was to be had sometimes merely for attending a church service; and then as now there was a flourishing mythology of great sums inveigled from charity by shrewd layabouts.
Many poor people were grateful for anything which lightened their burden, others were resentful of patronage which went with it.
Above the level of the desperately poor, those who could were self-helping to a degree which should have gratified those who for so long preached the doctrine.
The chief forms of ‘self-help’ available were saving or insurance, by which means workers, as the Charity Organization Society urged, strove to have something ‘put by’for illness, unemployment, old age and other contingencies.
Commercial savings banks, used primarily but by no means exclusively by the working class — they attracted many lower-middle-class savers — expanded rapidly in the mid-nineteenth century.
To encourage such savings further, partly on Gladstone's initiative, the Post Office Savings Bank opened in 1863.
By 1891–95 it had average total deposits of £83 m. — an average individual deposit of £14.75.
Savings banks, naturally enough, attracted only those workers with a surplus to save.
The most popular form of insurance — burial insurance — was, however, almost universal.
It might be thought odd that the desperately poor spent hard-earned pence on providing for a ceremony they would never see.
But a pauper burial was the final degradation of a miserable life, a respectable funeral a means of demonstrating self-respect to the end and hence of immense psychological importance.
Burial insurance was bought also for children, and, given the high infant death rate, parents were accused of using the probability of a child's death as a means of accumulating a small nest-egg.
If this was a common practice, and it was never proven, it was hardly deeply culpable.
The weekly contribution for burial insurance was 1 d .
or 1½ d .,
bringing about £7 10s. at death, sufficient to pay for a very modest funeral.
The contributions were paid weekly to door-to-door collectors.
Insurance against other contingencies, chiefly sickness, and increasingly also old age, was available primarily through Friendly Societies.
These offered up to 10s. per week sickness benefit plus the services of a doctor in return for a contribution of between 4d. and 8d. per week.
They were established in increasing numbers from the 1830s and were of varying size and kind.
Some were local, some national, some (the least popular) established for the working  class by clergy and other philanthropists, others by workers themselves.
All of them, but especially the independent working-class organizations, were unlike commercial insurance companies in holding popular, convivial meetings, often in pubs (although some societies were temperance organizations and met in places uncontaminated by drink) and in their sense of comradeship and obligation among members.
Many even of the larger societies were in temporary financial difficulties by the 1880s due to their willingness to pay long-term sick benefit as an effective old-age pension to aged members past regular work.
Past contributions had not been calculated to cover such expenditure, but societies felt an obligation to protect faithful members from ending their days on poor relief.
They saw their role as providing for mutual help among the working class in a situation in which individual self-help was impossible for so many of them.
The Friendly Societies were indeed the largest exclusively working-class organizations in Britain by 1900.
They had around 6 million members in 1904; there were l.3 million trade unionists at the same date.
In the last decade of the century commercial insurance companies providing sickness and burial insurance were growing rapidly, especially among younger people.
As the available range of leisure activities expanded such people were less interested in the convivial aspects of Friendly Society membership and more concerned with safe insurance, which Friendly Societies had not always been able to guarantee.
Nevertheless, Friendly Society membership continued to expand, and most had a sound financial basis by 1900.
Friendly Society membership throughout the period, however, came almost exclusively from the more secure, respectable stratum of the male working class, those who earned enough and regularly enough to contribute.
Among such men membership was almost universal and membership was itself a mark of a respectable workman.
There were, however, many rural societies and branches of larger societies, whose members were agricultural labourers, who often had the advantage of regular if not of high wages; and the high fall-out rate of membership of most societies testifies to the numbers who aspired to the security provided by membership but could not maintain regular payments.
Few societies admitted both men and women.
This was partly because few labouring families even among the better paid could afford double contributions and in such families the needs of the man took priority.
Few women earned enough to pay their own contribution.
When, however, some women did wish to join the  larger societies in the 1870s, the societies found their doctors unwilling to treat women unless they paid higher contributions than men, on the grounds that women were more often sick and would make heavier demands on their services, which thus would be of greater benefit to poorer women.
Some societies established separate women's branches, with higher contributions, but with little success.
Only in Lancashire were there flourishing women's societies, since Lancashire had better paid and more regular work for women, in the textile factories, than any other part of the country.
Elsewhere working women and the wives of working men lacked access to this elementary form of private social security.
Lower-paid, unskilled and casual male workers joined, when they could, the only substitute for a Friendly Society open to them — an annual ‘dividing-up’ club, ‘slate club’or ‘tontine’— the name varied regionally.
Often based in a pub, members paid weekly contributions, received small benefits when sick, and the sum remaining in the fund was divided among all members at Christmas.
Such clubs were vulnerable to untrustworthy treasurers' misappropriation of funds and gave members none of the benefits of an interest bearing fund.
They could not provide doctors' services or for old age.
But they were well adapted to the insecure lives of poorer workers; if due to unemployment or other crisis they had to cease contributions they could lose no more than one year's contributions.
Women were rarely allowed to nor could afford to join such clubs.
For medical treatment they and their children depended upon the Poor Law or, mainly in the cities, medical charities, or upon the charity of doctors, some of whom treated poor families free of charge or ran medical clubs of their own to which poorer patients could make small contributions.
Certainly, and not surprisingly, the higher stratum of more secure workers and to a lesser extent their families had access to better health and also housing provision in this period before the state played a significant role in either area — at least for as long as they remained in fairly regular work.
They were also the first to join permanent trade unions.
By the 1880s most of these provided not only bargaining machinery but health, old-age and unemployment benefits for their members.
Initially these were organized rather haphazardly with little serious attempt to match contributions to prospective claims on the funds.
After criticism from, among others, the Royal Commission on Trade Unions of 1868, these arrangements were improved.
The ‘new’ unskilled unions formed in the late 1880s initially  provided no such benefits, partly because their low-paid members could not afford the resulting higher contributions.
They were motivated also by the determination of the militant leadership not to be diverted by such activities from the pursuit of better wages and working conditions for their members.
These, rather than private insurance or public ‘welfare’, they saw as the real key to diminishing poverty.
They feared that if the union fund was too heavily committed to payment of ‘friendly benefits’, insufficient would remain in the fund to finance industrial action.
However, as their memberships declined in the less favourable atmosphere of the 1990s, they began also to provide ‘friendly’ benefits.
Members who had no other form of ‘social security’ available to them desired the benefits.
Trade unionists also discovered that provision of benefits were an effective means of retaining members between periods of industrial militancy.
‘Superior’ workers were also the chief beneficiaries of other manifestations of working-class mutual help in this period.
Building societies, for the finance of house building or purchase, grew rapidly and by the end of the century attracted many small investors, but their appeal was rather to tradesmen and the lower-middle class than to manual workers.
The Co-operative movement was a form of mutual aid with a wider working-class appeal although it also largely excluded the poorest.
Co-operative stores provided relatively cheap, good quality foodstuffs or other essential consumer goods to members, dividing their profits —‘dividends’— among members.
They were rarely situated in poorer districts, required a membership fee of up to £1, which the poorest could not afford, and did not allow ‘tick’ or sales bacon, etc.) which the poor were forced by low or uncertain incomes to buy.
A determined attempt to extend the benefits of Co-operative trading to the poor was made from soon after its foundation in 1883 by the women of the Women's Co-operative Guild.
This impressive organization, the bulk of whose members were working women or the wives of working men, led by their secretary Margaret Llewellyn-Davies, advocated shops in poor districts with reduced subscription, selling in smaller quantities.
Against the opposition of respectable male co-operators the women set up a number of successful shops of this kind.
The Guild also encouraged women to be active in local government, to criticize or improve the administration of the Poor Law, education, housing and public health.
By this combination of means both ‘respectable’ and, with much greater difficulty, the ‘residuum’survived periods of distress with varying degrees of success.
By the end of the century larger business firms were developing company welfare schemes which added to the complex web of social provision.
Some employers since the beginning of the nineteenth century had provided company housing, schools and other facilities either from philanthropic motives or in order to attract scarce labour.
After 1870 rather larger numbers of companies were providing a wider range of provision, including in some cases, old-age pensions and health care.
Partly this was because there were greater numbers of large firms able to afford such benefits.
Also, in the atmosphere of greater international competition of this period employers were increasingly aware of the need to increase productivity and realized that more secure conditions of life could promote higher output.
Company pensions enabled them to lay off older and less productive workers with a clear conscience and health care directly promoted more efficient production.
In addition such provision promoted stability in the workforce, since workers were reluctant to leave jobs which provided benefits unobtainable elsewhere.
Some employers, too, felt paternal concern for the welfare of their workers and were, like the  Quaker Cadbury family, active philanthropists in other fields.
In general, employers were more likely to provide for their better-paid skilled workers who were less easily replaced than the unskilled labourers.
THE POOR LAW
Central and local government provided in most circumstances a residual ‘safety net’ when all else failed, chiefly through the Poor Law.
The total number of paupers (i.e. recipients of poor relief was never in this period over 5 per cent of the population of England and Wales in any one year.
We have seen that the proportion in severe poverty was considerably higher.
Most paupers receiving workhouse or out-door relief from the Poor Law were children, their mothers, the aged, sick or disabled.
The Poor Law had been most effective in forcing all those who could to be self-helping.
It had not succeeded in eliminating their poverty.
The Poor Law was the most comprehensive official source for the relief of poverty, administered in England and Wales as laid down by the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 and a succession of later amendments, in Scotland and Ireland according to different  statutes and rather different principles.
The Poor Law for England and Wales was supervised by central government through the Poor Law Board (established in 1847) until 1871. 1871 the Local Government Board (LGB) was established to supervise all the growing functions of local government, including the Poor Law.
Central supervision of the Poor Law operated both through the regional inspectorate who supervised the locally elected administrators, the Boards of Guardians of each Poor Law Union, and submitted annual reports to the LGB, and also through circulars or memoranda to the Boards of Guardians.
Local Guardians were elected triennially.
Until 1892 generally only those paying rates on property with a rateable value of £40 p.a. or more were eligible for election as Guardians.
This excluded virtually all manual workers and most women.
After considerable labour pressure the qualification was reduced to £5 in 1892 and abolished in 1894.
The only remaining qualification for office and for voting was twelve months residence in the area covered by the Union.
The changes also applied to elections to municipal and county councils so that the electorate was now composed of all ratepayers, excluding recipients of poor relief.
On contentious points of policy Guardians and Officers could consult the LGB.
The LGB had indeed only advisory powers over local Boards.
If a Board chose to follow a generous policy, for example of paying outdoor relief to the unemployed, and could persuade local ratepayers to finance it, the central authority had some difficulty in stopping such action unless corrupt use of the money or the raising of excessive loans could be proved.
A major restraint upon such generosity was, however, the opposition of ratepayers.
The small tradesmen or shopkeepers who made up most Boards of Guardians throughout the period were unlikely to resist such pressure since their elections to the Boards depended upon the ratepayers.
Turnouts in Guardian elections were extremely low (perhaps 10–15% of registered electors) and Guardians who offended influential ratepayers were easily ousted.
Too grim a policy of refusal of poor relief was, however, restrained by the fact that Poor Law authorities had a fundamental obligation not to allow the destitute to die from starvation — in such cases the Relieving Officer could be indicted for murder.
The poor rate was the largest direct tax paid by most rate payers at a time when income tax was levied only on incomes above £150 p.a. and was paid by all householders, many of them themselves poor.
Rates were locally assessed and the amounts payable varied  considerably from place to place.
There was no provision for richer districts to subsidize poorer, hence unions with large numbers of poor persons could not tap the resources of those with few or none — a source of increasing resentment among Guardians of some poorer unions.
For London alone from 1867 a Metropolitan Common Poor fund was established, to which all London Unions contributed for the building and maintenance of workhouses throughout London.
Out-door relief continued to be financed by the rate yield of individual London Unions and continued to be a source of grievance among Guardians of poorer Unions.
The result was that by the late 1860s the Poor Law was locally highly anarchic.
Expenditure rose by 40 per cent between 1850 and 1870, faster than the rate of population growth.
The response was a tightening up of Poor Law policy from 1871.
The President of the Local Government Board, George Goschen, issued a memorandum urging that wherever possible out-door relief should be cut back; ‘deserving’ applicants for relief were to be referred to charities, the ‘undeserving’to be placed in workhouses.
Poor Law administrators were to encourage the co-operation of Boards of Guardians with charities operating on COS principles.
The new policy was an attempt to integrate public and voluntary action on principles similar to those of the COS [doc 2].
Throughout the 1870s inspectors advised Guardians on means of cutting expenditure: in particular there was to be more stringent investigation of applicants for and recipients of out-door relief.
Additional relieving officers were to be appointed to keep close watch on paupers, to enquire of neighbours and relatives as to whether they had undisclosed earnings or, in the case of single women, regular male friends capable of supporting them.
Mothers on out-door relief were to be encouraged or forced by the threat of withdrawal of relief to send some or all of their children into the workhouse, so that the mothers could support themselves by work.
Previously the central Poor Law Authority had not insisted that women should work.
An LGB circular of 1871 proclaimed that out-door relief should not be given to single women unless they proved their inability to find other employment by performing a daily labour task, officially termed a ‘labour test’, such as cleaning, in the workhouse, returning home at night.
Some Guardians pursued the new policy more vigorously than others.
The result was a fall in the numbers receiving out-door relief.
The change of policy hit women especially hard since they had greatly outnumbered men as recipients of out-door relief.
In  January 1871 there were 166,407 female out-door paupers in England and Wales; in January 1891 only 53,371, despite the fact that the policy was pursued less vigorously in the 1880s than in the preceding decade.
The policy of the 1870s was relaxed due to awareness of the hardship inflicted — those reduced to the extreme of applying for poor relief even in 1870 were those with no other resort, and their numbers could be further reduced only by increasing their hardship.
Charity was not sufficient or evenly enough distributed to take over from out-door relief.
The economy was not expanding in such a way as to absorb them in work, even if mothers of young children, children themselves, the aged and the disabled who made up the bulk of out-door paupers, had been able to take advantage of such expansion.
The unemployment of the mid-1880s contributed to the difficulty of sustaining the policy — workhouses were not large enough to hold all of the unemployed in the hardest hit district and out-door relief had to be given by many Guardians, though normally only in return for a daily ‘test’ such as stone-breaking in the workhouse yard — the task most favoured by Guardians for the male unemployed.
The attempt to impose a consistent out-door policy throughout England and Wales was effectively a failure.
The election of radical working men to Boards such as those of Poplar and West Ham in London and of philanthropic women to some Boards after the abolition of the Guardians' property qualification, increased the tendency of some urban Boards to treat applicants with rather greater generosity than the LGB intended.
In particular West Ham and Poplar and a handful of other Boards with active Labour members went as far as their resources permitted in providing out-door relief and improved workhouse conditions even for the unemployed, even though they faced considerable opposition from the LGB.
The strict out-door relief policy of the 1870s did not lead to a fall in total Poor Law expenditure.
This was due to the other important aspect of central policy from 1871, the improvement of institutional relief.
The destruction of the prevailing form of institution, the ‘general mixed workhouse,’ was encouraged.
Instead, Edwin Chadwick's aim of 1834 to give separate specialized care to deserving children, the aged, sick and lunatic was to be implemented.
These were groups in need of institutional care and whose need could not always be attributed to their own fault.
Nevertheless, Guardians were encouraged to ‘classify’ inmates according both to cause of poverty and to ‘character’.
Hence the  old, the young, the sick and the mad were to be separated, and within each group those of better behaviour were to be rewarded with better diets or more ‘comforts’.
Since this encouragement was not accompanied by subsidy from central government, the outcome was locally various.
Some ratepayers, especially in larger towns and cities, were persuaded to finance the building especially of workhouse infirmaries separate from the main workhouse building, where standards of treatment and nursing gradually improved — the room for such improvement being considerable.
Infirmaries were popular improvements since in many towns few free or cheap alternatives existed and the capacity of medicine to cure a wider range of illnesses was increasing.
The increased use of antiseptic techniques, the isolation of bacteria and recognition of their role in disseminating disease, and the gradual spread of improved nursing under the inspiration of Florence Nightingale, all led to improvements first in voluntary then in Poor Law hospitals.
Joseph Chamberlain as Chairman of the Local Government Board in 1885 was responsible for the Medical Relief (Disqualifications Removal) Act which removed the pauper stigma — disfranchisement — from inmates of Poor Law infirmaries who made no other demands on poor relief and increased both use of the infirmaries by respectable working people and their willingness as ratepayers to finance them.
After 1885  infirmaries continued to improve, though fastest in the big cities, but still, at the time of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws of 1905–09, local provision varied considerably.
Some still by that date did not have trained nurses but employed untrained workhouse inmates.
Maternity wards were notably slow to improve, largely due to their popularly believed, if apparently unfounded, association with prostitution.
More slowly, separate institutions of a new kind were also provided for children, the emphasis shifting from the large sometimes disease-ridden ‘barrack schools’ in which they were accommodated in the mid-century, to the more intimate ‘scattered homes’pioneered by the Sheffield Guardians in the 1890s, and ‘cottage homes’on the model established by  Barnardo .
Though still rather austere, the city and suburban villa ‘scattered homes’, housing between twelve and twenty children and their attendants, were a considerable improvement on the vast institutions still operating elsewhere in the country.
As education became compulsory from 1880, children from such homes could attend schools with other children.
The development of such institutions resulted partly from the dissemination of beliefs in the importance of a child's environment  upon personality, and of realization that children brought up in large institutions found considerable difficulty later in adjusting to non-institutional life.
In 1870 the PLB had also, rather grudgingly, allowed some Guardians to adopt the Scottish practice of ‘boarding out’(fostering, in modern terms) pauper children with working-class families, sometimes their own relatives.
This practice was not adopted enthusiastically by the LGB, partly due to fears that its cheapness would encourage Guardians to send children to unsuitable homes — fears which were justified by some unfortunate and tragic incidents of maltreatment and exploitation of child labour.
There was also a shortage of staff to supervise placements, and some opposition to the placing of pauper children often in more desirable homes than those of families of independent labourers.
However, in 1885 a lady inspector, Mrs Mason, was appointed to supervise ‘boarding out’ throughout the country, a task later shared with two other lady inspectors.
The aged, too, were increasingly placed in separate institutions, or more commonly in separate wards of the old workhouse.
LGB circulars of 1895 and 1899 recommended that out-door relief should be granted more readily to the aged poor.
(In practice Boards of Guardians, especially in rural areas, had tended to show more generosity towards the aged than to any other group.)
The circulars also recommended that those respectable aged who, for reasons of infirmity or lack of friends or family to care for them, required institutional care, should be allowed greater comforts in the workhouse.
Such ‘comforts’ included the wearing of their own clothes rather than pauper uniform, permission to give or to receive outside visits, for aged husbands and wives to share rooms, for men to smoke, women to receive additional rations of tea and to eat other than the prescribed diet.
The nature of the privileges suggests the rigour of the previous regime, which was still slow to change in many unions.
This changed treatment of the aged poor derived partly from the wider trend towards the improvement of institutional care.
It was also the result of mounting pressure from the late 1870s for more humane treatment of the aged.
Charles Booth and Joseph Chamberlain were among those who in the 1880s and 1890s pointed out that old age was a significant cause of poverty and pauperism.
They argued that it was often non-culpable since even the most respectable workers could not always save sufficient to provide for old age — a hazard which not all could expect to live to experience and whose length was uncertain.
Too many of the respectable labouring  poor ended their lives in the workhouse or on out-door relief — 50 per cent of those reaching the age of sixty, according to Joseph Chamberlain in 1891.
Others died in destitution for fear of the shame attached to a pauper funeral.
Both Booth and Chamberlain argued that the state should provide old-age pensions of between 5s. and 10s. per week to enable those over sixty-five to live and die respectably, free from the stigma of pauperism.
The debate about pensions continued into the 1900s.
In the preceding generation it contributed to the general discovery of the complex and various causes of poverty, and to considerable public discussion of the problem of the aged poor.
A series of government investigations were held into the question of pensions and the conditions of the aged poor, in 1885–87, 1895, 1896 and 1899.
Their sole effects upon the lives of the aged, before old-age pensions were introduced in 1908, were the LGB circulars of 1895–99.
The central principle of Poor Law policy in this period was that a clear distinction could be made between the deserving ‘helpable’ and the ‘residuum’, who were to be coerced into more socially acceptable behaviour.
This assumption arose from greater understanding of the complex causes of poverty, but this remained incomplete.
A punitive approach to the poorest survived the accumulation of indications that much even of the worst poverty was not self-inflicted, but derived from the inability of the market to provide sufficient homes, jobs or adequate incomes.
GOVERNMENT ACTION OUTSIDE THE POOR LAW
Central and local government activities outside the strict limits of the Poor Law expanded, much of it guided by the principles which ruled poor relief.
As a result of social investigation there was greater recognition than before of the causes of unemployment, in particular of the distinction between the chronic underemployment of the casual poor of big cities and the recurrent temporary unemployment of large numbers of superior workers in periods of depression.
This owed much to analyses of the labour market by H. Llewellyn Smith, of the Board of Trade.
Fears of militancy resulting from unemployment and the inadequacy of voluntary efforts to relieve it led to some recognition that charity could not provide sufficiently for either type of unemployment.
In Parliament in 1886, Liberals and Conservatives advocated publicly-funded ‘public works’— prison, road, harbour and house  building — as a constructive means of relieving the temporarily unemployed.
Leading members of the labour movement advocated both an eight-hour day, as a means of permanently increasing the regularly employed labour force (a nine or ten hour day, six days a week being then normal), and public works, despite some fears that under private enterprise such sharing of work could lead to depression of wages.
In March 1886 Joseph Chamberlain, as President of the Local Government Board, responded by issuing a circular to local authorities urging them to schedule necessary public works for periods of depression, and to co-operate with the Poor Law by providing paid, non-pauperizing work for those who applied for poor relief due to temporary unemployment.
The circular gave formal acknowledgement to a practice already employed by some authorities and which continued thereafter to be ignored by others.
Chamberlain was explicit about his motives in a letter to Beatrice Webb: ‘It will remove the great danger, viz, that public sentiment should go wholly over to the unemployed and render impossible that state sternness to which you or I equally attach importance.
By offering reasonable work at low wages we may secure the power of being very strict with the loafer or confirmed pauper.’
The circular was almost entirely ineffective.
The government offered no special finance for public works, and made no attempt to enforce implementation.
Once more, the poorest districts could least afford provision from their own funds.
Most of such work was unsuitable for operating in winter when unemployment was highest and when carried out with an untrained labour force it was expensive or inefficient, and failed to attract the temporarily unemployed artisans for whom it was intended.
They felt stigmatized, as skilled men, by taking unskilled work, and it left them no time to search for work at their trade.
The casually underemployed benefited most.
Amid demonstrations of the unemployed in the depression of 1892–95, local authorities in districts where the problem was worst established public works and opened labour bureaux, i.e. labour exchanges for the simultaneous registration of the unemployed and of available work.
These also were largely ineffective because the numbers of the unemployed, again largely casuals, far outnumbered the jobs notified.
The central government took no further action — although select committees investigated the problem in 1895 and 1896.
Poor Law Guardians were still prohibited from  giving out-door relief to the unemployed except in return for‘test’ labour.
In the 1880s and 90s the state moved a little more decisively into the fields of housing, factory reform, and public health.
With respect to public health, legislation in 1871 at last covered the whole country with sanitary authorities obliged to appoint such permanent staff as medical officers of health with powers to inspect and enforce eradication of such nuisances as polluted water supplies and inadequate drainage.
The Public Health Act of 1875 further clarified the duties of sanitary authorities.
A Public Health Acts Amendment Act in 1890 enabled every urban authority to introduce by-laws enforcing minimum standards of construction of sanitation and ventilation, etc., for new housing and provision of means of access for refuse removal.
Public health had been one of the first major areas of government social intervention, beginning with the Public Health Act of 1848.
It was early seen as a public responsibility, since the individual could not be expected to control such large-scale enterprises as water supply and sewerage.
Lack of control over these had led to health hazards for the entire population, rich and poor.
It was an area in which competitive private enterprise in the supply of water had early and clearly been shown to be deficient.
Education, arguably, could be provided through private enterprise, by the family.
It also, however, had come to be seen as a cause of public concern.
Concern for the religious and moral habits of the labouring poor and associated fear of public disorder among the uneducated masses had combined with philanthropic belief in the intrinsic value of education to bring the government to subsidize and later to supervise private provision, beginning in 1833.
An educated population, it was hoped, would be God-fearing, industrious and respectful of the law.
To these motives for public intervention in education was added, from the 1860s, a growing belief in the need for an educated work-force if Britain was to outface foreign industrial competition of increasing technological sophistication.
Britain remained, to the end of the century, slow — compared for example with Germany — to provide advanced technical education.
The emphasis was rather upon providing children with basic skills.
Children were inefficient contributors to the kind of workforce now required and also a smaller proportion of the entire population than in the early years of the century.
The economy was felt to need their education rather than their work.
In addition the spread of the franchise  necessitated an electorate able to evaluate political issues, preferably in a manner acceptable to the existing controllers of politics.
Private enterprise had failed to provide school places for all children and the state was required to fill the gaps.
The Education Act of 1870 set out to provide elementary schools for children up to a minimum age of ten throughout the country.
It also established elected school boards to supervise school building and education.
Education became compulsory in 1880 and free in 1891 — previously it had cost a small sum each week, with exemption for the very poor.
Many children continued to evade school.
In many rural districts provision was still patchy and enforcement of attendance sporadic.
Attendance officers were more active in towns and cities but, at least initially, met some resistance from parents.
This was not necessarily because parents failed to recognize the value of education for their children.
But the very poor could not afford to lose their children's wages or their care of younger children whilst mothers worked.
This posed a real dilemma for administrators.
Anne Besant, as a socialist member of the London School Board in the 1880s, was acutely distressed by the problems she saw of ‘gaunt hunger-pinched men and women…decent folk who didn't want to keep their children ignorant, but sometimes there were no boots, sometimes there was a baby to feed, sometimes there were no food.’
It appeared to be an almost insoluble dilemma.
Legislation further restricting the employment of children reduced the contribution they could make to the family economy.
Many, however, continued in casual jobs which escaped legal regulation — running errands, minding market stalls, caring for younger children — and schools in poorer districts had high truancy rates.
Some schools, e.g. in East London and Liverpool, adjusted their hours to take account of the needs of poorer children both for earnings and education, beginning or ending the school day later or earlier than was the custom, enabling schoolchildren to work before or after school.
Clearly such arrangements were not ideal — they could be exhausting for children and were at best a compromise among the law, the need for education, and the reality of poverty.
It was found in 1902 that perhaps 50,000 children in England and Wales were working more than 20 hours a week in addition to 27½ hours at school, some of them working between 30 and 50 hours a week.
By 1900 free education existed in principle for all children in England and Wales to the age of at least eleven.
Curricula remained  largely confined to ‘the three Rs’ and to rote-learning, although more adventurous, again mainly urban, school, boards, especially those of London, were beginning to widen their curricula and to provide ‘higher elementary’education for older children.
In other respects, also, the state became involved more closely with the care of children.
From the 1870s there was a discernible shift from the traditional notion that children were the responsibility of their families and that none should intervene between parents and child, a shift associated with wider changes in attitudes towards both children and the family.
The evangelical belief, much disseminated in the mid-nineteenth century, that children should be protected from the rigours of the adult world and educated and assisted to be morally good adults, was joined by the end of the century by a belief in the economic and military importance of building, from birth, a strong and stable race.
Evangelicals and others in the mid-nineteenth century still placed the central responsibility for the upbringing of children upon the family.
They also, however, supported voluntary effort and legislation, such as the Factory Acts, to help children who lacked adequate family support.
In 1889 the Prevention of Cruelty and Protection of Children Act for the first time outlawed proven cruelty to children and allowed children in certain circumstances to be removed from their families to a place of safety, usually a charitable institution such as Barnardo's.
They might also be legally adopted by Poor Law Guardians.
The Custody of Children Act 1891 gave judges discretionary powers to reject applications for writs of habeas corpus from parents of children removed due to ill-treatment.
The emphasis of the legislation, as of philanthropic effort, was upon the removal of the child from a corrupting environment, rather than upon improvement within that environment which was still seen as too intractable a task.
The state was as reluctant to intervene in the housing market, despite its manifest deficiencies.
Partly, this was due to the deep-rooted belief in the importance of all forms of property being held in private hands, and partly to the potentially enormous cost of solving the housing shortage, as well as to rather vain hopes that increasing prosperity and improved public transport would enable poorer urban dwellers to move to cheaper suburban accommodation.
Nor was it seen as of such immediate economic or political importance as public health, education or unemployment.
There were no riots concerning bad housing; indeed, the SDF made entirely unsuccessful efforts to organize rent strikes.
Nevertheless, the crowding together of the poor in slums was seen to be dangerous — debilitating to health and facilitating possibly seditious communication of the kind which had led to the riots in Trafalgar Square in 1886.
The crisis and propaganda of the 1880s persuaded the Conservative government in 1885 to establish a Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes.
This declared that there was a serious shortage of adequate houses in many areas, but recommended no legislation.
Housing Acts in 1885 and 1890 eased local authority borrowing for housebuilding, and as a result £4.5 m. was borrowed for this purpose between 1890 and 1904.
The bulk of this expenditure was by the London County Council, formed in 1888.
At last London became, for administrative purposes other than the Poor Law, a single unit, able to initiate or finance large projects.
The first elected council contained such active and progressive members as Sidney Webb, eager to encourage housebuilding for the working classes.
A distinguished department of architecture was established by the LCC which pioneered attractive low-cost housing design.
From the early 1890s the LCC built the first large modern housing estates in the country.
Other authorities followed slowly and on a smaller scale.
Sheffield, Manchester, Liverpool and Bradford, all under strong labour pressure, were among the more active, especially as the number of working-class councillors increased from the early 1890s.
In comparison with the size of the problem, however, such activities achieved only very small improvements by 1900.
Factory and workshop legislation regulating hours and conditions — including safety at work — were gradually extended until by 1891 they in theory covered even smaller workshops laundries and docks.
Many employers did little more than comply with the bare regulations.
Enforcement and supervision of conditions was especially difficult in smaller establishments.
The Factory Act of 1901 laid down enforceable standards of space, cleanliness and sanitation in workplaces, and of methods of payment.
It ordered the fencing of dangerous machinery and forbade the cleaning of machines while they were running.
Women were forbidden to work at night in any industry (a move opposed by some feminists).
Enforcement remained a major difficulty.
A serious problem concerned the fate of workers injured at work.
The rate of accidents, even of deaths, at work was high, especially in the mines, railways and docks and in the merchant navy.
In 1902–06 fifty seamen, twelve miners and eight railway-men  per year were killed at work.
In Birmingham it was common to see women with hands mutilated from mishaps in the metal workshops.
Often employers acknowledged no liability, blaming the carelessness of the worker, who might if the injuries were serious be thereafter unemployable.
The workman had to prove, by costly legal processes, that the employer had been negligent.
The Workmen's Compensation Act 1897 made employers liable for accidents at work and obliged them to insure against such events and to compensate the worker, almost regardless of cause.
Seamen, farm workers and domestic servants were initially excluded from the legislation.
The Act of 1897 was partly the result of trade union pressure.
The growth of unions and the serious industrial conflicts of the mid-1890s led the government into systematic intervention in labour relations.
In 1896 a labour department of the Board of Trade was established, composed partly of trade unionists.
Its role was partly arbitration and conciliation in industrial disputes and investigation of labour conditions.
Under H. Llewellyn Smith the department also became an important source of investigation of the numbers and condition of the unemployed.
Overall, by 1900 central government action concerning recognized social problems was greater than in 1870 but still slight in contrast with the magnitude of those problems and of the range of demands for action.
In the 1880s and 1890s there was an impressive number of official investigations into problems — the Royal Commissions on Labour (1893–4), Housing of the Working Classes (1884–5), Aged Poor (1895), on the Depression of Trade and Industry (1886), Sanitary Laws (1871), Factory Acts (1876), select committees on Distress from Want of Employment (1895), National Provident Insurance (1885–7), Old Age Pensions (1896 and 1899), The Sweating System (1890), on Poor Law Relief (1888), on Artisans and Labourers Dwellings Improvements (1881), to name a few.
The results were few, due partly to continuing powerful ideological opposition to government intervention.
There were other important inhibiting factors, one of which related to sources of government finance.
Direct action by central government would necessitate substantially increased expenditure and therefore revenue.
Low taxation was as dear to the Liberal heart as minimal government intervention.
Direct taxation was indeed low, at a flat rate of 1 s .
in the pound on incomes of £150 or above.
Minor changes, necessitated by increased expenditure on naval building and on education after 1870, brought from  Conservative MPs pleas for no further change lest lower-middle-class voters be alienated.
Those with earnings just above the tax threshold bore the heaviest burden of the flat rate tax as a proportion of income.
The Treasury, under the control throughout this period of orthodox Gladstonians, was committed to the belief that the income tax was a temporary expedient to be removed as soon as possible.
One possible alternative means of raising revenue, a graduated income tax, was advocated largely by socialists and as such tainted in the eyes of the main political parties.
The first attempt to tax the very rich a little more heavily was the introduction of death duties in 1889, by which duty was levied on estates exceeding £10,000 in value.
A more substantial graduated tax on property left at death was introduced in 1894.
By 1900 about half of government revenue was raised from income tax and from death duties.
The remainder was the yield on various customs and excise duties levied primarily on beer, spirits, wines, tobacco, cocoa and other ‘luxury’ items which varied a little from budget to budget.
There was mounting working-class pressure against increasing such taxes which, it was argued, were contributed disproportionately by those least able to pay, whilst the rich paid a tiny proportion of their wealth and income in taxation.
Joseph Chamberlain proposed to solve the revenue problem by the introduction of tariffs on imported industrial goods which would, he argued, help industry, increase employment and finance desirable social reforms.
Both political parties and the Treasury were, however, committed to free trade and opposed to tariffs, and the working-class movement feared that tariffs would lead to increased prices.
In the absence of other acceptable proposals or of the will on the part of government to override opposition to such proposals as existed, shortage of revenue remained an obstacle to central government action and was acutely worsened by the high cost of the Boer War which opened in 1899.
An alternative strategy for the government in these circumstances was to place the burden of financing social provision upon local government.
The Poor Law was already almost entirely financed by local poor rates; rates contributed over one-third of total educational expenditure (£8.8 m. in 1900) and the major part of the cost of public health, housing and other measures.
For much of the nineteenth century this strategy was attractive to local government because it enabled localities to maintain to a  large degree their prized autonomy.
They believed, with some justice, that local authorities were better able to provide for variable local conditions than remote central authorities.
However, local provision was constrained by ratepayer pressure against costly expenditure and led to considerable local variations in provision according to the willingness and ability of ratepayers to pay, and the imaginativeness or concern for local problems of local representatives.
Also, by 1900, and more acutely later, the demands made by central government upon local rates were causing local authorities to protest against further demands being made upon them, for example to build working-class housing.
The Local Government Board itself was also reluctant to take on yet further responsibilities in addition to those incurred since its foundation in 1871, with the growth of housing and public health legislation and the increasingly complex activities of the Poor Law.
LGB opposition to extensions of social legislation was increased due to the reluctance of the Treasury to provide what the Board regarded as adequate staffing.
Some local authorities made good use of their autonomy.
The actions of Chamberlain in Birmingham, of Sheffield in introducing ‘scattered homes’ for children, of the LCC, together with Sheffield, Birmingham and Bradford, in housing, have already been noted.
In towns where the labour movement was strong, trades councils and women's co-operative guilds put pressure on councils to improve housing and other facilities.
The election of more working-class councillors after the Local Government Act of 1894, often with the support of trades councils and other organizations, acted as a further stimulus in some districts.
Bradford was especially notable for its provision of clinics for infant and maternal health care and the provision of free milk for babies.
Many authorities pursued an active policy of ‘municipalization’.
This taking into municipal ownership of a variety of undertakings had various aims for those of differing political persuasions.
Chamberlain had seen it as an ideal way of combining the efficient running of Birmingham with improving its water supplies, housing and city centre.
The profitable running of such undertakings as water, gas, electricity and public transport could yield income either to relieve the rates or to provide other social services such as public baths or libraries.
In many cities prominent businessmen encouraged and financed city centre improvements, the building of art galleries, museums, universities, for very pride in their city or town, to enhance its national and international reputation.
The Fabians, notably the Webbs, were also active advocates of municipalization.
They shared Chamberlain's passion for efficiency but, unlike him, were in principle opposed to private ownership of the economy.
They saw municipal ownership and its efficient management as a means of improving public services and as a first step towards public ownership of the entire economy, and improved administration to prevent or cure social ills.
Many others in the labour movement, including many members of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), held similar views.
Some socialists but not on the whole the Fabians saw the continued decentralization of government to the municipalities as a desirable feature of future socialist society, providing a permanent check upon the growth or abuse of central authority.
This view had much in common with the continuing liberal preference for strong local government for a similar end, although liberals preferred the ownership of the economy to remain in private hands.
The outcome of these parallel strands of support for municipalization was a growth, especially from the early 1890s, of municipal ownership of public utilities such as gas and water supplies and public transport, and municipal provision of such services as libraries, museums, baths, wash-houses and improved street lighting and refuse disposal.
It was extensive in Glasgow, and grew rapidly in London after 1888 and in many smaller towns.
Municipal autonomy and initiative indeed reached a peak by 1900, thereafter, as we shall see, enthusiasm fast diminished and central government authority advanced.
Already by 1900 central government was under pressure to provide finance for such items as old-age pensions and subsidized working-class housing.
Such pressure was, however, still limited and the coming of the costly Boer War put a temporary halt to such hopes.
1900–1914
CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS OF LIVING
The distribution of wealth and poverty were examined more systematically between 1900 and the first world war than ever before.
Such investigators as Rowntree, A. L. Bowley and L. Chiozza Money demonstrated that the disparity between rich and poor and the proportion of the population living in severe poverty changed little over the period.
There was a slight narrowing of regional differences in income and experiences but, broadly, the countryside remained poorer than the towns.
After the stability of prices in the later nineteenth century, prices of essential goods began to rise from 1902 causing decline in real wages until 1914.
This contributed to the notable growth in trade union membership from 1902 and the industrial unrest of 1910 to 1914.
Trade unionism enabled some workers to obtain wage increases in line with price rises, but such gains, and trade unionism itself, were most marked among the more regularly employed and better-paid workers.
Some low-paid groups, such as agricultural workers, succeeded for the first time in establishing permanent unions although they remained relatively low-paid up to and beyond 1914.
The problem of serious underemployment remained, as well as that of seasonal unemployment in many trades.
Unemployment was high in 1902–05, and 1908–10, always reaching a peak in winter.
The following table suggests how little the distribution of income changed between Baxter's estimate of 1867 and 1914.
In 1912–14 the statistician A. L. Bowley and his colleagues surveyed five representative English towns to establish whether Rowntree's findings in York were more widely applicable.
For ease of comparability they used Rowntree's definition of poverty.
They were fully aware, however, both of its stringency and its   limitations, for example the uncertainty as to what degree of physical efficiency his nutritional standard could obtain, or what standard of housing marked the upper boundary of deprivation.
Clearly individuals could survive at a low standard of physical efficiency and in housing which to those accustomed to greater comfort was grossly overcrowded and substandard.
In thus questioning whether poverty should be defined as existence in conditions below the barest subsistence minimum, or whether a higher minimum standard should be established in the interests of humanity and of aiming for high national standards of comfort and efficiency, Bowley and his colleagues raised for the first time some of the problems concerning the definition of poverty, which have remained at issue ever since.
Bowley's work on this and other studies considerably advanced the scientific study of poverty.
[doc.
3]
Bowley confessed himself unable to understand how any of those  living at or slightly above Rowntree's minimum could be described, as Rowntree had done, as being ‘neither ill-nourished nor ill-clad’.
However, using Rowntree's definition, for the sake of comparability, in surveying the five towns of Northampton, Warrington, Bolton, Reading and Stanley (County Durham) he and his colleagues found: They concluded that low pay and large family size were still the major causes of poverty.
From an adult male work force of around 8 m.
Rowntree had estimated in 1900 that a family of two adults and three children required a minimum income of 20s. 6d. per week.
By 1911 prices had risen.
In 1911 Bowley estimated that 2.5 m. adult men earned less than 25s. per week while working full-time.
These numbers, he pointed out, could have been considerably increased were it possible to assess the numbers working short-time, as occurred in almost every trade during some part of the year.
It seemed indeed that the numbers of low-paid unskilled jobs were growing with the advance of mechanization.
Considerable concern was expressed, for example by R. H. Tawney, about the numbers of boys going from school into unskilled jobs with little prospect of advancement, from which they might be dismissed when they became old enough to qualify for higher adult earnings.
Though it was little discussed, this was also a problem among girls.
The marked growth of white collar employment in the period offered respectable, if not always highly-paid or secure, work to males and to unmarried women, generally to those from skilled manual working-class families.
This may have prevented some children of artisans falling into poverty as a result of the decline of  skilled occupations, but it did little for the lowest stratum who were always the most vulnerable to severe poverty.
Whilst Bowley and others investigated urban poverty, Rowntree became increasingly concerned about rural conditions and the drift from the land which he and others believed both increased urban problems and diminished the nation's capacity for self-support.
He discovered from Board of Trade figures for 1907 that agricultural earnings varied from an average of below 16s. per week in East Anglia and Oxfordshire to above 20s. per week in the northern industrial counties, in Middlesex and industrial South Wales, although he found ‘thousands’ of families living on earnings below 14s. 11d. per week, sometimes as little as 10s.
Rowntree's estimated minimum income of 20s. 6d. for a family of two adults and three children was derived from urban prices and, Rowntree pointed out, food prices tended to be higher in the countryside since the towns were the centres of food distribution.
Also many families had more than three children.
To supplement this wage data Rowntree sent his assistant, May Kendall, to collect budgets from a sample of forty-eight households representing low, medium and high wage districts.
Rowntree attempted no detailed quantification of rural poverty, in view of the wide scope of his inquiry.
However, he emerged convinced of the extent of severe, if quietly borne, rural poverty, caused above all by low pay and compounded by large families and diminishing work opportunities for wives.
Comparing the budget data with his York findings he found that only ten of the forty-eight households could afford food of sufficient energy value.
Although rural diets could be supplemented by home-grown food this could rarely be produced in quantity and included little protein, since animals were more costly to rear than vegetables to grow.
In any case, few men or women had sufficient time or energy after long hours of farm labouring or housework to devote to a garden or allotment.
When meat was available it was given disproportionately, as in the towns, to the men; children received very little milk.
Women and children suffered from underfeeding to a much greater extent than men.
Sickness caused an ‘appalling burden’ of debt.
The lowest incomes were generally supplemented by charity and in many households women and children were also wage-earners.
Very few families survived on a single wage.
It seemed that those who augmented inadequate incomes by poaching or stealing food raised physically healthier families than the more law-abiding.
Insufficiency of adequate housing was a serious problem.
Rowntree emphasized that such poverty was not due to idleness.
Such conditions, Rowntree found, encouraged young people, often reluctantly, to leave the land, and created a brooding if often inactive hostility of farmworkers towards farmers and landowners.
It meant that:
Rowntree's moving account of rural poverty complemented Bowley's careful statistics, as did several similar painstaking, unsensational accounts of poverty in this period, all remarkably alike in the details of hardship they recounted. from 1909 to 1913 the Fabian Women's Group recorded the daily budgets of thirty families in Lambeth, published as Round About a Pound a Week , written by Maud Pember Reeves's in 1907 At the Works by Lady Florence Bell surveyed the lives and living standards of the people of Middlesbrough.
Eleanor Rathbone published her first studies of poverty in Liverpool.
Beatrice Webb initiated a number of studies of aspects of poverty for the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws of 1905–09. [doc.
4]All of them made clear the extent to which poverty persisted even in households headed by a male working long hours, and when wives and children contributed to family income in all ways possible.
Opportunities for wives and children to contribute to the household income varied from place to place, though they were everywhere low paid.
The problem remained also of women who had no male to give them at least partial support, because they were widowed, deserted or never married; the census of 1911 counted 327,737 aged between 15 and 55 and thus likely to have dependent children.
The difficulties faced by these and by other women with dependent husbands or parents remained as great as before; neither higher wages nor action by the state came to their rescue.
Women were, as Eleanor Rathbone put it ‘…an inarticulate race.
They do not strike or write to the papers, and they have no votes.’
Only about 270,000 women were members of trade unions even in 1912 after the expansion of trade union membership after 1906, and it is likely that few of these had dependent children.
Female access to other forms of working-class self-help also remained extremely limited.
By 1911 only 2,235 married women were members of the four largest Friendly Societies.
Further evidence of the extent of poverty in the period came from data of sickness and mortality.
There continued to be striking regional and social class variations in infant mortality and in life expectancy at later ages.
For example, in the notably poverty-stricken textile town of Bailey in Yorkshire, the infant mortality rate was 172.5 per thousand, almost 1 in 6 of live births, compared with the national average of 127.3.
Poor children who survived infancy were predictably shorter and thinner than others and the differential widened as they grew older.
Between 1908 and 1912 the school medical officer for Batley found only 40.2 per cent of schoolchildren free from medical defects other than the endemic bad teeth.
Despite the considerable evidence of continuing severe poverty, national adult death rates continued the trend of decline discernible from the 1870s, and infant mortality began to fall decisively, for the first time in British history, from an average of 152.2 per thousand live births in England and Wales in 1898–1902, to 131 in 1903–07 and 111.8 in 1908–12.
The rate of decline was a little slower in Scotland.
Infant mortality is frequently assumed to be an especially sensitive indicator of severe poverty.
However, as we have seen, there is little evidence that such poverty did decline in this period; indeed the survival of more mouths to fed may have increased it.
The averages reflect a continuing social polarization, as one section of the population prospered and the condition of the low-paid and irregularly employed altered little.
Nevertheless, the reasons for the striking decline in infant mortality in this period remain rather mysterious.
It was perhaps partly attributable to medical and administrative change, in particular to new infant welfare services and supplies of cheap pasteurized milk.
How much these changes contributed is unclear, since most of them began after the downward trend in infant mortality had become established.
A possible alternative explanation for the trend is the improvement in the general health of many young females due to the improved living  conditions of the late nineteenth century.
As healthier mothers they were perhaps able to bear stronger infants.
The birth rate also continued to decline, though most slowly among the poorest.
ATTITUDES TO POVERTY
The purer strains of Liberal individualism were markedly less influential in the 1900s than in the previous generation.
They did not disappear, but were more muted than before.
A. V. Dicey's Law and Public Opinion in England , first published in 1905 with a second edition in 1914, was a distinguished lawyer's analysis of the growth of ‘state collectivisim’ since the 1870s and a warning (more insistent in the 1914 edition, after the Liberal reforms) that these developments were incompatible with democracy.
Hilaire Belloc's The Servile State , published in 1912 in response to the Liberal social legislation, was a trenchant restatement of the more radical style of liberalism which had long appealed to working people.
He applauded those measures, such as Lloyd George's budget of 1909, which tended to diminish social inequality, but attacked all moves to increase state centralization and control over the individual.
He described the National Insurance Act of 1911 as a ‘vile enslaving measure’ which compelled individuals to make contributions and to be registered with state agencies which diminished freedom and increased bureaucratic control.
It did nothing, Belloc believed, to diminish social and economic divisions.
Social justice, according to Belloc, could be attained only by destroying the concentration of power and wealth in the hands of a few, which bred inevitable contradictions between the values of self-respect and self-help preached in capitalist society and the material condition of the mass of the population which rendered it impossible for them to practice such principles.
Belloc's ideal was the traditional radical vision of a roughly equal community of small producers.
The considerable difficulty of achieving this transformation from a society in which wealth and power were becoming increasingly monopolistic diminished Belloc's appeal, although radical socialists supported his critique of state ‘welfare’.
More orthodox Liberals moved rather towards a compromise between ‘individualism’ and ‘collectivism’, as was evident in the practice of the post-1906 Liberal governments.
The foremost theorist of this view was L. T. Hobhouse, England's first Professor of Sociology, journalist and, briefly after 1906, Liberal MP.
Hobhouse believed that the desirable spiritual regeneration of all classes in  Britain required state prevention of the accumulation of excessive wealth and of exploitation, through redistributive measures, and would be assisted by the encouragement of self-help organizations such as trade unions.
By this means would emerge a general spirit of social responsibility, a strengthening of charity, self and mutual help, which would remove the need for long-term state intervention.
Hobhouse, like other ‘new Liberals’ such as C. F. G. Masterman, a Liberal MP who published in 1909 The Condition of England , an influential indictment of poverty and social inequality, went further in his demands for state action, especially for redistribution, than many contemporary Liberals were prepared to accept.
But probably more important than works of social research or political theory in spreading belief in the need for some degree of state action, was both concern about the condition of the economy and the impact of the Boer War of 1899–1902.
The latter initially diverted public attention from social issues.
Newspapers were dominated by news of the war.
The foremost advocate of social reform in the Cabinet, Joseph Chamberlain, was Colonial Secretary and responsible for the conduct of the war and hence had no time to pursue social issues.
The costs of war enabled government to claim that they could not afford social expenditure.
The war-time ‘khaki election’ of 1900 returned the Conservatives almost entirely on their war record with almost no discussion of social questions.
But it became increasingly obvious that Britain, the mightiest Imperial power, was having some difficulty in defeating a relatively small number of Boer farmers.
This in itself was alarming.
Then the news spread of large numbers of army volunteers (there was no conscription in this war) being rejected because they were physically unfit to fight.
Some of these claims, spread energetically by certain leading military men, were almost certainly exaggerated, but they were none the less serious.
They achieved even wider publicity and discussion when the ending of the war left time and space in the newspapers for such matters.
The impact of these discoveries was considerable because they reinforced other fears amongst individuals whose concern with social issues had not previously been notable.
Britain's apparent relative industrial decline in the face of competition, especially from Germany and the United States, had caused concern in the 1890s.
There were fears already of the likelihood of war with Germany, and the military performance in the Boer War caused new fears that Britain might face military as well as economic defeat at the  hands of her chief rival.
How to avert both these dangers became a major concern among employers, politicians and in the press, although optimism remained that solutions could be found.
One solution was the improvement of administrative and managerial efficiency, but emphasis was increasingly placed upon the need to improve the physical and productive efficiency of the mass of the population, and to increase the size of that population.
This gave a new urgency to discussions of the extent of poverty, sickness and physical disability.
Equally disturbing was the fact that the birth rate was falling more rapidly than that of Germany and that the infant mortality rate remained high.
The latter was even more distressing in view of the relatively higher mortality rate of male over female infants.
Such fears stimulated feelings of British nationalism.
There was little doubt that Britain could continue to be successful, but certain adjustments were thought necessary to bring this about.
National fears gave a minor stimulus to arguments for racial purity.
Eugenicists advocated measures to restrain the mentally, and less determinedly the physically, weak from reproducing (by placing them in institutions, or, more radically, by sterilization).
On the theoretical basis of the work of Karl Pearson and others, which proposed that mental and physical characteristics were primarily determined by genetic inheritance rather than by environment, such ideas enjoyed a minor vogue.
They attracted the Webbs who advocated the segregation of the ‘feeble-minded’.
The socially undesirable characteristics which advocates of this movement felt were inheritable and should be eliminated were, as always, strongly influenced by contemporary social imperatives.
They included, on occasions, ‘workshyness’ and the predisposition to produce illegitimate children.
The debate, still active today, between the relative influence of heredity and environment upon attainment and personality had emerged in the later nineteenth century but began to be vigorously debated in this period.
The emergence at this time of Freudian psychology, an important element in the international growth of this infant discipline in this period, offered one opposing perspective but was of insignificant influence in Britain before the First World War.
This was perhaps partly due to distaste for all things Germanic but more to the greater strength of indigenous theories and to the much greater influence upon policy and administration of medical men, already strongly committed to the belief that the cleansing and improvement of the environment could substantially improve the condition and habits of the poor.
The latter were more  concerned with the tangible and apparently more readily eradicable physical conditions which they believed influenced behaviour than with the less tangible effects of infant emotional experience or of inheritance.
Although eugenicist theories were influential within professional circles and attracted some who were concerned with wider social issues, their influence upon British thought and policy was limited.
They offered some credence to the contemporaneous growth in anti-semitism: limited and localized though this was, Jewish migrants were criticized and condemned in very similar terms to those later invoked against post-Second World War black immigrants, and which in the nineteenth century had been raised against the Irish.
Hostility reached a peak in the 1900s and restrictions were introduced upon Jewish immigration in the Aliens Act 1905.
However, the search for methods of countering the national economic and military ‘deterioration’ after the Boer War was dominated by discussion of methods of improving the numbers and environment of the masses rather than of weeding out the unfit.
Attention focused initially upon improving the condition of potential rather than actual members of the labour force and the armed services; on proposals and measures to diminish the infant mortality rate and to ensure that the surviving children grew up well fed and well cared for.
However, Britain's economic problems were immediate and the current generation of workers could not be neglected.
Some employers became aware that the efficiency of the workforce could be increased not only by capital investment and technological improvement, but by ‘increasing the efficiency of human capital’, i.e. by improving working conditions and providing welfare benefits for workers, so that they were both physically stronger and psychologically more secure and hence able to work harder.
Employers in this period were either providing from the resources of their businesses or demanding from the state such measures as pensions (which it was hoped would remove from workers worry about their future in old-age, and would enable employers to dismiss less efficient older workers with clear consciences), sickness benefit and medical care (which would enable them to recover more quickly and fully from sickness) and, more occasionally, unemployment benefit, which it was also hoped would increase the workers' sense of security.
In general they hoped, too, for considerable control over such measures and were unkeen about their falling into the hands of state bureaucracy.
Thus the experience of the Boer War combined with fears about  the British economy to produce a demand for state and voluntary welfare measures designed to increase ‘national efficiency’, in the contemporary phrase, among influential social groups who previously had been hostile or indifferent to social issues.
Fears about the economy also made some employers and politicians, as we shall see, a little more receptive to economic theories and proposals which promised to diminish the ill-effects of the swings of the trade cycle.
A further stimulus to recognizing the urgency of social reform came from the growth of the labour movement and the increasing militancy of sections of it.
Joseph Chamberlain's earlier recognition that working people could and should be seduced away from independent political action by state welfare measures was taken up by Lloyd George and Winston Churchill, as the need became more urgent due to the Labour success in the election of 1906 and to industrial militancy after 1909.
As working-class demands and demonstrations for full employment and better pay became more insistent, they also became more difficult to resist without risking a more serious confrontation.
During the 1900s large sectors of influential ‘public opinion’ became more aware, and more afraid, of the claims of labour.
The fear, given the absence of serious signs of undisputed support for revolutionary socialism, was not all-consuming.
There remained grounds for believing that the mass of the working class could be persuaded to support a modified status quo and wider acceptance that the claims of labour for better conditions were either legitimate or, at least, necessitated some compromise to avoid a more threatening mass move to the left.
Hence there was a growing, if often reluctant, recognition that only the state had the resources to solve pressing social economic and political problems.
A widespread insistence remained, however, that such action should be designed to stimulate and supplement self and mutual help and charity rather than to replace it.
As a result the Liberal government elected in 1906, urged on by a clamorous radical wing but aware also of the doubts of many of its supporters, introduced new but moderate social measures.
The Conservatives did not strenuously oppose them.
However, the labour movement was divided as to the extent and type of provision they desired from the state.
Many still felt that the chief need was for full employment and adequate pay, which would enable the working class to provide for their own needs and to retain their independence of state control; though they were  prepared to accept immediate state help for those whose needs could not be met in this way, such as the aged.
Many also were prepared to accept state welfare reform if it was to be truly redistributive from rich to poor, rather than financed by taxes on the poor themselves.
There was also widespread hostility to measures which entailed closer control over, and intrusion upon, the lives of the working class by those of other classes.
There was considerable suspicion, for example, of health visitors, deriving from their reputation for criticism of poor mothers' conduct of their homes and families.
School attendance officers were disliked for failing to take account of the need of some poor families for a child's income.
Understandably, welfare measures which gave benefits dissociated from any inspection or apparent evaluation of working-class character and habits appear to have been most popular.
Such opposition to bureaucratic intrusion drove a wedge between many working-class people and the Fabian socialists.
The Webbs, in particular, placed their faith for the future in the efficient re-engineering of society by ‘unassuming experts’.
Well-intentioned though their desire was to make available to everyone the best information concerning hygiene, health care, child care, etc., and although they always placed such recommendations in the context of ensuring that everyone, through improved wages and benefits, would live at least at a ‘national minimum of civilized life’, the ‘official interference’ implied by their proposals was disliked as much by working people who would experience it, as by the Liberal bourgeoisie who were hostile to the principle.
Hence, there was considerable tension within the labour movement as to the desirability of state welfare.
Many, however, came to accept it in the context of their hopes for future labour success: capitalist bureaucracy was undesirable, but when labour came to dominate Parliament, the bureaucracy would act in sympathy with the needs and condition of the working class and would no longer be regarded as an alien intrusion.
In this context the Liberal reforms were acceptable as a first step towards greater, Labour-controlled, changes in the future.
These growing hopes of political victory for Labour also contributed to a decline, though not disappearance, of support for municipal socialism in the 1900s.
Once Labour controlled Parliament it was thought that it would no longer be necessary.
It had also become clear that there were strict limits to its expansion in a capitalist state due to the reluctance of ratepayers to finance further municipal activities.
These divisions within the labour movement made it a less influential force on the side of social reform than is often thought.
Fear of Labour remained the motive for the promotion of social reform among non-Labour politicians, but equally important were military and economic fears.
VOLUNTARY AND SELF HELP
Publicly-financed welfare grew at local and national levels but still by 1914 the very poor survived primarily by their own efforts and by the help of family and neighbours.
This was stressed in all the social surveys of the period.
These also noted the continuing importance of charity.
However, although the large charitable institutions of the later nineteenth century continued, there are signs that many of them were finding increasing difficulty in raising funds and few significant new charities appear to have been founded.
The reasons for this are unclear.
In some districts it was due to the death of an older generation who were, often for reasons of religious belief, philanthropically disposed and whose successors lacked this combination of religious commitment (evangelicalism in particular had lost much of its mid-nineteenth century hold) and social responsibility.
This century has seen a remarkably rapid secularization of British society (with the exception of Northern Ireland) which has had some effect upon the decline in voluntary action.
Roman Catholic organizations shared this experience of diminishing resources, Jewish institutions less so, perhaps in response to the mounting ‘anti-alien’ fervour of the first decade of the century.
The activities of the Salvation Army and the smaller Church Army continued as before, but without notable expansion.
Diminishing geographical and social contact between local business and professional elites and the poor of their towns, resulting from the growing size and suburbanization of towns, may have contributed to the slackening of voluntary effort.
With rising prices the cost of maintaining a prosperous style of life also rose, and the growth both of the Labour party and of the trade unions perhaps destroyed hopes that charity could put an end to social and political divisions.
The Charity Organization Society survived, its practice modified more than its principles; still, until 1914, dominated by C. S. Loch who remained a prominent public voice on matters of social policy.
It was no more successful than before in controlling and  ‘organizing’ the bulk of philanthropic activity.
The settlement houses were as active as before but showed little sign of expansion, indeed Toynbee Hall found it increasingly difficult to attract residents.
The main influence of Toynbee Hall lay in the numbers of civil servants and politicians later influential in the social policy field who gained early experience as residents, including Alfred Milner, later Governor-General of South Africa, and William Beveridge who was sub-warden of Toynbee Hall from 1903 to 1907.
Beveridge and his contemporaries were much inspired by Canon Barnett, who by 1900 was firmly convinced of the economic as well as personal causes of distress and that more state help was needed for the destitute.
Beveridge himself, however, was sceptical of the value of much of the settlement's work.
He regarded its main value as providing the opportunity for social research upon which the government could base more far-reaching changes.
He had some reason for this view, since there was little sign that Toynbee Hall and the other settlements made any significant impact upon the East End.
During his time at Toynbee, Beveridge became increasingly aware that local residents regarded its activities as patronizing, whether directed towards rescue or research.
Local distress funds continued to be raised in periods and places of acute distress, although they came increasingly under government control.
By the time, in 1909, the Majority Report of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief of Distress recommended that the relief of poverty should remain primarily in the hands of voluntary organizations, such organizations were already beginning to decline from their late-nineteenth-century peak.
‘Self-help’ through mutual aid institutions remained crucial to the survival of all who could achieve it, with most such institutions expanding steadily.
Trade unions offering welfare benefits, and commercial insurance firms, however, grew faster than traditional Friendly Societies.
STATE ACTION UNDER THE CONSERVATIVES, 1900–1905
The costs of the Boer War increased Treasury reluctance to countenance social expenditure by the state.
However, under the post-war Conservative government they were under little pressure to do so.
Balfour, as Prime Minister from 1902, and his Cabinet colleagues showed no passionate concern for social reform.
Joseph  Chamberlain resigned from the Cabinet and from active politics in 1903 after a serious accident.
Tory philanthropy on the Disraelian model, if not dead, was not prominent.
The exception to Balfour's disinterest in social issues was education.
The Education Act 1902 was largely the work of R. L. Morant, the chief civil servant at the Board of Education, one of a number of policy-innovating civil servants in his generation.
But without Balfour's active support such a controversial piece of education reform would not have passed.
The Act abolished the separately elected school boards throughout England and Wales, bringing education under the control of the county and municipal councils.
It allowed and encouraged these local authorities to extend provision of secondary education, after the minimum leaving age, either by giving rate support to voluntary grammar schools, or by establishing rate-financed grammar, technical and/or ‘higher elementary’ schools.
They were also allowed for the first time to subsidize denominational primary schools.
In return, local authorities were empowered to appoint the teachers in such schools for all subjects other than religious instruction.
The purpose was to improve and standardize educational provision.
Rate support and local authority influence was expected to improve the often low standards of denominational schools, which made up a high proportion of existing elementary schools.
Secondary education was to become more widely available, providing a more educated workforce to meet the more sophisticated needs of an economy under increasing competitive pressure.
Furthermore, the abolition of the school boards was a first step towards reducing the number of overlapping, separately elected, local authorities which had emerged during the preceding seventy years; and importantly, in the eyes of Balfour and Morant, it would diminish the independence of local education authorities and the consequent considerable variation in the quality of provision, and also reduce the denominational influence upon local education.
Both Anglicans and Nonconformists had successfully controlled many school boards since their establishment in 1870, assisted by the low turn-outs in school board elections.
The Church of England as the major provider of denominational schools felt amply compensated for this loss by the new rate subsidies.
The Nonconformists, however, fought the Act bitterly.
They resented the fact that it perpetuated a situation whereby in many areas, notably in Wales, the only available school was  Anglican, no alternative being provided for non-Anglican children.
Non-conformist outrage at the Education Act was one reason for the Conservative defeat in the election of December 1905.
Another important effect of the Act was the growth of provision for secondary education.
Since, however, local authorities were enabled to subsidize established voluntary grammar schools as well as to found their own secondary schools, social divisions in secondary education were reinforced.
Voluntary grammar schools retained higher social status than the publicly financed ‘higher elementary schools’, which were stigmatized by their association with the entirely working-class elementary schools.
The voluntary schools continued to charge higher fees and were socially and intellectually selective in their intake.
(Fees were also charged for local authority secondary schools, though of lower amount.)
Another social division also emerged between those, mainly day, voluntary schools which needed to accept rate subsidy in order to maintain and improve their standards, and the elite, mainly boarding, schools, which were able to survive and indeed in this period to expand, unsubsidized, on the financial basis of their income from fees, endowments and investments.
The Act of 1902 reinforced divisions in education which had long existed but which had become more acute with the rapid expansion of both the private and public educational sectors since the 1870s.
As regards other aspects of social policy, the government was under pressure to introduce measures to improve the physical condition of the working class.
The post-war concern about population decline and the high infant mortality rate contributed to the introduction of the Midwives Act 1902.
Demands for the training and registration of midwives, to prevent avoidable infant mortality due to inexpertly attended births, had emerged before the Boer War.
This measure, whose public cost was negligible, was passed despite the opposition of thousands of untrained midwives who feared, reasonably enough, for their futures.
The implementation of the legislation was delayed to enable some of them to acquire qualifications.
The passing of the Midwives Act owed more to pre-war pressures and commitments than to post-war Conservative policy, although its passage through Parliament was assisted by the revelations during wartime or the poor physical condition of many of the working SDF and the COS had provided free or subsidized meals for needy schoolchildren.
In 1889 the London School Board concluded that  12.8 per cent of children attending London schools were permanently undernourished.
By 1905 there were over 300 charitable feeding associations in the United Kingdom, most founded before 1900, most of them providing free meals.
The high rates of sickness and mortality among infants in the later nineteenth century led voluntary organizations to provide advice on infant care and access to free or subsidized milk for poor mothers.
Local authorities with substantial Labour or progressive Liberal representation, notably Bradford and Liverpool, opened the first mother and baby clinics in the 1890s.
‘Hygienic milk depots’ were set up by local authorities (the first in St. Helens in 1899) to provide sterile milk for bottle-fed babies, although the standard of hygiene even of this milk was sometimes dubious.
In the 1890s many local authorities appointed lady health visitors, a practice begun on a voluntary basis in Manchester and Salford in the 1860s.
In 1892, on the suggestion of Florence Nightingale, Buckinghamshire county council engaged full-time health visitors and other local authorities followed.
They were not always welcomed by working-class mothers, who resented what they saw as intrusion into their lives and the sometimes patronizing advice on childcare from women who were often childless and who certainly had no experience of the difficulties of rearing children in poverty and in the inescapable dirt of poor homes with inadequate water supplies.
Many mothers recognized that their  children's health was endangered by unhygienic homes, by their own inability to buy sufficient food or milk, to breastfeed adequately, to obtain treatment for their sick children, but found that advice rarely met these real needs, which were the products essentially of poverty.
The socialist sisters Margaret and Rachel Macmillan were especially active, first in Bradford, then in London, in pressing through the school boards and municipal councils for more municipal and state provision for the health of infants.
From the 1890s some members of the ILP were actively demanding the ‘endowment of motherhood’(later known as family allowances) arguing that regular, unstigmatizing financial support from the state would enable poor mothers to rear healthy children.
Such humane pressures were reinforced by concern about the political, military and economic implications of continuing to produce a physically sub-standard nation, and of the loss of population caused by the high and rising infant mortality rate.
Reports that almost one-third of volunteers for the army during the Boer War had to he rejected due to physical inadequacy (too  short or too thin) or ill-health (in many case due to flat feet or bad teeth but frequently also due to heart and lung trouble or other serious ailments) were often exaggerated, but they strengthened such fears.
Such adult physical disabilities originated often in poor diet and medical care in early childhood, hence the increased pressure to improve the health and survival rates of infants and children.
Medical Officers of Health and others were convinced that the chief causes of physical weakness and infant mortality were unsuitable feeding and lack of hygiene in the home which could, they believed, be improved by the education of mothers in childcare and domestic skills.
Hence, more intensively in the 1900s, MOHs and such voluntary organizations as the Women's Co-operative Guild and the Infant Health Society gave talks to women, issued leaflets, and established schools to train mothers in childcare and domestic skills.
Domestic training became more prominent in the curricula of girls schools.
The government responded in September 1903 by appointing an interdepartmental Committee on Physical Deterioration.
Its title, significantly, assumed the deterioration of the physical condition of the population from some presumed superior state in the past, of whose existence no proof existed.
This committee of civil servants was to assess its causes and recommend remedies.
It interviewed Booth, Rowntree and most others prominent in the discussion of poverty: doctors, Friendly Society officials, military recruiting officers and others with relevant interests, such as factory inspectors, Poor Law officials and COS representatives.
On its behalf the Medical Inspector of Schools for Lambeth, Dr Alfred Eichholz, undertook studies of children in a sample of London schools.
The Report of the Committee said nothing surprising to the interested or informed about poverty and malnutrition.
It concluded that while actual deterioration remained unproven (medical witnesses in particular were sceptical about deterioration), working-class health and nutrition left much to be desired.
Its fifty-three recommendations included the extension and enforcement of state regulation of environmental health conditions such as overcrowding, smoke pollution, provision of open spaces, control over the distribution of food and the handling of milk; work conditions should be improved, over-fatigue prevented; mothers should be taught proper childcare and girls instructed in cookery and dietetics; adult drinking and juvenile smoking should be curbed; the state should  encourage physical training and exercise; there should be an adequate system of school medical inspection and a state-sponsored system of school feeding.
The Report included indeed a comprehensive set of proposals for the prevention of child and adult ill-health.
It said little about care through improved health services.
The recommendations concerning children attracted most attention among officials, politicians and the public.
Though eugenicists found some ammunition in the Report, of which they sought to take advantage, the medical profession were equally responsive but more influential.
The BMA urged the extension of physical training and medical inspection of schoolchildren.
The government responded by establishing another committee to investigate the carefully marshalled findings of the interdepartmental committee on the issues that attracted most public attention.
This interdepartmental Committee on the Medical Inspection and Feeding of Children Attending Public Elementary Schools was appointed in March 1905 and was, in the words of the minister responsible, Lord Londonderry,(President of the Board of Education) not to be ‘at liberty to make far-reaching proposals that the Unionist party would decline to support’.
Its Report, delivered in November 1905, fulfilled this objective admirably.
The Committee had been unable to decide how successful school feeding would be, but suggested that local authorities should keep a close watch upon voluntary experiments.
It found that school medical inspection was beneficial but that due to poverty or more often, they felt, to apathy and indifference, defects discovered by medical officers were often not remedied.
Pressure from the Conservative and Liberal backbenchers forced the government to permit Poor Law Guardians to give relief in the form of free school meals to necessitous schoolchildren, on application from a schoolteacher or school manager.
This was the minimum possible gesture by the government towards the school feeding lobby.
The parents of children receiving relief would still, according to Poor Law principles, be disfranchised, the statutory punishment for any head of a family who allowed a family member to receive poor relief.
Many parents refused to allow their children to receive relief for fear of this stigma.
Nothing was done about medical care for children.
The Boer War brought problems concerning children into greater prominence but forced little action from the government.
Public and official absorption in the war and its cost delayed action on other measures, such as old-age pensions, which the  Conservative Cabinet had been seriously considering in 1899.
Support for pensions revived after the war but met invincible Treasury and Cabinet opposition on grounds of cost.
Unemployment was less easily ignored; it reached a peak in the winter of 1902–03 and remained high, especially in the winter months, throughout the Conservatives' period in office.
There were demonstrations of the unemployed in London and elsewhere, organized by the SDF, the ILP and the Labour Committee for the Unemployed.
A prominent part in this agitation was played by the Poor Law Guardians of Poplar through public statements by its leading Labour Guardians, George Lansbury and Will Crooks (both prominent Labour politicians).
In Poplar, as elsewhere in the winter of 1902–03, and in the still more severe distress of 1903–04, public funds were opened for the ‘relief of distress’, often sponsored by newspapers.
They were used mainly to provide public works and made only a marginal impact upon the distressed: the Poplar workhouse was severely overcrowded in both winters.
In 1903 the Poplar Guardians leased for one year a new workhouse specifically for the use of able-bodied men.
In 1904 they opened the first Poor Law farm colony, in Essex, to provide work training for the unemployed.
The combination of high unemployment and the unprecedented unwillingness of some at least of the unemployed to accept their fate passively, demonstrated more starkly than before the absence of systematic public provision fur the unemployed.
The Poor Law had been designed to prevent rather than to relieve unemployment and relatively few ‘able-bodied’ men had ever resorted to it.
The labour test was unattractive both to the many of the unemployed, because it impaired their skills and prevented their seeking work elsewhere, and to Poor Law administrators, because discipline was difficult to maintain in the stoneyards.
When they had last been extensively used, in 1894 and 1895, able-bodied paupers in Bermondsey terrified the workhouse staff and played leapfrog in the stoneyard; in Poplar they formed a union and went on strike for a higher rate of relief.
Borough Councils with their power to offer public works could, as we have seen, deal only very imperfectly with unemployment.
Even a Board of Guardians so unusually influenced by Labour as that of Poplar was reluctant to pay out-door relief to the unemployed.
This was, of course, forbidden by Poor Law regulations unless paid in return for test labour.
the guardians in Poplar and other Unions with high rates of unemployment were constrained  from paying out-door relief not only by the regulations but by the fact that such payments would have to be financed by the ratepayers of the Union, most of whom were low paid.
Hence the Poplar guardians constantly but unsuccessfully pressed the government to introduce rate equalization.
The government was persistently unwilling to amend Poor Law principles to take account of the mounting evidence of extensive involuntary unemployment.
Walter Long, President of the Local Government Board, was more sympathetic to the unemployed than many of his colleagues.
His persuasion, combined with recurring unemployed demonstrations, moved them to introduce the Unemployed Workmen Act 1905.
This enabled the establishment of ‘distress committees’ in all metropolitan boroughs and in all urban districts with a population of not less than 50,000.
Elsewhere, they could be established at the discretion of the LGB when ‘distress’ was deemed to be suitably acute.
In the provinces, distress committees were to be responsible for both the registration of applicants and the provision of work.
In London they would register and investigate cases of distress, but the administration of relief was to be the work of a central body which would supervise and co-ordinate the work of committees throughout London.
These committees included representatives of local councils, charities and Boards of Guardians and were financed by a combination of rates and voluntary funds.
Long failed to persuade the richer boroughs and the Cabinet to include a degree of late equalization in the Act which was, however, important as an admission of government responsibility for relief to the unemployed.
It remained, nonetheless, within the tradition of mobilizing voluntary in place of state action wherever possible.
It was half-heartedly applied in many districts and this was effectively sanctioned by the obvious lack of government enthusiasm; it suffered from cumbersome and inexpert administration worsened by a shortage of full-time paid officials; from reliance on uncertain voluntary funding and, above all, from its central assumption that work could by these means be provided for those in need.
Experience had shown that to be unlikely.
Distress committees had no power to pay cash relief except in return for work.
And the old problem remained that skilled men would neither be given suitable work nor time to seek it for themselves.
The casual labour problem was too sizeable to be solved by these means and it was unsuited to the temporary needs of unemployed skilled men.
Women were still ignored.
The Act was immediately attacked by the TUC.
The number of unemployed demonstrations did not abate.
On 6 November 1905, 3,000 working women marched silently from Walworth and Poplar to Westminster, after Lansbury's request that the Queen should receive a delegation of unemployed women was refused on the grounds that it was ‘contrary to all custom and quite impossible’.
This demonstration moved Balfour to urge more contributions to Queen Alexandra's funds for the unemployed.
Labour was further incensed because Balfour's and the Cabinet majority's crowning blow to Long's hopes had been to ensure that the Act operated for only three years, the result of government's unwillingness to accept permanent responsibility for the relief of unemployment.
The immediate pretext for limiting the period of the Act's operation was, it was announced, the need for a thorough review of the poor relief system before any major permanent change was introduced.
Shortly before the Unemployed Workmen Bill became law, in early August 1905, Balfour announced the establishment of a Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and the Relief of Distress which would report on ‘Everything which  appertains to…the problem of the poor, whether poor by their own fault or by temporary lack of employment.’
On one level this was a familiar delaying tactic from a government unwilling to respond more concretely to increasingly pressing demands for unemployment and other legislation.
It was the more attractive because a general election was imminent and Balfour, at least, hoped to lose it, thus transferring the burden to the Liberals.
Nevertheless, the case for a review of the poor relief system was strong.
Unemployment was only one of a range of social problems for which the Poor Law's capacity to provide was, at best, controversial.
The Poor Law was facing criticism from a range of sources.
Many who had no wish to see the principles of 1834 modified were alarmed by the rise in poor relief expenditure.
The measures of the 1870s had temporarily reduced it in relation to population size, but in the 1890s it had begun to rise and growth was dramatic after 1901.
Expenditure in England and Wales was £7.8 m. in 1871; £8.1 m. in 1881; £8.6 m. in 1906.
Some attributed the growth to the democratization of the Poor Law franchise in 1894.
However, it was primarily the result of the gradual implementation of the LGB policy of improving institutional relief which, on average, cost four times as much per pauper as out-door relief.
Despite rising expenditure, the ratio of paupers to total  population continued to fall from the 1870s and rose only slightly during the depression of 1903–05.
Poor Law expenditure per head of population in 1904–05 was 10 per cent lower than it had been in 1833–34, although real income per head had doubled in that period.
Among Poor Law administrators at all levels the change in LGB policy from the 1870s had created some confusion.
Whereas previously it had sanctioned minimal provision for all paupers, since the 1870s it had insisted upon strict application of the principles of 1834 in the selection of paupers, and restriction of their numbers wherever possible, while at the same time insisting on relief ‘adequate to meet need’ in all cases.
Difficult though ‘adequacy’ was to define, this meant in practice not only improved institutions but also that, contrary to much previous practice, out-door relief once given should be sufficient for ‘decent living’, whether granted in cash or kind.
Out-door paupers should no longer be sent away with a sum of money obviously too little for survival.
In the early 1900s, the Poor Law inspectors pressed the policy of ‘adequacy’ with notable enthusiasm, to the dismay of many Guardians and ratepayers, since it implied increased expenditure.
Arising equally strongly from the findings of the poverty surveys, and out of the labour movement, were criticisms of the principles of 1834 as being inappropriate for the conditions of the 1900s in which the existence of involuntary unemployment was becoming difficult to deny.
Hence, by 1905 the Poor Law faced criticism from all sides and the case for a review was strong.
The members of the Commission included representatives of all the conflicting points of view and all the most prominent of those publicly concerned with the ‘social question’: Charles Booth, Octavia Hill, Lansbury, Beatrice Webb, C. S. Loch and four other representatives of the COS, three representatives of the LGB and two of Boards of Guardians.
Francis Chandler, Secretary of the Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, was added belatedly in December 1905 after protests at the omission of a trade union representative.
The chairman was the conservative MP (until the general election of January 1906) Lord George Hamilton.
This formidable body did not report until 1909.
Its investigations were important because the Poor Law continued to provide the institutional framework and principles for most publicly-financed welfare provision by the time of the election of December 1905.
STATE ACTION UNDER THE LIBERALS, 1906–1914
The 1906 election resulted in a victory for the Liberals, with a majority of eighty-four.
It also saw the first major electoral success for Labour: twenty-nine Labour and Lib-Lab members were returned.
Social issues were not prominent in the election campaign, with the exception of education, on which the Nonconformists waged a determined anti-Conservative campaign, and land reform, The Liberal government did not come into office committed to a clear social reform policy.
However, the Liberal backbenches after the election contained a larger number than before of members known to be committed to social reform.
Contemporaries regarded the party as one of reform, although probably a majority of Liberal members in the new Parliament still were radicals of the old Gladstonian kind, placing financial retrenchment and self-help before costly reform.
Labour members, though generally more committed to old-age pensions, free school meals and redistributive taxation than Liberals and considerably more so than Conservatives, gave greater primacy in their election addresses to unemployment and hours of work, which they regarded as the major social issues.
For their first two years in office the government acted very cautiously on social issues.
This was partly for the reasons given above, but also due to the very large Conservative majority in the hereditary House of Lords, which soon rejected a Liberal attempt to amend the 1902 Education Act.
This was the beginning of a long conflict between Conservative Lords and Liberal Commons which lasted until 1911.
The Cabinet briefly discussed and rejected a dissolution and election on the issue and decided instead to try for a decisive election victory within three years.
Social reform might assist such a victory, but it had to be of a kind which the Lords would not reject.
A further problem for the government was a serious shortage of government revenue, due partly to the costs of war and of peacetime defence measures, but also to the pressure of steadily increasing government expenditure upon relatively inflexible sources of revenue.
Children
In view of these constraints it is perhaps not surprising that the government was slow to propose concrete reform measures.
Its first successful pieces of legislation were repayments to Labour for their  support during the election: the Trade Disputes Act 1906, which reversed the Taft Vale decision and gave unions immunity from prosecution for non-violent acts in furtherance of an industrial dispute, and the extension of Women's Compensation, also in 1906.
Its next major measure was forced upon it by Labour backbenchers.
When William Wilson, Chairman of the Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners, introduced a Bill for the free feeding of schoolchildren by local authorities, early in the new session of Parliament, both the government and civil servants were unprepared, but in view of its considerable support in and out of Parliament, they agreed to support the Bill.
The inability or unwillingness of many local Boards of Guardians and/or education committees to reach any agreement over the operation of the Conservative scheme, and the unwillingness of many parents to allow themselves to be pauperized by it, had made it largely ineffective.
The Education (Provision of Meals) Act became law in December 1906.
It permitted, but did not, as Wilson had intended, require local authorities to provide meals for needy schoolchildren.
These were to be financed by voluntary contributions, by charges on parents or, as a last resort, from public funds.
However, parents who could not afford to pay for the meals were to be in no way penalized.
The legislation was to be centrally administered by the Board of Education; it was in no way to be associated with the Poor Law.
This measure was important, first, because it was the first extension from the field of schooling into that of welfare of the principle that a publicly-financed benefit could be granted to those in need, free both of charge and of the disabilities associated with the Poor Law; second, it was a step towards recognition that parents were not necessarily culpable for the undernourishment of their children and that, with public support, needy children could be well cared for at home and did not require withdrawal into public or voluntary care.
Although such measures had been and were still attacked, by the COS for example, for discouraging parental responsibility, it was equally arguable that they strengthened such responsibilities by making it possible for poor families to carry them out.
This was the unplanned beginning of a process whereby the Liberal government gradually withdrew provision for deserving groups from the Poor Law, at no cost to the Exchequer and as little as possible to local rates.
It was, however, a slow beginning.
By 1911–12 only 131 of the 322 education authorities in England and Wales had introduced the service.
Of these, only ninety-five  financed school meals out of rates, the remainder calling on voluntary contributions.
In 1912–13 about 100,000 children were fed in London, 258,000 in the rest of England and Wales.
In 1914 the Board of Education initiated a new Education (Provision of Meals) Act which made this provision compulsory for all local authorities, provided an Exchequer subsidy, authorized feeding during school holidays and left the determination of need to the school medical officers who were to assess need purely on grounds of health rather than of parental income.
The next major changes in social policy introduced by the Liberal government were also initiated outside the Liberal leadership.
In 1906 an adverse report by the Board of Education's inspectors on infant education led to the Board for the first time limiting school provision for children under five — hitherto the normal age for the entry of working-class children to full-time education had been three.
The higher age did not immediately become compulsory, due to the strain it would have placed upon the economy of working-class families.
In other respects the Liberals introduced few changes in education.
However, from 1907 the Board of Education began to encourage the admission of working-class children to 25 per cent of the places in state-aided voluntary secondary schools.
Their intention was to improve national literacy and technical skills: the provision of an educational ladder for brighter working-class children would increase the pool of highly-skilled manpower.
Nevertheless, by 1911 there were only 89,000 12–14 year olds in such state-aided secondary schools, and 33,000 aged 15–18, few of them from the working class.
As with school meals, there had been pressure for a generation for free medical treatment of schoolchildren from doctors and philanthropists.
There was by now considerable information as to the poor state of health of many elementary schoolchildren and the problem had become  startlingly visible as a result of the concentration of such children in schools after the introduction of compulsory education.
Poor families could rarely afford medical insurance and treatment for more than one member, usually the father.
Free treatment was available from voluntary hospitals and charitable dispensaries of which there were many in London and the large cities, but few elsewhere.
Free treatment through the Poor Law was still avoided by the poor wherever possible.
London appointed the first school medical officer in 1890.
The second was appointed in Bradford in 1894.
Bradford thereafter took the lead in the provision of  medical inspection on a large scale and established the first school treatment clinic, developments which owed much to the energy of Margaret McMillan.
Once again, however, it took the fears engendered by the Boer War to arouse widespread interest in the issue.
The Education (Administrative Provisions) Act 1907 included, buried among a number of routine administrative changes in the education service, a clause requiring local education authorities to ‘provide for the medical inspection of schoolchildren’ and ‘to make such arrangements as may be sanctioned by the Board of Education for attending to the health and physical condition of children educated in public elementary schools’.
These provisions attracted little attention while the Bill was debated and passed, and the Minister, Reginald McKenna, was able to be vague on the important question of the source of finance, which was the local rates.
The Act enabled Morant to establish a medical department at the Board of Education headed by George Newman, who was well-known for his commitment to improving health care for the working-class.
This department was responsible for the eventual establishment of school clinics throughout the country, but only slowly and after considerable controversy.
Expansion of the service was Morant's intention.
He was responsible for slipping the medical clauses unobtrusively into the Act of 1907, judging rightly that this was the only means to avoid public and parliamentary conflict about this extension of state action.
It would not, however, have been possible without the support of McKenna and the Ministers who succeeded him.
Morant and Newman hoped gradually to develop a comprehensive free health service for children administered by local Medical Officers of Health, seeing this as the first step towards a free health service for all.
They faced, however, opposition from doctors expressed by their professional body, the British Medical Association.
Doctors feared that their own functions would ultimately be supplanted or controlled by local authority health services and their opposition slowed the development of the inspection and treatment of schoolchildren.
The BMA strove to insist that local officials (medically qualified though they were) should merely inspect child health, leaving treatment to the independent doctors.
In the face of such opposition officials were unable to insist that children should receive full treatment, although in 1908 education authorities were advised to provide it where possible.
A few local authorities established school treatment clinics staffed by salaried  doctors.
The BMA remained opposed to such appointments but with the national supply of doctors exceeding the amount of remunerative work available, in a society in which relatively few could afford to pay the full cost of treatment, doctors were found to fill such posts.
From 1912, almost unnoticed by Parliament, Exchequer grants were paid to education authorities providing medical treatment.
Characteristically, Bradford had the largest scheme by 1910.
By 1914, 214 (out of 317) local authorities were providing some form of medical treatment for children, mostly under the control of the local MOH.
Elsewhere voluntary hospitals and charitable dispensaries were flooded with young patients, suggesting the extent of previously untreated ill-health among children.
It became clear, however, that a serious obstacle to the formation of an efficient national health service was the determination of the BMA to prevent its members becoming salaried state officials.
The considerable post-Boer War concern about children was reflected in the amount of legislative attention paid to them in the first years of the Liberal government.
The Notification of Births Acts of 1907 and 1915 were further steps towards quantifying and analysing the causes of, and ultimately further diminishing, infant mortality.
The next major move was the Children Act 1908.
This consolidated the legislation of the previous half century concerning the treatment of children by the law in both criminal and civil cases, and extended it in important ways.
Since the mid-nineteenth century, minors under sixteen had been progressively withdrawn from adult forms of trial and punishment.
The Probation Act 1907 established the form of probation still with us, as long urged by the Howard Association for Penal Reform.
The Children Act established separate juvenile courts from which adults not concerned with the hearing were excluded.
It brought closer Home Office control and local authority subsidy to reformatories for children for whom the first resort of probation had either failed or was thought inappropriate.
Remand homes were established by Treasury grants, supervised by the police, to prevent any child awaiting trial joining adults in prison.
No child under sixteen was to be placed in an adult prison for any purpose.
It was said in Parliament that ‘The courts were to become agencies for the rescue as well as the punishment of children.’
The Act aimed to reinforce rather than to diminish parental responsibility by requiring the presence of parents in court and by increasing the courts' powers to require  parents to pay fines for their children's offences.
Under the Act the Poor Law acquired the responsibility of visiting and supervising, in institutions or in their own homes, children who had been the subject of cruelty proceedings.
Local authorities were given the duty of inspecting all fostered children under seven, appointing infant life protection officers, and inspecting voluntary children's homes.
The Act imposed penalties for neglect of children, whereas previously only wilful cruelty had been penalized.
It became an offence for anyone in charge of children to allow them to bet in public places or to enter brothels.
Children were prohibited from smoking in the streets and the sale of tobacco to them became an offence.
The Act of 1908 was an important step in the extension of the state's responsibility for children, aimed above all at trying to prevent deprivation in early life leading to accidental death, criminal, or seriously disturbed, adulthood.
It aimed to reinforce ‘responsible parenthood’, mindful of contemporary fears that state action would contribute to the destruction of family responsibilities; and it increased state control over voluntary childcare.
In 1909 the Local Government Board carried out its responsibilities under the Children Act by making boarding-out committees obligatory in each Poor Law Union.
In 1911 it required that one-third of all boarding-out committees should consist of women, for their assumed superior sensitivity to children's needs, and that relieving officers should no longer supervise boarded-out children, thus removing such children from direct stigmatizing contact with the official administration of the Poor Law.
The boarding-out committees were to appoint salaried female visitors to visit boarded-out children and widows with children receiving out-door relief, and to supervise the conditions in which Poor Law children were working in service or as apprentices.
They also undertook life protection visiting under the 1908 Act.
A superintendent women inspector was appointed by the LGB to supervise these activities.
Guardians were slow to appoint salaried visitors; only 80 unions had done so by 1913.
However, the number of boarded-out children increased steadily, from 2,799 in 1885 to 11,596 in 1914 (14% of all children in care).
By 1913 there were 8,206 children over three in workhouses (compared with 11,072 in 1906); 70,676 were in voluntary institutions in 1913, compared with 58,991 in 1906.
In 1913 the Poor Law Institutions Order prohibited children between the ages of three and sixteen from remaining in a general mixed workhouse for more than six weeks.
Children under three were to  remain with their mothers.
Hence by 1914 a large proportion of one of the largest groups traditionally provided for by the Poor Law had been substantially removed from direct association with it.
These measures increased the sometimes petty and patronizing intervention of officials in poor families.
There was still too easy an assumption of the incompetence of the poor at parenthood.
Yet, given the reality that a number of children were deprived and neglected and the shortage of sympathetic officials, who could in any case have done little about the causes of such deprivation, it is difficult to known what alternative measures were available.
One cause of deprivation among children and their mothers, marriage break-up, received attention in the Matrimonial Causes Act 1907.
This consolidated previous legislation concerning maintenance payments to divorced and separated women but did not resolve their long-standing difficulties in obtaining these payments from recalcitrant or poor husbands.
Payment could be enforced only by the courts, and would achieve little when poor husbands could not afford to pay.
Support increased for the ‘endowment of motherhood’, cash support for all families regardless of the cause of their poverty.
The amount of social legislation initiated by the Liberal government increased notably from 1908.
Their relative slowness to act in their first two years in office was partly due to the continuing revenue problem.
Asquith, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, concluded that a free trade government could solve this only by introducing a graduated income tax.
The existing flat rate tax of 1s. in the pound could not, Asquith assumed, be increased without incurring hardship for those on lower taxable incomes.
He overcame considerable opposition from within the Treasury, with the support of a favourable report from the Select Committee on Income Tax of 1906.
Nevertheless he had to move cautiously, aware of the considerable prospective opposition from the remaining Gladstonians on his own backbenches, from the Conservatives, and from the Lords.
Hence in the Budget of 1907 he took only a first step towards graduation by introducing into the tax system different rates of tax for earned and unearned income.
He achieved this by the least painful means possible, by reducing the rate of tax on lower levels of earned income.
He had thus established a principle upon which his successors could, and did, build.
It did not, of course, increase the revenue.
However, the absence of any immediate military threat enabled him to reduce naval expenditure in this and  the succeeding Budget, thus leaving a small amount of revenue available for social expenditure.
More important in bringing about a change of direction in government policy were changes in the top government positions.
In April 1908 Campbell-Bannerman retired due to ill-health, and shortly afterwards died.
Asquith succeeded him as Prime Minister; Lloyd George took his place, entering the Cabinet for the first time, as Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Another new Cabinet Minister, Winston Churchill, became, somewhat reluctantly, President of the Board of Trade.
These changes shifted the balance of interests within the Cabinet by placing in key positions ministers who were, for different reasons, committed to social reforms.
Asquith, like Campbell-Bannerman, was personally, if somewhat indolently, in favour of reform, but also like his predecessor was extremely cautious about pursuing it, for fear that it would lose as many votes from middle-class taxpayers as it might gain from others.
He was, however, open to the persuasion that both Lloyd George and Churchill were prepared to apply.
Lloyd George had both a real desire to bring about social improvement and a shrewd appreciation of the gains it could, if carefully approached, bring both to the Liberal party and to his personal reputation.
Churchill, for this period of his life, seemed also to have inherited something of his father Randolph's concern for social matters.
He also felt strongly that a moderate reform programme was an essential means to destroy the menace of Labour and an essential prerequisite of military success and imperial expansion.
[doc 5]He was also determined to turn the role of President of the Board of Trade (at this time a junior post well under the control of the Treasury) to his advantage by introducing striking social legislation.
In this he was much assisted by an enthusiastic and expert collection of civil servants.
Old-Age Pensions
Asquith, meanwhile, recognized the necessity for some social legislation if the problem of the Lords was to be solved by another victorious general election for the Liberals.
The chief measure which he had in mind was old-age pensions.
Pressure for this was considerable and it appeared to have popular support.
For a generation a debate had raged concerning the form pensions should take.
Pensions financed by a weekly contribution throughout working life, of the kind introduced in Germany in the  1880s, had been advocated by Chamberlain and others.
They were, however, opposed by many working people on the grounds that those in need — low-paid workers, including most female workers — could not afford to contribute, and deserved after a life of labour a benefit paid from taxation rather than from their own pockets.
The Treasury also opposed contributory pensions, objecting to the cost of setting up the machinery to collect contributions, to keep the necessary records and to make payments, in addition to the cost of paying pensions to those who were already aged and could make no contribution.
Asquith was persuaded by these arguments.
He believed that the central problem was that of helping the existing aged poor who had suffered from the bad industrial conditions of the past, and that younger generations should be induced to save.
He believed that they had greater capacity to do so than previous generations and hence would be less in need of support from the state when they reached old-age — there was therefore no need to establish complex insurance machinery.
In the Liberal tradition, Asquith preferred to think of state welfare as a temporary measure which would be rendered unnecessary by the increasing capacity of the population to practice self-help.
Once Asquith had accepted the principle of state-financed pensions he had to decide to whom they should be paid.
The labour movement, supported by Charles Booth, had long advocated universal pensions payable to all over sixty-five.
Booth argued that any selective system would give rise to anomalies and would necessitate a costly system of selection.
It also risked acquiring the stigma attached to the means-tested Poor Law.
However, the likely cost of universal pensions at sixty-five was £17 m p.a.
The Treasury made it clear that they would allow no more than £7 m.
This led Asquith to fix a pensionable age of seventy, despite the mass of evidence that must people who survived to old age ceased to be able to support themselves by work in their mid-sixties — sixty-five was the age adopted by most occupational and charitable pension schemes.
Treasury stringency, however, left no option but to restrict the pension in this way.
Raising the pensionable age, however, was not enough to meet the Treasury's requirements.
Further means of limiting the number of pensioners were worked out by a Cabinet committee.
The Pensions Bill was guided through the Commons by Lloyd George the new Chancellor, although he had played no part in drafting the Bill.
Although the pension was later popularly known  as the ‘Lloyd George’ he did not strictly deserve the credit.
The Pensions Act which became law in August 1908 granted a pension of between 1s. and 5s. per week to those over the age of seventy with incomes of between £21 and £31 10s. p.a., provided that they had not been imprisoned for any offence, including drunkenness, during the ten years preceding their claim, were not aliens or wives of aliens, and could satisfy the pension authority that they had not been guilty of ‘habitual failure to work according to his ability, opportunity or need, for his own maintenance and that of his legal relatives’.
This clause proved impossible to implement.
Also excluded was anyone who received poor relief after 1 January 1908, although, as a result of a Commons Amendment, this clause was to be reviewed after two years and was removed in 1911.
It was argued that it unfairly penalized those who worked throughout their lives until their mid-sixties, but were thrown onto the Poor Law before they qualified for the pension.
Better-off workers could survive this period on Friendly Society or trade union benefits; the clause discriminated against poorer workers, including women, who had no access to such resources.
Qualification for the pension was to be determined by newly-appointed district pensions committees.
It was a pension for the very poor, the very respectable and the very old, as progressive Liberal and Labour Members of Parliament pointed out.
Their attempts to lower the age limit to sixty-five failed, but drove Lloyd George to protest that the measure was only an experimental ‘beginning’ in a new field of state action and beginnings needs must be cautious.
Five shillings (2s. less than the lowest amount which, according to Rowntree, could support an individual for a week) was held to be too low.
Lloyd George claimed that the pension was not intended to give full subsistence, merely an addition and an incentive to desirable private saving.
The sliding scale of pension resulted from a Commons amendment, an attempt to minimize hardship for those narrowly above the income limit.
In its amended form the Bill passed easily through the Commons.
The Conservative leaders expressed their preference for contributory pensions but did not restrain many of their backbenchers from voting for it.
A minority or Liberals attacked the principle of state welfare, arguing that the state should rather encourage self-help and philanthropy.
It was also passed, rather reluctantly, by the Lords.
However, the number of defeated Commons amendments convinced Lloyd George and his Treasury civil servants that  future pressure for costly extensions of the measure were inevitable.
The civil servants belatedly regretted their refusal to set up contributory machinery which, though costly in the short run, would have shifted the cost of future changes in the scheme onto the contributors.
They seem also to have underestimated the likely future increase in the cost of pensions due to the increasing numbers living into old age.
The lack of enthusiasm for social expenditure in the Treasury produced a remarkable lack of foresight in such matters.
Lloyd George became convinced that if need due to ill-health and other contingencies were to be met by cash benefits, as he believed that it should, the only financially and politically feasible means was the establishment of contributory insurance.
For all its inadequacies, when the first pensions were paid on l January 1909, 490,000 people qualified, a striking testimony to the extent of severe poverty in old age untouched by the Poor Law.
A majority of them were women.
The Act was welcomed by many old people because it gave them a regular income free from the taint of poor relief; though many, rightly, criticized it for giving ‘too little too late in life’, that little was more than had been given before.
The historical importance of the measure was that it gave, for the first time, a publicly financed cash benefit to a group of the needy, free from the deliberately induced stigma associated with the Poor Law.
However, it was granted on conditions of respectable behaviour not very different from those the Poor Law had been designed to induce.
The introduction of pensions was an official admission that the respectable and hard-working could be poor through no fault of their own.
[doc 6]
National Health Insurance
Lloyd George saw ill-health as the next major problem to be tackled.
It threw too many respectable people onto the Poor Law and caused the loss of many working days.
Hence, almost immediately after the Pensions Act was passed, Lloyd George set off for Germany to investigate the longest established national insurance system.
After his return in August 1908 from a packed five-day trip he set his civil servants at the Treasury to explore means of setting up a similar scheme for Britain.
He hoped initially to provide weekly cash benefits and some medical treatment for all earners beneath the income-tax limits, also maternity benefit — one more attempt to reduce infant  mortality — widows' and orphans' pensions (which would remove a substantial group from the Poor Law) and an ‘invalidity pension’ for those unable to work due to permanent sickness or disablement.
During the process of discussion, Lloyd George's dreams were forced to contract.
Widows' and orphans' pensions were not greeted with enthusiasm outside women's organizations, who supported them but had little influence.
It appeared that they would require a higher contribution than many working men could afford, and they were dropped.
For the same reason invalidity pensions were restricted by the Treasury to the severely disabled — an advance, but less than Lloyd George had hoped.
The day-to-day administration of the scheme which emerged — the collection of contributions and payment of benefits — was placed in the hands of organizations already experienced in such work: Friendly Societies, trade unions and certain commercial insurance companies.
This placated their fears that national insurance would replace and destroy them and provided a ready-made and cheap machinery of administration.
Workers who were too low or irregularly paid to be accepted by Friendly Societies and did not join a trade union, might contribute through the Post Office.
The administration was placed under the general supervision of a central National Insurance Commission, established in 1912 under the control of Robert Morant.
The Societies were assured that they would suffer no state intervention in their traditional business.
Insured workers acquired the right to full treatment by a doctor whom they could choose from a locally selected list, or ‘panel’.
The doctors were paid on a per capita basis.
Contributors were also eligible for free treatment in TB sanatoria — TB being a major cause of ill-health and death among adults.
They were not eligible for free hospital treatment for any other purpose — an evasion of the problem that fifteen million insured people, if actually treated for all their needs, would have overwhelmed the hotch-potch of voluntary and Poor Law hospitals.
When the National Insurance Act was introduced in 1911 it also provided sickness benefits of 10s. per week for men, 7s. 6d. for women (because their loss of earnings during sickness was lower than that of men) for the first thirteen weeks of sickness, although nothing was paid for the first three days, the aim being to help long-rather than trivial short-term sickness; 5s. per week was paid to men and women for the following thirteen weeks.
The disability pension was 5s.
A 30s. maternity benefit was to be paid to the wives of insured men.
Contributions for most within the scheme were 4d. per week from male employees, 3d. from the employer and 3d. from females.
It covered those aged sixteen to sixty-five earning £160 p.a. or less.
Arrangements were made to obtain contributions from employers of casual labour who might have more than one employer in any week.
However, in view of the importance of even 3d. in the weekly budget of the poor, the inconvenience to, and lack of enthusiasm for the scheme of, employers and the absence of any machinery for ensuring that all workers earning under £150 p.a. wee indeed covered, it is probable that many of the poorest workers (many of them women) were not in the end provided for.
The scheme, unlike that of Germany, was ‘fully-funded’, i.e. contributions were not as in Germany calculated on an annual basis to cover outgoings in each year, but supposedly accumulated at interest to pay the full cost of an individual's benefit, as in commercial insurance.
The state subsidized older contributors.
It gained the disposal of a large fund — a matter of some interest to a Chancellor short of revenue.
It was argued that this arrangement would make the scheme more popular both with contributors and with advocates of self-help, since contributors would appear to be financing their own benefits, whilst experiencing a form of training in saving.
The measure met the qualified support of Labour in Parliament who argued, as always and reasonably enough, that the scheme gave too little.
They were also aware of the considerable Labour criticism outside Parliament that the scheme was insufficiently redistributive in view of the high employee contributions and the fact that the ‘approved society’ machinery was also financed by working-class contributions.
Again it was argued that the poor should not have to pay for their own ‘welfare’ out of hard-earned incomes.
[doc 7]
The scheme met, if anything, a stronger assault from the right.
Conservatives who had claimed to prefer contributory pensions in 1908 faced outraged complaints from their constituents about the growth of bureaucracy and the cost to employers.
This became especially colourful as it dawned upon employers of servants that they would have to buy stamps for their cooks and skivvies.
The indignation aroused by the granting of ‘sickness benefits for serving girls’ is one of the more enlightening moments in the history of class relations in Britain.
Attempts to organize boycotts of contributions by employers of servants were apparently unsuccessful.
However, once more, it is unknown how often silent evasion went  undetected: the official machinery was not extensive enough to check on the activities of all small employers.
Nevertheless, the Bill passed easily through Parliament.
Despite the reservations about the scheme of the BMA, which spoke mainly for the consultant élite of the profession, less prosperous GPS flocked to join the ‘panels’.
Benefits were paid from 15 January 1913.
One of the most noticeable results was the unexpectedly high number of claims from women.
Unsure whether this was due to a greater propensity to malinger or to a higher rate of ill-health among women, a committee of enquiry was set up in August 1913.
This reported in July 1914.
The committee was impressed by the testimony of doctors as to the unexpectedly high rates of previously untreated illness among women.
Women had rarely previously been members of Friendly Societies, the extent of their ill-health had been unknown when the Act was framed, and administrators were unprepared for it.
[doc 8]
The Insurance Act was also followed by an increased demand for in-patient hospital treatment by men and women, which again suggests the extent of illness previously undetected.
Such discoveries strengthened arguments for a comprehensive health service.
The insurance scheme entirely neglected the health problems of contributors' dependents.
Lloyd George was assured by his civil servants that a healthier male workforce would be better able to provide for their wives and children, and, contradictorily, that lower-paid workers would be unable to afford sufficient contributions to cover their families.
Though the health problems of women were almost certainly greater than those of men, they were less visible and of less direct concern to advocates of economic efficiency.
The legislation did most for the better-paid male workers, an increasingly crucial sector of the workforce both economically and politically.
Taxation
Simultaneously Lloyd George tackled the pressing problem of government revenue.
The controversial Budget of 1909 (initially rejected by the Lords and finally passed in April 1910 after a general election on the issue and amidst continuing constitutional conflict) took further Asquith's moves towards a graduated income tax.
The basic rate of tax on earned income was raised to 1s. 6d. in the pound.
A super-tax was introduced on incomes above £3,000 p.a.
Death duties were increased on estates of over £5,000 and for the first time, and an especial cause of the controversy with the Lords, taxes were levied on land: 20 per cent of the unearned increment on land values, levied on sales of land.
As a form of compensation to taxpayers with lower incomes and higher outgoings due to dependent families, Lloyd George introduced another new and lasting principle into the tax system: a £10 abatement of tax for each child under sixteen for taxpayers earning £500 p.a. or less.
He also provided £200,000 for a development fund, to be devoted to increasing job opportunities by such measures as afforestation and the provision of smallholdings in the countryside.
A small step in this direction had already been taken by the Smallholdings and Allotments Act 1908, a response to a long-standing Liberal interest in the land question.
Immediately before the outbreak of war in 1914 Lloyd George was planning, in association with Rowntree, further measures to diminish rural, and to a small extent also urban, poverty, by the renewal of the countryside.
Such action was prevented by the war.
The Royal Commission on the Poor Laws
Also in the last months before the war Lloyd George appears to have been contemplating a more direct assault upon the Poor Law which had been almost unchanged by the Reports of the Royal Commission in February 1909.
This Commission had undertaken an immensely detailed study of poverty and poor relief and had ended in conflict between the majority of its members and a minority composed of Beatrice Webb, George Lansbury, Frances Chandler and the Rev. Russell Wakefield, Dean of Norwich.
This division to some degree reflected the pre-existing division of opinion on the Poor Law and its desirable replacement.
However, the Minority and Majority Reports which resulted had more in common than divided them.
It is likely that some degree of unity could have been achieved between them had not Mrs Webb become convinced that the division was irreconcilable and determined to make every effort to bring her proposals to fruition.
She felt, rightly, that the majority would never share her belief in the efficacy of the expert and of efficient administration.
Both reports condemned the existing system and recommended the end of a separate Poor Law.
Both believed that it was too locally various and too unsystematically administered at the local level.
Whereas in London and other large cities workhouses had largely been replaced by more specialized institutions, in too many Unions  the general mixed workhouse still operated.
Both recognized that much involuntary poverty went untouched by the Poor Law and that Poor Law functions overlapped too much with those of other local authorities.
Both accepted that the new system of relief should be based on rigorous classification of applicants and the further development of specialized services.
Both emphasized the importance of prevention of poverty and of rehabilitation.
Both supported the introduction of labour exchanges, and decasualization of labour although, as we shall see, they differed on other aspects of unemployment policy.
Both favoured the raising of the school leaving age in order both to reduce the size and improve the quality of the labour market.
The majority favoured raising the age to fifteen except among those entering a skilled trade; the minority recommended part-time education to continue to age eighteen.
Neither Report recommended giving any free services except after detailed investigation of individual circumstances.
The Majority Report wished to replace the Guardians with public assistance authorities in each borough or county, consisting partly of members of the elected local authority and partly of co-opted members of local philanthropic organizations, with the role of investigating and assisting poverty.
Thus they hoped to co-ordinate public and privately financed welfare with the efficiency which the COS had sought throughout its existence.
The Minority, whose Report was drafted by the Webbs, felt that this proposal would bring insufficient change.
They demanded dramatically, with an eye to its propaganda value, ‘the break-up of the Poor Law’.
They argued that since poverty was not one problem but a complex of many, each category of need (sickness, widowhood, old age, etc.) should be separately dealt with by a committee of the elected local authority, with the exception of unemployment, which as a national rather than a local problem should be dealt with by central government.
Beatrice Webb believed that the retention of a voluntary element in the social services would render them inefficient at exercising the ‘element of compulsion and disciplinary supervision’ over the clients which she thought essential for their improvement.
‘It is no use’, she stated ‘letting the poor come and go as they think, to be helped or not as the charitable choose.’
The Majority, whilst also favouring discipline for the poor, argued that voluntary workers would respond more flexibly to need than those limited by state regulations.
They recognized, as the Webbs did not, the strength of popular opposition to bureaucratic intervention.
The system proposed by the Minority  would be co-ordinated by a registrar of public assistance empowered to investigate cases and levy a charge for services where the client was able to pay.
Both Reports assumed the existence of a ne'er-do-well class at the base of society, for whom punitive labour colonies or similar institutions would be required.
As the Minority Report put it: ‘The national Authority dealing with the able-bodied requires…what we might almost term a Human Sorting House, where each man's faculties would be tested to see what could be made of him; and a series of Training Establishments, to one or other of which the heterogeneous residuum of Unemployed would be assigned.’
It is wrong to represent the Majority Report as standing on the side of ‘reaction’, whilst the Minority carried the red flag of progress.
Arguably, many of the Majority recommendations were the more politically and financially feasible and more in tune with popular feeling at all levels.
When the Reports were published the Webbs launched a propaganda campaign on behalf of their proposals, for which there was little sign of mass support.
The Reports were published amidst a general expectation among informed opinion that the Poor Law would indeed be reformed or abolished.
Leading Liberals, including Asquith, frequently asserted their desire for radical reform of the Poor Law and there is little reason to doubt their sincerity.
Their actions, however, were inhibited by hostility to change from the civil servants of the Local Government Board, supported by their ineffectual President, John Burns, once the fiery socialist leader of the dockworkers, the first working man to enter a Cabinet but no longer a radical on social issues.
Action was also held back by the need to reform local finance which both Reports recommended.
Without a system of rate equalization, equitable provision of local services was impossible.
This was, however, opposed by richer local authorities and by those, often the same ones, who prized their local autonomy.
Poorer districts saw fewer virtues in autonomy.
Government leaders might have welcomed a united report from the Royal Commission, which could have justified real reform of the Poor Law.
Instead they dismantled the Poor Law from outside, by removing from it needy groups by means of legislation on issues such as old-age pensions and national health insurance.
Hence the Poor Law remained substantially unreformed by 1914.
The failure of the Webbs' campaign to ‘break up the Poor Law’ was a disaster for their most sustained attempt to achieve reform by ‘permeation’of the Liberal party.
Consequently on their  return in 1912 from a recuperative world tour, the Webbs began actively to support the Labour party.
As a result of the measures concerning children, the aged and the sick, the total number of paupers fell between 1910 and 1914 from 916,377 to 748,019.
The fall was most dramatic among out-door paupers.
Employment and Unemployment
The other major set of issues dealt with by the Liberal governments after 1908 concerned employment.
By 1908 it was clear that the 1905 Unemployed Workmen Act had done little to ameliorate the problem.
There were increasing demands for a national policy for the unemployed as distinct from central support of local efforts.
Willingness to help the unemployed varied locally as much as the incidence of unemployment itself.
The labour movement was demanding, and demonstrating in favour of, ‘the right to work’(which meant public works schemes, paid at standard wages) and shorter hours in order to spread the available work more widely.
There were, however, divisions within the Labour movement between those prepared to press for unemployment benefits and public works and those who argued that these were mere palliatives, and that shorter hours, higher pay and ultimately social ownership of industry should be the fundamental aims.
The only group of workers to achieve shorter hours by legislation were the miners, who were granted an eight-hour day in 1908 after forty years' campaigning.
Since it enabled employers to replace the two-shift with a three-shift system in the mines, it produced little real improvement in miners' living standards.
However in 1912, after a series of strikes, a rather reluctant government granted the miners a statutory minimum wage.
In 1911 Churchill, by then Home Secretary, introduced a Shops Act, the subject of a long campaign led by Sir Charles Dilke and female trade unionists, which established a half-day closing each week, thus reducing the very long hours worked by shop assistants but without increasing job opportunities.
From 1906 radical Liberals were demanding nationally organized and funded, and preferably profitable, public works schemes, rural development, and improved education to increase skill and efficiency.
They were motivated partly by concern about the continuing extent of the problems and by a desire to prove that a free trade economy was compatible with social improvement.
All of these proposals were puny in relation to the size of the  problem, and unlikely to change it fundamentally.
More far-reaching proposals were made both by the Majority and Minority Reports of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws, both much influenced by William Beveridge's analysis of the causes of unemployment.
This distinguished between the temporary unemployment of skilled workers in periods of depression and the permanent underemployment of others in a labour market overstocked with workers with limited or no skills.
Both Reports proposed the establishment of national labour exchanges at which all unemployed workmen would be registered and to which vacancies would be notified.
Decasualization of such occupations as dock labouring was to diminish underemployment.
Programmes of public works were proposed by the Minority, to be planned on a long-term basis designed to forestall, as well as to relieve, depression.
The Majority, having less faith in the virtues of economic planning, saw public works only as emergency measures in times of crisis.
Both Reports proposed that the problem of juvenile labour could be lessened, as R. H. Tawney recommended, by compulsory part-time education.
Mothers of young children were to be withdrawn from the labour market to be supported by allowances from the state and by their more fully employed husbands.
Industrial re-training would be provided, in colonies for those who refused to work.
The latter were proposed more enthusiastically by the Minority than by the Majority.
The Majority favoured unemployment insurance, the Minority non-contributory benefits which would enable suitably respectable beneficiaries to be selected; training colonies were the alternative for the undeserving.
The government went some way towards implementing some of the measures the Reports proposed in common, due largely to Winston Churchill's initiative.
Before he became President of the Board of Trade and before the Royal Commission Reports were published, he advocated a package of social reforms including labour exchanges, training of juvenile labour, decasualization, counter-cyclical intervention by the state in industry and military service to absorb some of the unemployed.
Churchill's move to the Board of Trade in 1908 coincided with the return of acute economic depression.
The Local Government Board refused to take any new action.
Churchill investigated German local labour exchanges and within a year proposed to the Cabinet their introduction and that of unemployment insurance and the development of employment opportunities in the countryside.
They were accepted by the Cabinet.
Churchill's ideas concerning unemployment had been much influenced by Beveridge's analysis of unemployment and by his proposals.
In July 1908 he recruited him to the Board of Trade with the responsibility of making the proposals a reality.
With the details of their organization worked out by Beveridge, labour exchanges were introduced in June 1909, after an easy passage through the Commons.
They were to be established in all districts, financed by the Treasury, and would publish information about job vacancies.
Registration at an exchange was not to be compulsory for the unemployed; their large numbers and the mismatch of many of them with the available jobs would have led the scheme into immediate crisis.
The appointed management boards of the exchanges included worker representatives.
They were established from the beginning of 1910.
By February 1914 there were 423 exchanges in the United Kingdom registering over two million workmen a year.
In practice, not unexpectedly, they were of more value to the temporarily displaced skilled worker than to the chronically under-employed — the most intractable problem.
Even among the former they failed to make a decisive impact upon the labour market before 1914, due partly to workers' suspicion of bureaucratic intervention in the labour market and to the indifference of employers, who had little difficulty in finding labour when they needed it.
By 1914 the exchanges were filling 3,000 vacancies a day, but these would perhaps have been filled even in their absence.
For every applicant who found a job between 1910 and 1914, three did not.
The exchanges achieved least, predictably, in areas and times of high unemployment.
Once the exchanges were established Beveridge and Churchill moved on to examine how to introduce unemployment insurance.
Meanwhile, however, Churchill introduced the Trade Boards Act 1909.
This for the first time established boards representing employers and workers to fix minimum wages in the largely ununionized ‘sweated’ industries.
These were low-paid, largely female, occupations mainly unmechanized and carried on in small workshops.
The largest trade concerned was tailoring, but similar conditions prevailed in such occupations as cardboard-box-making, lace-making, and chain-making.
Many women in these trades were also employed as out-workers in their own homes.
A Select Committee on the Sweated System in 1890 had recommended the extension of factory legislation to these trades to improve hours and conditions of work.
Women's labour organizations continually raised the issue, and the Women's Fabian Group took it up actively in  1905, with the support of the Daily News .
One aspect of the growth of the women's movement in this period was increasing female agitation concerning the conditions of poorer women.
The Fabian women organized an exhibition in Westminster of photographs and reconstructions of the working conditions of women in the sweated trades, with information about their hours and wages.
This, combined with pressure from such organizations as the trades-council-based Anti-Sweating League achieved, first, a Select Committee on Sweated Labour in 1907, then the Act of 1909.
Equally important in bringing about this and other measures concerning the labour market was the active support of civil servants in the Labour Department of the Board of Trade.
This department was particularly well suited to putting Churchill's ambitions into effect.
Socially and educationally, its recruitment was more open than that of most civil service departments.
A high proportion of its members were specialist economists and statisticians with knowledge of labour conditions; others were trade unionists.
They devoted much time to the investigation and publication of wage rates (A. L. Bowley was recruited for this purpose) and investigation of labour conditions, including those in the sweated trades.
However, the effectiveness of the Trade Boards Act is uncertain since the capacity of the Board of Trade to inspect and supervise the large numbers of small workshops, still less the women out-workers, was extremely limited.
The proliferation of ‘sweated’ workshops, and outwork had itself been in part an employer response to the closer regulation of factories during the nineteenth century, an attempt to evade these regulations.
The 1909 Act attempted to close off this means of evasion.
The Labour Department did its best with the resources available to implement the Act.
An unemployment insurance scheme was not seriously proposed in Britain until 1907 when suggested by Beveridge as a desirable complement to labour exchanges: it could replace poor relief and relief works, giving the unemployed a right to benefit while they sought jobs.
At the Board of Trade, Beveridge, with Llewellyn-Smith, gave considerable thought to the problems of putting it into practice.
The central problem was that the chronically unemployed could not be covered by insurance.
They would require relief so frequently that their unemployment could only be covered by unrealistically high contributions.
Llewellyn-Smith proposed that insurance should be compulsory for all grades of workers in three trades; shipbuilding, engineering  and building and construction.
These were trades liable to seasonal and cyclical fluctuations, but where unemployment was neither so frequent as to be uninsurable, nor so low as to be unnecessary.
Casual workers in these trades, who worked for more than one employer in a week, were to pay a whole week's contribution for each employment.
This was intended to encourage decasualization.
Llewellyn-Smith estimated that three million men would be covered.
Each insured workman would make a contribution of 2½d. per week, the employer 2½d.
After the first week of unemployment the claimant would receive 7s. per week for a maximum of fifteen weeks in any one year, paid at the labour exchange at which registration would be compulsory for insured workers.
Payment would be made only if the unemployment was involuntary; disputed claims would be referred to newly appointed local committees consisting of representatives of capital and labour; workers would be entitled to refuse work under conditions inferior to the norm for their occupation.
The total cost to the state was estimated at £1 m.
The scheme faced criticism from orthodox Liberals, who objected to compulsion, and from a variety of sources in the trade union movement.
Some socialists felt confirmed in their belief that this was a further stage in the government's plot to regiment and direct labour, even to force the unemployed to break strikes.
They argued that to avoid this it should be placed under trade union control.
Others objected to the substantial working-class contribution to the scheme, arguing that it should be fully redistributive and extended to all workers.
The Webbs objected that the scheme did not distinguish sufficiently between deserving and undeserving and that it included no measures for the prevention of unemployment.
In the summer of 1911 the proposed unemployment insurance scheme passed easily through Parliament as Part 2 of the National Insurance Act.
The first contributions were paid on 1 July 1912, the first benefits on 1 January 1913.
By July 1914 it covered 2.3 m. workmen (almost no women worked in the insured occupations) of whom 63 per cent were skilled.
Most had not previously been covered by a trade union unemployment scheme.
The two years before the war saw a return of prosperity, yet in the year before July 1914 over 23 per cent of insured men claimed benefit.
This demonstrates the high rate of unemployment even in relatively favoured trades in good times.
Both Lloyd George and Churchill saw national insurance as a  necessary first step towards the prevention of unemployment, which they hoped to bring about by extending the principle of the Development Fund into a national policy to counter depression.
Churchill, Beveridge and their colleagues recognized that insurance dealt only with the most tractable tip of the unemployment problem.
It covered predominantly skilled and organized workers while the casual labour problem and that of juvenile labour was untouched.
The clauses concerning casual workers were largely ineffective, employers having no interest in decasualization and workers fearing that the alternative was lack of work.
As yet no better solution could be found to the problem that there were more ‘workers’ than work available.
The Education (Choice of Employment) Bill 1910 inched towards the latter problem by enabling local authorities to provide vocational guidance for school-leavers; in the following year the Board of Education gave grants for this purpose.
By mid-1912 only forty-one authorities had responded.
Part 2 of the National Insurance Act authorized technical retraining schemes for adults, but this was not implemented until 1925.
With the two sections of the National Insurance Act, however, Lloyd George and Churchill had introduced new approaches to two major social problems, which were of lasting importance.
They had done so at little cost to the state or to the better-off taxpayer.
National insurance was, as Lloyd George recognized, a most convenient device for a government short of revenue since it drew finance from workers and employers without the politically unpopular necessity to increase income tax.
The amount of help poorer workers were giving to the Exchequer by 1912 was, in fact, considerable.
In that year a family earning 18s. per week was paying 10.2 per cent of this small income in indirect taxes (7. 1%), National Health (2%) and Unemployment Insurance contributions (1.1%) These percentages declined as incomes rose.
A family earning the respectable artisan wage of 35s. per week was paying only 5.27 per cent in taxes and contributions, 3.65 per cent of this in indirect taxes.
There was considerable substance in the complaints of Labour that national insurance added to as well as diminished the burdens of poorer workers.
Housing and Town planning
The Local Government Board, which had historically borne most of the responsibility for the treatment of poverty, had played very little part in the new measures of the Liberal government, except  on occasion to disrupt them.
The one large measure for which they were responsible was the Housing and Town Planning Act 1909.
The housing problem had improved little since the 1890s, although a few local authorities, notably the LCC, had taken advantage of the legislation of 1890 and 1900 to build the first large council estates.
But still by 1910 the LCC housed less than 2 per cent of its population.
The concern about health and infant mortality led nationally to some recognition that both were worsened by overcrowded and insanitary housing and by limited access to fresh air in polluted city centres.
This gave some stimulus to the movement for town planning which, inspired by Ebenezer Howard's advocacy of ‘garden cities’, pressed for the substitution of the continuing spread of overcrowded cities with new low-density communities in which homes and industry were segregated.
It offered a semi-rural idyll to the most urbanized nation in the world, at a time when rural life was rapidly shrinking.
The only such city started before 1914, was Letchworth, in 1903, built by a public company.
The concept had greater effect upon the building of suburbs, which became leafier and of lower building density than before.
Such new suburbs were most attractive to the lower middle class, although Port Sunlight and Bournville were built on similar principles for workers, as were the LCC's first cottage estates.
Pressure to limit unplanned high-density urban sprawl was the more acute because, in the fifteen years before 1908, 500,000 acres of land passed from agricultural to building use, mostly on the fringes of existing urban areas.
Pressures for more and better housing for the working classes led to the introduction of a succession of unsuccessful Bills into Parliament from 1901.
John Burns had shown some interest in the issue as a member of the LCC and in Parliament before 1906.
The 1909 Act which he introduced was important both for consolidating previous legislation and for certain initiatives.
It removed the previous obligation upon local authorities to sell their houses into the private sector.
The LGB acquired powers to prod local authorities into action both in building housing and in closing unsanitary dwellings.
Between 1909 and 1914, partly as a result of the Act, partly in continuation of a preceding trend, loan sanction was given for significantly more houses to more local authorities than before.
However, the number of closures of unfit dwellings also increased.
Between 1910 and 1914 loans for the building of 6,780 houses were sanctioned while 7,427 were closed — a net loss to the housing stock.
The 1909 Act was more important in the long run for its encouragement of urban planning.
It concerned only new developments and enabled local authorities for the first time to make town-planning schemes ‘as respects any land which is in course of development or appears likely to be used for building purposes’.
It aimed, as John Burns put it, at ‘the home healthy, the house beautiful, the town pleasant, the city dignified and the suburb salubrious’.
The purpose of the Act above all was that future developments would be on low-density garden suburb or garden city lines, primarily the former.
Local authorities still could not, however, as in Germany, purchase land compulsorily for planning purposes, merely by agreement.
By 1915, 74 local authorities had obtained permission for 105 schemes.
The problems of overcrowding and homelessness remained as great as in 1900.
Conclusion
The Liberal governments of 1906–14 introduced new principles of social policy which have been of lasting importance, but in accordance with no conscious grand design directed at Cabinet level.
The effect or their legislative changes, however, was to initiate the dismantling of the Poor Law from without, by withdrawing from it the most obviously deserving groups, though in accordance with principles little different from those of the Poor Law.
This was clear in the system of disqualification for old-age pensions; also insurance benefits were by definition available only to those who worked and hence contributed regularly.
Benefits were kept sufficiently low to preserve the incentive to work and save, but those least able to work or save — the lowest paid, the irregularly employed and women — gained least of all.