

FACT SHEET 1
Versatile Potatoes
Potato Production
Throughout Britain there are 20,000 farmers who grow potatoes as part of their farm business.
Collectively they use about 155,000 hectares of land and produce approximately 6,000,000 tonnes of potatoes each year.
With consumption in Great Britain averaging 114kg (250lb) per head per annum, incidentally the highest consumption figure in Europe, most of the crop is consumed in this country; some potatoes are exported whilst the remainder are held back for use as a seed to produce the following year's crop.
Although potatoes are grown virtually everywhere in Britain the principal areas for maincrop production are Lincolnshire, Yorkshire and East Anglia in England and the Lothian, Fife and Tayside regions in Scotland.
Early potatoes are grown mainly in Cornwall, Kent and the South Western coastal areas of Wales and Scotland.
Maincrop potatoes are planted by machine in March and April and harvested during September and October.
Throughout the growing period they require both sunshine and water and must be protected from diseases which can affect the crop.
After harvesting most of the crop is stored in large storage buildings and gradually, over the winter and spring months, the potatoes are graded and released for sale.
The storage buildings are specially designed and are equipped with sophisticated temperature and humidity controls to keep the potatoes in perfect condition.
Early potatoes are planted in February and are harvested in late May and June.
They too are planted by machine but, unlike maincrop potatoes, they are lifted by hand to avoid the risk of damage to their skins which at that time have not ‘set’.
An increasing proportion of the early potato crop is grown under polythene sheeting.
This method of cultivation protects the growing plants from late frosts and builds up heat in the soil so that the potatoes are ready to be lifted 2–3 weeks earlier than if they had been grown conventionally.
The climatic conditions of Scotland and parts of Cumbria and Northumbria are particularly suitable for the production of healthy high quality seed potatoes required for the following  year's crop and it is in these areas that most of the seed potatoes are grown.
Buying Potatoes
The four most popular places for buying potatoes are:
Fruit and vegetable shop
Supermarket
Market
Farm shop/gate
Potatoes should always be bought from a reputable dealer and should comply with the Potato Marketing Board's Ware Standard.
They should be firm and have an attractive appearance, with little or no damage.
In particular new potatoes should be bought in small amounts as they lose their freshness within a few days; they should have a skin which feels damp to the touch and is easily removed by rubbing.
Food Labelling
Regulations require potatoes to be marked with the name of the variety at the point of sale.
On sacks and pre-pack containers the name and address of the packer must also be shown.
Storing Potatoes
If bought in polythene bags, potatoes should be removed as soon as possible after purchase, otherwise rotting may occur.
As warmth will cause potatoes to sprout and light will turn them green, they should be kept in a cool, frost free, dry, dark place, well away from strong smelling foods or substances which might taint and affect their flavour.
The Ware Standard
The Ware Standard is set by the Potato Marketing Board in order to guarantee the quality and size of potatoes offered for sale.
Potatoes which must not be offered for sale include those which are:
SHRIVELLED or WIZENED
DAMAGED
DISEASED
Affected by GREENING
BRUISED or DISCOLOURED internally
Damaged by FROST
MISSHAPEN
TAINTED
Since it is impossible to guarantee that every potato with a fault can be removed a tolerance of not more than 5% of all faults is permitted.
This represents a maximum of 1.25kg per 25kg bag.
The Board determines the size range of potatoes which can be offered for retail sale but certain large or small potatoes for specific uses are packed and labelled accordingly.
FACT SHEET 2
Versatile potatoes
Composition of a Raw Potato
Composition changes during cooking
In the potato there are groups of starch grains which lie within the cells.
The cell walls are made up of cellulose and pectin.
As potatoes are heated the starch grains swell and gelatinize, the cellulose softens and the pectin becomes more soluble.
Once cooked complete gelatinization takes place giving the potato a soft texture while the soluble pectin allows the cells to separate making them easily digestible.
Water
1.
Body tissues contain approximately 70% water which is essential for life.
2.
Transports nutrients to organs and tissues.
Iron
1.
Stored in the liver, spleen and bone marrow.
2.
Helps the production of healthy blood cells.
Protein
1.
Aids growth and repair of body tissue.
2.
Provides energy.
Dietary fibre
1.
Assists in maintaining proper bowel function and affords protection against diverticulosis, haemorrhoids and varicose veins.
Carbohydrates
1.
Broken down to glucose which provides energy.
Vitamin C
1.
Maintains healthy connective tissue.
2.
Aids the absorption of iron.
Section of a potato as seen through a microscope
Raw potato
Partially cooked potato
Fully cooked potato
Greening of potatoes
Potatoes turn green when they are exposed to any form of light.
It can happen during the growing period, during storage, on the farm, in the shops or in the home and is due to the presence of chlorophyll within the potato.
If the potato is green throughout it should be discarded.
However, if it is only green in small patches, these should be peeled or cut away during preparation.
Potatoes also contain an alkaloid called solanine, which when it occurs naturally in the potato at a level of approximately 0.01% is responsible for the characteristic flavour of the tuber.
If exposed to either artificial or natural light the solanine level will rise and could cause gastroenteritis, but because of the bitter nature of this substance it is unlikely that sufficient quantities would be ingested to cause illness.
Enzymic browning
The brown/black discolouration of the peeled potato is due to a reaction between tyrosine, a colourless substance found in the potato, and oxygen in the air.
This reaction produces a dark pigment known as melanin, which is responsible for the discolouration.
The reaction is speeded up by the presence of enzymes, hence the name enzymic browning.
This process can be represented by the following equation:
Tyrosine + air + enzyme = melanin
The three most commonly used commercial methods to prevent this reaction taking place are:
1.
The addition of sodium metabisulphate in solution.
This releases carbon dioxide which inhibits the enzyme.
2.
‘Blanching’ in oil, steam or water to over 75°C.
3.
The exclusion of air to create a vacuum.
The simplest method for the housewife is to cover the peeled potatoes with water.
This excludes air and so prevents oxidisation.
Some potato varieties are more susceptible to enzymic browning than others.
After cooking discolouration
Blackening, during or after cooking, is caused by a chemical reaction between iron, present in the tuber or in some regional water supplies, and chlorogenic acid, which exists naturally in the potato.
The higher the levels of chlorogenic acid and iron, the greater the discolouration.
An easy way to overcome this problem is to add citric acid, i.e. lemon juice, to the water in which they are boiled, as citric acid forms a colourless compound with the iron.
FACT SHEET 3
Versatile Potatoes
Preparation and Cooking of Potatoes
Preparation
Scrub or scrape the skins of early potatoes before putting them into lightly salted boiling water and cooking until just tender.
Peel maincrop potatoes thinly, preferably using a potato peeler.
Thick peeling is not only wasteful but also results in a loss of some of the valuable nutrients which potatoes contain.
Any eyes or blemishes should be removed and the potatoes should be cut into even-sized pieces to ensure that they are all cooked at the same time.
If boiling, the potatoes should be placed in a pan, just covered with lightly salted cold water and boiled gently until tender.
Cooking
Boiling
Boiling is a method of moist heat cooking whereby the heat is transferred by conduction.
The disadvantage of using water as a medium for cooking is that it absorbs a considerable proportion of the minerals and vitamins in the potato.
As the loss can be quite substantial, the quantity of water in which potatoes are boiled should be kept to a minimum.
If the potatoes have been peeled the cooking water can be used for sauces or soups.
Steaming
Steaming is another method of moist heat cooking again by conduction.
It differs from boiling in that the steam produced cooks the food resulting in a smaller loss of minerals and nutrients, however as steaming takes longer there is a corresponding reduction in the level of vitamin C.
By using a pressure cooker, the temperature of the water is increased, reducing the cooking time and the loss of nutrients.
Baking
In baking dry heat is used to cook the potatoes and although a much higher temperature is achieved than by most moist heat methods the loss of nutrients sensitive to heat is somewhat greater.
Using a potato baker or skewer to carry the heat through the centre of the potato lessens cooking time and reduces these losses.
Frying
The fat or oil used in frying gives a high temperature and rapid results but the potatoes inevitably absorb some of that fat during cooking and this increases their energy value.
The loss of vitamin C in fried potatoes has been investigated but the results show considerable variation according to conditions.
However, the loss of vitamin C is invariably less if the potatoes are cooked rapidly in deep fat as opposed to slower frying in shallow fat.
Microwave cookery
The principle of this method of cookery is the conversion of electrical energy into microwaves which generates heat within the food.
This very rapid method of cooking conserves most of the nutrients, but as the air in the oven is not heated food cannot be crisped or browned.
Potatoes should always be cut into equal sized pieces to ensure even cooking, bearing in mind that the smaller the pieces the greater the loss of Vitamin C through oxidisation.
For this same reason cooked potatoes should not be kept hot longer than necessary.
Calorific values per 100g
Boiled 76 Kcal
Baked 78 Kcal
Roast 150 Kcal
Chips 234 Kcal
Crisps 533 Kcal
Processed potatoes
One quarter of our annual potato consumption is eaten in a processed form.
The term ‘processed’ covers such methods as freezing, chilling, crisping, dehydration and canning.
Each sector of the processing industry has different requirements in terms of variety, size and quality and producers who consistently fulfil these requirements have an opportunity to enter into contracts with processors to supply their production needs.
FACT SHEET 4
Versatile Potatoes
History of the Potato
Solanum tuberosum, or the potato as it is better known, has a history both ancient and glorious.
The Incas killed each other to ensure a supply of human blood as sacrificial fertiliser for their potato planting rites; Shakespeare wrote of its aphrodisiac qualities, Louis XIV wore its flower in his buttonhole and Van Gogh painted them.
As recently as fifty years ago Hitler ordered that a statue of Sir Francis Drake at Offenburg be  razed to the ground because he was holding a potato plant.
Surely no other vegetable can lay such claim to fame.
It is agreed that potatoes originally came from the Andes, but, in the absence of any written language in ancient Peru, tracing their chronological development was often a question of conjecture.
We know from the pottery of the Chimu period that the Incas were cultivating potatoes during the 13th Century but we believe that for many hundreds of years before that the Quecho Indians had enjoyed a staple diet of wild potatoes and had even developed an ingenious method of freeze-drying them to provide food throughout the winter months.
Whether Drake was the first person to introduce potatoes to Britain is a matter of debate, but they certainly came to this country as stores aboard the ships which sailed to South America on missions of pillage and plunder in the 16th Century.
As a ship's food potatoes, with their high vitamin C content, were inadvertently responsible for an appreciable reduction in the incidence of that dreaded seaman's disease scurvy.
Like most innovations potatoes met with a certain resistance from the public both in Britain and on the continent of Europe.
The Burgundians thought that eating too many potatoes caused leprosy, the Prussians believed that they were responsible for the dreaded consumption, whilst the Russians simply said that they were food sent from the devil.
However one particular champion of the potato was Antoine-Augustin Parmentier a French chemist who was captured by the Germans during the Seven Years War and survived largely on a diet of potatoes.
On his return to France he was so enthusiastic about them that he even planted a trial field and let the local population steal them so that they could experience this new vegetable for themselves.
As the word spread that potatoes were a very good food to eat people's reluctance to include potatoes in their diet was overcome and by the end of the 18th Century almost every country in Europe had accepted this knobbly brown tuber as part of their everyday diet.
Potatoes were enjoying an unprecedented popularity amongst all classes of society; in the houses of the aristocracy they were being  marinaded in champagne, poached in wine and decorated with truffles.
However, its culinary heyday came to an end with the approach of the Napoleonic wars.
In 1793 Britain set up a Board of Agriculture to promote the growing of potatoes to counter Napoleon's threat to starve this country into submission.
Can we possibly claim that potatoes helped to win the battle of Waterloo?
There is no doubt that this encouragement to grow potatoes had a disastrous sequel some fifty years later.
It was perhaps unfortunate that potatoes could be grown on land which would not support other crops because this led to countries with poor rural economies turning more and more towards potatoes as their sole means of sustenance.
Sadly, when a potato disease called blight devastated the Irish crop in 1845, 1846 and again in 1848 the entire population faced famine and starvation.
This great Irish tragedy claimed some 2 million lives and of those who survived thousands were forced to emigrate to North America, resulting in one of the most crippling population losses ever experienced by any country.
In Victorian times baked potato sellers were a familiar sight in most towns and cities throughout Britain, particularly during the winter months, when not only were potatoes bought for eating, they were also bought as hand warmers.
While the British were enjoying their baked potatoes the Americans were enjoying crisps.
Like so many other culinary classic dishes crisps came about by accident.
A chef in Saratoga Springs exasperated by a difficult customer complaining that his french fries were not sliced thinly enough cut the potatoes paper thin; the irony was that the customer enjoyed the delicacy so much he asked for more and thus crisps were born.
Today some 5,000 million packets of crisps were sold in Britain each year.
During the two world wars the growing of potatoes in every available plot of land was actively encouraged.
This was to compensate for the lack of imported fruit and vegetables.
Potatoes with their high level of nutrients provided not only nourishment and energy, but also essential vitamins usually obtained from other sources.
Potatoes certainly helped Britain to ‘Dig for Victory’ even though it was in the form of Lord Woolton's pie.
Today the potato is rightfully acknowledged to be the most important vegetable we eat.
No wonder that most people consider a meal to be incomplete without potatoes.
WORKSHEET
Versatile Potatoes
Production and Sale of Potatoes
Britain grows some 6,000,000 tonnes of potatoes each year.
1.
What is the current annual potato consumption figure per head of population in Britain?
2.
What consumption figures can you find for four other countries in the E.E.C.?
3.
Which varieties of potatoes are grown in your region?
4.
What happens to these potatoes between the time they are harvested and the time you buy them?
5.
Visit two or three different types of retail outlets and find out which varieties of potato are on sale.
Make a table of your results like the table shown below:
Were the potatoes sold loose or pre-packed?
If loose what was the price per 450g?
If prepacked:
A.
What was the weight of the prepack(s)?
B.
What was the price of the prepack(s)?
Storage and Preparation of Potatoes
1.
Potatoes turn green when exposed to light.
Take three potatoes of the same variety and place one in a cool dark place, expose one to daylight and one to fluorescent light.
A)
Compare the appearance of the potatoes after one, three and five days.
B)
After five days cut each potato in half.
How far does the greening penetrate?
2.
Exposure to frost affects the flavour of potatoes.
Take two potatoes of the same variety and place one in the fridge on a high setting and the other in the vegetable rack for three days.
A)
Can you detect any difference in appearance between the potatoes?
B)
Boil each potato and compare any difference in flavour you might find.
3.
Using a vegetable peeler peel 450g of large potatoes and 450g of small potatoes.
A)
Compare the time taken to peel each batch.
B)
Evaluate the wastage.
C)
Work out the cost of edible potatoes.
Cooking Potatoes
1.
What happens to the structure of a potato when it is cooked?
2.
Why should lemon juice be added to the cooking water when boiling potatoes?
3.
Choose equal quantities of three varieties of potatoes and boil them.
Tabulate the differences you find in:
A)
Appearance
B)
Texture
C)
Flavour
Indicate which variety you would recommend for this method of cooking.
4.
Choose three varieties of potatoes, carry out a test to determine the differences between baking potatoes in a microwave and a conventional oven.
A)
Compare the length of cooking times.
B)
Compare both skin and flesh appearance after baking.
C)
Can you detect any difference in flavour.
5.
Compare any two methods of cooking potatoes.
State which method would fit in best with healthy eating guidelines and explain why.
Nutritional Value of Potatoes
1.
Why is the potato so important in our daily diet?
2.
Devise a recipe incorporating potatoes which shows what a valuable role they play in a healthy eating regime.
Processed Potatoes
1.
What proportion of our annual potato consumption is eaten in processed form?
2.
How many forms of processed potato can you think of?
3.
List eight different frozen potato products.
4.
Ask your family and friends to give you their empty crisp packets for a week.
A)
How many different flavours have you collected?
B)
From your collection is there any one flavour of crisp which is outstandingly popular?
General
Design a poster or leaflet which would encourage people to eat more potatoes.
POTATO VARIETIES IN BRITAIN
A SELECTION OF VARIETIES WIDELY AVAILABLE IN THE SHOPS
June–July August–March September–May
Potatoes are farmed in Britain in three basic seasonal groups: EARLIES, SECOND EARLIES, and MAINCROP.
These have been colour coded as above to help you identify when they are available.
Home Guard
Short oval tubers; white skins
White mealy flesh
Good for boiling and salad use
Arran Comet
Oval shaped tubers; white skins
White waxy flesh
Good for boiling and salad use
Ulster Sceptre
Long oval tubers; white skins
White, very waxy flesh
Good for boiling and salad use
Maris Bard
Oval shaped tubers; white skins
White waxy flesh
Good for boiling and salad use; used by chip shops; good for baking when mature
Pentland Javelin
Short oval tubers; white skins
White waxy flesh
Good for boiling and salad use
Alcmaria
Long oval tubers; pale yellow rough skins
Pale yellow waxy flesh
Good for boiling and salad use
Wilja
Long oval tubers; yellow rough skins
Pale yellow firm flesh
Good for boiling, baking and chipping, excellent flavour
Estima
Oval tubers; light yellow skins
Pale yellow firm flesh
Good for boiling, baking and chipping
Desiree
Oval tubers; red skins
Light yellow flesh; firm texture
Good for all cooking purposes, boiling and mashing, roasting, chipping and baking
Maris Piper
Oval tubers; white skins
Cream flesh; floury texture
Excellent for baking, boiling, roasting and chipping
Cara
Round to oval tubers; white skins, pink colouration around eyes
Cream flesh; soft texture
Good for baking, boiling, roasting and chipping
Pentland Dell
Long oval tubers; white skins
White-cream flesh; floury texture
Good for baking and chipping
Pentland Square
Round oval tubers; white skins
White flesh; floury texture
Excellent for baking, roasting, chipping and mashing
Romano
Round oval tubers; pink skins
Cream flesh; waxy texture
Good for baking, boiling, roasting and chipping
King Edward
Oval to long oval tubers; white skins, splashes of pink
Cream flesh; floury texture
Excellent for roasting, baking, chipping and scrumptious mashed
Premiere
Round oval tubers; pale yellow skins
Pale yellow mealy flesh
Good for boiling, salad use and chips
HELPFUL HINTS
You should always buy potatoes from a reputable supplier.
Best quality potatoes look clean, well shaped and firm, free from cuts, blemishes, greening and rots.
Use this chart to help you choose the variety, size and quantity best suited to your taste and needs.
Buy new potatoes in small quantities, enough for your immediate use, to enjoy their ‘home grown’ fresh taste.
Maincrop potatoes, preferably unwashed, will keep if properly stored.
Store in a dark, cool but frost-free, airy place.
Light turns potatoes green.
Warmth and dampness may cause sprouting, shrivelling or rotting.
Never store in polythene bags!
Scrub potatoes in cold water with a vegetable brush or domestic scouring sponge, particularly if they are to be cooked in their skins.
Cook potatoes of a similar size together to ensure they cook evenly.
Large potatoes may be cut.
Place potatoes in just sufficient water to cover, bring to the boil, then simmer slowly to prevent the potatoes falling apart.
For salad use, a teaspoon of lemon juice added to the cooking water helps conserve colour.
Serve as soon as possible to retain the flavour.
There are many other varieties grown in Britain.
Their availability will depend on local distribution.
If in doubt ASK your supplier first or phone your local PMB office (consult telephone directory).
One such is Epicure , an early variety particularly popular in Scotland.
Also look out for new varieties like Ailsa ,Costella ,Sante and Nadine , whereas Kerr's Pink ,Golden Wonder and Record are old established floury varieties good for roasting, baking and chipping.
Charlotte ,Pink Fir Apple ,Belle de Fontenay and Linzer Delikatess are speciality potatoes for salad use.
NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION
Potatoes are an inexpensive source of carbohydrates and nutrients — particularly vitamin C. They also provide a valuable source of protein, iron, thiamin, niacin and dietary fibre.
Potato Processing in Great Britain 1990
Potato Marketing Board
HUMAN CONSUMPTION
The estimates given in Tables 1–5, made by the Potato Marketing Board, are derived from data obtained from H.M.
Customs and Excise, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, including the National Food Survey, and the Board.
Since the individual estimates within specific tables are subject to errors varying in degree, the estimates given for any one season should be treated with reserve.
However, taken over a number of seasons, the figures give guidance on the changes in the pattern of consumption of potatoes and potato products (shown as raw equivalent tonnages).
Table 1
POTATOES MOVING INTO HUMAN CONSUMPTION IN GREAT BRITAIN FROM ALL SOURCES
Table 2
ESTIMATES OF POTATOES MOVING INTO HUMAN CONSUMPTION IN GREAT BRITAIN FROM ALL SOURCES
Table 3
ESTIMATED TONNAGE OF RAW POTATOES USED FOR PROCESSING IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Table 4
EXPORTS OF PROCESSED POTATO PRODUCTS FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM
Modern marketing
Several large national and international organisations are actively engaged in the manufacture and marketing of processed potato products.
This, allied to the rapid development of supermarkets, freezer centres and companies supplying caterers, means that a wide range of products is readily available to the consumer.
Large sales forces, backed by national press and television advertising and thorough test marketing, ensure that the wholesalers, retailers and customers all know what products are being offered.
In addition, extensive research is being undertaken to improve existing lines and develop new products.
Many processors are examining new packing materials and using them to produce complete meals, which contain potatoes and only need heating up before being ready to eat.
CANNED market
There has been some fluctuation in the tonnages canned in recent years.
Market developments appear to be linked with finding improved varieties which will give a more presentable and palatable product.
There are three main types of usage:
(i)
diced or dehydrated potatoes used as an ingredient in broths, salads, soups, stews and vegetable mixtures.
(ii)
canned new potatoes
(iii)
small whole potatoes graded from suitable maincrop varieties canned for the catering trade.
Canned Dice
requirements
1.
Large ‘blocky’ tubers, preferably over 50mm.
2.
Clean skin with shallow eyes.
3.
White flesh, free from blemishes.
4.
Waxy texture to prevent sloughing.
5.
Specific gravity under 1.085 (21% dry matter).
varieties
Maris Peer, Maris Piper, Pentland Crown, Pentland Dell and Pentland Squire have proved to be suitable.
husbandry
The aim is to produce a well-grown tuber with a minimum of disease.
The use of wider rows is preferable, so that greening is reduced to a minimum.
storage
Cool storage at about 5°C with sprout inhibition will enable weight losses to be minimised.
The store temperature should be raised over 7°C before unloading commences.
Careful handling is necessary to reduce mechanical damage.
Canned New requirements
1.
High yield of small tubers between 20mm and 40mm.
2.
Clean thin skin, with shallow eyes.
3.
Cream or white flesh.
4.
Blemish and damage free flesh to minimise trimming and rejection losses.
5.
Freedom from after-cooking discolouration and taints.
6.
Firm waxy texture.
7.
Specific gravity under 1.080 (20% dry matter).
varieties
At present Arran Comet and Maris Peer are most often used.
storage
Tubers may be held in the ground for short periods after complete defoliation.
Temporary cool storage at 5°C has been tried.
Staggered plantings are also used to ensure a continuity of supply.
Crops have been successfully grown in Scotland for harvesting in August and September to extend the canning season.
husbandry
The advice of your local Agricultural Advisory Officer should be obtained on cultivations.
The following points are mentioned as a guide but it should always be the practice to consult the canner's agent or fieldsman about special requirements.
1.
Multi-sprouting will induce more main stems which produce a larger number of small tubers.
Mini-chitted seed can be planted.
2.
Higher than average seed rates with close planting are used.
3.
Haulm destruction is carried out to stop the specific gravity from getting too high.
Lifting a crop two weeks after burning off with sulphuric acid allows the tuber skins to set, which reduces the risk of mechanical damage during handling and transit.
CHIPS
varieties
Whilst some users prefer Pentland Dell, other varieties such as Maris Piper, Pentland Crown, Pentland Hawk, Pentland Squire and Wilja are used at many plants.
Other varieties, such as Désirée, Estima and Record may be used if the sample meets the factory specification and the price is competitive.
Russet Burbank is being grown since it is a leading variety for French fry production in North America.
requirements
1.
Medium to large sized tubers over 45mm.
2.
Shallow eyes and regular shape.
3.
Cream or white flesh with no blemishes.
4.
Freedom from internal bruising, disease, cracking and greening.
5.
Specific gravity over 1.080 (20% dry matter).
6.
Reducing sugar content below 0.25%.
7.
No tendency to turn grey or black after cooking.
husbandry
Chitting is necessary, along with early planting, so that early maturity is obtained.
Planting in up to 90cm wide rows allows a well-rounded ridge to be formed.
This helps to reduce the number of green tubers.
It should also produce less clods and thus minimise lifting damage.
If clods and stones are present their removal prior to planting can help to reduce tuber damage.
storage
The aim is to keep the crop at 7–8°C.
If lower temperatures are used, the reducing sugar level may become too high.
A chemical sprout inhibitor should be used for long term storage.
The tubers should not be chilled during grading or during transit to the processing plant.
They should be handled with care to minimise damage.
CRISPS
varieties
Bintje and Wilja are used at the beginning of the season but during the maincrop season Record is preferred.
Record is also being grown for early lifting in the coastal areas of Cornwall and Wales.
Other varieties such as Maris Piper may be used when the sample meets the required specification.
Many new varieties are currently being evaluated in order to widen the range of suitable varieties.
requirements
1.
Uniform, regular shaped, medium sized tubers over 40mm.
2.
Clean skin with shallow eyes.
3.
Freedom from internal bruising, disease and greening.
4.
Specific gravity over 1.085 (21% dry matter).
5.
Reducing sugar content below 0.20% and preferably below 0.10%.
husbandry
Chitted seed, along with adequate fertiliser, should be planted early to ensure early maturity.
Sulphate of potash gives a higher dry matter than muriate.
The haulm must be allowed to mature to increase the dry matter content.
Haulms are normally burnt off about two weeks before lifting commences.
Late harvesting in cold conditions can give unduly high reducing sugar levels and cause more tubers to be bruised and should, therefore, be avoided.
storage
Record must be handled gently to prevent bruising.
Storage temperatures of 9–10°C are normally used.
After storage, care must be taken not to chill tubers during grading and transportation to the factory.
C.I.P.C. is widely used for sprout inhibition.
Some crispers now have sufficient controlled environment storage to enable them to take delivery of most of their supplies at harvest time.
DEHYDRATED
varieties
Many varieties including King Edward, Maris Piper, Pentland Crown, Pentland Dell and Pentland Squire are used for dehydration.
Price is an important factor when about 6 tonnes of potatoes are needed to produce 1 tonne of dried material.
Outgraded tubers of many varieties are accepted if they have been carefully dressed and have an adequate dry matter content.
The two main types being manufactured are flakes and granules.
Dice and slices are also produced.
requirements
1.
Flake and granule makers require evenly shaped tubers over 25mm with no greening.
2.
Dice and slice makers require evenly shaped, moderate to large tubers.
3.
Tubers with shallow eyes and no deep surface damage.
4.
Cream or white flesh with few blemishes.
5.
Freedom from taints and after-cooking discolouration.
6.
Specific gravity over 1.080 (20% dry matter).
7.
Reducing sugar content under 0.50%.
husbandry
The aim is to obtain the maximum saleable tonnage at reasonable cost and therefore 90cm rows and normal husbandry methods are used.
The tubers should ideally contain little disease, greening or severe mechanical damage.
storage
Storage at 6–7°C has proved to be successful.
Sprout inhibition is used when necessary.
Table 6
POTATO AREA BY VARIETY PLANTED BY REGISTERED PRODUCERS IN GREAT BRITAIN IN 1988, 1989 AND 1990
Jackets
To suit the occasion
A WIDE RANGE OF SNACKS can be made simply and cheaply from potatoes — the world's most versatile vegetable.
Once you have served baked jacket potatoes this dish will become a firm favourite.
Serve them as a vegetable, as a snack or the main meal, served with a salad.
Listed below are a few reasons to bake a potato.
Potatoes are easy to buy and readily available everywhere.
Potatoes are cheap and a considerable amount of profit can be made with a little thought being put into the presentation.
Potatoes are very satisfying and provide good value for money.
With a selection of fillings, it is easy to please all tastes.
Jacket potatoes are easy to prepare and cook.
All that is needed is an oven.
Jacket potatoes provide a warm welcome on a cold day and a substantial meal in summer.
Standard Menu
1.
Cheese and Pickle
2.
Chicken in Curry Sauce
3.
Chopped Egg and Sweetcorn Relish
4.
Baked Beans and Ham
5.
Cheese, Tomato and Onion
6.
Prawns in Cocktail Sauce
7.
Cheese and Ham
8.
Chilli Con Carne 
9.
Coleslaw and Cheese
10.
Sausages and Baked Beans
11.
Egg Mayonnaise
12.
Tuna and Egg Mayonnaise
13.
Cottage Cheese and Sweetcorn Relish
14.
Chicken in Paprika Mayonnaise
15.
Scrambled Egg and Bacon
16.
Corned Beef and Baked Beans
17.
Shrimps in Tartare Sauce
18.
Cottage Cheese and Chives
19.
Ratatouille and Cheese
20.
Crunchy Peanut Butter and Cheese
Speciality Menu
1.
Fisherman's Delight — smoked mackerel fillets, flaked and mixed with sweetcorn, peas and mayonnaise.
2.
Squire's Choice — sliced roast beef rolled up with a filling of pickled red cabbage and horseradish sauce.
3.
Creamy Bakes — cream cheese, hardboiled egg, chives and diced red pepper mixed with mayonnaise.
4.
Beachcomber — prawns and diced crab sticks combined together with marie-rose sauce.
5.
Derbyshire — sage Derby cheese, grated and mixed with sliced mushrooms and diced bacon sautéed together.
6.
Waistliner — combine cottage cheese, diced red pepper and sweetcorn.
7.
The Cheshire Cat — Cheshire cheese, grated and mixed with diced apple, mustard and a little butter.
8.
Sweet 'n Sour Sausage — sausages grilled, cut diagonally and mixed with sweet 'n sour sauce.
9.
Spanish Armada — flaked tuna fish with chopped green pepper, onion and tomato.
10.
The Berliner — coleslaw in a cone of German sausage.
Exotic Menu
1.
Arabian Night — mix together chilli con carne, mango chutney, sultanas and chopped walnuts.
2.
The Royal — roll of smoked salmon garnished with lemon and maitre d'hotel butter.
3.
Savoury Treat — combine diced avocado pear, prawns and seafood sauce.
4.
Tropicana — cooked diced chicken mixed with sour cream and fresh mango.
5.
Islay Prawn Delight — prawns blended with mayonnaise and malt whisky.
6.
Eastern Promise — cooked, diced chicken, celery and walnuts mixed together with curried mayonnaise.
7.
Pearly Queen — cod roe with pearl onions and watercress.
8.
Festive Filling — cooked chopped turkey and apple combined with cranberry sauce.
9.
Trawler Pots — smoked mackerel fillets, flaked and mandarin orange segments blended with mayonnaise.
10.
Curry Bakes — curry sauce with minced beef, sultanas, coconut and diced bananas.
Baking Potatoes
Select even-sized maincrop (old) potatoes 8–10 oz (225–275 gm) in weight.
METHOD
1.
Scrub well, dry and prick the potatoes all over with a fork.
2.
Place on a baking tray and bake in an oven at 425°F, 220°C or Gas mark 7 for approximately 1 hour.
The skins can be rubbed with a little margarine prior to cooking.
This will provide a shiny appearance when cooked.
BUYING
Always buy up to quality and not down to price.
Choose potatoes which have shallow eyes and are of a good shape.
Avoid any that are green, have scuffed skins or are excessively dirty.
There is a legal obligation placed upon retailers to show variety names on all forms of packaging and bins where potatoes are offered for sale.
VARIETY
Whilst most of the maincrop varieties of potatoes are suitable for baking, Maris Piper, King Edward, Désirée and Cara are especially good for this purpose.
Potato Marketing Board  
VEGETARIAN VARIATIONS
WITH THE VERSATILE POTATO
THE POTATO IN A VEGETARIAN DIET
The days when a vegetarian was looked upon as someone odd, even a freak, are now long past and today those whose eating preference is for non-meat products are not only respected, but, perhaps more importantly, actively catered for in shops, restaurants and other food outlets.
For years the potato has been acknowledged as one of our staple foods but recently its true potential has become more widely known.
Today more and more people are enjoying potatoes happy in the knowledge that they are eating a healthy, nutritious, low calorie food which provides many of the essential requirements for a satisfactory diet.
For instance potatoes can provide up to one-third of our daily requirement of vitamin C, together with vitamin B 6 , iron, calcium, protein and dietary fibre.
Of all the vegetables available, potatoes are, without doubt, the most versatile and this, coupled with their nutritional value, makes them the obvious choice for inclusion in a range of appetising dishes.
But of course no one wants to buy a product if it is not of the highest quality and this is where the Potato Marketing Board can help.
The Board sets a quality standard known as the Ware Standard which is the farmer's guarantee to the consumer.
By choosing home grown potatoes the housewife knows she is buying only the best for her family.
Here are just a few of the many ways in which you can use potatoes — we hope you enjoy them.
HELPFUL HINTS
Potatoes bruise easily, so treat them with care.
Potatoes packed in a polythene bags should be taken out of the bag as soon as possible.
Potatoes should be kept in dark, cool, airy conditions.
Buy new potatoes in amounts you will use immediately so that they are always fresh and tasty.
Maincrop potatoes can be bought in larger quantities provided you store them carefully.
Prepare potatoes just before cooking to conserve the nutrients.
Peel potatoes thinly to retain those nutrients which are stored just under the skin.
Cut potatoes into equal-sized pieces to ensure even cooking.
Simmer potatoes slowly to reduce any tendency for them to break down during cooking.
Add lemon juice to the water to prevent after cooking discolouration.
AN ALTERNATIVE WAY TO EAT
The Vegetarian Society exists to further the interests of those who have decided that their diet should not include meat and animal by-products.
Currently some 3.25 million people in Britain (6% of the population) are vegetarian and the number is growing as more and more people refuse meat on the grounds of health, humanity and the environment.
The Society has available hundreds of recipes suitable for use by vegetarians and will give advice and information to individuals or groups and will provide training to caterers who wish to offer vegetarian menus in their restaurants.
THE COMPOSITION OF POTATOES PER 100g
For more information contact:
The Vegetarian Society .