

STUDY
How to Study
One of the most useful skills you can learn, and one that will be of benefit throughout your life, is how to study.
Studying documents, procedures, reports, plans and other working papers will be a part of your life well after you have finished your BTEC course.
In order to study effectively you need to be organised and to put sufficient time aside to learn and to reflect.
The aim of your study is for you to LEARN .
This we define as the process of acquiring new knowledge and skills, and critically assessing the views and attitudes which you hold.
You learn best if you have a clear idea of why you are learning something.
It is important to have a goal at which to aim when you are studying.
Having a goal
In order to study effectively you need to start by being certain what it is you are studying, and what it is you want to learn.
You need a GOAL — something to aim at which will make all the study and learning worthwhile.
Unless you have a goal your learning will be an uphill struggle.
Of course, some people are very lucky and always know exactly why they are doing things.
With planning it is possible for all of us to clarify our thoughts about our hopes and future needs.
To start the process of formulating goals you need to ask yourself some fundamental questions about your own motivation.
The activity which follows is designed to assist you in doing this.
Activity: ‘What are your goals?’
You should do this exercise as honestly as possible.
There are no right answers.
It is useful to carry out this exercise in pairs.
One person should ask the other the questions and record the answers, and then the process is reversed.
You should discuss the implications of your answers with your partner at the end of the exercise.
‘Are you interested in money?’
‘Are you concerned about status?’
‘Is your main goal happiness?’
‘Are friends important to you?’
‘Is your social life important to you?’
‘What interests and hobbies would you give up for advancement at work?’
‘Would you be prepared to move home for work?’
‘Would you be prepared to take an interesting job at a low salary?’
‘What do you want out of life?’
‘What is it about work that gives you the most pleasure?’
‘What is it that you dislike most about work?’
‘What are your career ambitions?’
‘How have you planned to make a success of your career?’
‘Do you intend to carry on studying after you have completed this course?’
‘Do you find study difficult?’
‘What are the main barriers you find to studying?’
‘How have you planned to make your study more effective?’
Only you can answer questions about your motivation.
There are various activities in this book to help you know yourself better.
The importance of these is that they make you think and help you recognise what it is that ‘makes you tick’.
Once you know this, you can establish a goal or a series of goals which will then give you a purpose for your studies.
When the going gets tough with your studies, having goals will help to see you through.
Study — the preliminary steps
Be clear in your own mind what is involved in the course which you are studying.
This is particularly true of the BTEC National which has a complex course structure.
Your course will have started with an  induction period when some of the demands of the course will have been explained to you.
You need to make clear notes about what is being expected of you.
In particular, you need to be certain about how many assignments you will be given and when you are expected to hand them in.
A good idea, used by many students, is to draw up a grid showing the weeks the assignments are handed out, the hand-in dates and the grades you have achieved.
It is useful to put this information on the inside cover of a loose-leaf course folder.
If you do this exercise it will provide you with an idea of how much time to spend on each assignment.
Examples of how you might do this are shown in figures I and 2.
Find a suitable place to study where you feel happy and comfortable.
This may be difficult at home but you will work better if you have a desk in a room where you can do uninterrupted work.
Some people work better to music while others do not.
If you find music helps your concentration then use it.
Pay attention to the level of lighting and never sit in the shadow.
If you develop eye strain it might be because you are reading too close to the  printed page.
About eighteen inches is the optimum distance between eye and page.
Set yourself a personal timetable for study.
It is quite unrealistic to think that you can spend every waking moment working, but it is equally unrealistic to have hobbies and interests which fill every evening and the weekend and for you to expect to pass the course.
Study takes time and the best way to use it is to set yourself a programme.
REGULAR STUDY is the most successful way to learn.
It is a good idea to put aside two evenings a week and, say, a Sunday afternoon on a regular basis.
Times for study are important but personal things.
Through trial and error you need to establish what times suit you best and then keep to them.
Some people study best for a couple of hours straight after coming home from work or college.
Others work better late at night, while a few people  prefer to be up early in the morning and study before they go to work.
Regardless of your preference you should try to establish a pattern.
Do not work for long periods without a break.
Long periods of continuous study are very tiring.
An effective period of study is about twenty to twenty-five minutes.
Try breaking a period of study into twenty minute blocks.
You should make a cup of tea in one break, take a short walk around the block in another.
In this way you will return refreshed to your study.
An important study aid is to keep an indexed set of files.
It is important to file away your classwork notes carefully so that you are able to find them again when you need them.
Some people find it helpful to write out their notes again before they file them.
They find that the act of repetition helps the learning process.
Do keep your notes in good order.
Loose-leaf binders are the most flexible means of keeping notes and hand-outs tidy.
You can use coloured dividers to classify them into subjects.
Above all, enjoy your study.
If you think of it as fun then it will become a pleasure.
Achievement is one of the most important means of finding satisfaction.
If you have developed the skills for effective study from your course, then you will have achieved a great deal.
The diary method of learning
Your course and this hook can provide you with activities and ideas to guide your study, but it is you who have to do the learning.
One useful way of assisting your learning is to keep a diary.
A diary helps you to reflect and it aids memory.
You can learn both from your successes and mistakes.
Keeping a diary is a time-consuming activity but you can keep it within manageable bounds by being selective in the events you record.
A good place to start is to record the experiences you have in group activities.
These experiences can be rewarding, frustrating, elating and even painful, but they are usually memorable.
You may decide to ponder on why sometimes you are the centre of attention and why at others you are an outsider, or how alliances are formed, or why a group works well in one situation and becomes bogged down in other circumstances'?
The idea we are putting to you is to keep a diary of certain of the major aspects of the course and to use it as an aid to reflection and learning.
Making effective notes
There is an activity which will take a great deal of your time as a student, which is of crucial importance to your success and which passes with hardly a mention on many courses — we refer, of course, to note-taking.
Everyone assumes that students know how to make and use their notes, and yet time and time again a piece of work does not receive the grade it deserves because crucial material or ideas have been left out; often this is information which the lecturer gave out in classes but which the student did not note down.
Making good notes in lectures or from books is an important art and a useful skill.
It will stand you in good stead throughout your life because effective note-taking is as important in business as it is to study.
Why make notes?
Notes are important for the following reasons:
Note-taking aids concentration when you are listening to a lecture, watching a video or reading a book or article.
If you do not make notes your mind will have a tendency to wander and you will quickly lose the thread of the ideas with which you are trying to come to terms.
Making notes is the best way of keeping your mind on the task at hand.
Note-taking provides a means of ordering your thoughts and ideas about any particular subject.
Note-taking provides references which are essential for assignment and examination preparation.
Most people's long-term memory is very limited when it comes to remembering specific points or ideas.
Of course, you can always refer to books but this is rarely convenient if you have a piece of work to do for a deadline.
Your own notes are personal to you and ordered by you so that it is relatively easy to find the material you want when you want it.
Without a good set of notes you will handicap yourself when it comes to assignment and examination preparation.
Note-taking helps you think, select and remember.
It provides your work with organisation which is the key to understanding.
The ability to remember information is related directly to the importance which it has for you.
The more time you have spent making notes from lectures or from books and rewriting and ordering those notes, the greater the importance that material will be to you.
You will have invested time and effort in the activity and you have a vested interest in seeing a return from the investment.
How to make notes
There is a range of different types of note-taking and each has its place.
You should select and practise the appropriate method for the task in hand.
Verbatim notes are used where you want to record everything that is being said in a lecture or copy exactly what appears in print in a book or magazine article.
You will only want to do this on rare occasions.
Unless you are a shorthand writer you will not have the speed to make verbatim notes from a talk and there is rarely the need to copy out material from books.
The photocopier will do the latter job for you.
Verbatim notes provide an exact record of what has been said or what happened, but the times when you require this are extremely limited.
It is the process of paraphrasing, ordering and abbreviating which helps to fix material in the memory.
Sequential notes follow the pattern as laid down by the lecturer or speaker, or record the pattern of thought of the author whose book you are making notes from.
In order to summarise a lecture you need to listen carefully to the lecturer and record the main points as they are made.
The best way to do this is to have a series of numbered points with headings and then to write concise summaries under each heading.
It is useful to jot down a few examples under each point as this aids understanding and memory.
DO NOT WORRY ABOUT WRITING IN COMPLETE SENTENCES .
Most students invent their own shorthand and shortforms.
The important thing about notes is that you understand them.
You should write your notes up in continuous prose as soon as possible after the lecture so that you do not forget what the shortforms stand for.
This also has the advantage of allowing you to add material which you have remembered but have not written down.
When taking notes it is important to write down any new words or concepts, even if you do not understand them at the time.
You should research them as you write up your notes and prepare precise definitions which can be referred to later.
Classified and patterned notes follow the pattern determined by the student and not by the lecturer.
Individuals find their own style of creative note-taking.
Some people use a series of boxes, while others start with the lecture title in a centre circle with the main points radiating from it.
Arrows and lines are used to link related points.
In this form of note-taking, only keywords and main points are recorded, and it is important to copy up the notes soon after the lecture in order to fix the train of thought.
The advantage of the method is it blends creativity with listening.
Asking questions
Up until now we have given the impression that note-taking is a fairly passive activity, albeit one that can be creative.
In order to gain as much as possible from a lecture or reading a book, it is important to ask questions in order to answer queries as they arise.
This is easy to do in lectures.
You  should jot questions down as they occur to you during the talk.
Some of them will be answered in the lecture but those that are not should be asked at an appropriate point.
Asking questions and preparing to ask questions is an important part of note-taking.
It makes you think about what you are listening to and it gives you an active role in the lecture process.
Similarly, points which occur to you when you are reading should be brought up either in class or in a tutorial with your lecturer.
A positive approach to study of this nature makes it more interesting and provides a degree of excitement.
A Goal for Karen
Karen had always wanted to travel and see the world.
Yet she realised that she also had a strong need for security.
She did well at subjects like geography and foreign languages at school which reflected her interests in other countries and cultures.
Karen realised that her goal was to find a job which was challenging and interesting and which provided her with opportunities for foreign travel.
Once she had identified her goals she, together with her BTEC Course Tutor at her College, chose options on the National Diploma which allowed her to pursue these aims.
She studied, among other option units, Travel and Tourism, Economic Geography and French.
Karen made application early in the second year of the course to a number of major national travel companies as an overseas representative.
She undertook work experience with a tour operator to find out whether the reality matched her expectations.
She found that establishing her own goals based on her needs made studying that much easier and gave a purpose to the activities and assignments she was asked to do on the course.
Karen found a job with a major travel company after she completed her course.
The study skills she had learnt were certainly of value — six weeks before she went on her first overseas assignment her company put her through a crash course in Greek!
Thinking and Creativity
A major aspect of any course of study is the development of your powers of reasoning and thinking.
One of the main set of attributes looked for by employers in their recruits is their ability to find interesting, creative and workable solutions to problems.
Before we discuss how you can develop your creative powers, we need to make a distinction between two different but related activities —THINKING and LEARNING .
There are many people who are scared of thinking as an activity.
They believe that creative thought is only for clever people.
This is not the case.
Thinking is a skill and like any other it can be developed and improved through practice.
Traditional academic courses stress learning.
If you take a degree in English Literature or International Relations, you will do so with the intention of learning about the subject.
That is to say, your study will provide you with the knowledge that is generally accepted as making up the subject.
This is true to some extent on a Business Studies course, but learning about commercial activity is only a part of your studies.
What is different about a vocational course is that you are also expected to be creative and to produce new ideas, novel applications and improved methods of doing things.
In short, you will he required to apply the principles of thinking on a regular and systematic basis.
Of course, thinking and learning are necessarily intertwined.
Thinking requires prior knowledge and learning — it makes little sense to reinvent the wheel — but too much emphasis on learning what has been the case can inhibit the growth of thinking about how to do things in unusual and interesting ways.
Business courses place an importance on creative thought because it is new ideas which keep a business ahead of its competition.
Often problems seem intractable because the same solutions are tried time and time again  without success, whereas what is needed is a new approach and fresh thinking.
Critical and creative thinking
There are two main forms of thinking —critical and creative .
Both are powerful in their own way, but each has a different purpose and a different end.
Academic study has tended to emphasise critical thought as the natural companion to learning a subject.
Students are often asked to criticise such and such an author's views, or to appraise critically the outcome of a particular idea or thought.
It is important to subject views, ideas and actions to thorough examination.
It exposes flaws and loopholes; and, by analysis, contradictions are highlighted and the limitations of proposals are exposed.
As a method of thought it is important as it helps to prevent had ideas or decisions from being implemented.
The purpose of critical appraisal is to show up the effects of a proposal before time and effort are invested in putting an idea into action.
Creative thinking is the process of developing new ideas, new inventions and novel ways of doing things.
It often involves looking at problems afresh and giving serious consideration to ideas which have traditionally been regarded as impossible or is practicable.
Critical thinking is, however, essentially negative as it seeks to dissect and not to build.
Creative thinking is different and it is the process of dreaming up new schemes and finding solutions to problems.
A good illustration of the difference between the two types of thought is given by the two National Diploma students who had analysed what they wanted from a job when they had finished at college.
They came up with a vision of work that offered them a challenge, was interesting and in which they were in charge.
Many of their friends were critical .
They did not think that these qualities could be found in a job for college leavers — Well perhaps interest and challenge, but not being in charge.’
For the two students some creative thinking provided the solution — to set up in business of their own.
Many people shy away from creative thinking.
Its application does put its exponents in the firing line of critical appraisal.
There are those who feel uncomfortable with the exposure critical thinking brings.
It does, however, have its consolations because developing new ideas can be a stimulating and exciting experience, especially if they come to fruition.
There is another reason for the reluctance to indulge in creative thinking and that is because it is often confused with original thought.
The very idea  of coming up with something so novel that no one has thought of it is daunting.
The truth is that most creative thinking is not of this magnitude.
Instead it involves such things as finding new uses for old products or showing how solutions considered impracticable can be made to work.
There are organisations which take a positive approach to creative thinking and build it into their staff development structure by organising creative days or even weeks.
During these, competitions may be held for ideas which will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the organisation.
Every employee is encouraged to produce ideas and no suggestion, however small, is rejected without serious consideration.
Sections and departments hold brainstorming sessions and posters are displayed to encourage the climate of innovation.
The purpose is to create a permanent creative thinking culture in which all employees, regardless of grade and status, come to regard thinking as an essential element of their role.
Brainstorming
The Secretarial Section of a Business Studies Department was concerned about the rising cost of the paper which the students used during their typewriting practice.
Ideas were sought to find a solution.
The thought which came most readily was to restrict the amount of paper which each student could use and to force them to be more economical with it.
However, this was seen as a rather negative solution to the problem and so another more positive approach was tried —brainstorming .
Staff and students sat down together to engage in an exercise in creative thought.
The rules were simple — do not analyse the problem, just devise solutions.
All ideas, however unusual, would be considered.
Fifteen minutes were put aside for this activity and over twenty-five suggestions were recorded, although some were overlapping.
Here is a selection:
‘Charge all students a small sum of money each year to cover the paper they use.’
‘Put all the waste paper through a shredder and sell it in the college shop as bedding for rabbits and guinea pigs.’
‘Find a sponsor for the Secretarial Section — perhaps a local employment agency or a paper manufacturer.’
‘Reorganise the practice office so that the students do ‘live work’ instead of assignments.
A charge could be made for the work carried out and this could offset the cost of the paper.’
‘Form a parent/student association to organise social and fund-raising activities.‘
‘Cease purchasing typewriters and in future buy word processors so that most corrections can be done on the screen.’
This example shows what can be done by brainstorming.
The purpose is to be creative.
No idea is ruled out during the period of the brainstorming.
A brainstorming session is devoted to creative thought.
Generally, speaking, as brainstorming sessions get underway the ideas start to flow and one person's good idea stimulates another person's thoughts.
What often starts as a trickle finishes up as a torrent of new ideas.
Ten or fifteen minutes is usually long enough for the activity.
It is only at the end of a session when creativity is exhausted that the results are subjected to criticism and appraisal and an attempt is made to analyse what has been suggested.
It helps to carry out this activity in a group but individuals can use the method with equal success.
The idea of a brainstorming session is to look forward.
All ideas, however absurd, should be expressed.
A variant on this approach is lateral thinking , made famous by Edward de Bono.
This involves making random leaps and jumps in thinking in order to develop novel ways of problem solving.
Logic and precision are put aside and the final solution is more important than the steps which lead to it.
The basis of lateral thinking is to be provocative with your ideas and to put them forward however bizarre or ridiculous they sound on first hearing.
The idea that supermarkets should be built on green field sites out of town rather than in the High Street would have seemed absurd only a few years ago.
Key words
A useful way of developing creative thinking and one which can be of great benefit when you are studying and looking for inspiration is the technique of key words or key terms .
This technique is also known as word association or the association of ideas .
The idea is simply to take the subject or problem with which you are dealing and write it in the centre of a piece of blank paper.
The next stage is to jot down every idea or word which comes into your mind which you associate with it.
It is, of course, only brainstorming by another name but, by creating the planetary diagrams which are a fundamental part of the technique, you find that certain patterns of thought start to emerge.
You may, for example, have been given an assignment to do on the organisation of a business.
When you look at it you realise that organisation can mean a variety of things — which is the one that you are expected to write about?
This is where the key word technique can be of value.
Write the word organisation in the centre of a blank sheet  of paper and map everything that you associate with it which comes into your mind.
As with brainstorming, do not reject anything at this stage.
It is only after you have the key words on paper that you can begin to structure them.
This idea is of great benefit in examinations.
Many students find it useful to spend two or three minutes drawing a key words map for the questions they intend to answer.
The very act of brainstorming often throws up the structure of the answer as well as the main points which it is necessary to cover.
Managing your Time
In order to make a success of study, you need to learn how to manage your time.
Time is limited.
Take out of a typical day the classes you must attend, the time spent travelling, the hours you sleep, the eating, shopping, meeting friends, relaxing, watching television, listening to music and all the other activities of a busy day, and there is not much time left for study.
Students and business people alike are faced with the challenge of making the best use of their time.
You should think of time as a resource and, like any resource, it can be squandered or utilised in an effective and efficient manner.
We are certain that you will be aware of how some people are able to achieve more than others, cram so much more into a working day, and do it with seemingly little effort.
Those who have this skill are usually no brighter or cleverer than others but they do have an element in their make up which others lack — they are organised.
The key to successful time management is knowing what you want to achieve, how much it means to you, and how much of your time and energy you are prepared to devote to it.
Successful time management allows you to do more than merely cope with your study or your work in the office.
It can provide you with time itself.
One essential ingredient of organising your work is to be able to put aside enough time in the day for thought and reflection.
This is both a luxury and a necessity.
It is a necessity because it provides the opportunity for reflection on how well you have carried out various tasks and whether there are better ways of doing things.
It allows you to check that you have not forgotten to do essential jobs and, if you have, it provides the chance to rectify the mistake.
But good time management also gives the luxury for future planning.
Looking forward is a theme in many areas of this book.
Life is more interesting if you are able to guide your own destiny, and this is only possible if you can find the time to plan.
Logging your time
Many people operate in a haphazard way.
They give little thought to, what they have to do in a day and how long each task may take.
They do not set themselves objectives to achieve.
In consequence they are often disappointed with how they have spent their time or with what they have achieved.
If you are in this category and want to get out of it.
or if you want to improve your organisation, then keeping a time log is a good place to start.
It is very easy to do.
It consists of a record of all the things you do in a day and, in order for it to be of value, you need to log every activity you are engaged in for at least one week, if not for two.
The very activity of keeping a log focuses attention on how you have used your time.
You need to be honest with yourself and ask whether your time has been used profitably.
Do not be concerned that a part of your day is given up to relaxation and leisure.
These are necessary and you cannot spend all of your time studying.
What you need to do is to decide how much time study requires and then find the time in the day to do it.
Some people are dismayed when they first start to keep a log.
If this happens to you, do not be concerned.
Most people could make better use of their time and the whole idea of the log is to provide the information and stimulus for improvement.
The important thing is to be happy with what you are doing with your life.
If you are content with what you do then this is all that matters.
If, on the other hand, you are not, then you need to make the effort and change the priority you give to the organisation of time.
Keeping a log and a study diary (described in the previous chapter) are useful disciplines.
People who keep regular diaries find that the records  become a source of motivation.
You start to see a pattern developing in your study and you do not want to let yourself down by not studying today.
A filofax can be more useful than a conventional diary as an aid to time management.
Filofaxes have a loose-leaf format and have a wide range of inserts which include diaries, note pages, ‘to do’ lists, addresses and telephone numbers, entries for personal goals, and personal finance.
They allow for cross-referencing and can provide you with a ready guide to your goals and the tasks you need to do to carry them out.
Activity: ‘A time log’
Keep a detailed log of your activities during the next two weeks.
You will need to be disciplined and honest in keeping it.
At the end of the fortnight, write an Action Plan for the way you intend to use your time during the next two weeks.
You should continue to keep the time log to see whether the actual use of time conforms to the goals you set in the Action Plan.
Negotiation on work schedules
At the start of your course you will he provided with a schedule informing you how many assignments you will be expected to do, with the dates for them to be handed out and collected in.
In the previous section we suggested that you devise a simple diary to log in these assignments.
If you do this you are unlikely to face the problem of forgetting about work and having inadequate time to do an assignment justice.
Nevertheless, one problem which faces all students is that however well they plan, they may still fall behind with their work.
It is not always their fault.
Illness or a domestic problem can be the cause.
If this happens to you, do not panic.
Worry causes stress, and this in turn can make the problem worse.
You need restful sleep for any study and this does not happen if you are suffering from stress.
Many students do not realise that they can negotiate alterations to assignment deadlines if they run into difficulties.
If you are behind we recommend you do this.
It is an important aspect of proper time management.
If you realise that you cannot make the schedule, then you need to negotiate a realistic alternative.
But remember that you will be under pressure after the negotiation, as the work has to be completed.
It is at this point that proper forward planning and the use of the time log become of crucial importance.
Priorities and objectives
Forward planning consists simply of working out what you have to do to make a success of your course, working out how much time you require to complete the tasks and then breaking those tasks down into weekly schedules.
Within each schedule you need to identify the priorities and to make certain that you give them their due weight and tackle them first.
All of us have a tendency to put off the difficult tasks or those we dislike.
You will need to be honest with yourself when setting priorities because on occasions the most important tasks may be the ones you feel least disposed towards.
It is important to put the plan in writing.
The very act of writing it out clarifies what you need to do and provides you with an agenda to work towards.
You should use the plan as a checklist for your future activities and as a monitoring document to show you how you performed against the plan.
Managing paperwork
One of the most difficult tasks is to manage paperwork.
We have already stressed the need for you to keep your notes and assignments in properly labelled and categorised loose-leaf folders.
But you also need to learn at an early stage how to manage the paperwork on your desk.
If you develop good habits they will stand you in good stead in your business and managerial career.
They will also save you hundreds and perhaps thousands of valuable hours!
Here are some simple rules for managing paper:
1.
Sort paperwork out into priority piles.
You cannot do everything at the same time.
Some things need to be dealt with first and others are of lower priority and can wait.
Sort mail out into three piles — urgent, important and ‘ c-drawer ’.
The  c-drawer is literally a desk  drawer .
Put into the  c-drawer items that do not require replies.
There are not enough hours in the day to attempt to deal with everything.
Do not throw correspondence away just in case you were wrong and it is important.
From time to time the  c-drawer will need weeding and material should either be filed or thrown away.
You should deal with your paperwork in the priority piles you have established.
This is easier said than done.
Items can be high priority but are uninteresting, time consuming or difficult to resolve.
Nevertheless, it is important to do them first.
Important items which are left have a habit of preying on the mind.
You should apply the same rule to your assignments.
Look at the hand-in dates and do the ones that have to be handed in first, not the ones you feel are most interesting.
2.
Keep your desk clear.
When you start work your desk should be clear of paper.
This enables you to keep your mind on the task in hand.
It aids concentration, and can increase efficiency.
Time is not wasted by the temptation to work on other papers and you do not feel ‘bogged down’ by the amount of work you have to do.
As you work your desk should remain tidy and unnecessary paper disposed of.
3.
Handle each piece of paper only once.
For many people there is a temptation to sift through the urgent and important in-trays again looking for the work which they know they can deal with quickly and easily.
The more complex correspondence is left until later, sometimes very much later, when of course it is even more difficult to deal with because of the delay.
Do not put down a letter or a memo until you have dealt with it.
The reason is simple, if you have taken the trouble to read it the content is fresh in your mind and so it is easier to find a reply.
There are, of course, exceptions to the rule.
There are times when an item requires more thought but they should be few and far between.
Disposing of letters and memos in a decisive way is a good habit.
SECTION II
COMMUNICATION
What is Communication?
Communication has a number of different but related meanings:
Communication is the process of passing messages — ideas, information, beliefs — from one person to another person(s).
This can take a multiplicity of forms including signals, gestures, speech, letters, telex, telephone, morse code, fax, television and radio.
Communication is the name given to transport and travel facilities which enable people and goods to move from one place to another.
We talk about ‘channels of communication’ when we discuss air travel or the proposed fixed rail link being, constructed under the English Channel.
It includes road, rail, air and sea transport.
Communication in this sense is not a topic of discussion in this book, although it will form an element of your course in the Organisation in its Environment unit.
Communication is a means of spreading news, ideas, propaganda, advertising and entertainment to large, often multi-national, audiences.
The mass media embrace newspapers, books, magazines, radio, television, theatre, video and film.
Communication of data via computerised and electronic means is a relatively new mode of communications but one which in the space of about thirty years has revolutionised the way in which we use, store and transmit information and data.
It has opened up.
via satellite and telecommunication links, sophisticated means of communication for a vast range of purposes including the control of spacecraft, weather forecasting and news transmission, and has provided us with vast and easily accessible data banks.
Analysing communication — the theory
How do we communicate?
What is the process and what happens when people give and exchange messages?
The communication process
The mechanics of communications are:
sender — transmitter
signal-code
channel-receiver
Let us consider a simple situation.
A person (the message sender) enters a room and sees another person he or she recognises, and decides to send a recognition signal to them.
The message or signal has to be ‘encoded’.
The sender has a choice of means.
The message could be spoken —‘hello Jill’— or a non-verbal media could be employed — a wave.
It is conceivable that the sender could set up a board and easel and compose a poem to signal to another, or write a message on a piece of paper and make a paper aeroplane to fly across the room.
But, of course, many of our means of communication are instinctive and we have practised them so frequently since childhood that we choose the means of encoding a message almost without thought.
This is the case with our recognition example.
On other occasions the encoding process might be the result of a great deal of consideration.
We often have to decide ‘shall I write or would it be better to explain the matter in person…?
The important part of the communication process is to encode the message in such a way that the receiver understands the message and the  meaning behind it.
It is important that we achieve our objective because misunderstandings may lead to embarrassment, hurt, anger or rejection.
Many modes of communication may serve the purpose but we will need to, choose one which is personally and socially acceptable, and does not provoke anger, surprise, or obscure the message.
We might enter the room and sing our greeting accompanied by a few dance steps, but ask yourself whether the message might not be obliterated by the way our actions would be interpreted.
The signal has to be seen as one which is appropriate for putting our message across.
Let us assume that in the split second that it took our sender to walk into the room and to recognise another person, a decision was made to smile.
The smile is then a signal of recognition.
The process of communication does not end here.
You have probably experienced smiling at someone you know closely followed by embarrassment, surprise and rejection when they did not recognise you, and instead of receiving the expected smile in return you were met by a blank stare.
Your signal has to be decoded and understood by the receiver.
The smile has to be understood by the other person as what it was meant to be — a friendly greeting.
It is at this point that things often go wrong and communication breakdowns occur.
Other people cannot act on your message unless they have understood it.
The problem is that understanding is a personal process and depends on so many different factors.
We decode messages in personal, social and cultural contexts.
If a person walks into a room and says ‘bonjour’, our decoding process and actions will depend on whether we understand sufficient French to decode the message successfully and reply appropriately.
Very many misunderstandings occur because messages are decoded in ways in which they were not intended to be.
We have to be aware of this possibility and, if we find that we are being misunderstood, find another means of expressing ourselves.
If our smile does not receive a response we may try a more straightforward communication —‘hello Jill, it's good to see you again.’
Once the receiver has decoded the message and interpreted it, they must then decide how to act upon it.
Once the smile has been interpreted as a greeting, the receiver has to decide on an appropriate means of feedback .
The process of feedback follows the same pattern of encoding, signalling and decoding.
The art of communication is to know how your message is being received by others and how to respond to the messages you receive.
From this discussion the following conclusions can be drawn about the nature of communications:
Communication is a two way process .
It requires a sender and a receiver.
Appropriate signals have to be employed if a message is to be understood.
Even in simple communication there is plenty of room for error, ambiguity and uncertainty.
For this reason you have to be aware of the effect which your communication has on other people.
If you have not been understood, you have not communicated.
Communication barriers
A popular phrase is ‘know what I mean?’
Perhaps the reason why so many people say it or use the other favourite, ‘yoU know’, at the end of sentences is that they are uncertain whether other people understand them.
‘I am always misunderstood’ is another common cry for help.
If people do not understand you, is it their fault or yours?
Why is the message not reaching its audience and can you do anything to change things so that it does'?
The answer to the first part of the question is that communication problems can be caused both by the sender and the receiver, but if you are frequently misinterpreted you may need to think about the message and the manner in which it is being transmitted.
Barriers to communications are common and they cause misunderstanding, frustration, hurt and anger.
There are people who blame most of the problems in human affairs on communication failures, and they have a point.
It may be an over-simplification, but imagine the improvement to our daily lives if everyone always understood everyone else, and it our speech and actions were always interpreted in the way we intended.
Listed below are some of the more common communication blocks and barriers:
The receiver is not listening .
This is one of the most common reasons tor communication failure.
We are often so anxious to talk, to express our views or to make our point, that we often fail to listen to what is being said to us.
If we return to the theory we started with, we will realise that we have not even bothered to decode the message.
Listening is an important skill and one we all need to develop.
Being a good listener is not only useful because you will hear what others miss, but you will find that people will tell you things that they shield from others.
(For a further discussion on listening see pages 33 to 35.)
The sender and the receiver are speaking different languages .
This may be the case literally when a French speaker has to communicate with a non-French speaker but, even within a common language, usage varies enormously.
Accent, tone, fluency and vocabulary can affect the ability of sender and receiver to understand or to be understood.
We are all aware of the problems of trying to understand a complex document written for a specialist audience.
The sender and receiver have different expectations .
The words may carry our meaning, but the receiver may be expecting something else from them and interprets accordingly.
We may be expecting a promotion at work.
We are called into our boss's office, which heightens our expectations —‘this must be it’ we think.
The boss congratulates us about the handling of a recent matter and the interview ends.
We leave the room feeling let down and the boss, no doubt, feels much the same.
If we analyse this scenario we can see why the manager might be surprised about the encounter.
The manager was giving praise but in return was met with disappointment and a long face.
What cannot be known are the thoughts or expectations in someone else's mind.
Oral communications
The greater part of most people's communication is oral.
This is as true for the business world as it is in our leisure moments.
And yet most people give little thought to their use of the spoken word.
A few people take elocution or voice projection and control lessons, but this is usually because they are interested in a career on the stage, rather than because they want to improve their communication skills.
Ask the average person how much time they put into training their voice or obtaining feedback about the effect of their voice on others, and they will probably consider you to be a little mad.
Your voice and your use of language are parts of your personality but you must not think of them as something fixed —‘something you are born with’.
Like your personality, your speaking voice can grow and develop if you want it to.
When you enter the business world you will be expected to take part in an array of situations which call for specialised oral communications.
In order to make a success of your business career you need to be prepared to work hard at oral skills.
The list of oral skills required for business is long, but for the purposes of illustration some of the more important are listed below:
Taking an active part in committee meetings
Giving speeches and making presentations
Persuading others to our point of view 
Negotiating for contracts, deals, etc.
Convincing other people of the worth of your ideas
Selling the company's goods and services
Holding business telephone conversations
Making video presentations
Taking part in appraisal interviews
Holding counselling or welfare interviews
Giving instructions
Training others
Entertaining customers and clients
Each of these situations requires a different set of oral skills, a variety of language use and different ways of speaking.
It is only with thought, practice and feedback that the necessary skills can be acquired.
Language is a social phenomenon.
While people do have private languages with which to communicate with themselves or others close to them, the main purpose of language is to communicate with others.
The effectiveness of your oral communication depends on whether your use of language has the desired effect.
The questions which follow are designed to help you assess your oral communication skills:
Do other people always listen to what you have to say?
Do other people always understand you and act on your suggestions?
Do you use the right tone and the right words with which to express yourself or do you find yourself tongue-tied?
Are you able to express your emotions and feelings freely when necessary?
Can you confidently speak in a range of different situations, such as on the telephone, while dictating or on video film, and move easily from one to another?
Is your voice loud enough to be heard on all occasions?
Your answers to these questions are important.
Without skills such as these, your career progress will be slower than you might hope for.
Some of you might hide behind the idea that you are ‘shy’.
You may be shy,but good oral communications are a key business skill .
If you are not confident in speaking in a range of different situations then you need practice.
You will be given plenty of practice on the course but you must take every opportunity to build on your strengths and overcome your weaknesses.
Remember that language is a shared activity and that you will only be able to put your message across if you can speak easily and fluently.
Qualities of speech
Speech is immediate and flexible
Speech is the best medium of communication in many situations.
In the vast majority of face-to-face situations we communicate via speech backed up by non-verbal gestures and signs.
Speech is, of course, quick and flexible.
It is easy to switch from a serious and formal business discussion to a jovial telephone conversation and back again.
It allows us to express emotions, explain abstract ideas, ask questions, seek out information, cross-question, tell jokes, make an impression upon others, and a hundred and one other things.
Our business and personal lives depend upon being able to use words successfully.
Speech lacks permanence
Although speech is immediate and flexible, it lacks permanence.
With modern recording techniques we are able to capture the spoken word but the majority of speech dies as soon as the sound waves our voice creates fade.
Speech does, of course, live on in memory but, as we all know, memory can be very unreliable.
For this reason, we need in business to record what has been said.
The deliberations of formal committee meetings are always recorded in the form of Minutes.
Parliamentary proceedings are written up and published in the daily Hansard .
It is often useful to make detailed notes after important meetings, interviews and telephone conversations.
You will find with experience that this will save endless arguments about what was really said and agreed.
Alternatively, you can make an oral record if you have a dictation machine.
Speech provides opportunities for tone and variety
The spoken word has vast opportunities for variety by the use of tone, stress, inflexion and in the way that our words are delivered.
Accent, dialect and the register of our voice (whether we use formal or informal language) all add to the variety, as does our use of idioms and colloquialisms.
Accent and dialect can give rise to all sorts of difficulties.
Dialects are forms of the language which have certain different words, meanings or sentence constructions from the rest of the language.
Dialects like that of the ‘Geordies’ of north-east England use words like ‘canny’, ‘bairn’, ‘alreet’in place of those more usually employed in Standard English.
Dialects are spoken with pronounced regional accents.
Accents vary the way in which words are pronounced.
English as a language has given rise to a very large number of accents; we recognise national accents for those countries where English is the predominant language — Australian, American, New Zealand, British, Irish accents for example.
And within those countries there is a wide variety of accents.
This is particularly true of Britain itself.
In Britain, accent has a number of origins which may be regional, social or ethnic.
We easily recognise Yorkshire, Scots and Welsh accents, but it is also possible to detect a person's social class by listening to his or her speech.
Some accents, like that of London Cockney, are both regional and social.
Britain is a country of immigration and many recent immigrant groups speak English with their own accents.
It is often possible to tell which part of the world people come from just by listening to them talk, whether it is from Poland, Jamaica, Pakistan or Hong Kong.
There is no one right way of pronouncing or speaking English.
Some people believe that ‘BBC English —— that form of English properly called ‘Received  Pronunciation ’— is the correct way of speaking.
Certainly, received  pronunciation does have a dominance in certain circles, particularly in the worlds of the mass media, education and commerce.
Because of this cultural dominance it is often seen to be ‘proper English’ with other ways of speaking judged as inferior.
Fortunately, the bias against other accents and dialects has waned in recent years and today they are appreciated for the variety they bring to the language.
The important point to bear in mind is — can you be understood ?
Language is a means of communication and if other people cannot understand your speech then you will have to think carefully about modifying the way you speak.
Delivery, tone, intonation and stress are important for adding interest to what we say.
The well thought out pause can be used to hold the listener's attention.
Stressing important words in a sentence again is an aid to understanding.
People will soon stop listening to a monotonous voice.
Tone provides the context to the words.
Light and humorous delivery for breezy topics, whereas deeper and serious tones for grave and important matters are in order.
Speech allows for colloquialism and slang
Whereas when we write we have to conform to fairly strict rules of grammar, when we speak we have more choice in the way we employ language.
All of us have an informal way of speaking when we are with friends and in social settings.
We may employ slang terms or colloquialisms — and English has a rich and constantly changing vocabulary of such words and phrases.
Some find themselves into formal language while others remain always in the realm of slang.
There is nothing wrong with  using slang.
The important point here, as everywhere, is only to use it when it is appropriate.
Some people use informal language as their ordinary language and so run into difficulties when they come up against, formal and official situations.
In such circumstances their use of slang and informal language may make them seem rather stupid in the eyes of others.
Being able to know what is required and when to use particular forms of language is an important skill.
You develop it by the subject of our next section — listening.
Listening
When you hear the words LISTEN and LISTENER , what words do you associate with them?
Here is a possible list:
hearing
concentration
understanding
silence
caring
attention
concern
thoughtful
sympathetic
trusting
receptive
interest
thought
study
application
pay heed to
The words in this list are of two types.
The first are words which describe the process of listening — hearing, concentration, silence.
The second are words which describe the feeling which we have about people who listen.
We describe listeners as caring, understanding, trusting and sympathetic individuals.
Listening is an important skill for two reasons.
Firstly, it enables you to know and to analyse what others are saying.
The better your listening skills the better your understanding of what is being said to you.
You will also have a better recall of what has been said.
This will mean that you will be in possession of more information and facts than people who pay scant attention to what is being said.
Secondly, if you listen carefully you are more likely to make the right responses to what is being said to you.
If you do not listen your responses may be ‘off beam’ and you may appear to others to be rather stupid.
Also, if you listen, people will come to trust you.
You will find that people will confide in you and tell you their secrets and unveil their emotions if you are prepared to listen to them.
Listeners are usually caring and sympathetic people.
Listening is not just an important communication skill.
It is also a major social skill.
A person who listens shows that he or she has time for others.
Listening and hearing
There is an important distinction between listening and hearing.
We hear a wide range of noises all day and every day but we only listen to those to which we wish to pay attention.
Listening is the conscious act of paying attention to a sound.
When we listen we analyse, formulate judgements, commit to memory and learn.
We are looking for understanding by listening to something or someone.
For this reason, listening is an important part of the learning process, and that process should continue throughout life.
The development of listening skills is important for your personal and business life.
Improving listening skills
You may say ‘Surely I do not need to learn how to listen, I have been doing it all my life.’
Of course you have, but do not confuse hearing with listening.
To improve your listening abilities, with all its attendant benefits, you must be prepared to learn how to do it.
The following guide may be useful to you.
You should:
Set aside times for positive listening practice.
As a student you have a perfect opportunity — use your lectures.
Radio broadcasts are another good means, but you should also try listening to the television.
Television is such a visual medium that we all tend to concentrate on the images and not the words.
Select a programme and concentrate on the dialogue for a change.
Take notes during your positive listening sessions.
Not only do notes provide a record that can be referred to, but they also act as a check on how well you are listening.
If you are not listening, you cannot take notes.
Make it a habit always to go to a lecture or a meeting with a pen and paper and take notes.
Those of you who are taking shorthand units will be doing a lot of listening practice and you will have plenty of opportunities to improve your skills.
Concentrate on what is being said and do not allow yourself to be distracted by whatever else is going on.
It is easy to start daydreaming, looking out of the window, or concentrating on other things such as the speaker's facial expressions or clothes.
You need to make the effort to put your energy into the task in hand and to listen to what is being said.
Listen with a purpose — why are you listening to this lecture?
Set yourself an objective and then use your listening session to achieve it.
A useful goal is to obtain maximum benefit out of each lecture or meeting.
It is surprising how many people waste their time in class by not concentrating, and then have to go over the same ground again at home.
Positive listening is a means of becoming a more effective student.
Enter into the spirit of positive listening .
Ask questions during and at the end of classes.
This is an excellent way of learning but you can only obtain the material for the questions by listening.
Make it your goal to listen in, such a way that you ask at least one question by the end of each class.
It not only will make the learning more effective but it makes classes more interesting and fun.
Show others that you are listening to them .
Facial expressions and body posture can show a speaker that you are listening.
A smile, slight nods of the head, laughing at jokes, eye contact, all show the speaker that you care about what you are hearing.
This will stimulate the speaker and consequently make your listening more enjoyable.
One of the authors once taught a class who applauded at the end of classes they enjoyed.
The encouragement given made for a great rapport with the class and gave a stimulus to improve the lectures.
It also showed that the class listened.
How do you show your appreciation to others for things they do that you have enjoyed?
The Business Letter
One of the essential skills in business is the ability to write clear and informative letters.
Despite the use of the telephone and the growing importance of electronic mail, the letter remains the most important communications channel between the business and the outside world.
Why are letters so important and what makes letter writing such a key skill?
There are a number of answers to these questions.
The letter is an ambassador for an organisation
Every letter contains a message — it may confirm an order, complain about a late delivery or clarify a point — but it also does a great deal more.
As well as an explicit message, a letter contains an implicit one.
The readers find out about the kind of organisation they are dealing with.
A letter plays an ambassadorial role.
It is a key means of public relations.
The design of the logo and the letterhead, the feel of the paper, the layout of the letter.
the quality of the typing and the care with which English is used, all give the reader a message about the organisation they are doing business with.
A well-written and crafted letter which is professionally presented will present a positive image both of the writer and of the organisation.
The letter must be able to convey its message to the reader
The purpose of a letter is to convey information and ideal to another person or persons.
To do this successfully, care and thought must be given to the choice of words and phrases and to the tone and style.
Letters are a record of what has or has not been agreed or said by various parties
In business, copies of every letter mailed are kept in a file to record what was said and what was agreed.
Similarly, letters received are filed for the same purpose.
One of the major advantages of letters over telephone conversations is that they provide a permanent record.
What are business letters for?
The purposes for which business letters are used are many but some of the most important are listed below:
Making complaints.
Answering letters of complaint (letters of adjustment).
Making and answering enquiries.
Requesting and providing information.
Tendering and confirming quotations.
Providing references.
Sending condolences.
Selling and advertising (mail-shots).
Providing introductions.
Applying for jobs.
Requesting payment.
Stationery
All organisations use printed stationery.
The reasons for this are simple but important:
Printed stationery saves time and effort by not having to reproduce standard material such as addresses and telephone numbers.
Printed stationery ensures that every item of correspondence conforms to the requirements of the law.
Printed stationery provides a means of projecting the organisation's image to its customers and clients.
Printed stationery ensures that there is a degree of conformity in the correspondence which leaves the organisation.
Corporate identity and logos
An essential clement of the layout is the printed format of the paper, known as the letterhead .
Nowadays, the printing is not just confined to the head of the paper.
The purpose of the letterhead is to produce a corporate  identity .
This is to give a particular impression of the organisation to its public.
It is usual for a company to have a policy on its corporate image and to carry this image through to all its publicly available printed materials such as price lists, brochures and leaflets, visiting cards, compliments slips, envelopes and display boards and signs.
The most important part of the corporate identity, after the name of the organisation itself, is the logo .
A logo is a visual symbol which seeks to communicate a simple message to the public in such a way that it is instantly recognisable and memorable.
Just try thinking of Coca Cola or Pepsi Cola and you probably think of their distinctive logos.
The publishers of this book, Macmillan Education, use a large M as their logo and you will find it displayed on the base of the spine of this book.
Virtually every organisation, large or small, uses a logo to express its identity to the public.
Your college will have its logo on its prospectus, application forms and headed letter paper.
It is usual to design a logo around the organisation's name or an abbreviation of it.
Activity: ‘Logos’
You should design a series of logos for your College, its Department of Business Studies, and for three or four of the companies prominent in your area.
Do not worry that they already have logos.
In addition to the actual design, you should include a short statement of why you chose a particular design, what message it seeks to convey, and the type of image it is portraying.
Statutory requirements
The law has a deal to say about what information should be contained on a business letter.
The person receiving a letter from a company must be given a degree of information about the organisation which they are dealing with.
The nature of the legal requirement depends upon the type of organisation it is.
Sole traders and partnerships must conform with the Business Names Act 1985.
This states that the following information must be given in legible characters on all business letters, written orders, invoices, receipts and demands for payment:
The name of each partner, if the business is a partnership.
The name of the individual carrying on a business as a sole trader.
Companies must comply with the Companies Act 1985 and display the following information on their stationery:
The company's name.
The company's place of registration and the number with which it is registered.
The address of the registered office.
Its status as a limited company — for example, Ltd, Plc.
For any limited company exempt from the obligation to use the word ‘limited’ as part of its name, the fact that it is a limited company.
This normally applies to private companies limited by guarantee.
The Business and Technician Education Council is such a company and you should ask your course tutor to see one of their communications to see how they display their limited liability status.
Companies do not have to list their directors on their stationery, but if they do they must list the full name (or the surname and initials of forenames) of every individual and corporate director.
Other essential information and stationery style
In addition to the requirement to conform to the law, all business stationery should usually display the following information:
The address of the company, including the postcode (or the address of the branch, factory or site to which replies should be sent).
The telephone, telex and fax numbers.
References.
The company's reference is usually marked Our ref:, the customer's as Your ref:.
With so much information required in a business letter, the style of the printed material is of importance.
The style needs to be clear, uncluttered, informative and one that projects the company image in a positive fashion.
The other essential is to make certain that there is sufficient space on which the text of the letter can be typed.
The last point sounds simple but some organisations do become so carried away with logos and elaborate art work that well over half the area of the printed page is unavailable for typed material.
There are organisations which prefer plain matter of fact styles, while others favour elaborate designs and layouts.
It is becoming a measure of good practice to find an uncluttered style and not to overburden stationery with heavy dark ink and dominating logos.
To create this light style, the company address and other essential information can be relegated to the bottom of the page.
This leaves just the name and the logo, or perhaps just the logo at the top of the sheet.
How to lay out a business letter
There are a number of conventions which you need to master for laying out a business letter.
You should note that there is no single correct business letter layout.
The convention you follow may be a matter of personal choice but nowadays it is more likely to he a matter of company house-style.
An organisation will specify that all its letters must be typewritten on headed paper and use, say, a fully blocked, open punctuation style.
If you work for an organisation which dictates a house-style, then you must conform to it in your correspondence, but you should remember that there are a number of equally valid alternatives.
The conventions of letter writing, like the conventions of language, change.
The changes reflect altering taste and also developments in technology.
Word processors electronic typewriters and printers tend to favour certain layouts over others.
Style of punctuation
Typewritten business letters have different conventions to handwritten letters.
The main difference is that a style has evolved known as open punctuation in which all punctuation outside of the main body of the letter is omitted.
Letters which are traditionally punctuated are said to have a closed punctuation style.
Open punctuation is a very popular style in business letters.
The reasons are based on both economy and style.
It saves time and effort on the part of the typist not to have to put commas at the end of each and every line of an address and full stops at the end of an address and after the date.
In addition, open punctuation makes the page look neater, cleaner and crisper.
Blocked and semi-blocked format
There are two conventions of layout in common use —semi-blocked and the more modern fully blocked format.
Remember, neither format is more correct than the other.
The choice of layout is a question of style and preference.
The semi-blocked letter (see figure 3) has the following features:
The date is situated on the right-hand side of the page in line with the address.
The paragraphs are indented, usually five spaces from the left-hand margin.
The complimentary close (yours sincerely/yours faithfully) is centred on the page.
The signature and the sender's name and title are centred.
The layout is fully punctuated.
The fully blocked letter (see figure 4) has the following features:
All typing begins on the left-hand margin.
The date is typed on the left-hand margin.
The layout will use open punctuation (that is, no punctuation).
This is done for neatness of presentation.
The content of the letter is punctuated.
There is a half-way house style known as the blocked format which starts all paragraphs on the left-hand side margin but leaves the date on the right and centres the complimentary close.
Salutations and complimentary closes
It is a strong convention to link the recipient's name and address to a particular salutation and complimentary close.
The usual practice is as follows:
If you are addressing a named person or persons — Joan Johnson, Mr A. B. Tiller, Mr and Mrs Smith — then the salutation will address them by name.
Dear Mrs Johnson or Dear Joan (depending on how well you know the person you are writing to)
If you are writing to a woman whose marital status you are unaware of, then the title Ms can be used.
The complimentary close when addressing a named person(s) is Yours sincerely .
A letter addressed to a close acquaintance — Dear John — can close with Kind regards or Best Wishes .
If you are addressing an organisation or a person known only to you by their title — the Head of Business Studies, The Metal Consortium PLC the Department of Health and Social Security — then the salutation will be Dear Madam if the recipient is known to be a woman and, traditionally, Dear Sir if the sex is unknown.
However, with so many women holding important positions we prefer the use of Dear Sir or Madam .
This shows consideration to the recipient.
Such letters will close with Yours faithfully .
References
It makes a great deal of sense to include a reference on all business letters.
Most business letters have printed on them
Our ref:(refers to outgoing mail)
Your ref:(refers to incoming mail)
The reason is to be able with ease to identify the sender of the letter, who typed it, and the file number if the organisation has one for a particular account.
Without references, letters may do the rounds of various desks before the correct destination is found.
This means that there will be a delay in dealing with the correspondence, which is bad for the sender, but also puts the organisation in a poor light.
The convention which usually governs references is to include the writer's initials followed by the initials of the person who typed it — ES/NS.
This may be followed by an account reference number ES/NS 1736()/N/164.
The recipients of the letter
On all business letters, the name (where known), title and address of the recipient of the letter is included.
This is to make it clear to whom the letter is intended, to ensure that the recipient has an address for further correspondence and to provide the address for window envelopes if they are being used.
Subject heading
Many writers add a subject heading to a letter on the line immediately below the salutation.
The reason for this is so that the recipient can see at a glance what the letter is about.
Most business people receive so much correspondence that it is difficult for them to deal with all their correspondence immediately on receipt.
Subject heading can be a guide to the importance of the content.
Dear Miss Hughes Installation of a Photocopier 
Designation and signature
Letters are always signed.
In some organisations all letters have to go out under the signature of a senior manager while in others designated employees can sign their own letters.
It is important for the recipient to know the name and the status of the sender of correspondence.
Because a signature may be difficult to decipher, the sender's name and title are always typed at the end of the letter.
You may have received a letter where the letters p.p. are written before the signature of the sender.
This means that the letter has been signed by another — the secretary or personal assistant — in the absence of their principal.
Figure 5 shows a general completed layout for a business letter.
Confidentiality
It is often the case that a letter is for the eyes of a particular person and nobody else.
The usual practice in most offices is for a post-clerk or secretary to open all the incoming mail and to place it in the in-tray of the  appropriate recipient.
If this is the case with confidential material, then there can be no guarantee that the secrecy of the material can be maintained.
To avoid this happening, confidential mail should have CONFIDENTIAL printed on the envelope and on the letter itself.
The latter is to remind the recipient of the letter's status.
Some organisations have a hierarchy of confidentiality — CONFIDENTIAL, PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL, STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL, TOP SECRET.
If you are sending a personal letter to a person at their place of employment and you wish that person only to open it, the envelope and letter should be marked PERSONAL.
Writing the letter
So far we have discussed the conventions of the layout of letters.
We now turn to the important business of composing appropriate letters.
We will start with the structure of the letter .
A business letter, like any piece of writing, will be best structured by working to a plan.
This will help ensure that the information will be presented in a sensible and logical order and that the necessary information is included.
The opening of the letter
A well-written business letter will start by putting its message into context.
The use of a subject heading is an aid to this.
It should be followed by stating the reason why the letter is being written and by acknowledging any previous correspondence Many openings are of a standard variety:
Thank you for your letter of the 17th February 19…concerning…
I have received your letter of…
I am replying to your letter of…
All of these introductions are personal and to the point.
Some writers employ the words ‘reference’ in some form such as‘With reference to your letter…’.
This is not recommended as it is impersonal.
Worse still is the use of the shortened form of reference ‘re’ as in ‘Re your letter of…’.
Even in a formal business letter you should use a personal and human form of address.
Of course, not all business letters are in reply to someone else's letter.
You may be initiating the correspondence.
If this is the case then the opening sentence must make your purpose clear:
I am applying for the post of…
I wish to place an order for…
I have pleasure in informing you of…
The body of the letter
The middle paragraph(s) of the letter gives the details of the business which has been introduced in the opening paragraph.
It may be the detailed description and prices of merchandise, details of a complaint, ideas for a new product, or whatever.
The important point is to write the information in a clear and logical fashion.
To help you do this it is useful to:
Keep sentences short.
It is easier to think clearly with short sentences than long ones.
Long sentences can become complicated and so obscure the message.
Use tabulated formats if you have a number of points to make.
Do not use unnecessary words.
‘I will be brief and to avoid further confusing the issue I intend…’— this is a trap which many writers fall into.
Phrases such as‘I must emphasise the importance…
‘, ‘I would also add…‘, are a waste of words and best avoided.
Come straight to the point and keep to the point are the golden rules of letter writing.
Do not say more than you have to.
Do not confuse your reader with technical terms or jargon.
If you have to use technical terms and you have any reason to believe that your reader may not understand them, then you should explain them.
Be careful in your choice of words.
If you can pick between a common and a less common word, always choose the common one.
Never show off in your use of words.
It does not impress the reader and it may obscure the message.
Concluding the letter
You need to make it clear to the recipient what it is you want of them.
This is the purpose of the letter's concluding paragraph:
Please deliver the goods to our Manchester office.
I expect the matter to be dealt with promptly.
Thank you, again, for inviting me.
It is usual to have a closing pleasantry, but you should only use them if they add to the letter in a positive manner: Please let me know if I can be of further assistance.
Do not hesitate to contact me if you require more information.
Tone and style
It is important to use language appropriately in business correspondence.
You cannot be informal when giving notice of dismissal or redundancy, or if you are writing a letter of condolence or complaint.
On the other hand a close business acquaintance will be surprised to receive a letter from you with a very formal tone.
There are a number of points to keep in mind when considering the appropriate style and tone of business letters:
Make certain that the style suits the subject.
If you are asking a favour you must be polite.
A complaint requires a forceful approach.
An order for goods should be factual and to the point.
A conciliatory tone should he adopted for a letter of adjustment.
Keep the reader in mind.
If you know the recipient, then your letter should be shaped to his or her personality and status.
This is particularly important if you have to convey technical information to someone you know not to be an expert.
It is easy to make the mistake of sounding pompous in business letters.
If you are clear who you are writing to and address them directly, the tone of your letter has a good chance of appropriately expressing your message.
Let your letter express your personality.
Business letters do not need always to be impersonal and formal.
If you are genuinely pleased to hear of someone's success, then say so.
If you are pleased to do business with a customer, then let the customer know of your pleasure.
You should be polite, tactful and helpful whenever possible.
It is easy to sound harsh and uncaring by using impersonal language.
If you are sorry that you cannot be of assistance, then you should say so.
If you can provide help and assistance in ways which are beneficial to a customer or client, then you should always do so.
And if you have to break an appointment or point out an error, then it is important to use phrases which are tactful and polite.
‘I am sorry to inform you that we no longer carry a stock of the spare parts you require.
I believe that A. J. Northwood & Sons is the closest dealer who may be able to help you.
Their address is…’
‘Please accept my apologies for having to cancel our meeting on the 24th January.
A matter has arisen requiring my personal attention.
I will phone you next week to arrange another date.’
‘I am sorry to inform you that your application for the post of…has been unsuccessful.’
Standard letters and paragraphs
You may find yourself writing a large number of similar letters on a regular basis.
If this is the case, then you may wish to compose a number of standard letters which can be sent as a matter of routine.
With the advent of word processors, the use of standard letters and paragraphs has been made easier.
But there are dangers as well as benefits to their use.
Many people in business mark their correspondence with a series of letters and numbers which are instructions to the typist to compose a letter from previously composed standard paragraphs.
A note on a piece of correspondence may read as follows —‘A (insert 12th March), B, D & E’.
Each letter would refer to a standard paragraph, although in paragraph A there is the need for the insertion of a date.
Standard letters of this kind are very useful as replies to stock enquiries.
A standard paragraph may not always reflect the tone required to deal with a particular enquiry; it may not be quite appropriate to particular circumstances and it may not feel right to the recipient.
Therefore, while there are many advantages in standard letters, they should be used with caution.
Activity: ‘Letter writing’
1.
Many of us become hot under the collar over local issues, whether it is poor transport services, an objection to the proposed siting of an amusement arcade opposite where we live, or the lack of sports and other social facilities.
Read the letters page of your local newspaper and become acquainted with the style, manner and length of letters written by other citizens.
When you have done this, compose a letter stating your views on an issue of your choice and with the intention of publication in your local paper.
2.
Your knowledge of organisations can always be improved by visits to see particular processes or operations in action.
Choose a business in your area which interests you and about whose products or services you would like to know more.
Write a letter to its Publicity Department requesting a visit and stating what it is you want to see and what you are hoping to find out.
Do not forget to include details of dates and times when you will be free to make your visit.
3.
As the end of your course approaches you will begin making job applications.
Preparation is one of the keys to success.
Using national newspapers, select at least one job which is of interest to you and then write a letter of application.
4.
The authors would welcome constructive comments and suggestions about this book and, in particular, about the various ‘activities’ contained in it.
Write a letter to us ‘c/o’ our Publisher.
The Memorandum
The memo is the life blood of the communications system of the organisation.
It is the main form of internal business correspondence and the means used to communicate the majority of written messages.
Most memos are still paper memos but increasingly they are sent electronically via computer networks.
The word ‘memorandum’ means a message which aids the memory.
As you will find out, they can be used for a variety of purposes and memos are produced in a number of formats.
The flexibility of the memo makes it the major form of internal communication.
The format of the memo
Brief memos are usually written on A5 size paper (148 x 210 millimetres) and larger and more complicated ones on A4 size paper (210 x 297 millimetres).
The following tables give the defining features of memos:
Format
Notes
To
From
Copies
Reference
Date
Subject
The Message
Reply
Signature(s)
The receiver(s)
The sender(s)
Often copies of memos are sent to other people for their reference.
The receiver must know who else is acquainted with the memo's contents
A memo may carry a reference which may consist of the sender's and typist's initials and/or a reference number 
Memos act as a record and must be dated
It is usual to write a short title to each memo in order that the reader can see what it is about at a glance
This should be as short as practicable, clear and to the point.
The use of a note format with numbered paragraphs helps to reduce reading time and aids understanding
Memos are often sent on pre-printed forms, many of which are divided in two.
The message is written on the left-hand side.
The receiver can write a reply on the right
In some organisations it is the practice to sign memos.
An example is shown in figure 6.
What are memos used for?
To inform others
To record Company policy decisions
To seek information
To place views on record
To confirm conversations and telephone conversations
To give instructions
They can be used to inform others of a wide variety of matters.
These are often communicated via official memorandums.
Some organisations colour-code their memos and have, say, yellow for policy memos, blue for information and white for all others.
Many memos are written to find out information from within the organisation.
It is often the case that a member of an organisation wishes to put views or ideas on record.
This can best be done by means of a written memo.
A memo is a clear means of recording the outcome of an oral discussion.
It is the case that, in all organisations, instructions need to be communicated.
The issuing of memos is a common means of give instructions.
Style
As memos are often short and written to others within the same organisation, the style that a memo is written in is not thought to matter.
In some situations, such as providing purely factual information, this may be the case, but insensitive memos have been known to have an adverse effect on the motivation of others and their willingness to carry out instructions.
The style which is employed will depend upon the intention of the writer:
Information giving
Memos which provide straightforward information can be written in an impersonal and formal style.
If the fire drill procedure is being altered, or the opening times of the staff canteen are being extended, then a  factual style is appropriate.
Memos of this type are often displayed on notice boards for general information.
Information seeking
The style for information giving is too often confused with information seeking.
The latter involves the recipient of the memo in additional work, whereas merely giving information does not.
When you want other people to do things for you, then style should be polite and you may need to persuade them to co-operate.
It is important to explain why the information is required.
Far too often those in authority expect others to obey and so use formal and even terse language when penning memos.
Subordinates will respond — they have to — but will do so in bad grace if they feel that they are not being properly treated.
Directing
There are a few occasions where it is absolutely necessary to issue a general instruction.
Formal language is required, and it may be necessary to state the consequences if the memo's contents are not complied with.
Nevertheless, it is still possible to request co-operation and compliance with the instructions in a polite way.
Communicating ideas
Memos are often used to put forward a view or to provide new thinking on a subject.
If you are writing memos of this type, the language can be personal and lively in order to communicate the freshness of your views.
Other people need to be excited by new approaches and this cannot be achieved by a dull and formal memorandum.
Motivating others
Memos are sometimes used to help motivate others.
It may be that last year's sales figures were up and you want to stimulate others to greater efforts.
Again, lively and vivid language is best employed for this end.
Personal communication
Often people who know each other well communicate by memo.
If only the two people are involved in the communication then an informal and personal style is the rule.
However, if the memo is to be copied to others or is likely to ‘go public’, then a more formal tone may need to be employed.
Activity: ‘Writing memos’
1.
How much do you know about the structure of your College?
Write a memo to the Principal requesting an interview to discuss the College organisation.
2.
What do you know about departments within the College, other than your own?
Write a memo to the Head of Catering/ Engineering/Building or any other Department, requesting an interview to discuss the courses offered and the careers that they are expected to lead to.
3.
How much do you know about your own Department?
Write a memo, to be pinned on the college notice board, offering to pass that knowledge on to other students.
4.
Write a memo to the Head of your Department suggesting social and/or sports events which you think would improve college life.
Using the Telephone
How often do you use the telephone’?
Most people now have a telephone at home and many more use telephones in their working lives.
Businesses would have difficulty surviving without the use of this communication tool, and our private lives would be very different without it.
It is possible to dial a number and, within seconds, to he speaking to a business acquaintance or friend in Saudi Arabia, the USA or Australia, to name just three of the many countries it is possible to dial direct.
By dialling three digits it is possible to call for emergency help from the police, fire and ambulance services in addition to being able to ask for sea mountain or cave rescue.
We can call operator services if we are unable to locate the number of someone we wish to contact or if we are having difficulty in making the desired connection.
It is possible to book alarm calls, make transferred charge calls, telephone for travel information, for the time, the weather, or just to listen to a story or some music!
The telephone system is becoming increasingly flexible, allowing telephone calls to be made almost anywhere.
Car phones and portable telephones are now common-place.
Many businesses employ telephone conferencing as a convenient means of holding meetings.
There are many more services available from our telephone system — many of which we take for granted.
In fact, we probably take the whole system of communication by telephone very much for granted.
Using the telephone has become a ‘habit’ for many people.
Have you noticed how well-prepared some individuals are when they answer the phone and how others are ill-prepared, as though they never receive calls?
What makes some people ‘better’ on the telephone than others'?
Let us take a look at this phenomenon.
Some voices are miserable and unfriendly while others are so happy and bright we can hear ‘the smile’ in them.
Which would you rather talk to?
A good telephone voice does not mean having a middle class or ‘posh’ accent — it means developing a friendly, happy and interesting tone, and adjusting the pitch of your voice to suit the situation.
A good telephone voice can do much to improve the temper of irate or unhappy callers.
Activity: ‘Smiling voices’
Spend one whole day concentrating on the sound of your voice.
However you feel, make an effort to sound happy every time you speak.
You will be surprised at how people will respond to you, and their reaction will encourage you to be happy and to continue speaking with ‘a smile’ in your voice.
Receiving calls
There are many other ways in which our telephone technique can be improved.
Here are some of them:
Always answer the telephone promptly.
Always answer with a greeting and any relevant information, such as‘Good morning!
Sallis and Sallis, can I help you?’ or ‘Hello!
Extension 007, Jane Bond speaking.’
Always answer the phone clearly and say who you are —‘Jane Murphy, can I help you’ or ‘Good morning, Murphy speaking, can I be of assistance.’
Do not say ‘Mr Smith’ or ‘Miss Jones.’
Other people use titles to address you but you should not use a title, only your name.
Always have a pad and pen next to your telephone — and encourage others to do the same.
Telephone message forms are even better than a pad as they prevent you from forgetting to ask relevant questions.
Having to say ‘hold on while I find a pen’ to a caller always makes an organisation appear to be inefficient.
Always write messages down at once, and read them back to the caller so that they can be checked.
Always give the caller ample time to explain the reason for the call.
Always keep the caller informed of what is happening — they cannot see you!
Always give the caller your undivided attention.
Always treat the caller in the way in which you would hope to be treated.
Always be patient.
Never keep callers waiting while you look for information or try to transfer them, etc., without explaining what you are doing and giving them a chance to call back if they are in a hurry or if they are calling long-distance.
Never use slang or jargon.
Never lose your temper.
Never shout.
Making calls
Remember that a telephone call costs your employer both money and time, and for those reasons your technique for making calls should be both planned and cost-effective.
One important element in this is to make certain that you understand the tariff for calls and that you only make essential calls during peak rate periods.
As with any other aspect of business, proper planning and thought will improve your technique and reduce the possibility of errors and misunderstandings.
It will keep the cost of calls to a minimum.
The following pointers will help you improve your technique for making calls:
Plan your call thoroughly before you make it.
Be certain who you want to talk to, what you want to say, and whether you want to leave a message if he or she is not available.
It is a good idea to jot the points down on paper before you dial the number.
Make certain that you have any letters, your diary, files, and any other necessary documentation available if you need to refer to them.
Searching for papers can be annoying to the person being called and it wastes time and money.
Make certain that you are not disturbed when making a call and that there is the minimum of background interference.
Always have a pen and paper by the phone so that you are able to take notes of the conversation.
You should write up the notes immediately after the call before the memory of the call fades (see figure 7)
Dial the number carefully as this will reduce the likelihood of a wrong number or a misdirected call.
When you are connected, be clear and confident in your manner when you are asking for the person you want to speak to and in announcing yourself: ‘Good afternoon, this is Kate Farmer from Witcombe & Co.
I wish to speak to Mrs Cooke please.’
Be prepared for a delay while the operator puts you through to the relevant extension.
In many organisations you will be put through to a secretary whose job it is to filter calls.
In order to pass through the barrier you will need to explain the nature of your message briefly, although if it is confidential you must say so.
If the person you want to speak to is not available, then you should leave a clear and precise message.
You should make it clear whether you will phone back or whether you wish to be telephoned.
When you make your calls, ensure that you speak clearly and precisely.
Pay attention to your intonation and emphasis.
Be careful about the way you pronounce names and figures.
You may need to spell them out or check that they have been understood.
Seek confirmation that the other party understands your meaning.
Do not make unnecessarily long calls as they are wasteful.
On the other hand, do take the trouble to be friendly and courteous.
A telephone conversation allows the opportunity to build up a personal relationship.
Report Writing
A business report can either be written or oral.
In it an employee may be required to analyse a given situation, comment on progress made to date, provide advice and possibly to make recommendations.
There is no standard form for reports.
The style and format will depend upon the content and the context of the report and the audience to whom it is addressed.
Usually, when a person is asked to provide a report he or she is given a brief which provides the terms of reference.
There are some organisations which have standard report forms and these are designed to save writers' and readers' time.
Report forms are particularly useful for standard reports such as accident or progress reports.
It is important to keep your audience in mind when writing a report.
It should be designed to meet the readers' needs and to solve their problems.
The form of a report should allow you to put your ideas across to your readers.
Types of report
Reports for the public
Annual Reports
Press Releases
Reports for a specific audience
References
Disciplinary Report
Staff Report/Annual Appraisal Record
Routine reports
Maintenance Report
Inspection Report
Quality Control Report
Production Report
Sales Report
Occasional reports
Accident Reports
Commissioned reports
Market Research findings
Fact-finding Surveys
Investigating/Research Reports
Policy Change and Revision Reports
Oral reports
These are generally used when speed is of the essence, but you may be called upon to give an oral report to accompany a written one.
This will usually involve summarising the main points, findings and conclusions of the written report.
Writing a report
There is a common rule to follow regardless of the style or the function of a report.
You must write in a clear and lucid style.
The following points will help you develop a good writing style.
Draw up a plan
The key to good writing is to know what you want to say.
You need to list the points you intend to cover and put them in order.
Decide on the length of the report and its format.
You need to work out the structure of the report in advance.
Know your audience
Plan and organise your work with your reader mind.
You must know who you are writing for.
Different groups demand different styles of writing.
You need to ask whether your readers understand the background and the context of the subject.
If they do, you can concentrate on the substance, but if not you will need to provide them with background material.
You can use technical language for the expert which is not appropriate for the layperson.
Write clearly and concisely
Make your writing clear and simple to understand.
Choose words which best convey your message to your audience.
You are fortunate to be writing in English as it has a vocabulary of over half a million words — over five times as many as French.
This gives you choice.
You should pick words which accurately and concisely convey your meaning.
It generally aids understanding to use short rather than long words.
A Thesaurus will help you in finding appropriate words.
Remember to vary your sentence length.
The average sentence should be short.
Put action into your writing
Use active verbs wherever possible.
They are a sign of good writing.
Active verbs make your writing lively, personal and direct.
You make verbs active by placing the subject before the verb.
An easy way to remember how to do this is to ask yourself a question ‘who or what did the action?’ and place the answer before the verb.
In the active voice the subject of the sentence does the action.
In the passive voice the subject does not do the action: it suffers the action.
EXAMPLE
Passive The customers were helped by the travel agent.
Question Who helped the customers?
It was the travel agent.
Active The travel agent helped the customers.
Another method of making a passive sentence active is to change the subject of the verb.
EXAMPLE
Passive An assignment which receives a refer grade must be repeated by the student.
Active Students must repeat referred assignments.
In this example the subject has been changed from the assignment to the student.
Use only the active voice for procedures and employ it as much as possible for descriptions and operations.
Passive verbs are sometimes necessary, but they should be used sparingly and for a purpose.
They have a function when they focus attention on the object of the verb.
For example‘our secretary was given the promotion’.
Or where the subject is unknown or irrelevant as in, ‘the book was printed in 1991’ or ‘the goods were delivered on time’.
Passive verbs are also useful when a writer wants to be deliberately vague: ‘A mistake was made in the timing of the examination.’
Avoid cliches and redundancies
Cliches are phrases that become devalued with overuse.
They make writing stale and wordy.
Use your own phrases to give life to your writing.
There are many cliches which should be avoided and the following are some of the common ones.
a bed of roses
baptism of fire
a pinch of salt
reinvent the wheel
best of a bad job
benefit of the doubt
dark horse
dead cert
believe it or not
matter of fact last straw
Redundancies
These are long-winded phrases and can often be replaced by a single word or left out without loss of meaning.
Economy of words is a sign of good writing.
Some common redundant phrases are:
due to the fact that — replace with because
in order to
at a later date
from this day forward
in relation to prior to to
later
from now
about
before
Prefer the simple to the complex
Use short and familiar words wherever possible.
Simple words make your meaning clear and allow the reader to concentrate on the message.
There will be no repeated searching of the dictionary for obscure words.
Use complex words only when you need a precise meaning and a simple word will not serve the purpose.
Revise and edit your work
Revise and edit everything you write.
One of the best editing techniques is to read the piece aloud as you check it.
For those of you who write using a word processor editing software is now available which can draw attention to defects in your writing style.
Spelling checkers and Thesauruses are now common features of most word processing packages and should be used to correct errors and to avoid duplication.
A void jargon
Jargon consists of words or expressions developed for use within particular groups or professions.
Jargon words usually sound ugly and unintelligible to outsiders.
It is difficult to define which words or phrases constitute jargon.
One person's jargon is another's technical language.
Every occupation has its own.
Try to avoid jargon words unless they have a precise purpose in your writing.
Structure of reports
From what we have said above it is clear that there is no single structure for reports, although what follows can be used as a model:
1.
Terms of Reference.
2.
Summary of main findings and conclusions.
3.
Introduction.
Sets the scene and explains the nature and purpose of the report.
4.
The Body of the Report.
This is a detailed description of the evidence, the methods used and the research findings.
5.
Conclusions and Results.
This draws together the findings from the body of the report.
6.
Recommendations.
This is the important part of the report as it is the reason for the original commissioning of the report.
You need to show  how the recommendations follow from the conclusions drawn from the relevant evidence.
7.
Appendices.
These contain detailed statistical or other information, which would disturb the flow if presented in the body of the report.
Activity: ‘Report writing’
1.
Write a report for your Course Tutor on the last industrial visit which your group made.
The report should be between 750 and 1000 words in length and contain an explanation of what you learnt from the visit.
2.
Write a report for the Head of your Department on your experiences (a) on your course and (b) at the College.
You should pay particular attention to the differences between your experience of school and that of College.
3.
Write a report of between 1000 and 1500 words on your last period of work experience with particular emphasis on the benefit it has been to you.
The report is to be written for the Personnel Officer of the organisation which provided you with the placement.
Press Releases
Many organisations use press releases because it provides them with publicity at little or no cost.
Newspapers and radio stations use them as copy for stories, as this unsolicited material is a good source of news for little effort.
Reporters cannot be everywhere and so press releases can help to ensure that newsworthy events receive the publicity they deserve.
If the story is newsworthy enough a newspaper or radio station will use it, however dull and uninteresting the press release.
But you stand a better chance of your material being used if it is topical, lively and written in a similar style to that employed by the particular newspaper or radio station.
You must first seek to interest the editor and to do this you must make certain that the essence of the story is contained in the first few sentences.
You cannot guarantee that an editor will read to the end of a press release.
The art of a good press release is to excite the editor's interest with the first sentence.
It is important to use the first few sentences to summarise the story you are presenting.
Writing a press release
Remember that with any piece of writing you must address a particular audience.
This is especially true of press releases.
You should be very careful in your choice of intended audiences.
Is your story one of general interest or is it a specialist story which is destined for, say, the business page of the local paper?
If it is the latter kind, then you can be rather more technical and detailed than you might be for the general readership.
Remember that the general public is looking for newsworthy stories.
In order to read the story they must find it interesting or useful, and it must not be so detailed and technical that they cannot understand it.
Stories are  more eye-catching if they refer to particular people rather than to abstract ideas or impersonal facts.
‘Managing Director tells of bright future’
has more appeal than
‘The growth in planned production is to be 15% greater than that in the last financial year’
Once you have attracted people's attention to a story with a bright, lively opening paragraph, you can provide them with some facts and figures.
There is always a danger in becoming too technical.
A good way of breaking up the detailed explanation is to add a quotation or two in this section.
This again provides a personal angle as well as a change of style.
‘The company's plan is to relocate its main offices to a five acre green field site.
The relocation will be in three phases, each of which is planned to take eighteen months.
In all, some 300 people will be involved in the move.
One of those who will be first to move, Mrs Jean Cooke, a secretary in the Sales Department, said, ‘I have seen the plans for new offices and it is going to be super.
The offices are going to be bright and airy.
I am looking forward to the move.’’
The quotation from Mrs Cooke is important.
Many people who work in offices may identify with her and envy her new working conditions.
She sounds motivated and this may lead other people to consider applying for jobs with the company.
Potential customers may like the sound of doing business with such enthusiastic people.
Mrs Cooke will have friends and relations who will buy papers to see her name in print.
Sentences in press releases should be kept short.
It is usual in popular journalism to write short sentences and to use clear, everyday language.
You should follow this convention in writing a press release.
Always leave the least important part of the story until the end.
At first sight this might sound a little strange.
You may feel that the last paragraph should be a strong conclusion, but you must remember the realities of the news room and the editor's desk.
Your release may be 600 words but, if the editor can only print a story of 400, the easiest means of editing is to cut the last part of the story.
You should, of course, present the press release properly.
It should be typed on A4 paper with double spacing and generous margins.
The idea is to give the editor plenty of room to make changes and alterations.
Sending appropriate photographs can help the press release's chances of being published although, if a picture helps the telling of the story, the newspaper will usually prefer to have its own photographer take pictures.
Figure 8 shows what a press release might look like.
Activity: Designing a press release
Would you like to see your group's name in the local paper?
If so, why not draft a press release and send it to the local press describing their achievements?
There must be a great deal which you are involved in which will be of interest to the general public.
Visual Presentation of Information
Today it is commonplace to find business reports and academic textbooks employing complicated statistical and numerical data in interesting visual forms.
You may not realise that this is quite a recent phenomenon.
If you look at most textbooks of ten or fifteen years ago in your library, you will find that they contain mainly text.
Few books are published nowadays without the authors using graphics to illustrate their ideas.
This is particularly true when it comes to material requiring numerical analysis.
Not only textbook writers are utilising such methods.
Companies are very aware that effective presentation is a major means of marketing their image.
Company reports and brochures are often very good sources of pictorial presentation.
Internal reports are also becoming better illustrated, and therefore more informative, through the introduction of desk top publishing .
This is the name given to integrated computer hardware and software which allows for the easy production in the office of complex and elaborate documents and reports.
The software packages allow for bar charts and pictograms to be easily incorporated into the body of a report, while a high-quality laser printer doubles as a photocopier so that large numbers of perfect copies can be easily produced.
Visual presentations catch the eye and make the reader interested in reading the accompanying text.
This is especially true when figures are being presented.
Comparisons are simpler to make when numerical data is presented in diagrammatic form and conclusions are easier to draw from it.
This chapter is not about statistics.
You will cover statistical and quantitative methods elsewhere on your course.
Instead, it is designed to assist you in considering how charts and diagrams can make the presentation of data more interesting and informative.
Whenever you want to show a trend, analyse large amounts of data or highlight statistical information in a report, then graphs and charts are the ideal means of presentation.
Thinking in pictures
Look at the following: The information in this exploded pie diagram is presented in a clear and effective way.
The same data is given in a different format in the paragraph which follows:
‘The age structure of our customers as provided by the latest survey is as follows — approximately 50% of them are over 40 years; some 25% are in the 20–40 age group; while the remaining 25% are aged below 20 years.
Of the under 20s — 40% are aged under 11; 10% are in the 11–14 age bracket; 25% are 14–17; and the remaining 25% are aged 17–20 years.’
If you read the paragraph carefully you will find your eyes continually moving to the pie chart for confirmation that you have understood what has been written.
The information in both is identical; it is only the format which is different.
But because one format is visual, this makes it easier to comprehend and understand.
Visual formats make the drawing of conclusions simpler.
The continuous text is dull and, therefore, difficult to read.
This makes it hard to use the information it provides constructively.
The choice of format is not merely one of preference, it is the key to the reader being able to understand the message.
Many of you will already have access to a personal computer and most of you will have access to one in the future.
There are many software packages available which have graphics facilities.
Many of them link with databases, report writers and spreadsheet facilities so that you can present data from them in a visual form.
Not only are these very powerful facilities but they will enable you to draw professional graphics although you may not be an artist, and to present numerical data properly without the help of a statistician.
Varieties of presentation
There are a number of common graphs and charts which are regularly employed in business to assist the reader to visualise numbers and results.
The ones which you are most likely to come across include:
Bar charts
Stacked bar charts
Horizontal bar charts
Pie charts
Line graphs
Pie bar comparison charts
Bubble charts
Pictograms
Bar charts
The most common statistical charts are bar charts, as shown in figure 9.
You do not need a degree in statistics to see what has happened to the firm's trading profit over this six year period.
Imagine if the company had tried to use the caption ‘Six years’ growth of profits!’
Instead we can clearly see a growth from 1989–94, a slight fall from the peak in 1993 and a substantial fall in 1994.
The very simplicity of the chart encourages you to ask questions such as:
‘What caused the growth from 1989 to 1992?
‘What was the reason for decline in profits after 1993?
A bar chart is simply a series of blocks or bars in which each bar represents the total number of items being compared.
The height of each bar is read from the vertical axis.
It is often effective to draw the bars in three dimensions as this lengthens the visual impact.
When constructing a bar chart, it should be noted that the width of the bars or any gaps between them have no significance at all.
The vertical scale must start at 0 so that the heights of each bar can be accurately compared.
Bar charts are very versatile and accurate.
They can be represented vertically, horizontally or be combined with line graphs.
They have strengths both in terms of accuracy and visual impact.
As with every method of presentation, they have their limitations.
They can only be used to compare a limited number of items and their impact is heightened when there are considerable differences between the items being compared.
Figures 10 and 11 show respectively two variations of the standard bar chart — the stacked bar chart and the horizontal bar chart.
Line graphs
A line or x/y graph shows the relationship between two or more factors.
Figure 12 shows an example of a line graph with which you may already be familiar from the other units of your course.
It is known as a demand curve and this graph shows the relationship between the price of a product and the amount of it which consumers demand at particular prices.
It is easy to see that at high prices consumers will only want to consume small quantities, while a fall in price will mean that demand increases.
The major advantage of the line graph is that it is easy to analyse the relationship between variables.
The graph is read as follows.
If the price of product A is 60 pence per kilo then 10,000 are demanded, but if the price falls to 33 pence then the quantity demanded rises to 40,000 kilos.
The graph allows us to draw the conclusion and to answer questions such as:
‘What is the consequence for demand of a 10 pence rise in price if the existing price is 20 pence?’
‘How much of product A will be demanded at 50 pence?’
‘If I want to sell 80,000 units what is the maximum price I can charge?’
Line graphs (see figure 13) are drawn up by constructing two scales:
(a)
The vertical scale or y-axis.
This must start from a point of origin and be divided into equal portions.
(b)
The horizontal scale or x-axis.
Again, this starts from a point of origin and is divided into equal portions.
The division of the x and y scales do not have to be identical.
In order to construct a line graph, at least two sets of tabulated data are required.
This must be data whose relationship we are concerned to discover.
This data is plotted on the graph and a line is drawn to link the points.
The use of graph paper makes accurate plotting possible — compare the tabulated results below and their plot in figure 14.
It is possible to plot the relationship between a number of variables on the same graph.
In the example in figure 15, we combine Demand and Supply graphs (figures 12 and 14) to produce a graph which can illustrate how price is determined in a competitive market.
The long-term price of the product is that where the differing interests of producers and customers converge.
This is the point known as the equilibrium point.
From this point the Market Price and the Quantity of.
the products demanded and supplied can be determined.
Combined bar and line graph
A combined bar and line graph (figure 16) simply combines two forms of representation.
In our example, the relationship between each year's sales is shown by the bar chart but the line graph shows the trend over the period.
Pie charts
Another popular graph is the pie chart (see figure 17).
It is usually employed for dealing with percentages where the whole circle represents 100% and the ‘slices’ or proportional segments show the fractional percentages.
A very effective use is to show the proportion of costs in the manufacture of a product.
The whole circle, containing 360, represents the total amount of whatever it is that is being divided up, in this case the total cost of manufacturing.
In order to find the ‘slices’, each element is divided by the total and multiplied by 360.
If the cost of Labour is £6600 and the total cost of manufacturing is £12,000, its slice is calculated as follows:
The total costs of manufacturing and their respective slices are made up as follows:
After calculating the angles for each, a protractor is required to draw these angles.
The usual convention, followed in this example, is to place the largest, slice on the left and for the other slices to be drawn in descending order.
There are limitations to the use of pie charts.
It is difficult for them to be drawn accurately and the human eye finds it difficult to detect small differences — in our example the slices representing 12% and 13% of the total.
Pies can be confusing and cluttered if more than six or seven slices are displayed.
They are useful only for a single set of data and cannot be used to compare two sets unless two pies each representing different totals are compared.
However, these criticisms are outweighed by the visual impact which pie charts have.
They give a good general impression of the size of the figures involved in a clear visual form.
Bubble charts
Bubble charts are particularly useful when comparing the results of a number of different items.
In figure 18, a company with seven products, code named A, B, C, D, E, F and G, is comparing their performance in the home and overseas markets:
Product E is the best performer in terms of growth, showing 80% + in both markets.
Product D is a growth performer in the overseas markets but its performance in the home market has declined from the previous year.
Activity: ‘Bubble chart analysis’
Describe how products A, B, C, F and H have performed by analysing the bubble chart.
Pictograms
A pictogram (see figure 19) is often used for its eye-catching qualities.
Its strength is that it is visual and easy to understand.
In our example the size of the books represents the sales of the textbook.
To compare one year with another, you merely compare the size of the pictures.
The drawback is obvious — accuracy and precision are missing.
Even if we knew that, for example, the 1989 sales were 10,000 copies, what are the levels of sales for 1990 or 1991?
The inability to convey accurate figures limits the use of pictograms except where we wish only to provide a general impression of a set of figures and where detail is not important.
Giving a Talk
During your course you will be asked to give at least one talk.
You may be asked to do the activity in this chapter of the book or a similar one devised by your lecturers.
For many of you, giving a talk may be a nerve-wracking experience and yet you talk to people quite naturally every day of your life.
You need to ask yourself what is so different when it comes to talking to an audience?
The difference is the stress you experience when you have to stand up and address other people.
When you give a talk you become the focus of attention.
The audience will listen carefully to what you have to say.
You can be the centre of attention in a conversation but then the focus changes as new participants enter the dialogue.
In conversation, people do not fix their eyes on you and make notes: they are informal and natural, while talks are set piece, formal occasions.
With a talk, the topic is specified in advance and you will be expected to keep to your brief.
In conversation, we deviate as and when we like.
You may start talking about a particular subject and finish discussing something very different.
There is no length to a discussion, unlike a talk where speakers are given a specific time for delivery.
Talks are then a special and different activity, requiring practice to master.
Initially, they are stressful but that is not a reason to avoid them.
There is a challenge in doing something that is difficult and a sense of achievement when it is finished, especially when the audience applauds.
Preparing for a talk
The audience
When giving a talk or making a speech you must be aware of whom you are going to talk to.
Many talks fail because speakers talk down or over the heads of their audience.
The age, sex, background and expertise of the audience are all important factors for consideration.
You need to re  member that you can be very technical when talking to experts but that the same illuminating technicalities will bewilder an audience comprising only lay people.
The size of the audience is also an important factor to keep in mind.
It is possible to be informal and adopt a conversational style with a small audience, but the larger the audience the more formal your talk needs to be
You need to keep your audience in mind when you are preparing for your talk.
The type of audience you are addressing will affect what you will say and how you say it.
The content and structure
You must spend time preparing the content of your talk.
You must be clear what you are talking about and you must have marshalled all the necessary facts and information.
After doing this, you need to structure your material in such a way that the audience will be able to follow the arguments and the drift of your thinking.
You will need an introduction which states clearly what you are talking about and why.
This is called ‘flagging’ and it signals to your audience what the talk will be about.
The way you start is most important because if you lose your audience at the beginning you will find it difficult to win back their attention.
Try to find a vivid illustration of your theme to start off your talk.
This will help to stimulate the audience's interest in what you are going to say.
It will be helpful to make notes for your talk but do avoid reading them.
You cannot read and make eye contact with the audience.
You must look at your audience when talking to them.
What you need to do is to rehearse your talk so that the final delivery can be fluent and easy.
Always visualise your audience when practising, as this will help you in choosing the right tone for your voice.
Do not learn your lines, as this can make the talk rather stilted unless you are a competent actor.
You must not be afraid of thinking on your feet and adding good ideas that occur to you as you speak.
Writing a plan
While you must not read a speech, you should make notes.
These are aids to enable you to keep to your theme and they provide a logical consistency to the talk.
The type of notes you make are personal but the important point is that you can follow them with only a glance.
Some speakers prefer a series of underlined headings, others divide the page in two and put the headings on the left and supporting information on the right.
A popular method is to use post cards.
They can be held in the hand.
The usual method is to write each main point and supporting information on a single card.
Because they are small they do not give the audience the impression  that you are reading from notes which does happen if your notes are on A4 size paper.
Visual aids
The use of visual aids can be helpful to your talk but they are an aid and should not substitute for what you intend to say.
Do not use visual aids for the sake of using them and do not use them as a defence to hide behind if you are nervous.
If you decide to use them, make certain that they are clear, well-presented and can be read by your audience.
Poorly produced visual aids are worse than no aids at all.
The type of aid you can use will vary depending on your subject, but you can think about using:
Notes written on a transparency and projected on to a screen by an overhead projector.
Notes previously written on a flip chart pad.
Handout notes.
You should be careful how you use them because the audience may read these rather than listen to you.
Slides projected by a slide projector.
These can be very effective if your talk requires a high degree of visual impact.
Make certain that your slides are good ones as they will be the focus of the talk.
Video films.
These substitute for a talk and should be used sparingly.
People are very used to watching television for entertainment and not for information.
Chalk board notes.
If you use this method, make certain that you write them on the board before the talk and that your writing is legible.
While this method is suitable for teaching, it is not a good one for business presentations.
Overhead projectors provide more flexibility and masking techniques allow you to highlight areas which you want audiences to concentrate on.
Models, charts and other devices.
If you are talking about marketing pot plants, then some of the sample plants will help to draw your audience's attention to the subject.
The message about using visual aids is to use what is appropriate to the talk and do not let the technique dominate the context.
In this area, the message is more important than the medium of communication.
Activity: ‘A talk’
You are requested to give a talk to the members of your group on a topic of your choice.
The only stipulation is that the topic must have some relationship to business activity or current affairs.
You will be required to talk for about 15 minutes.
If it assists your talk, you can use visual or other aids to illustrate it.
You can bring notes with you for the talk but you should avoid reading them to your audience.
At the end of your talk you will be expected to answer any questions which the audience may have to ask.
You will be assessed on your ability to:
Present an interesting, lively, and well-structured talk on your chosen topic.
The information should be clearly presented and it should be plain to the audience: what the topic is; why you have chosen it; what view you take on the matter; and why you have arrived at any particular conclusions.
Effectively use notes, and other aids, when giving your talk.
Answer questions from the audience effectively.
Non-Sexist and Non-Discriminatory Language
As an introduction to the topic of non-discriminatory language consider the following job titles:
SENIOR SALESMAN
CHAIRMAN OF THE MANPOWER PLANNING COMMITTEE
What do these titles tell you?
Firstly, they provide you with information about two functional roles common in business — a senior member of the salesforce and the chairing of a committee planning the use of human resources.
The second thing they tell you is rather more subtle.
The organisation concerned would normally expect these roles to be occupied by men.
Language can reinforce the disadvantage which certain groups experience.
For example, advertisements which consistently use businessman as the synonym for people in business seek to remind women that in many areas of commercial life it is still a man's world.
Discriminatory language can have the effect of demotivating those discriminated against.
It informs them that others in society are more important and have a natural right to fill certain positions.
The use of  discriminatory language can and does disadvantage women and members of ethnic minority groups.
The latter are usually discriminated against by overt racist language which denigrates a person's colour and ethnic background.
Discrimination against women is of a different type, for whereas racial discrimination usually comes from slang usage, sexual discrimination is present in the formal structure of our language.
Many authors writing in the third person use ‘he’ and ‘his’, even when the references include or refer to women.
Other examples of discrimination are to be found in role titles such as foreman or tradesman widely used in business which imply the positions are normally (and rightly?) filled by  men.
Some people argue that it is very difficult to write without making use of masculine pronouns or words with a masculine connotation when they are also referring to women.
We hope that by employing non-discriminatory usage in this book we have shown that it is possible and easy to adopt another style.
An argument commonly used to defend sexist language is that it is ‘correct’, and ‘everybody knows’ that ‘he’also includes ‘she’.
But our language is constantly changing and what is correct is only so because it is accepted as such.
What defenders of titles such as‘chairman’ are doing is defending male superiority and not the English language.
The reason for being aware of sexism in language is that it biases experience constantly towards the male sex and gives little or no prominence to the role of women in society.
You will find organisations who employ both men and women talking about exercises in man power planning, discussing the performance of their sales men not their salesforce, and having meetings chaired by chair men .
The constant use of ‘he’ when talking and writing about managers gives women and girls the impression that it is an uphill struggle if they want a career in a leadership position.
Equal opportunities demands a language which is not biased.
In the table that follows we provide a guide to avoiding discriminatory language.
Common discriminatory words
Airman
Aviator, Pilot
Businessman
Business person
Cameraman
Camera operator
Chairman
Chair, Chairperson
Commonman
Commoner, Common people, People, Ordinary folk
Craftsman
Craftsperson, Artisan
Everyman
Everyone
Fair sex
Women
Fireman
Firefighter, Fire officer
Foreman
Supervisor
Housewife
Homemaker
Man-hours
Hours of work
Man-in-the-street
Person-in-the-street, Ordinary folk, Common people
Mankind
Human beings, Human species
Human race, Humanity
Manmade
Human creation
Man of letters
Writer, Author
Manpower
Newscaster, News reporter, Journalist
Nightwatchman
Guard, Security guard
Repairman
Repairer
Salesman/girl
Salesperson
To man (Verb) as in ‘to man the ship’, ‘to man the barricades’, or ‘manning the office’
To staff, serve, work, people, run operate
So instead of ‘the telephone must be manned at all times’ we can write ‘the telephone must be staffed at all times’
Weatherman
Weatherforecaster
Workman
Worker
Yes-man
Crawler, Sycophant
As well as titles which imply male ownership there are those which refer to roles usually filled by females.
Examples are Housewife, Charlady, Tealady, Salesgirl, Girl Friday, Waitress and Chambermaid.
These are usually low status roles, whereas the roles given the masculine gender are predominately high status, such as Businessman.
There are occasional exceptions to this such as‘Office boy’, but in the main the roles specifying the female gender refer to low and often subservient roles.
You need to avoid the use of low status female gender role terms with the same care you take to avoid male gender titles.
Activity: ‘Alternative titles’
Below are some common sexist titles.
You should find suitable non-sexist alternatives for them.
Using language in a sexist manner stereotypes women.
A stereotype is a fixed mental impression which people have about others.
It gives all members of a group the same set of attributes.
One common stereotype is that all women are natural wives and mothers.
Another is of women always taking the more subservient roles in home and work situations.
It is important in our use of language not to reinforce stereotypes.
‘Oh! that's a girl's job’, ‘only women do the typing’, or ‘get a man in to fix that machine’, are all examples of language which stereotypes.
It is very usual  in meetings for women to be asked and to be expected by the men present to serve the coffee!
Once stereotyping takes place it is difficult to change peoples' perceptions of a particular role.
A woman wanting to work in construction will find it difficult to enter ‘a man's world’, and most employers will be taken aback to find a man attending for interview as a secretary or child-minder.
Our language can never be entirely value free but when you speak or write you need to think carefully of the effect it is having on others.
Ideally it should not unfairly discriminate or stereotype.
There are problems and dilemmas in using  non-discriminatory language.
Traditionally, the word ‘black’ has had a meaning as dishonourable, sinister and evil and terms like ‘to black’, ‘blacken’, ‘blackball’, ‘black mark’, ‘blackleg’, ‘blackspot’, ‘blacklist’, ‘black market’, ‘blackguard’, ‘black sheep’and ‘blackmail’refer to anti-social or wicked behaviour.
The use of ‘black’ to describe unscrupulous or villainous behaviour may be repugnant to many members of ethnic minority communities and you should be careful about their use.
There are plenty of acceptable alternatives, such as‘boycott’ for ‘blacking’, ‘extortion’for ‘blackmail’, ‘danger area’for ‘blackspot’.
‘Managers’
Casey Miller and Kate Swift in their book on sexist language make the point that there are a number of words with the prefix ‘man’ which have nothing to do with the male gender.
Such words as manager ,manipulate ,manuscript and manufacture derive from the Latin word manus ‘the hand’.
They argue, sensibly, that for this reason it would be ridiculous to find alternatives for the syllable ‘man’ in these words.
How to avoid using sexist language
There are problems when using HE, HIS, HIM, HIMSELF if women are also being referred to.
You can avoid using the male pronoun as follows:
You can use ‘you or your’
You can write the sentence in the plural ‘they or their’
‘his or her’, ‘himself or herself’, ‘he or she’ can be used.
EXAMPLES
SEXIST:
Every student should hand in his assignment by Tuesday.
NON-SEXIST:
You should hand in your assignments by Tuesday.
Every student should hand in their assignment by Tuesday.
Every student should hand in his or her assignment by Tuesday.
Some  writers use s/he as a non-sexist alternative.
This is not particularly elegant and it is difficult to know how to pronounce it.
We believe it is better to use the alternatives listed above.
Activity: Non-discriminatory language
You should re-write the sentences below making them non-discriminatory.
It is important that the office is manned during the lunch hour.
All students should research the topic ‘mankind and his environment’.
Every employee should note that it is his responsibility to ensure that Health and Safety regulations are complied with.
The firemen manned the pumps and fought the blaze.
Businessman sought for busy office.
He should be well-educated.
The pay of nurses, firemen and ambulancemen is below the national average.
SECTION III
ORGANISATIONS
The Structure of Organisations
Anyone joining an organisation needs to find out quickly how the organisation is structured and how it works.
If you think back to joining the College, you will realise how important this was to you.
You needed to know what group you were in, who was in charge of that group, what the rules of attendance and work were, what was expected of you and by what criteria your work was going to be measured.
The list, we suspect, probably seemed endless.
The first few days in any organisation are all about issues like these.
Many organisations, College included, realise this and organise induction sessions for their new members to familiarise themselves with the basic characteristics of the organisation.
As a member of an organisation yourself, you will have come to realise how complex and varied they are.
You will also have made a discovery that what seems to you to be the main features or focus may be seen differently by other people with whom you come in contact.
What seems to you to be a very minor regulation may appear to be a major infringement of liberty to another.
What seems well organised to you is a source of frustration to others.
Some people like to have a clear set of rules to live and to work by, while others condemn these same rules as ‘bureaucratic’, restrictive and stifling.
Another aspect of organisations which you might have discovered is that organisations are constantly changing.
Ask someone who left your course and College some years ago.
You will find that their recollections are different from the way the College is now.
Organisations are in a constant state of flux caused by such things as changes in personnel, changes in technology and changes in the environment in which they operate (see figure 20).
How are organisations structured?
‘Form follows function’ is a phrase which is often used when discussing organisational structures.
It means that the design of the structure — the form — has to be led by the function which has to be performed if the organisation is to be successful.
For this reason no two organisations have the same structure.
An engineering plant and an advertising agency are different and this difference will be reflected in their organisational design.
Nevertheless, there are common features in organisational structures and it is helpful to analyse some of the most typical features.
Different organisations have different structures.
The design of an organisation depends on the goals it is pursuing, its size, its market, the environment in which it operates and the technology it is employing.
The way in which an organisation is structured depends upon the way its members feel it will best survive in the world.
Activity: ‘An organisation chart’
What characteristics of hierarchical structures can you deduce from studying the chart?
(You ought to be able to deduce at least five.
The answers are given on page 100, but to start you off: how many management tiers does this organisation have?)
There are numbers of ways in which organisations can be structured.
Geographically based organisations
Geographically based organisations such as retail businesses readily spring to mind.
The major units of say Marks and Spencer, or Boots are their High Street stores.
Banks and Building Societies also have geographically based structures.
Manufacturing companies with dispersed plants will follow a similar pattern.
Market based organisations
Some organisations are planned to conform to the structure of their markets.
In some cases this provides a variation on the geographically based structure.
But it may be that the company is producing a range of products and has set up separate units or subsidiaries to exploit each product market.
Functionally based organisations
In this structure the organisation is designed around the different functions required to make and sell its product or service.
Product based organisations
In this structure the organisation is designed according to the product which is being manufactured.
Each company/unit will have its own manufacturing, accounting, sales and purchasing functions.
Matrix organisations
The matrix structure has become popular in recent years with project based organisations and with many educational establishments.
Its critics argue that it is complex and confusing and requires people to spend a lot of their time attending meetings.
Its supporters make the point that it breaks down rigid hierarchies and allows for greater participation in the decision-making process.
A matrix structure
In a typical matrix there are two hierarchies — in this case there are Functional Managers who have staff and resources but no work, and Project Managers who control the work but have no staff and resources of their own.
The Functional Managers’ job is to provide the staffing and the resourcing for the projects which the organisation is undertaking.
It is their.
job to see that all the resources in their area of responsibility are suitable for the projects being undertaken.
Project Managers are freed from direct responsibility for staff so they can give their attention to the effective management of their project.
They call upon the resources provided by the Functional Managers.
Each staff member reports to two bosses — his or her Project Manager and his or her specialist manager.
This aspect can cause some confusion.
The fundamental organisational principle — unity of command — is broken.
It is a tenet of most organisations that people only have one direct manager.
In order to avoid the confusion which could be caused if employees were given two divergent sets of goals to pursue, matrix management involves a complex committee system and relies on good and regular internal communications.
A good example of a large multi-national company organised on a matrix structure is UNILEVER, best known in the UK for its subsidiary Lever Bros, the soap and detergent manufacturer.
Unilever operates world wide and is divided into some 500 operating companies.
Each company is given considerable autonomy so it can know and respond to local markets.
However, all subsidiary companies have to operate under broad general guidelines.
In many countries there are several companies operating in different product and service areas.
The UK has over 50 Unilever companies.
The matrix structure of the company is based upon product and geography.
In each country there is a National Manager responsible for  policies, government contracts, personnel, finance and taxation.
On the other arm of the matrix there is a Co-ordinator at Director level responsible for the central policy for each product grouping within the organisation.
The advantage of this structure is that it responds swiftly to meet most developments whether from competition, government or consumer bodies.
Activity: ‘College structure’
On what basis is your College organised?
Is it
Customer/client based
Functionally based
Geographically based
Market based
Product/service based
A matrix organisation
You should discuss why you have come to your particular conclusions about its form of organisation.
Response to technological change — mechanistic and organic structures
The distinction between two models of organisation structure-mechanistic and organic — derives from the work of T. Burns and E. M. Stalker in their book The Management of Innovation (1966).
Their ideas grew out of research carried out in the electronics industry where companies face high rates of technological change.
Two basic forms of organisation were found to operate.
One they describe as mechanistic, the other as organic.
The mechanistic structures were machine like.
They were functionally divided with defined chains of command.
That is to say, there was someone with the responsibility for each operation accountable to ‘somebody at the top’.
There was a precise definition of task and job.
Interaction and communication mainly followed vertical lines — and was mainly top downwards.
Operators did what they did because of orders coming from the top.
The other form of organisation was dubbed ‘organic’.
In these organisations, jobs had lost much of their formal definition and there was a constant redefinition of tasks.
Because of this, responsibilities and functions were redefined through interactions with others while participating in common tasks.
Communications were lateral as well as vertical.
Burns and Stalker found that organic structures were better able to respond to change than mechanistic ones.
The ‘network structure’ of control, authority and communications provided a greater commitment on the part of the workforce and made it better able to respond to change.
Does this mean that defining jobs and structures is a mistake?
There is plenty of work from other managerial researchers to contradict it.
Elliot Jacques and Wilfred Brown, in their longitudinal studies associated with the Glazier Metals Company, found that individuals have a felt need to have their role and status clearly defined in ways that are acceptable to them and their colleagues.
Ambiguities as to roles can lead to stress and frustration.
The Glazier Metals work demonstrated the importance of channels for participation and communication but seems to dispute the informal and evolutionary structures associated with organic organisations.
The structure of organisations largely depends upon functions.
Entrepreneurial organisations in highly competitive and technologically fast changing environments need first and foremost to respond to change and  to innovate.
For them, speed of action in decision-making and for innovation is all important.
Other organisations have different goals — institutions such as banks have to put accountability, reliability and security high on their list of priorities.
For them it is important to pinpoint responsibilities and to define functions carefully.
Accountability of this type favours mechanistic structures.
Answers to ‘organisation chart’ activity on page 95
There are two tiers of management.
The organisation is a hierarchy, with a formal chain of command.
The organisation is divided into three (these could be geographical divisions — say 3 shops, or functional divisions, which could be production, accounts and sales — or product based divisions).
The organisation employs 13 employees, four of whom occupy management roles.
There is one overall ‘boss’— who might be titled Managing Director, Chief Executive, President, Principal, etc.
The span of control for each of the 4 Managers is 3 employees.
There is ‘unity of command’ which is to say that each member of the organisation only has one direct supervisor.
It can be assumed that the degree of power and authority of each role holder increases towards the apex of the hierarchy.
Each manager is accountable for the work of his or her sections, departments, shops or whatever name is given to each division of the organisation.
Organisational design
Another way of approaching organisational design is to ask questions about the functions which management in organisations need to perform in order to be successful.
One of the best means of classifying the necessary functions is the ‘seven S schema ’.
The seven S's are: The seven functions are seen to divide into two types.
Strategy, Structure and Systems — the so-called Hard S's — are concerned with the way an organisation operates and its efficiency.
The other four — Style, Skills, Staff and Superordinate goals — are the human relations and value aspects of the organisation.
It is often said that Japanese management concentrates on the Soft S's whilst Western management concentrates on the Hard S's.
Whatever the truth of the proposition the successful company should have clear policies and priorities for ensuring that all seven functions are properly managed.
For many companies policies on style, strategy and organisational values are often missing.
The need for them is not so apparent as for the other S's, however for long term survival they all play a vital role.
Formal and informal organisations
Much organisational theory concentrates upon the formal structure of organisations.
That is to say upon the documented and officially described features of the organisation.
The formal structure is the structure of the organisation charts which we have drawn up in this chapter.
But organisation charts only give us the bare bones of the organisation's structure and we should not be carried away with the idea that official descriptions tell us all.
It might be useful to think of an organisation chart as a kind of London Underground map.
As you are probably aware, the actual network of lines and stations beneath London's streets does not conform to the neat, straight lines with regularly spaced stations depicted on the map.
The lines weave and turn and the stations are not regularly placed.
The map is drawn to help the traveller, not to be an accurate reflection of reality.
Similarly, the organisation chart is an idealised guide.
Some people argue that the INFORMAL ORGANISATION describes what really goes on in an organisation whereas the FORMAL ORGANISATION describes what ought to happen.
To understand the workings of an organisation we need to impose the structure of human relationships on top of the formal structure.
The informal structure is the structure as it actually operates rather that the way it ought to operate.
If we look at the two charts in figures 21 and 22, we can see how they intermesh.
Figure 21 shows a typical formal structure embodied in an organisation chart.
Figure 22 superimposes some of the major informal channels on to the chart.
We are producing what is sometimes called a sociogram which is a diagram which maps human interactions.
In this example, if we look carefully there seems to be two centres or loci of power rather than just one.
Formally, B is A's subordinate but informally a good part of the organisation centres upon B with little reference to A.
To understand any organisation we have to understand both the formal and the informal.
For anyone working within an organisation it is important to understand both.
Often the two structures are so intertwined that it is impossible to separate and distinguish them.
Some organisations recognise the role of the informal to the extent that the formal structure is built around it.
Ask why someone reports to so and so and you will receive the answer that ‘it has always been the case’, or that ‘she gets on better with X rather than Y’.
If we ask why many of our towns and cities are laid out as they are we find the answer is buried in history.
The same is true for many of the relationships in organisations.
Why is there often a difference between formal and informal structures?
Formal structures are designed in order to:
Carry out tasks.
Be permanent.
Fulfil the organisation's goals.
The structure has been consciously designed and has an official purpose.
Informal structures are not designed, they happen through human interactions.
They exist to meet the human needs of the people who work in organisations.
People are more than organisational units and have a wide variety of needs.
Many of these needs such as those for friendship, affection and esteem can only be met through informal networks.
We often find that people quite junior in the hierarchy have influence out of all proportion to their position because of their standing in the informal structure.
There is nothing intrinsically wrong with informal groups and informal structures.
In fact, they can often be healthy and dynamic mechanisms for reinforcing organisational goals.
If they fulfil needs in their members not met by the formal structure of work, then they have an important role in preventing frustration and resentment.
But there are occasions when they can conflict with the official policy of the organisation.
Informal groups or cabals may develop to impose their will on an organisation or to pursue a course of action in opposition to official policy.
The informal communication channels
Just as the formal organisation has its communications structure of meetings, memos, reports, notice boards and staff bulletins, the informal  organisation has its own communications channels.
Those of the informal organisation are generally oral and usually very fast in their operation.
The channels are known variously as the grapevine ,gossip and rumour .
Their important characteristic is that they cut across the divisions of the formal structure and usually are very powerful if the matters to be communicated are formally confidential or affect the future of particular individuals.
Some people believe that gossip should not be indulged in or listened to.
However well-intentioned we might be, all of us do it.
And often it is the only means of discovering what is happening.
Some organisations seek to channel the grapevine for productive purposes by producing house magazines which allow issues to be raised publicly which would otherwise only become known through rumour.
Organisational Concepts
In order to understand the way organisations operate, it is useful to understand a number of the key concepts underlying the structure.
The following concepts are a vocabulary which will help you in being able to analyse and study the functioning of organisations.
Accountability
This is one of the major ideas holding the structure of organisations together.
It can be thought of as a kind of organisational ‘cement’.
The idea is that every person has another person (or sometimes a group or committee) to whom he or she has to account for the proper discharge of responsibilities.
Accountability is present in every work role.
Every person, whether at the most junior or the most senior level, has someone to whom he or she is accountable for doing the job properly.
In figure 23, A is directly accountable to his manager X for his work being carried out effectively.
X is accountable to Y for the proper management of the work of X's section, which includes not only X's responsibilities but also those of A, B and C.
At the most senior level, the Managing Director, Chief Executive or whatever the title of the most senior person in the organisation is, will be accountable to a Board for the effective work of the whole organisation.
In a company, accountability will be to a Board of Directors, if it is a local  authority then the Chief Executive is accountable to the full Council and the Principal of your College is accountable to the Board of Governors (see figure 24).
Everybody has a boss, a person who has the responsibility to oversee his or her work; the Chairperson of the Board has the company's shareholders while the Prime Minister has to face the electorate for a renewal of the mandate at least every five years.
The Governors of Colleges have an interesting accountability; they are accountable to the local authority which owns the College but they are also accountable to the community which the College serves.
Activity: ‘Accountability’
1.
To whom are you accountable at College?
2.
To whom are you accountable at work?(part-time students)
3.
What organisations are represented on the Governing Body of your College?
4.
To whom is the senior person in your company/organisation accountable?(part-time students)
Authority
A question which is frequently asked of office holders is: ‘By what authority can you tell me to do such and such?’
In order to carry out your responsibilities you require two things —POWER and AUTHORITY .
In order to be able to exercise any degree of power in an organisation, an office-holder must have an official sanction for the exercise of that power.
Authority is the legitimate right to exercise power.
Sources of authority
The most important writer on authority in organisations was the German sociologist Max Weber (1864–1920).
Weber was a student of social organisations and was interested in how organisations could direct the individuals in them towards given objectives.
In order to direct people, those in senior positions require authority to legitimise the instructions and orders they give.
It is because organisational members see their authority as legitimate that they are prepared to obey.
According to Weber, the claims to legitimate authority are based on one or more of the following grounds:
1.
Traditional authority — here claims to legitimacy are based on long-established beliefs and traditions.
People obey others because ‘they always have done so’.
In many family-run businesses, the source of authority is of this kind.
2.
Charismatic authority — this is where authority rests on the ability to motivate others by the strength of personality.
Charisma is that aspect of personality which a few people possess which makes others follow them.
Some modern businesses have bosses of this type.
The traditional entrepreneur is often a person possessing charisma.
The mass media and particularly television can create the aura of charisma around people of otherwise unexceptional personality.
This is particularly the case in the worlds of politics, sport and entertainment.
3.
Rational and legal authority — this is the source of authority in most organisations.
Rational authority is that which is exercised by  ‘experts’.
We buckle our seat belts on aeroplanes when the sign tells us to because we obey the commands of the expert — the pilot.
Legal authority is that which rests on the rules of the organisation.
The right of someone to exercise power is sanctioned by the organisation's rules.
Activity: ‘Sources of authority’
What are the sources of authority which legitimise the actions of the following office holders?
(The answers are given at the end of the chapter.)
Bureaucracy
In everyday usage, bureaucracy is synonymous with ‘red tape’ and inefficiency.
However, there is a more technical meaning and one originated by Max Weber.
For Weber, a bureaucracy was a special form of social organisation particularly associated with modern, large-scale industry and commerce.
What characterises bureaucracy is the rational and systematic way in which official duties are defined and distributed.
A bureaucracy exists where:
There is a definition of responsibilities via job descriptions.
Officials are given the power and authority to carry out tasks, but that power is limited by the rules which govern their office.
The use of authority is not arbitrary but governed by rules.
Competency of officials is ensured by proper selection and training so that they can effectively carry out their obligations and responsibilities.
There is a carefully defined hierarchy of offices which can provide the organisation with continuity via recruitment from below.
Work in the organisation provides individuals with a career and so is the main or sole source of income of its members.
There is the proper maintenance of records and files.
We can see from this that in the technical sense most large and many small organisations can be described as bureaucracies.
The civil service, banks, most large companies and local authorities display these characteristics.
The major criticism of this approach to describing organisations is not that it is inaccurate but that it ignores all the informal and interpersonal aspects of organisations and concentrates too heavily on the formal aspects of work organisations.
Delegation
It is often said that delegation is the art of management.
Simply, the need for delegation arises where one person feels it appropriate to ask a subordinate to carry out tasks which he or she would normally do.
The need for delegation arises because
A job-holder's role is overloaded.
It is good staff development to ask a more junior member of staff to carry out tasks normally associated with more senior positions.
The problem with delegation for managers is how much to trust and how much to control the tasks which have been delegated.
It is the case that even though tasks are delegated, the responsibility for those tasks cannot be.
But you cannot expect another to carry out a task if he or she is constantly being observed by someone else.
Excellence
One of today's key management concepts is excellence.
The term was coined by Peters and Waterman in their book In Search of Excellence.
The authors surveyed forty-three high performance companies in the United States to see if there were common factors in their success.
They discovered eight common characteristics amongst these firms.
In place of the rigid bureaucracies and hierarchies of many traditional companies Peters and Waterman found less conventional and more dynamic organisational forms.
The eight characteristics of ‘excellence’ are summarised below:
A bias for action .
Managers in excellent companies have a strong preference for doing things rather than analysing situations.
Keeping close to the customer .
A key factor in these companies' success is knowing their customers' preferences.
Autonomy and entrepreneurship .
Large successful corporations divide themselves into small companies and operating divisions.
These smaller units are encouraged to think independently and competitively.
Productivity through people .
People are seen as the key organisation resource and employees are aware that their best efforts are essential and they will share in their companies' success.
Hand-on, value driven .
Excellent companies have strong corporate cultures and organisational values.
This is promoted by ensuring that executives keep in touch with the firm's business.
Sticking to the knitting .
Peters and Waterman found the excellent companies were those that kept to the business they knew best.
Simple form, lean staff .
Organisational structures are simple with few layers and few people in senior executive positions.
Complex and matrix structures are not in evidence in the survey of excellent firms.
One structural dimension whether it is product, geography or function predominates.
Simultaneous loose-tight properties .
There is a paradox here.
At senior executive level there are policies of encouraging individual effort and autonomy but a simultaneous tight hold is kept over certain corporate essentials.
For instance, a corporation may have clear strong central guidelines on financial targets while leaving the subsidiary companies free to choose how to achieve them.
Hierarchies
Most organisations are structured as hierarchies.
That is to say, they are designed as tiers of managerial levels.
In a hierarchy there is an unequal distribution of responsibility, power and authority with most of the power concentrated at the top of the pyramid.
A hierarchy exists when there is a system of people or things ranked into some kind of order.
For organisations, this order is one of authority and accountability.
If Mrs A is the Managing Director who has a subordinate Mr B who in turn manages a subordinate Miss C, then the set A-B-C is a hierarchy.
The term ‘hierarchy’ suffers like that of ‘bureaucracy’from having two meanings, a popular and a technical meaning.
The popular use of hierarchical is of a system which is synonymous with the popular usage of bureaucratic.
A hierarchy is seen as stultifying, rigid and caste-like.
Many people believe that organisations should become non-hierarchical and be based on group and consensus decision-making.
The technical term is one  which concentrates on the fact that any form of ranking constitutes a hierarchy.
In the technical sense it is perfectly possible for an organisation to have a hierarchical structure and to have popular and participatory decision-making.
The hierarchical structure merely defines who is in charge of what and is accountable to whom.
Flat hierarchies and tall hierarchies
Some organisations are ‘tall’ in their structure while others are ‘flat’.
The distinction lies in the number of management layers an organisation has.
Flat hierarchies have few layers of management with large spans of control (see figure 25).
Tall hierarchies are characterised by small spans of control but with a large number of managerial levels (see figure 26).
Tall hierarchies are often seen as bureaucratic.
Their multiple levels of management often involve rigidities which arise from the need to define roles and jobs rigorously in order that functions do not overlap.
Communication between the top and the bottom of the organisation is often difficult.
Senior managers may be remote from the majority of the staff.
Delays in decision-making can be a difficulty as it takes time for problems at the bottom to come to the notice of people at the top, and for ideas at the top to percolate to the bottom.
However, despite these drawbacks there can be considerable bonuses.
There is a great deal of scope for promotion and career development in a tall hierarchy.
Because spans of control are smaller, then supervision can be more direct and the possibilities of genuine team work are available.
The advantages of specialisation and the division of labour are available in tall hierarchies, and small and expert sections can easily be incorporated into them.
Flat hierarchies have fewer problems of communication between the top and the bottom.
There are fewer status differentiations between organisation members and more opportunities for people at the bottom to influence those at the top.
On the other hand, spans of control are larger in flat structures and unless organisational members are self-reliant there is the possibility that the level of supervision will be inadequate.
Additionally, promotion and career development opportunities are lacking in these structures.
The best structure — flat or tall — depends upon the needs of the organisation.
Each organisation operates differently, with different motives, priorities and goals.
The structure should be tailored in such a way that it can most effectively pursue its aims.
This view is known as the CONTINGENCY APPROACH .
It states that there is no one correct way to manage or design an organisation, only a best way for each individual organisation.
The right structure is contingent , that is to say depends, upon the wide range of factors including the competitive environment, the type of product, the quality of the labour force and the culture of the organisation.
Management
Management is the term given to the planning, controlling and decision-making functions within organisations.
It is difficult to give any general definition of management as what constitutes management varies greatly between jobs and between organisations.
A useful starting point is to divide management functions into personnel or people functions, task functions, and systems functions.
Most managers will find themselves involved in some or all of the following.
Personnel/people functions
Selection and recruitment
Training and development
Counselling and advice
Disciplinary actions
Performance appraisal and assessment
Pay and bonus assessment
Task functions
Supervision and delegation
The definition of work roles and tasks
Product development
New business
Marketing and selling
Quality control
Systems functions
Communicating and informing
Budgeting and costing
Decision-making
Goal setting
Evaluation and review
Power
Power is a feature of all organisations.
It is simply the ability which a person or group has to make others do what he, she or they want them to do.
Power is often seen as a sinister concept.
Of course, it can be and often is.
But it is the way in which it is exercised which is the key.
In many organisations, power relationships often go unnoticed because instructions and orders are often couched in polite terms —‘Could you, please, do this or that for me’.
The power relationship underlies such an instruction because if an employee does not carry out the instruction then managers are entitled to exercise sanctions which are the manifestation of their power — the ultimate sanction being the sacking of an employee.
In organisations people are only given sufficient power to carry out their responsibilities effectively.
In addition, organisational members require to be given the authority to exercise their powers.
Charles Handy, in his book Understanding Organisations , has classified the forms of power available to members of organisations as follows.
Physical power
This is where force or the threat of it is used by someone to achieve his or her own ends.
Organisation members never have the right to use physical sanctions (except in the case of the courts, prisons and other institutions of public safety).
In industrial relations, physical force does on occasions manifest itself during strikes or lock outs when negotiations have broken down.
Resource power
Many managers possess this power.
They may have the ability to decide how to allocate scarce resources, whether they are finances, promotions or new equipment.
Position power
This is sometimes called legal or legitimate power.
As Handy puts it ‘the power that comes as a result of the role or position in the organisation.’
People who occupy certain roles have certain rights.
It is such rights that allow managers to allocate work, control resources and provide the rights of access to various networks of information.
Expert power
This is power which arises from the possession of expert knowledge.
As a source of power, it can only be claimed and used if others recognise and accept it as a source of power.
Personal power
This is often called charisma and it is the power of personality.
It is like expert power in that it can only be exercised if others recognise and accept it.
Negative power
This is the power to stop things happening or to delay or disrupt them.
Many people in organisations have the power to delay or distort developments.
Trade Unions often use this source of power when negotiations break down during collective bargaining.
Responsibility
Work is all about responsibility: the duties and commitments which we are required to undertake during our working day.
Responsibility goes hand in hand with accountability because all role holders are accountable to their superior for the exercise of those responsibilities.
In addition, it is not something that can be delegated and employees cannot escape their responsibility by delegation.
Span of control
Span of control refers to the number of persons for whom a manager has direct responsibility.
In figure 27, A has a span of control of four, and B and C spans of control of three people each.
There is much debate about the optimum span of control.
Much depends upon the type of work and the sort of people employed.
Unskilled trainees will require a great deal of supervision and so efficient management will call for a smaller span of control than a situation where the employees are experienced.
Usually, self-motivated professionals require little supervision and so in such circumstances spans of control can be large.
Staff and line
Line management roles refer to those positions which are directly concerned with the operational aspects of the business (see figure 28).
Functions such as production, sales, accounting and purchasing are all concerned with the making and selling of a product.
Staff functions on the other hand are those which provide common services to an organisation (see figure 28).
The canteen, the personnel  department, maintenance and central computing services usually fall into that category.
They are provided centrally in order to make the most effective use of resources and to give line managers the freedom to do the jobs they are paid to do.
Activity: ‘College organisation chart’
Draw an organisation chart of your College.
You should clearly distinguish between line and staff functions.
In order to do this you need to consider whether a particular department, section or function is directly concerned with the main operational function of the College.
The operational function is the provision of teaching and learning opportunities for students.
Status
Status is an important concept in any consideration of how organisations work.
Generally, it is the case that the positions at the apex of the hierarchy have more power, authority and status than those lower down.
Status is defined in terms of values and norms.
People and their roles have status because other people assign it to them.
Status is usually enhanced with a range of symbols which express status to others.
The size of offices, the type and size of office furniture such as desks, reserved car parking spaces, titles and badges of rank are just some of the ways in which status is expressed.
Are status and status symbols really necessary?
To answer this question you need to distinguish between status that is earned and that which is not.
If people are accorded status because of the respect in which their achievements are held, then status may be regarded as a normal part of social life.
But, of course, some status symbols merely seek to inflate the importance of an office or a person out of all proportion to his or her achievements or responsibilities.
Status can be an important motivator.
Many people struggle for promotion in order to enhance their status within organisations.
Answers to ‘Sources of authority’ activity on page 108
A Police Officer
Legal/Rational and Traditional Authority
A Car Park Attendant
Legal Authority
Your Boss
This will depend on your business but it is likely to be Legal/Rational
Your Course Tutor
Rational Authority
The College Principal
Rational/Legal Authority
You
It depends upon your role, but if you are at work is likely to be Legal/Rational
The Archbishop of Canterbury
Traditional Authority
The Prime Minister
Legal/Rational, Traditional, Charismatic
A Judge
Legal/Rational, Traditional
A Civil Servant
Legal/Rational
Meetings
Meetings, Bloody Meetings is the title of a well-known training film produced by Video Arts Ltd, and it may well be shown to you on your course.
Its title sums up the attitude of many people to what is an essential feature of working life — namely, meetings.
Managers may spend as much as fifty per cent of their working lives engaged in meetings of various types.
It is usually the case that the more senior people are, the more meetings they have to attend.
We need to ask why meetings are so essential.
The rationale for working with others in meetings of all types is based on the following:
They enable people to pool ideas.
They are means of settling disputes.
They can bring conflict into the open.
They enable consensus to be reached.
They co-ordinate activities.
They are a means of informing others.
They offer opportunities for participation in decision-making.
They are a useful vehicle to test out ideas before implementation.
They are a vehicle for accountability.
They are a means of formulating policies.
If meetings are potentially so useful, then why do so many go wrong?
In order to answer this we need to understand what makes so many meetings ineffectual and time-wasting, and to formulate means by which the meetings you attend can be as productive as possible.
During your course you will be involved in a wide range of activities which will involve you in meetings both formal and informal.
You need to develop the skills to run and to participate in successful meetings.
A very good way is to start by keeping notes of your observations about the running and the outcomes of meetings you attend.
Some of the points to look out for are:
‘Was the meeting well chaired?’
‘Did the meeting have a clear purpose?’
‘Did the participants know why they were participating?’
‘Did the meeting have an agenda?’
‘Was the agenda kept to?’
‘Were clear decisions reached?’
‘Were the decisions recorded?’
‘Did the meeting drag on longer than it needed to?’
‘Was the bulk of the time devoted to the important or the trivial agenda items?’
‘Did some people dominate the meeting, and if so, why?’
‘What roles did particular participants play?’
‘What role did you play in the meeting?’
‘Were all the participants playing an active and positive role?’
Types of meetings
The main types of meetings are:
Problem-solving meetings .
This type of meeting concentrates on tackling problems and making decisions.
There are usually shared objectives in the meeting — at least that the problem should be solved.
Negotiation meetings .
At this type of meeting there are usually two sides who are trying to make an agreement or bargain over a point.
In such a meeting the two sides usually have different objectives.
Selling meetings .
In this type of meeting one person or party is trying to persuade the others to a particular point of view.
The objective of the persons doing the convincing is to ‘sell’ their ideas to others.
Command meetings .
This meeting is called by a manager to inform his subordinates or to instruct or to control them.
The manager specifies the objectives.
Communications/advisory meetings .
This is an exchange of views and opinions.
Its major objective is to seek opinions so that a manager can take a decision at a later stage.
Support meetings .
Many meetings help individuals and groups to overcome their particular problems or fulfil an emotional need.
The objectives will be personal to the individual members.
One problem with meetings is that they are not all of one type.
It is important to know what type of meeting is best for a particular purpose and to make certain that the participants know the purpose and status of  the meeting.
People often become frustrated if they are uncertain about why a meeting has been called, what it is for and why they are there.
Expectations have to be met if people are to be satisfied with their experience of a meeting.
If people expected to come to a meeting to make a decision, they will feel let down if the meeting does not reach one.
Meetings do not have to be decision-making.
A meeting which just airs views is quite legitimate but every one present should be aware of it.
Committee meetings
Most organisations of any size work through a system of committees.
They have the function of making policies, taking decisions, and co-ordinating activities.
They are an essential element in the management process and they provide the means of participation of various interests.
Committees are formal and follow rules of procedure.
The main features of committees are:
They elect or have appointed a person who chairs the meeting.
The Chair conducts the meeting, interprets the rules and makes certain that the business of the meeting is effectively and properly conducted.
(Until recently the title Chairman was given to the person chairing meetings.
This title is still the one in general use but the moves towards non-discriminatory, non-sexist language have led to the use of titles such as Chairperson , and the more neutral Chair .
The title Chair is useful in that it separates the formal role from the person occupying it.)
They have a Secretary , whose role is to record the proceedings and the decisions of the meetings and to publish the minutes of the meetings and the agenda with any supporting papers.
They have a written agenda , which is generally published in advance together with the Notice of the Meeting (see figure 29).
This provides the timetable for the meeting and allows members of the committee to prepare themselves in advance for the discussions that will take place.
(The control of the agenda can be one of the most important powers which the Chair exercises by deciding the order of the discussion and whether or not a particular issue is a legitimate topic of debate.)
A typical committee meeting has the following structure:
(a)
Apologies for absence from members unable to attend.
(b)
The signing of the minutes of the previous meeting prepared by the Secretary as a correct record of the proceedings.
(c)
Matters arising from the minutes.
This allows the meeting to ask questions, comment or review what happened at previous meetings  and to check that decisions have been carried out, or that matters have progressed in the manner envisaged.
(d)
The business items of the meeting.
These items form the bulk of the business of the committee.
(e)
Any other business allows matters to be raised which are not on the agenda.
Some committees refuse to allow non-agenda items, while others only allow matters notified to the Chair before the meeting.
The value of AOB is to allow urgent matters to be raised which cannot wait until the next meeting.
Some meetings have an exchange of information session after the discussion of the minutes.
This allows members to give a brief review of events on topics of interest to other members, and to update the progress of these events since the previous meeting.
Some committees may have a correspondence item in which they consider and suggest replies to important items of correspondence  received .
This item often appears on the agendas of the committees of clubs, societies and voluntary organisations.
Formal committees have rules of procedure which govern the way in which the meeting operates.
The rules may be laid down in Standing Orders or may be the custom and practice of the organisation.
The Chair, interprets and enforces the rules of the meeting.
It is the duty of the Chair to make certain the procedures are adhered to.
The rules usually applied to meetings are:
That the Agenda order is strictly adhered to unless a motion is made to alter the order.
That members of the Committee speak through the Chair.
This means that all remarks have to be addressed to the Chair.
It means that only one person can speak at a time and that members cannot address each other directly.
This prevents personal discussions and arguments developing freely and allows the Chair to retain control of the meeting.
Decisions are usually reached upon a motion being put to the meeting.
If a visible consensus is not reached, then decisions are taken on a majority vote.
The Chair has the casting vote in the case of a tie.
Accountability in committee meetings lies with the whole membership and not with particular individuals.
Final agreement is the agreement of all, not just the members who are in favour of a particular motion.
The ‘hidden agenda’
We have described how meetings can have a variety of objectives and be used for a number of tasks, and we have described the procedures which normally govern the operation of formal meetings.
What we have not done is to describe ‘what really goes on’.
You may ask ‘but surely the minutes will tell us what went on?’, and up to a point they do — in the formal sense.
There are two structures operating in any meeting and these may be classified as follows.
(1)
The ‘surface structure ’.
This is what the meeting is notionally about, or as we have already described it, the formal structure.
A meeting to decide next year's budget is formally about just that — fixing the budget.
The minutes will be entirely concerned with just these items, but in almost all meetings something else is happening.
(2)
The ‘deep structure ’.
The ‘something else’ that happens in meetings is sometimes called the informal structure and it is about the politics of decision-making.
The interplay of personalities plays a considerable part here.
If we take our budget-fixing example and examine it for a moment, we realise that two separate things may be going on.
On the  surface there is the process of deciding which department in the organisation will have what to spend next year.
Complex formulas will often be employed to show how impersonal and objective the decision-making has been.
Underlying this scientific calm will often be the interplay of personalities and politics.
Departmental managers, wanting a larger share of the cake, may feel aggrieved about the effect of the formulas on their plans, and may be jealous of those who appear to be doing well out of the process.
A manager may support another manager's position and justify it according to organisational criteria, but underneath the solidarity may lie the expectation of being supported later in the meeting.
The ‘hidden agenda’ is the name often given to this covert process whereby liaisons and alliances are formed for mutual support, and battle lines are drawn.
It is often complained of by many that a meeting will take five minutes to agree the expenditure of ten million and two hours to debate a minor item worth only a few thousand.
The hidden agenda helps to explain although not to justify it.
Often the trivial item is one on which a person's reputation, promotion or future prospects depend.
To be successful at meetings you need to know what is really going on, or in other words what is below the surface.
What are the forces, who may combine with you or against you and why?
You need to know the trade-offs from support, the costs of failure, and the price to be paid in attacking a view.
An all-out attack by a junior on a senior at a meeting is usually costly, especially if the junior member wins.
That junior may have to pay for the victory with a heavy defeat in the future.
Senior managers cannot afford to lose face too often and will bide their time to re-assert their authority.
You may ask whether there has to be these two levels at meetings.
The answer is that there does not but, in practice, there is usually a strong element of politics.
A few very mature groups can meet together and are able to state openly how they feel without their feelings being manipulated or exploited by other members.
In such meetings the deep structures rise to the surface and form part of the main agenda.
Committees who wish to operate in this fashion have to avoid their members playing games or having manipulative strategies.
They have to work to fulfil, as far as possible, the genuine needs of their members.
In such situations, assertive team members who are able to state a strong case but appreciate the genuine needs of others are necessary.
The other difference is the absence of the competitive winning and losing.
The outcome of mature meetings is to search for solutions and to reach consensus, not for a particular group to score points over another.
Taking minutes
The minutes of a meeting are the record of the proceedings and the proposed actions which have been decided.
They are taken by the Secretary, although the actual recording activity may be delegated to a Minute Secretary or Committee Clerk.
If you are given this task it is best to write the minutes up the same day or as soon as possible after the meeting while the discussion is still fresh in your mind.
There is a special responsibility which the Secretary has and that is to make certain that the minutes are accurate.
Once the next meeting has approved them, they form the official record of what happened and what was decided.
There is no going back and so they must be accurate and precise.
Minutes must contain all the facts about a meeting.
When and where it met, the times it opened and closed, the people who were present, apologies for absence, actions it was agreed should be taken and the names of the individuals who will take responsibility.
Some minutes are very full and contain verbatim quotes while others only record the decisions and the actions required.
The later ‘decisions only’ approach helps to prevent members from making long speeches which they can read in the minutes.
It is important to number all of the items in the minutes so that it is easy to refer to particular items at a later date.
How to be successful at meetings
Be organised .
Successful committee members are properly and thoroughly prepared for the meetings they attend.
Read all the papers you are sent, before attending the meeting.
Mark passages to which you want to refer or where you wish to seek clarification.
Be punctual for meetings .
Nothing creates a worse impression than people who are late for meetings.
Take notes during meetings .
You should not rely on your memory about important issues or decisions.
Minutes of meetings do not always record all of the details which were discussed.
Your notes should be brief and to the point.
Taking notes helps concentration, particularly during long meetings.
Pay particular attention to the wording of minutes .
It is very easy for a Secretary to fail to capture the feeling of a meeting when he or she writes up the minutes.
Compare the minutes with your own notes and raise any discrepancies.
Find support for your ideas .
You may need to form alliances for your ideas.
It is sometimes worth lobbying other members beforehand if you want support on an issue.
Remember that other people will expect your support in return for backing you.
Keep to the point .
Nothing is more irritating than people who do not keep to the point and talk for too long.
You are more likely to influence others if you make your points clearly, forcefully and succinctly.
Be watchful of the tactics of others .
There are a variety of ways of defeating a proposal other than directly speaking against it.
You may find your opponents talking at length of earlier items on the agenda or have late items postponed to a later meeting, or talking off the issue in order to divert the discussion.
You are likely to make a success of meetings by recognising when others are using tactics such as these.
You may need to remind the Chair of the length of the agenda or the point at issue if a speaker is not keeping to the matter at issue.