

Childhood in the Family
Claims that ‘the family’ is in decline are often heard in contemporary western society.
Traditional patterns of family life and cultural values are said to be breaking down under the pressure of geographical and social mobility, and the power of the mass media.
The alternative interpretation, that the heterogeneity in society is being more widely felt, and as a result family life is becoming less parochial, is heard rather less frequently.
Such arguments are rehearsed most often in relation to children.
Responsibility for their welfare and early learning experiences has traditionally rested with the family, but some would argue that the family is losing its viability as the primary provider for children.
Leaving aside this particular controversy, there is a great deal of interest in the topic of historical and cultural variations in patterns of child rearing in the family, which is illustrated by the articles in this section.
Worsley (1.1) evaluates three key themes related to the family in industrial society: the isolation of the nuclear family, the loss of functions of the family, and the character of relationships between husband and wife, and between parents and children.
The discussion is relevant not only to the main topic of this first Part, but to many other issues taken up by later articles in the collection.
Firstly, Worsley argues that overgeneralizations about the breakdown of the family unit are not justified by evidence on kinship networks.
More detailed analysis of this as it affects the experience of old people is developed in Part Six.
Secondly, claims that the family is losing its educational function need to be balanced by an acknowledgment that increasing emphasis is now placed on the central role parents play in their child's development, even where very young children spend part of the day in the care of another (see Part Two).
Finally, the movement towards greater sexual equality is affecting relationships within the family, but a strong argument can be made that traditional role differentiation between men and women is strongly resistant to change (see Part Four).
The Worsley extract also introduces the main theme of this section, attitudes towards and treatment of children in the family.
Worsley suggests that the supposed trend towards permissiveness is a good deal more complex on closer examination; that there is a considerable gulf between theory and practice, and little consensus in either.
Plumb (1.2) traces changes in the way children were treated between the seventeenth and eighteenth century.
There are numerous difficulties in making an historical study which depends entirely on written evidence, which may not represent the experience of the mass of children, and is at best a distillation of the views of the literate classes.
There are also dangers in suggesting that writers such as John Locke influenced attitudes, rather than merely reflecting changing attitudes, away from a punitive to a more liberal approach to children.
Similar questions apply to  the contemporary counterparts of eighteenth-century writing about childhood — the popular Child Care Manuals.
Perhaps the most famous, Benjamin Spock's Baby and Child Care, is now in its fourth edition and has world-wide sales in excess of 28 million copies.
This must be taken as evidence that parents find value in such manuals, but whether they seek specific advice on child-rearing practice, or use the book as a source of more general reassurance, is unclear.
Newson and Newson (1.3) suggest that it is only in this century that questions about how to bring up children have been widely discussed; hitherto the niceties of different child-rearing philosophies were set aside in the face of a more fundamental dilemma, whether children would survive at all beyond the first few years.
Newson and Newson trace the relationship between emerging concepts about childhood, and the cultural context of different epochs: subjugation of the will to avoid damnation; the strict clinical regime advocated by Truby King; the responsiveness to the natural instincts of the child, e.g. for affection and play; and the reassertion of parenthood responsibility and self-determination.
The remaining three articles offer personal perspectives on childhood and the process of learning in the family.
Kenyatta (1.4) describes childhood amongst the Gikuyu, where the family and community has primacy over the learning experiences which will equip children with the skills and qualities valued in this pre-industrial society.
The children's play is described as modelling adult activities: hunting, agriculture, crafts, etc.
There is no place for schooling in these children's education, which is rooted in their day-to-day contact and intimacy with their environment.
Indeed Kenyatta argues that the content of formal instruction is so divorced from the experience and life-style of the Gikuyu society that it does not serve the interests of their children.
This Third World view contrasts with the autobiographical interpretation of childhood experiences in industrial society, offered by Carl Rogers, the well-known American psychotherapist (1.5).
Rogers describes his childhood in a strong family group.
His parents' religious conviction and corresponding belief in the virtue of hard work clearly had a formative influence, but it is notable how much significance is attributed to more formal education, especially learning through books.
In contrast to Kenyatta, Rogers offers a conventional interpretation of the value of schooling, and its relationship to family experiences.
It is seen as extending horizons, the means for communicating between generations the accumulated wisdom of a culture, offering opportunities to engage in more abstract context-independent learning.
The value of formal education was largely endorsed by Rogers' family, who taught him to read before school, although he does acknowledge their concern about his consequent impractical nature.
It is notable that even when the young Rogers was inspired by the direct experience of discovering two moths in nearby woods, he turned immediately to books to find out about the life-cycle, and learn the lepidopterists' terminology.
Rogers' experience of American family life in the early part of the century was of a cohesive group exerting a powerful religious influence over its members (with a taboo on dancing, playing cards, drinking, smoking, etc.), as well as expecting commitment to family demands (coming straight home from school) and fulfilment of family expectations (gaining entry to the University of Wisconsin).
The next extract by Urie Bronfenbrenner (1.6) is taken from his comparative study of child-rearing in the Soviet Union and the USA, in which he argues that the status of the American family has diminished, that it is losing its influence over children.
A whole range of contributory factors are singled out, and evidence offered, notably on age stratification leading children to be more peer than adult-orientated, and television viewing increasingly dominating their waking lives.
In evaluating such arguments several problems arise.
For example, it is not clear how far the model of past family life with which recent trends are being compared, was really widespread in American society, and it is also not clear what criteria can legitimately be used to judge whether child-rearing patterns past and present are desirable or undesirable.
1.1 The Family in Industrial Society
P. Worsley
To write the words ‘the family in industrial society’ is to make a lot of assumptions and to open up a complex range of questions.
It assumes, firstly, that there is something unique or special about the family in such a society, and, secondly, that this uniqueness is in some way associated with an easily recognizable phenomenon called ‘industrialization’.
Further it assumes that the differences between the forms and functioning of the family in ‘industrial’ and ‘pre-industrial’societies are greater than any differences that might exist within these two categories such as, in the former, between capitalist and socialist societies.
Even if we agree that these kinds of assumptions have some general validity, the questions that then stem from them are equally complex.
If we can associate certain patterns of family living with the process of industrialization then what were these particular patterns, and were they caused by industrialization or a necessary pre-condition for it?
Finally, as industrial societies do not remain static — indeed some sociologists are already talking of a ‘postindustrial’ society — what further changes, if any, are we likely to see in patterns of family living or in the development of alternatives to what we usually understand as ‘the family’?
The nature of the changes
Whether or not particular authors take industrialization to be the main engine of change, or whether they include other factors, such as urbanization and bureaucratization, three generally agreed themes seem to emerge from the writings of many sociologists of the family.
From reading these accounts it would appear that three main changes have taken place in family structure and functioning over the past one or two centuries:
(a)
The family has become a more isolated unit, relatively separate from wider sets of kin, and functioning chiefly as a conjugal or nuclear unit.
(b )
The family has either lost many of its functions or has become more specialized in these functions.
In particular, the family has lost its central functions as a productive unit in the wider economy.
(c )
Internally, relationships within the family have become more egalitarian, both between husband and wife and between parents and children.
It should be noted also that many sociologists would argue-particularly Goode, for example(Goode, 1970)— that these changes are not simply confined to Britain and the United States but are taking place throughout the world, although at different paces and starting from different points.
Sociologists differ as to the amount of weight they place on each of these changes and the way in which these changes are evaluated.
Thus the more pessimistically inclined will write of a ‘loss’ of functions of the family, while the more optimistic sociologists will talk of the ‘change’in and ‘specialization’of these functions.
The final alleged change — that of growing equality within the family-is perhaps the most controversial and the one which is most challenged by contemporary feminist writers who argue that the family is, and continues to be, the major unit sustaining the exploitation and subordination of women.
Thus despite the apparent consensus among many sociologists about these changes in family form and functioning, there is still considerable debate and controversy.
Let us consider each of these debates in turn.
(a) The isolation of the nuclear family.
Those who argue that the modern nuclear or conjugal based family is a ‘relatively isolated’ unit do not deny that individual family members may maintain strong relationships with members of the families in which they were brought up (their families of origin) even after they have married and formed their own families (their families of procreation).
The overwhelming body of evidence for Britain and the United States is that such ties are maintained after marriage and that this is not simply a matter of recognizing connections at Christmas and birthdays plus occasional visits or telephone conversations.
Married couples may live close to one or other set of parents or their own children and their spouses.
Each may provide assistance in times of infirmity or sickness or in the provision of baby-sitting or other services.
Kin may still be of importance when it comes to seeking work or accommodation.
Furthermore, these kinds of effective ties are maintained not only among traditional working-class or immigrant communities, where factors such as economic need and outside hostility may cause them to depend more upon each other, but also among the more mobile members of the middle class.
Here, parents may provide valuable financial assistance to their married children in the early stages of their family life-cycle, when the head of the household is beginning a career, and when the young couples are faced with the initial expenses of setting up a home and providing for young children (Bell, 1968).
Early exaggerated statements by sociologists about the tendency, in modern society, for the nuclear family to become ‘isolated’ had the effect of masking the existence and strength of these intergenerational ties, which persist in spite of geographical distance or social mobility.
But taking a wider historical and comparative perspective, there is some truth in these statements.
Marriage today is seen as a matter for the couples themselves and not something to be decided upon by members of some wider kinship grouping.
The couple is expected to set up a separate residence for  themselves on or shortly after marriage (that is, and has long been, a general European pattern), and the chief obligations of the spouses are to each other and to their children, and only after that to their own families of origin.
The emphasis is, therefore, on the conjugal bond, to such an extent that marriage has become an index of ‘normality’ or ‘settling down’and is now a status formally open to almost everyone of the appropriate age […].
This ‘democratization’ is, as Bernard reminds us, a relatively new trend of the last hundred or two hundred years, and one which contrasts with an earlier situation where marriage was ‘…a kind of privilege, a prerogative, a gift bestowed by the community’(Bernard, 1976, p. 123).
Furthermore, there is no clearly bounded or defined kinship unit-such as a clan or a tribe — outside this nuclear or conjugal family.
Rather, the conjugally based family exists in the context of a fluctuating network of kin, neighbours, friends and workmates.
In many cases, kin may be ‘chosen’(and other kin ignored) just as friends may be chosen, and individuals may choose to go to non-kin instead for particular kinds of help or services.
To some extent, then, kin can take on the status of friends, perhaps involving special kinds of obligations and pressures, but also subject to the influence of factors such as distance and the preference of the couples themselves, rather than determined by blood relationship.
This network of kin and non-kin has no clear boundaries; at the far edges are individuals who are simply ‘known’ or ‘recognized’as kin, while towards the centre there are more effective ties, perhaps involving frequent visits and exchanges of goods and services.
Rules within this network about how couples should relate to particular categories of kin are often unclear and subject to considerable variation between families, and this ambiguity itself provides a clue about the nature of the modern nuclear family.
A good illustration of this is the lack of certainty that many young people have over the question of how to address their parents and parents-in-law after marriage.
Some will use the first name or parental terms (such as‘mother’, ‘father’, ‘Mum’, ‘Dad’, etc.), others will adopt more formal modes of address ('Mr Smith', ‘Mrs Jones’), while many find this awkward situation eased somewhat when they themselves have children and they are able to use the term ‘Gran’ or some equivalent (Firth et al.,1969, pp. 418–22).
(b) The loss of functions.
It would appear to be an easy task to show that the nuclear family has progressively lost many of its functions over the past two hundred years.
Its economic functions, for example, have become severely limited; once a unit where the members produced jointly (on a farm or in some form of domestic industry) as well as consumed jointly, the nuclear family has now simply become a unit of consumption only.
The links between the family and the economy have become more indirect, mediated through the wage-packet.
Similarly, it can be maintained, the educational functions of the family have been taken over by more specialized agencies, as have the functions of leisure and protection.
Even the so-called ‘sexual function’ of the family — that is the function of  regulating and channelling sexual activity — would appear to be of more limited significance today, although supporters and opponents of the ‘permissive society’alike may both be guilty of confusing talk about and representations of sexual activity with actual practice.
(For some of the evidence see Schofield, 1968, and Reiss, 1967.)
In many respects, therefore, it would appear that the family is a much less important institution in modern society than it was in the past.
Yet, while this account of loss of functions and dwindling significance might appear to be almost self-evident, many sociologists — most notably Talcott Parsons (in Parsons and Bales, 1956, pp. 16–17)— have argued that this picture is much too simple.
The family, he maintains, has not so much lost its functions as it has become more specialized in its functions.
The family is doing fewer things, but it is doing these things rather well.
Parsons argues that the specialized functions of the nuclear family today are twofold: the socialization of immature children (often called ‘primary socialization’), and the stabilization of adult personalities.
Taking the first function, while it is true that the education (and hence, also,[…]socialization — since the two cannot be readily separated) of children and young adults has increasingly been taken over by agencies outside the home such as schools, play-groups and youth organizations, the basic primary socialization of the child is still very much a responsibility of a nuclear family.
It is in this family that the child is taught to make basic distinctions between self and others, or between male and female, to acquire and to use language, and to develop a framework through which to understand, interpret and evaluate the world outside.
Through what is sometimes called ‘role-playing’ within the family, the child is taught to anticipate certain adult roles and identities, particularly those identities associated with being a man or a woman.
Children's toys, for example(dolls or ‘Action Man’), clothes (pink for a girl, blue for a boy) and names help to establish and define stereotypical patterns of behaviour associated with being male or female.
Here, Parsons points out, the task of socialization may be much simpler in our culture for girls, because the role-model — the mother-is usually close at hand around the home and the daughter can imitate her behaviour much more readily.
For sons, on the other hand, socialization may be more in terms of broader, more stereotypical notions of masculinity such as may be manifested in horseplay at weekends or evenings, rather than in terms of the more specific feature of the father's role at work, which may often be hidden from the male child.
Perhaps the most important feature about all these, and other, aspects of the primary socialization process is that a large part of it is unplanned and non-deliberate.
[…]Socialization within the family is manifested in subtle cues of things said and things not said, of facial expressions and gestures which arise in the course of day-to-day living within the same dwelling.
The daily ritual of meal-times, for example, may often contain a wealth of deliberately and non-deliberately imparted information for the child, in part confirming his status as a child (children should be seen and not  heard, children should finish their cabbage because it is good for them), in part defining the stages of growing up (older children sit on ‘proper’ chairs, drink out of ‘proper’cups, and use knives and forks), and in part defining and reinforcing certain adult identities (father carves the joint, mother brings food from the stove).
When some sociologists talk of the ‘socialization function of the family’, therefore, they are not talking of a family deliberately and consciously performing a function assigned to it from outside by ‘society’, but rather of a more subtle process that arises out of the facts of being married, of sharing a residence over a long period of time, and of parenthood.
In so far as any one institution is responsible for this basic stage of child socialization — literally, making social —then that institution is more often than not in our society the nuclear family.
Furthermore, if outside agencies — such as courts or social workers decide that socialization has in some way been inadequate, it is to the family that they are most likely to turn in the allocation of blame or responsibility.
The modern nuclear or conjugal family, however, does not simply fulfil the function of socializing children; according to Parsons, it also fulfils functions for adults.
In a society which is increasingly bureaucratized, and characterized by impersonal relationships in the work-place or the streets of the city, the home forms a major setting where adults may enjoy primary social relationships.
So many popular expressions maintain that the family is the place where one can ‘be oneself’, where one can ‘let one's hair down’ and so on.
The values of privacy and the values of home are closely interwoven, especially in contemporary middle-class culture.
The family home, for example, is the one place where adults may indulge in ‘childish’ behaviour (perhaps with and through their own children) without incurring moral disapproval.
A further aspect of the family, linking these ideas of privacy, home and self-expression, has received considerable attention in the last few decades with the growth of popular psychology manuals on how to enjoy or improve married sex and, more recently, encounter groups and sexual therapy.
Even mate-swapping or ‘swinging’ may sometimes be seen as an adjunct to a stable, adult family life.
These two features of the family in industrial society — its relative isolation and the specialization of its functions — may together suggest that the family enjoys a relatively autonomous status in contemporary society.
If the family can be said to perform functions for the society of which it is a part, it performs these functions indirectly (that is, through the individuals who, as adults, move out of their own families of origin and form families of procreation), and possesses a certain degree of latitude as to the performance of these functions.
Modern society, it may be argued, is not like a set of neatly intermeshing and well-oiled cogs, but rather a game in which groups of players have considerable discretion so long as they keep within a set of rules which are often themselves rather loosely defined or at least open to negotiation and change.
Hence families in this kind of  modern society are not all alike, although there are limits to the range of variation.
This account of the functioning of the family in modern industrial society may be considered to be defective in a variety of respects.
Ignoring for the present some of the difficulties inherent in functional analysis, we may note, for example, that the account of socialization ignores the variety of other agencies that play an important part in socializing the child.
Schools and play-groups have already been mentioned, but there are many other less formal agencies: direct, such as other children, other kin or neighbours; and indirect, such as television.
To some extent, of course, these other agencies are often filtered through the family and evaluated by the parents on behalf of the children: the mother may ‘censor’ the amount and kind of television that enters the home, or parents may discourage, with varying degrees of subtlety, their children's choice of certain ‘undesirable’friends.
Yet in this respect as in many others, few families are a complete law unto themselves, and many children are able to participate in the culture of the playground or the street in happy ignorance or gleeful defiance of adult wishes.
The reader is recommended to consult the work of the Opies as an example of a vivid reconstruction of the semi-autonomous world of children's songs, games and folk-lore, a culture often carried on and elaborated over generations (Opie and Opie, 1959).
More important, perhaps, is the fact that this account of the family may be considered defective in that it ignores the varieties of patterns of family living that are to be found in a modern industrial society.
Specifically, we are presented with a rather bland, urban or suburban, middle-class model of family living as if this were a model of or for society as a whole.
Of course it may, and indeed has, been argued-that the middle-class model is the model for the future [= =]but for the present we may simply note the variety of modes of family living that continue to exist and flourish.
We have already mentioned that kin continue to play an important part in family life and that families vary considerably in the density and complexity of their kinship networks.
Rural communities in Wales or the North of England, Italian immigrant communities in London, or Pakistani communities in Rochdale, working-class communities in Bethnal Green or Liverpool, French Canadians in Quebec; all these patterns and many others can be said to exist within industrial societies and yet do not clearly conform to the model presented earlier.
Relevant factors underlying these variations are linguistic, ethnic or cultural identity, discrimination on the part of the host community, mobility or lack of mobility and economic differentiation.
This last factor is of particular importance.
Long working hours, shift-work, large families and overcrowded dwellings may limit the possibility of privacy and of personal growth through the shared marital culture which Parsons's model postulates.
Finally, it may be noted — as this previous point suggests — that the account presented by Parsons and others has tended to dwell on the eu functions (positive functions) at the expense of the negative or  dys functions of this pattern of family living.
The private dwelling which may be the course of personal fulfilment and growth may also be the centre and source of child- or wife-beating.
Here the value of privacy may act against the interests of family members; neighbours may consider that it is not their business to interfere and the beaten wife-at least before the growth of women's self-help centres — may find that she has nowhere to go (Pizzey, 1974).
The family has probably always been a major source of violence — consider the wealth of folk stories and songs that deal with cruel sisters, feuding brothers, and infanticide — but now the violence may be more hidden, less open to immediate social control from the wider community, at least until it is too late.
The violence, of course, may not be physical; in some of the families that Laing and his associates have described, privacy becomes isolation, togetherness becomes a mutual and corrosive manipulation, and love becomes a commodity or weapon (Laing et al .,
1970).
It may also be asked — and it is being asked with increasing urgency-whether this family that has been described is not the one remaining institution that prevents women from fully developing as individual personalities?
This theme will be taken up in the next section.
(c) Towards a more egalitarian family structure?
In outlining the main changes that have taken place in the family in industrial society it has sometimes been maintained that one of the most important changes has been the evolution of a more egalitarian or more democratic family structure.
In the first place it is argued that this growing equality has been a ‘relational’ equality between men and women in the home.
Women are free to choose their spouse, and have moved towards the development of equal rights in such matters as divorce and control over property.
The spread of readily available and simple means of contraception has meant that the wife is less likely to spend much of her life in the bearing and rearing of children and is more likely to seek employment outside the home, thereby developing a source of income and interests outside her traditionally defined role: ‘…in Britain the proportion of all wives in paid work went up from 10 per cent in 1911 (as it remained in 1931) to 26 per cent in 1951 and 42 per cent in 1971’(Young and Willmott, 1975, p. 101).
She has become a more equal partner in decision-making, in the enjoyment of sex, and in control over domestic resources.
Similarly, the husband is playing a greater part in domestic tasks associated with the house and children.
In the second place, it can be argued that similar changes have taken place in the relationships between parents and children.
The traditional patriarchal structure has been eroded, partly because the formal head Of the house has moved out of the home into the completely separate sphere of work, and partly because the authority he derives from control over economic resources and property is eroded in an urban, money economy.
Child rearing is more ‘permissive’, and while children may not be granted the status of equal partners in the family decision-making process, they are no longer simply expected to be seen and not heard.
The relationships  between husbands and wives, and between parents and children, have, it is argued, become permeated with a democratic ideology.
The evidence, however, reveals a much more complex pattern.
There are, in the first instance, many resistances to these processes within our society.
In the case of child rearing, commentators may confuse the development of ‘permissive’ child-rearing theories with a growth of permissiveness in practice,and assume that the former also entailed the latter.
Certainly, there is little strong evidence of an unambiguous growth in permissive child-rearing practice, at least in the United Kingdom.
At the very least, we need to consider variations according to social class as Table 1 (taken from the Newsons' study of child-rearing practice published in 1963) demonstrates.
This suggests, too, that the very notion of ‘permissiveness’, and its converse, is a slippery one; in many cases it would seem to mean little more than an exchange of more overt physical controls for more subtle emotional controls.
In both cases, the actual structure of authority between parent and child remains unchanged.
Similarly, in the case of relationships between spouses, it can be shown that clear divisions between the women's sphere and the man's sphere persist, and the illustrations of this do not come exclusively from rural or traditional working class communities.
In professional or managerial families, for example, the husband's career is the dominant consideration, maintaining the traditional division of labour between the husband as breadwinner and wife as housewife (Pahl and Pahl, 1971).
Studies which show apparent equality in decision-making between husbands and wives often omit or do not give due weight to many of the more important decisions such as where to live, when to move or when to buy a new car (Gillespie, 1972).
In most cases, the role of the husband as chief income-earner is still likely to be the deciding factor in any marital power struggle.
More significantly, it is possible to point to certain paradoxical elements in the apparent development of a democratic family structure.
In the first place it must be asked why, if this growing equality between spouses has been achieved over the past hundred or so years, has the militant feminist movement grown throughout the world during the 1960s and 1970s?
In part the answer might lie in a ‘revolution of rising expectations’, a growing, perceived contradiction between the overt ideologies of equality and the apparent growth in opportunities for women opened out through the educational and employment systems, on the one hand, and the actual experience of being a woman on the other.
A woman may not be bound by her role as a housewife but it is still the case that in so far as any one person is left with the main responsibility for the housework, that person is the woman.
Even in cases where the husband and wife contribute equally to the family budget, there is no guarantee that both will contribute equally to the day-to-day running of the home and caring for the children.
In short, the growing participation of women in the labour force has not been matched by an equal growth of male participation in the home.
Furthermore, this very development of the family as a relatively    private and semi-autonomous sphere has, at one and the same time, left the wife free to develop interests outside the home but also, through the increasing stress on the importance of the home in childhood socialization and the growth of adult personalities, laid much of this new domestic responsibility on women.
The woman, therefore, is placed under a severe set of conflicting pressures: on the one hand to develop her identity outside the home and, on the other, to develop and improve new and subtle human ‘skills’ as a housewife and as a mother.
At the same time, in contrast to earlier eras, the housework is more likely to be carried out in isolation, without reference to others or without any external standard of comparison from which she might derive status or recognition for her particular skills as a cook or a housewife.
Furthermore, the long hours of housework are, as many feminists have stressed, unpaid and do not receive any recognition as productive labour in national income statistics.
Another paradox may be noted in the case of children.
On the one hand it would appear that they are less likely to be clearly subordinated to traditional patriarchal authority.
At a time of rapid social change, for example, and through the educational system, the child may acquire a degree of independence as a result of the new knowledge and experiences that he comes to possess.
In some respects, also, the parents may be more inclined to treat the child as a person with views of his or her own.
At the same time, however, the child's status as a child is perhaps more tightly defined through employment legislation, the raising of the school-leaving age (thus depriving the child of an independent source of income as well as retaining him or her within an institutionalized system of control), and the growth of a market geared to particular and distinctive images of childhood and adolescence.
Writing of modern, mass-produced toys, Barthes argues:
…faced with this world of faithful and complicated objects, the child can only identify himself as owner, as user, never as creator; he does not invent the world, he uses it: there are, prepared for him, actions without adventures, without wonder, without joy (Barthes, 1973, p. 54).
This perhaps overstates the case but at least reminds us that the modern child is provided with images of himself as a member of a distinctive category just as, a few years later, teenagers are presented with a variety of images defining what it is to be a teenager, each stressing a collective autonomy and independence.
The child is in some respects freer than his predecessors while, at the same time, less able than might have been the case in the past to participate in adult culture.
Is it possible to summarize this account of the family in industrial society?
Certainly, by now, we should have learned to be cautious about simplified statements which attempt to outline the central features of ‘the family in modern society’.
In the first place it is clear that ‘modern’, ‘Western’, ‘industrial’ or ‘capitalist’society is not some homogeneous whole but one which contains many varieties of patterns of living, many  different communities and subcultures with differing degrees of openness to the wider society, differing historical experiences, differing ways of relating as families and as individuals to the major changes in the economy and in ways of earning a living.
The task of sociology is to develop tools and modes of understanding these different patterns and responses and to relate them to the broad strands of historical change.
In the second place, the account that has been provided has been shown to be open to differing interpretations of value;in other words, while we may agree what the main changes in the family have been, we may disagree over whether or not we approve of these changes.
To some, they are signs of an overall decline in the family and in familistic values, to an extent which threatens the fabric of society itself; to others, they indicate a successful adaptation on the part of the family to economic and social change; to yet others, the changes have meant deeper and new contradictions in the role of women and more subtle patterns of sexual exploitation.
Another part of the sociologist's task is to investigate these diverse and conflicting values, to examine the social forces shaping them, and to explore the effect they have in actually shaping the institution of the family which was the original subject of inquiry.
One final warning is necessary.
The attempt to talk about ‘the family in industrial society’ implies some contrast with the family in ‘pre-industrial society’, thereby apparently lumping together feudal Europe, the major empires and kingdoms of the Middle and Far East and the Americas, and the many forms of tribal, hunting, nomadic and peasant societies that have been found throughout different parts of the globe.
Such an approach is not only unscientific: it is also arrogantly ethnocentric.
Finnigan has demonstrated how misleading it is to describe ‘primitive societies’ as if they were all in some way ‘dominated by kinship’(Finnigan, 1970, pp. 1 7 1–94), and Laslett and his associates at Cambridge have shown how, in many ways, the composition of the family in pre-industrial England was similar to that of the family of today (Laslett, 1965).
Then, as now, the norm was that young married couples should live in a residence separate from those of their families of origin, and the three-generational household was as rare then as it is now.
These qualifications and cautions become particularly appropriate when we come to consider the historical and social sources of these broad changes that we have attempted to outline.
Perhaps the least contentious way of describing the family in contemporary society is to characterize it as a ‘relatively autonomous’ institution.
At a more theoretical level this characterization has some affinities with Gouldner's concept of ‘functional autonomy’:
In conceiving of systems as made up of more or less functionally autonomous elements…the elements are not merely ‘parts’ but are seen to exist in and for ‘themselves’.
They are seen to have an existence apart from any given system in which they are involved, their reality does not depend solely upon their involvement in the system under examination (Gouldner, 1970, pp. 215–16).
More concretely, and with particular reference to the institution of the family, we have seen:
(a)
That there is no generally recognized familistic unit other than the nuclear family.
(b)
That this unit is relatively ‘shallow’ genealogically speaking, i.e. that it tends to consist of two generations only and that for many couples the main tie of commitment and responsibility is the conjugal one.
(c)
That the relationships outside this conjugally-based family are, to varying degrees, reflections and expressions of choice, rather than of firm and unambiguous duty.
(d)
That this relatively autonomous conjugal unit is supported by a familistic ideology, which stresses the importance of relationships between the spouses, and between parents and children, and which tends to equate the values of independence and privacy with this kind of family unit.
Finally, and following from these previous points:
(e)
That the relationship between this family unit and other sectors of society, notably the economy, are indirect and subject to considerable variation.
To describe the family of today as a relatively autonomous, conjugally-based unit is probably the best way to do justice to the variety of patterns that not only persist but which continue to evolve and develop, and to recognize some of the sources of contradiction and tension within the family as well as some of the sources of strength.
Finally, to describe the family in these terms is not necessarily to argue that societies other than those so-called ‘industrial societies’ may not possess some of these familial features as well.
To talk of ‘the family in industrial society’ implies, as we have noted, that in some way the family has changed with the process of industrialization.
But what does this mean?
Does this mean that industrialization caused certain changes in the family; or that certain changes in the family were a necessary (if not sufficient) precondition for industrialization to take place; or that, more vaguely, there is some degree of ‘fit’ between a certain type of family and a certain type of economy?
The historical and comparative evidence, as well as the evidence drawn from our own society, presents many difficulties in the way of reaching any clear decisions on these matters.
Thus we have seen that there is considerable evidence of a living and functioning network of kin (some sociologists write of a ‘modified extended family’) in modern industrial society and how some historians have shown how many similarities exist between the family in pre-industrial Europe and the family of our own times.
Some further evidence of the complexities involved in handling the problems of the relationship between social and economic change and change in the family comes from accounts of the way in which families  handle problems of migration in societies undergoing processes of urbanization and industrialization.
Rapid urbanization and industrialization takes place with the growth of a new, mobile labour force recruited from rural areas or from other, more rural, countries.
Such movements, however, do not necessarily and simply entail the substitution of a smaller conjugally-based family for a traditional extended family; rather it would appear that at these times kin may take on a new significance, and that we may need to look at a network of relationships much wider than the conjugal family.
Thus:
(a)
Families in the rural areas or in the countries of emigration may provide financial assistance for some of their unmarried males to travel many hundreds of miles to seek employment.
Reciprocally, such families may receive financial remittances from their migrating members once they have established themselves, and those left behind may derive prestige in their local community from the successes of their sons in the cities or the new countries.
(b)
Kin already established in the countries of immigration or in the city may provide all kinds of assistance to related newcomers, whether in terms of accommodation, short-term financial loans or in finding work.
Less tangibly, but almost of equal importance, the newer migrants may obtain advice on how to adapt to the urban way of life with its newer and more ‘sophisticated’ ways.
A wide-ranging network of advice, information and assistance may develop, linking the families left behind and those who have migrated on a seasonal, short-term or longer-term basis.
Such patterns have been noted, with considerable variation, in Latin America, Africa, India, rural North America and Britain at the time of the Industrial Revolution.
This brief examination of the inter-relationships between family, migration and urbanization should serve to illustrate the point that it is often difficult to establish any clear pattern of causation.
Changes have certainly taken place, often dramatic and painful changes, involving exploitations and deprivations.
Yet, at the same time, there has not, in most cases, been a sharp break between one way of life and another but rather a process involving subtle shifts in emphasis, whereby one set of relationships — kin, friends and neighbours — take on new significances in place of or in addition to older or earlier established relationships.
This brief discussion should also illustrate the point that we have, implicitly, adopted a very broad definition of industrialization, taking the term to include not simply the adoption of new techniques of production (factories and corporations) but also wider and related changes such as the development of industrially-based cities, migrations to these cities, the growth of bureaucracies and, perhaps, less tangible changes in values.
In a more detailed analysis it would be necessary to separate out these different factors and to attempt to assess how each has contributed or is  related to changes in the family.
Thus, talking of industrialization in this sense would entail an interest in such topics as a growing separation between home and work, and the growing transformation of the family into a unit of consumption linked to the sphere of production through the separate and specialized earnings of its constituent members.
When we are considering the impact of urbanization, we focus upon the way in which changes in the family and economy are affected by physical distance and spatial separation, the increasing need to travel to work, and perhaps the substitution of primary social relationships in a relatively stable territorially-based community such as a village by more secondary, more impersonal and fluctuating social relationships — which may, under certain circumstances, cause the members of the nuclear family to become more dependent upon each other.
When we talk of capitalism, we are concerned with a system which is based upon the need for what Weber calls ‘forever renewed profit’ through the selling of the worker's labour power to the property-owning employer, and the consequences these socio-economic relationships have for the family.
When we talk of mobility, we are talking about movement that is both geographical and social, and about the way in which these movements separate family members as well as, perhaps, creating new ties between other family members.
Clearly the task of separating out these different strands of historical change is an enormous one but the mere outlining of these problems reminds us that the sociologist must always be sensitive to the differential cultural and historical experiences often hidden under such general and abstract labels as ‘industrialization’, ‘migration’, ‘urbanization’, ‘capitalism’ and so on.
If, therefore, it is difficult at this stage for us to establish with any certainty general patterns of cause and effect between ‘industrialization’ and the relatively autonomous conjugal family, it may be possible for us to argue that there is at least a degree of fit, a congruence, between these two elements.
This involves a recognition that societies have some kind of pattern and that certain features of a society appear to ‘hang together’.
1.2 The New World of Children in Eighteenth-Century England
J. H. Plumb
The history of children remains obscure — a happy speculative field for psychoanalysts, demographers and historical anthropologists, but attention, largely through the pioneer work of Philippe Aries, is steadily growing among conventional historians.1 And so it should.
We have too long neglected some of the most vital fields of human experience, as if unworthy of a professional historian's attention.
For eighteenth-century England there is no good history of sex, none of prostitution; not even a good history of attitudes to women.
Death has been ignored, and so has food.
Animals, except as a part of husbandry or the meat market, have no history.
And children are little better served.
There is some good antiquarian work on the history of individual schools.
There is a considerable volume of commentary stemming from Locke's Some Thoughts Concerning Education (1693), and from the reception of Rousseau's Emile , first translated in 1763, but this is mainly ideological, although there has been discussion of Locke's attitude to what should be taught in straightforward histories of education.
And yet comparatively simple problems remain to be solved.
For example, were there fewer schools and schoolmasters, or more?
There is little solid evidence, as yet, to answer such a question with confidence.
Nevertheless, from what we do know, there can be no doubt that the children's world of the eighteenth century — at least for those born higher up the social scale than the labouring poor — changed dramatically.
In the late seventeenth century a new social attitude towards children began to strengthen, and it was this attitude which John Locke gave literary force and substance in what was to prove as influential as any work that he produced, his Some Thoughts Concerning Education , published in 1693.
The dominant attitude towards children in the seventeenth century had been autocratic, indeed ferocious.
‘The new borne babe’, wrote Richard Allestree in 1658, ‘is full of the stains and pollutions of sin which it inherits from our first parents through our loins’.
From birth English children were constrained.
They spent their first months, sometimes a year, bound tightly in swaddling bands.
Their common lot was fierce parental discipline, even a man of a warm and kindly nature such as Samuel Pepys thought nothing of beating his 15-year-old maid with a broomstick, and locking her up for the night in his cellar, or whipping his boy-servant, or even boxing his clerk's ears.
Samuel Byrd, of Virginia, who rebuked his wife for severity towards a servant, could make a young  dependant of his, Eugene, drink, according to Byrd's diary, ‘a pint of piss’ as a punishment for bed-wetting.
A fortnight later the same punishment was inflicted, apparently with success, because some weeks later Eugene, according to the diary, was flogged just ‘for nothing’.
Lloyd de Mause reports that ‘the earliest lives I have found of children who may not have been beaten at all date from 1690’.
And of two hundred counsels of advice on child-rearing prior to 1700, only three, Plutarch, Palmieri and Sadoleto, failed to recommend that fathers beat their children.
Subservience was expected from children, and sometimes the autocratic power of the father was enforced by law.
It was a crime in New England, punishable by death, for a child of 16 to curse or strike a parent.
Harsh discipline was the child's lot, and they were often terrorized deliberately and, not infrequently, sexually abused.
Their toys were few, often home-made, and, except for the very rich, their pets were usually purposeful — a pony for riding, a dog for shooting and hunting.
Much of their education was devoted to religion and to the catechism.
Naturally, there were many exceptions to this dark picture — parents who doted on their children, and who played with them; they were a minority, for most of the upper and middle classes rarely had their children at home.
If they had children in the house, they were more often than not other people's, and therefore more likely to be ill-treated.
The typical childhood of an upper-class English boy of the late seventeenth century was Sir Robert Walpole's, who was born in 1676.
Almost immediately after birth he was sent out to a wet-nurse at the nearby village of Syderstone, where he remained until he was weaned, at about 18 months.
At 6 he was dispatched to a school at Great Dunham kept by the rector, Richard Ransome, where he remained, enjoying only very brief holidays, until he went to Eton; nor did he go home for all of his holidays.
Often he stayed with Townshend relations nearby.
Indeed, until he was summoned home from King's College, Cambridge, in 1698, after the death of his elder brother, Walpole had rarely spent more than a few weeks at his Norfolk home in any year since he was 6.17 Not all families, however, sent their children away from home so early, or for so long.
The Ishams were kept at home by Sir Justinian, their father, and taught by a tutor who lived at Lamport.
Some others, however, like the earl of Sandwich, sent their sons in the first instance to the local grammar school.
We need a far more systematic study of the education of the gentry and aristocracy than we have, but the impression is that the Ishams and Sandwiches were a minority, and most gentry families acted like the Walpoles.
This meant that children and parents shared few pursuits together, and the art of the seventeenth century would seem to bear this out.
Up to about 1730 family portraits are formally posed groups; increasingly, however, after 1730 children are shown playing or reading or sketching or fishing or picnicking with their parents — family scenes of mutual pleasure and enjoyment, and ones which the parents wanted recorded.
One has only to compare  Michael Wright's ‘Sir Robert Vyner and Family’(1673) with David Allan's ‘Family of Sir J. Hunter Blair, Bt, or Wheatley's entrancing ‘Browne Family’.
Also, portraits of individual children are far more common in the eighteenth century than in the seventeenth, again arguing both for a change in fashionable attitudes, and also, may be, for a greater emotional investment in children by parents.
There had been, however, towards the end of the seventeenth century, a perceptible new attitude — John Evelyn, long before Locke, had practised many of the Lockeian ideas on education on his own son, preferring a system of rewards, provocations, emulation and self-discipline to physical punishment or verbal chastisement.
His whimsical friend, Aubrey, was also strongly against corporal punishment, although he allowed the use of thumbscrews as a last resort! 18 Indeed, Locke's book encapsulates what was clearly a new and growing attitude towards child-rearing and education which was to improve the lot of the child in the eighteenth century.
Locke, although not opposed to corporal punishment as a final sanction, nor indeed for very young children of an age too tender to be reasoned with, in order to instil the necessary fear and awe that a child should have for an adult, strongly disapproved of beating once formal education had begun, just as he was equally opposed to bribing the child to work through material rewards.
The Rewards and Punishments then, whereby we should keep children in order,are quite of another kind; and of that force, that when we can get them once to work, the Business, I think, is done, and the Difficulty is over.
Esteem and Disgrace are, of all others, the most powerful Incentives to the Mind, when once it is brought to relish them.
If you can once get into Children a Love of Credit, and an Apprehension of Shame and Disgrace, you have put into them the true principle…
As well as arguing for a more liberal attitude towards the child, Locke also pleaded for a broader curriculum.
He believed education should fit man for society, as well as equipping him with learning, hence he pressed not only for lessons in drawing, but also in French.
Indeed, he opposed rigid grounding in English grammar and urged that Latin be taught by the direct method, as it would have been had it been a living language.
Locke's attitude to child-rearing was as modern as his view of education.
In his letters he encouraged breast-feeding by the mother, and was concerned with early toilet-training-indeed, his attitude towards the child was ahead of his time, but in no way original.
There had been a current of antipathy to the strict Calvinist view of the child throughout the seventeenth century; and the concept that, given the right environment and the proper course of education, compassion and benevolence, the essential goodness of the child would triumph over its propensity for evil, already had a longish history.
John Earle, as early as 1628, likens the child to Adam before the Fall all innocence which time destroys, for experience corrupts; yet the original  nature of the child is pure.
However, this thin stream that stems from earlier generations becomes a broad river in the generations that follow Locke.
After Locke the education of the child increasingly becomes social rather than religious.
Morality is still uppermost, but it is a social morality with which parents and teachers are concerned, not the repression of old Adam, the suppression of evil, or the breaking of the will, and, in consequence, the view that a proper submissiveness in the child can only be achieved by harsh discipline weakens, at least for a time.
The birch existed, particularly in the older public and grammar schools, nor was it absent from some of the newer schools, if the denunciations of some publicists are to be believed.
Nevertheless, no one can read through the hundreds of advertisements in the provincial press for private schools, or the numerous handbooks on the care and education of children, or the occasional prospectuses of academies that have survived, without realizing that the emphasis on education had changed.
Its aim was social, to equip the child with accomplishments that would secure for it gainful employment, and this, doubtless, was a major inducement for parents to spend money; but every advertisement boasts that the school will instil those virtues — sobriety, obedience, industry, thrift, benevolence and compassion — that educationalists regard as the virtues of a successful social man.
And the best way of achieving these ends was through developing the child's sense of emulation and shame.
The true aim of education, according to the author of the Dialogues on the Passions, Habits, Appetites and Affections, etc.
Peculiar to Children,was not to teach bad Latin, harsh French, as if the children were ‘a parcel of Parrots or Magpies’, but ‘to teach them the Government of themselves, their Passions and Appetites’.
Better an increase of virtue than ‘their abounding in human literature’.
And teaching should be quite natural and the pupils free to speak as they wished before their masters.
Indeed, the author was against all restrictions.
Children should never realize that they are on a curb or under its direction.
They must be taught through benevolence and sympathy; when the necessity arises shame may be used, but fear only in the last extremity, and then ‘with such delicacy that if possible the habit may not gather strength by the use you are constrained to make of it’.
This, indeed, is a far cry from Sam Byrd's ‘pint of piss’ or beating his boy Eugene ‘for nothing’.
The attitude to children had radically changed.
True, there were still plenty of pockets of sadism where the whip and the birch were freely used.
Not all fathers or mothers were converted so easily from tyranny to benevolence, but, by the 1740s, a new attitude to children was spreading steadily among the middle and upper classes.
By 1780 John Browne could make one of the principal virtues of the expensive academy for gentlemen's sons that he proposed to set up a total absence of corporal punishment.
This gentle and more sensitive approach to children was but a part of a wider change in social attitudes; a part of that belief that nature was inherently good, not evil, and what evil there was derived from man and  his institutions; an attitude which was also reflected among a growing elite in a greater sensitivity towards women, slaves and animals.
Not only did this new attitude towards children begin to emerge among educationalists in the middle decades of the eighteenth century, but we can deduce also from the success of small private academies, from the development of a new kind of children's literature, and from the vastly increased expenditure on the amusements and pleasures of children, that parents, too, were no longer regarding their children as sprigs of old Adam whose wills had to be broken.
Many had come to look upon their children as vehicles of social emulation; hence they began to project their own social attitudes as the moral imperatives of childhood.
And so education for society became paramount.
Owing to the growth of economic opportunity and social mobility, it was now less necessary to make a child accept its calling as a dictate of God.
Locke's attitudes were replacing those of the catechism.
1.3 Cultural Aspects of Child Rearing in an English-Speaking World
J. and E. Newson
If anthropologists from centres of learning in New Guinea or the Congo were to turn the tables on us and publish studies of the behaviour patterns found among the English-speaking peoples of Great Britain and the United States, one phenomenon to which they would surely pay special attention would be the cult of Child Psychology.
The demand of an ever more literate population for books, pamphlets and magazines on parenthood is met by a stream of material which surpasses itself each year, not only in volume, but in the seductive, indeed sumptuous, way in which it is produced.
Commercial firms marketing goods for the infant consumer hand out subsidized baby books as part of their advertising policy; others run advisory services or distribute regular magazines in which child care is discussed.
In the publishing world as a whole, periodicals concerned with the family become more and more specialized: quite apart from the dozens of magazines addressed to women generally, we find some catering for the interests of parents in particular, some especially for the ‘mother to-be’, and others for parents of individual age-groups or of children with special characteristics or handicaps.
Books about childhood appear on every level, from those in which specialist communicates only with specialist, through all types of handbook for readers with a vocational interest in children, to those in which the expert and the less expert, with equal show of authority, make parents the target of their beliefs (substantiated or not) on how children ‘should’ be brought up.
And, in support of the printed word, television and radio move in with their advice and discussion programmes, educational bodies run courses in psychology for parents, parent-teacher associations organize lectures, and one can even learn from a gramophone record how to teach one's children about sex.
Seen in historical and anthropological perspective, perhaps the most interesting aspect of the contemporary preoccupation with childrearing is that today we are self-consciously concerned with the possible psychological consequences of the methods which we use in bringing up our children.
This attention to the total psychological development of the child is indeed a new phenomenon, in that earlier generations of parents have been chiefly preoccupied by the related themes of physical survival and moral growth, rather than with concepts of mental health or social and emotional adjustment.
So massive a change of emphasis must be of fundamental significance, not only to the anthropologist and the social historian, but to the child psychologists, psychiatrists and psychotherapists  whose very existence as a group depends upon the climate of opinion which regards their professional skills as valuable and necessary, and which places them on an equal footing in social esteem with the more anciently respected callings of the paediatrician and the pedagogue.
In this chapter, we intend briefly to survey some of the cultural and technological correlates of a society's attitudes towards child upbringing generally; and, more specifically, to examine a few of the ways in which the individual methods which parents adopt in the handling of their small children are defined or modified by the intricate pattern of cultural pressures to which they find themselves subject.
We would ask the reader to bear in mind from the outset, however, that we write from the viewpoint of the English urban sub-culture, in which we are not only fieldworkers and observers but life members; nevertheless, we believe that the English and American complexes of parental experience show very many points of coincidence, both historically and contemporaneously, both in the things that parents do and in the reasons for which they do them: and that, therefore, a discussion in these terms will have a validity for parent-child behaviour on both sides of the Atlantic.
From the physical point of view, the human child is at its most vulnerable during and just after birth, and it remains ‘at risk’, in the actuarial sense, throughout early childhood, particularly during what our society thinks of as the pre-school years.
For the whole of human history up to the turn of the present century, simple physical survival has been the dominant issue in child upbringing: a question not of ‘How shall I rear my child?’ but of 'Will I rear him?’
In the middle of the eighteenth century, the mortality rate for children under 5 in England and Wales has been estimated as seventy-five for every hundred births.
In 1865, the infant mortality rate was 154 per thousand live births; a hundred years later it was 21.8 per thousand (Registrar General, 1963).
Even today, of course, whether the child will survive at all is still the overriding consideration for millions of mothers in the underdeveloped areas of the world.
There are still countries in which a mother can expect one in three of her children to die before reaching the age of 5 (UNICEF, 1964).
If we take the ‘developing countries’ as a group, compared with the ‘more developed countries’, infant mortality (in the first year) is more than five times as high in the first group as it is in the second; but during the years from one to four — that is, after weaning — the mortality rate in the developing countries is forty times as high as elsewhere: forty deaths for every thousand children surviving their first year, compared with one per thousand in the more developed areas (Pate, 1965).
These statistics expressed in terms of expectation of life testify even more vividly to the distance Western society has travelled in being able to take the survival of our children almost for granted.
At birth, a baby in India has an expectation of life of 32 years; in Mexico, 39 years; in the United Arab Republic, 38 years.
The United States baby can expect a life span of 70 years, and in the United Kingdom this rises to 71 years.
Once a child has survived his vulnerable first five years, his expectation of  life naturally increases, but this increase will vary in direct proportion to the dangers which he has so far evaded: thus the United Kingdom 5 year old can now expect to live until he is 75, the American until he is 72.
The Indian child, however, once he is 5, increases his expectation from 32 to 46 years; the Mexican, from 39 to 55 years— and the 5 year old of the United Arab Republic can now expect to live to the age of 59, having added 21 years to his total expectation of life by virtue of having survived the ‘pre-school’ period (UNICEF, 1964).
The ability to view infant care practices in any other light than whether they help the infant in his basic struggle to live is, then, something peculiar to our own century and, within this century, to the technologically advanced countries in which infant and child mortality rates have now been reduced to comparatively insignificant proportions.
Briefly, child psychology is a luxury which only a small section of the world's parents can afford to consider: mothers need a respite from the most urgent problems of hunger, sickness and exposure before they can give much attention to questions of personal adjustment and maladjustment.
And this factor of priorities is reflected in the literature directed towards parents, which, though it may often be out of touch with individual parental needs and circumstances, is written within a total social context and expresses closely enough prevailing social trends.
Thus what is interesting about the women's magazines in England during the first years of the twentieth century is not the content of the advice given on child rearing, but the fact that so little advice is given at all; sometimes, from one year to the next, children are barely mentioned save for the occasional appealing illustrations, the pattern for a christening bonnet or the recipe for a nursery pudding.
For the literate group of women who might be expected to read magazines, this was in fact a transitional period: freed to a greater extent than ever before from the shadow of death, this was not yet the time of the educated lay interest in infant psychology which was soon to be aroused by Montessori, Froebel, Susan Isaacs and the Freudians generally; nor had the hygienist movement yet got under way.
Future historians may one day look back on this short period as a golden guilt-free age for parents!
The religious morality
It is true that much was written about the moral upbringing of children during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; but this topic was itself clearly linked with the expectation of death, rather than with the hope of a balanced and integrated life.
The Evangelical movement, despite its minority status, cast its influence far more widely than the actual numbers of its adherents might suggest; it is of especial interest to students of child rearing attitudes, in that its followers were so prolific in their writings that their beliefs (or watered-down versions of their beliefs) dominated both the advisory literature available to parents and the children's own reading matter for upwards of two centuries.
For the Evangelicals, the prospect of  heaven or hell was a major source of motivation in their attempts to ‘form the minds’ of their children.
Susanna Wesley herself, mother of John and Charles, puts this plainly enough in a letter to John:
I insist upon conquering the wills of children betimes; because this is the only foundation for a religious education…religion is nothing else but the doing the will of God, and not our own…
Heaven or hell depends on this alone.
So that the parent who studies to subdue (self-will) in his children, works together with God in the saving of a soul: the parent who indulges it does the devil's work; makes religion impracticable, salvation unattainable; and does all that in him lies to damn his child, soul and body, for ever!…
This, therefore, I cannot but earnestly repeat,— Break their wills betimes; begin this great work before they can run alone before they can speak plain, or perhaps speak at all.
Whatever pains it cost, conquer their stubbornness; break the will, if you would not damn the child.
I conjure you not to neglect, not to delay this!
Therefore (I) Let a child, from a year old, be taught to fear the rod and to cry softly.
In order to do this,(2) Let him have nothing he cries for; absolutely nothing, great or small; else you undo your own work.
(3) At all events, from that age, make him do as he is bid, if you whip him ten times running to effect it.
Let none persuade you it is cruelty to do this; it is cruelty not to do it.
Break his will now, and his soul will live, and he will probably bless you to all eternity.
(Wesley, 1872)
‘Break the will, if you would not damn the child’— and damnation was a very present and real risk, in an age when most families would have lost at least one infant and often several.
Passages from the catechisms devised for small children by the many child-orientated members of this movement show very clearly the emphasis upon death as a part of normal experience:
Q: When must you repent and believe, children?
A: Now, Sir, in childhood.
Q: Why must you do it now, children?
A: Because we may soon die, Sir.
The famous and vastly influential Token for Children (1753)by John Janeway was even more explicit:
Are you willing to go to hell, to be burned with the devil and his angels?…
O!
Hell is a terrible place…
Did you never hear of a little child that died…and if other children die, why may not you be sick and die?…
How do you know but that you may be the next child that may die?…
Now tell me, my pretty dear child, what will you do?
Isaac Watts' much loved and quoted hymns (1842) include many verses such as these:
Why should I say, ‘Tis yet too soon To seek for heav'n, or think of death?’
A flow'r may fade before ‘tis noon, And I this day may lose my breath.
(from Song XIII,The Danger of Delay)
There is an hour when I must die, Nor do I know how soon ‘twill come A thousand children, young as I, Are call'd by death to hear their doom.
(from Song x, Solemn Thoughts of GOD and Death)
The pious and happy deaths of good little boys and girls, with, for variety, the occasional frightful deaths of irreligious children who were assumed to have passed straight to the eternal fires of hell, are continually described and lingered over in children's books of the eighteenth and nineteenth century, from Janeway onward.
The ‘Child's Companion’ of 1829, a well-illustrated little volume of stories and poems, contains no fewer than thirteen improving deathbed scenes, together with one discourse on death and two poems inspired by gazing on children's graves.
The headstone of a 2 year old moves the poet to observe:
Two years! oh happy little life We cannot weep its early end;
and he concludes with the familiar warning:
The grave may open next for you !
You may not see another Spring.
Keep death, and heaven , and hell in view; Begin the present year,anew .
The combined effect of the religious beliefs of the Evangelicals and the historical facts of childhood mortality upon trends in child upbringing is clear enough.
Given a society in which death is a familiar occurrence and in which most children will have experienced the loss of a sibling through death; given, too, a belief in a highly authoritarian God with unlimited powers of reward or punishment through heaven or hell: the logical consequence is to prepare children as carefully for death as for life, to ensure above all else that the child shall be ‘saved’ at least spiritually, if not physically, and indeed to avoid tempting the deity by any suggestion that life is preferable to a happy death.
Charles Wesley (1868) wrote a number of hymns for the use of parents; he himself lost his first two children.
I ask as with my parting breath, To each allotted be A holy life, or early death; But which, I leave to thee.
Moreover, the likelihood of death at a tender age leaves no time for a gentle, patient, permissive approach to child upbringing; the lesson must be learnt by the child early and certainly: ‘Break his will now , and his soul will live’.
The all-powerful God is consciously represented within the family by the almost equally powerful father: ‘Vengeance is mine’ saith the Lord, but meanwhile vengeance is Papa's.
In the sort of conflict situation in which Benjamin Spock (1946) would suggest ‘distracting him  to something interesting but harmless’ or ‘give him a graceful way out’(from a temper tantrum), or where Susan Isaacs in 1932 tells the mother ‘not to be too ready to treat any momentary defiance as an immediate occasion for a pitched battle of wills’, the Evangelicals and their followers were, on the contrary, eager to seize upon such an opportunity, since their battle was with the devil himself, and the child's spiritual salvation at stake; distraction was the last thing they would have advised, for it was their urgent intention to rouse in the young child a vivid appreciation of his own shortcomings, as being the quickest and most effective means of subjugating his will to higher authority.
The medical morality
Curiously enough, the Evangelical concern to eradicate the devil in the child finds many echoes in the hygienist movement which dominated the twenties and thirties of our own century.
Martha Wolfenstein (1955) has brilliantly analysed the changing pattern of advice given in succeeding editions of Infant Care,the bulletin for parents published by the United States Children's Bureau; a close parallel in the United Kingdom is found in the Mothercraft Manual (Liddiard, 1928).
Although not a Government publication, this book, first published in 1923, achieved considerable popularity before the Second World War and has run to twelve editions, all revised by the original writer, the most recent being that of 1954; in England it was the main vehicle for the principles of Sir Truby King and his Mothercraft Training Society.
The passage that follows (very similar to advice given during this period in Infant Care)comes from the 1928 edition, and might well be subscribed to by Susanna Wesley: the emphasis may be different, but the spirit is the same.
The italics are ours, and mark the parts which had been deleted by the time the twelfth edition was reached in 1954; the word trained was replaced by rightly guided.
There are several signs in the twelfth edition that the writer still hankers for the old methods, despite the necessity for tempering some of the more repressive advice, and the book remains far more authoritarian in tone than more recently written baby books.
Self-control, obedience, the recognition of authority, and, later, respect for elders are all the outcome of the first year's training, as emphasized in preceding chapters.
The baby who is picked up or fed whenever he cries soon becomes a veritable tyrant, and gives his mother no peace when awake; while, on the other hand, the infant who is fed regularly, put to sleep, and played with at definite times soon finds that appeals bring no response, and so learns that most useful of all lessons, self-control, and the recognition of an authority other than his own wishes.
If parents and nurses would only realise how much easier it is for the child to bend to the social and moral laws in later life, when trained from infancy, how much sorrow might be saved.
To train an infant for the first year is comparatively easy, but after that the child begins to resent authority, and the conscientious mother has to be prepared to fight and win all along the line, in matters small and great .
In many ways, the hygienists can be seen as the heirs of the Evangelicals; here again, this trend of social attitudes towards infant care must be set in its broader context.
In the twenties, both in England and in America, we have a situation in which the infant and child mortality rates are fast declining, mainly owing to new advances in medical knowledge; at the same time, the world's values have been shaken by the First World War, writers and journalists have both more freedom and more inclination than ever before to discuss religion from an agnostic point of view, and the vengeful God of heaven and hell no longer impresses in quite the old way.
For middle-class parents at least, however, a new power is taking his place: the equally authoritarian medical expert.
The morality of aseptic rationalism has superseded that of spiritual regeneration.
It was indeed clear in the twenties that the medical profession had something important to say to mothers.
The infant death rate was still high enough, especially among the poor, for parents not yet to have become complacent; meanwhile, the promise was held out, and for the first time could be kept, that babies could be successfully reared provided that medical advice was faithfully followed.
This was an inducement not to be ignored; most parents, given the choice, would prefer the expectation of earthly survival for their children to the hope of heavenly reward.
The time was in fact ripe, not only for a secession from religion (which, after all, had never given parents anything very tangible), but for a transfer of allegiance from the other traditional reference groups of parents: away from the methods prescribed by folklore, custom and the baby's grandmother, and towards the new blessings held out by scientific mothercraft.
Medical hygienism was quite obviously a necessity, nor is it likely to become completely unfashionable; the consequence of this interest to the student of child care was that the enthusiasm justifiably generated by its successes led to an assumption that mental hygiene, applied on the same principles, would be equally beneficial.
Without, apparently, a single doubt as to the validity of this premise, the advice was laid down, the warnings given.
The leading authorities of the day — English, foreign and American — all agree that the first thing to establish in life is regularity of habits.
The mother who ‘can't be so cruel’ as to wake her sleeping baby if he happens to be asleep at the appointed feeding-time, fails to realize that a few such wakings would be all she would have to resort to…
The establishment of perfect regularity of habits, initiated by ‘feeding and sleeping by the clock’, is the ultimate foundation of all-round obedience.
Granted good organic foundations, truth and honour can be built into the edifice as it grows.
(Truby King, 1937)
Never play with or excite a baby before bedtime…
Half the irritability and lack of moral control which spoil adult life originate in the first year of existence.
The seeds of feebleness and instability sown in infancy bear bitter fruit afterwards.
(Truby King, 1937)
Masturbation — This is a bad habit…
The great thing is to recognize the condition early…
Untiring zeal on the part of the mother or nurse is the only cure; it may be  necessary to put the legs in splints before putting the child to bed.
He must never be left in such a position that he can carry on the habit, he must be made to forget it; this sometimes takes three months, or longer in the worst cases…
This habit, if left unchecked, may develop into a serious vice.
The child's moral nature becomes perverted; one such child has been known to upset a whole school.
(Liddiard, 1928)
Thumb Sucking — If this is done frequently and perniciously it must be taken in hand and treated as a bad habit.
Sometimes it is enough to put on cotton gloves; if not, the best plan is to make a splint of corrugated cardboard [illustrated in original]; this allows free movement of the arm from the shoulder joint but prevents the hand from getting to the mouth.
These splints should be taken off twice daily and the arms exercised and rubbed.
(Liddiard, 1928)
There is a sensible way of treating children.
Treat them as though they were young adults.
Dress them, bathe them with care and circumspection.
Let your behaviour always be objective and kindly firm.
Never hug and kiss them, never let them sit in your lap.
If you must, kiss them once on the forehead when they say good night.
Shake hands with them in the morning.
Give them a pat on the head if they have made an extraordinarily good job of a difficult task.
Try it out.
In a week's time you will find how easy it is to be perfectly objective with your child and at the same time kindly.
You will be utterly ashamed of the mawkish, sentimental way you have been handling it.
(Watson, 1928)
It seems extraordinary to today's parents in England and the United States that women of the twenties and thirties should have been prepared to accept either the content of these pronouncements or the authoritarian tone in which they were made; yet accepted they were, in that innumerable women made valiant efforts to stifle their natural desire to cuddle their babies and to feed them when they were hungry, or were wracked with guilt and shame when they ‘mawkishly’ rocked the child or sentimentally eased his stomach pangs in the small hours with a contraband couple of ounces.
For the educated mother in particular, it took a great deal of courage to reject a system of upbringing which combined quasi-religious appeals to ‘duty’ and ‘rightness’and ‘goodness’with a claim to be based on the rational attitudes which she herself, as a ‘modern’woman, was supposed to have embraced.
During the last few years, we have begun to learn something of these mothers' true feelings from the women who suffered the regime at first hand: what stands out in such accounts is the emotion which is still generated in the mother by her own memories.
The quotations that follow are both from personal letters to the present writers, commenting on a published suggestion that those who give advice to parents often do not pay enough attention to the parents' own views.
The first correspondent holds a distinguished position in the highest ranks of the nursing profession; the second is the author of books on social work with children.
I am so in agreement…that I feel quite emotional.
My daughter was born during the Truby King period, and it took a month of untold agony for myself and the  child before I threw every book I had out of the house and all my well meaning and Truby King obsessed relatives with them.
From then on, mother and child progressed happily, and since those early and terrible days I have treated advice with cautious courtesy.
As for breast feeding, I feel so strongly about this that I can hardly express myself!
For the mother who finds breast feeding terribly difficult and there are so many of these — the solemn pronouncements she will hear from her own parents and from health visitors, obstetricians and other professional people can lead to real emotional and mental suffering.
I well remember the long watches of the night when I and my baby struggled to overcome a physical incapability on my part, and I cannot begin to tell you the relief on both sides when I strode out of the house, bought the largest tin of baby food I could find, and gave her the first square meal she had had since birth.
I was caught up in the Truby King Mothercraft doctrine of 1935…
The health visitors prated and bullied; one's baby screamed and tears splashed down one's cheeks while milk gushed through one's jersey.
But one must never pick the baby up — it was practically incestuous to enjoy one's baby, so I gathered, young, obedient, motherless, indoctrinated mother that I was.
I made up my mind then that next time I had a baby I would love it.
But that baby never came…
In my day, we were instructed that frost never hurt a baby yet, and if the baby cried it must be mastered.
Working-class women cuddled their babies up in the warm as women had done for millions of years.
We, the young graduate law-abiding wives of the thirties, cried ourselves as our babies went blue with cold…
See Mary McCarthy's novel The Group…
She speaks for us all.
‘The young, graduate, law-abiding wife’ is indeed exemplified in Mary McCarthy's Priss, whose situation is exacerbated by being married to a paediatrician.
We cannot quote here more than a short paragraph, but the whole of chapters 10 and 14 of The Group should be required reading for those whose profession it is to advise parents (McCarthy, 1963).
The nights were the worst.
There were nights when, hearing him start at three or four in the morning, she would have welcomed anything that would let him stop and rest-paregoric, a sugar-tit, any of those wicked things.
During her pregnancy, Priss had read a great deal about past mistakes in child rearing; according to the literature, they were the result not only of ignorance, but of sheer selfishness: a nurse or a mother who gave a crying child paregoric usually did it for her own peace of mind, not wanting to be bothered.
For the doctors agreed it did not hurt a baby to cry; it only hurts grown-ups to listen to him.
She supposed this was true.
The nurses here wrote down every day on Stephen's chart how many hours he had cried, but neither Sloan nor Dr Turner turned a hair when they looked at that on the chart; all they cared about was the weight curve.
Moralities of natural development and natural needs
Meanwhile, from the direction of the psychoanalysts and the nursery educationalists, another school of thought had been arising.
In some ways not altogether opposed to the hygienist school (they did not very much approve of cuddling, although as early as 1932 Ian Suttie had protested against the ‘taboo on tenderness’), nevertheless a basic interest in the  child's natural intellectual and social development, together with a less inhibited approach to sexual function, opened the door to greater permissiveness generally.
In her enlarged edition of The Nursery Years (1932),when the Children's Bureau was still advising mechanical restraints for thumbsucking, Susan Isaacs preferred extra play and companionship, and — incredible immorality!—‘substitute pleasure , in the shape of a good boiled sweet’.
Where the Children's Bureau had now advanced from restraint to diversion as a treatment for masturbation, Isaacs was giving a brief account of Oedipal conflict and advising parents that they were ‘far more likely to do harm by rushing in to scold or correct than by leaving the child to deal with it himself — in a general atmosphere of calm goodwill’, and was citing Dr Ernest Jones in her support.
Perhaps of especial importance for the liberating influence of the educationalists was their emphasis upon natural play and its functional status in the child's development.
Natural play was good — it was also messy and dirty.
It was functional — but it was also enjoyed by the child.
And if adults were to learn about child development by observing free play, there must also be free communication.
At last, the dirty, happy, noisy child could be accepted as a good child.
Martha Wolfenstein (1955) points out the distinction which has long been made ‘between what a baby ‘needs’, his legitimate requirements, whatever is essential to his health and well-being, on the one hand, and what the baby ‘wants’, his illegitimate pleasure strivings, on the other'.
The hygienists considered only physical needs as legitimate — and even hunger, if expressed at an unsuitable time, was excluded.
The wish for companionship was very definitely in the category of illegitimate pleasure strivings: ‘We now come to the treatment,as it were, for a baby who cries simply because he wants attention, which is: ‘Baby must cry it out’.’
In general, the baby's wishes had tended in the past to be suspect, and the mother had been expected to look for some non-permissible motive behind them, in the form either of dangerous (probably erotic) impulses or of a rebellious determination to dominate the mother-in either case, constant control of the child was called for, and only the baby who had submitted himself completely to the mother's control could be called a good baby.
Now that virtue could be acknowledged in the toddler as he freely followed his own natural pursuits and interests — not excluding the exploration of his own body-the ground was finally prepared for an acceptance of babies' desires as needs in themselves: ‘Babies want attention; they probably need plenty of it’(Children's Bureau, 1945).
In Wolfenstein's words (1955), ‘What the baby wants for pleasure has thus become as legitimate a demand as what he needs for his physical well-being, and is to be treated in the same way.’
Hygienist theories were in any case too stress-provoking to the mother to have lasted very many years; the only group who did seem to derive satisfaction from them were some who, standing in an advisory role to the parents, found in such an authoritarian regime a source of power.
There  are still such personalities in advisory positions today; fortunately for parents, as we shall see, this attitude is out of fashion.
The final reversal came with the publication of two seminal books, an article and a film; and again it was from the direction of psychoanalysis that the change came.
In the United States, Margaret Ribble (1943) published The Rights of Infants ; in England John Bowlby (1952) followed up his earlier studies of maternal deprivation as an antecedent of what he had called ‘the affectionless character’(1946) with his report for the World Health Organization,Maternal Care and Mental Health ; and in the opening volume of the journal Psycho-Analytic Study of the Child , Rene Spitz (1945) published his paper on hospitalized infants and the effects of lack of mothering, and supported this with the widely circulated documentary film,Grief: a Peril in Infancy .
All these writers brought dramatic evidence (some of which has since been more critically appraised (Pinneau, 1950; Ainsworth, 1963), that babies and young children need mothering — not only the mother's presence, but the rocking, cuddling and lap play which had been so expressly forbidden — and that to deprive the baby of the natural expression of maternal warmth could prevent normal development of social relationships and permanently mar his personality.
According to Margaret Ribble (1943), indeed, for the newborn baby ‘the need for contact with the mother is urgent in order to keep the reflex mechanisms connected with breathing in operation as well as to bring the sensory nervous system into functional activity’.
While statements such as this invited the charge that factual evidence was becoming confounded with too-hasty interpretation, the basic thesis survived and has been strengthened by other workers not of the psychoanalytic school: notably the ethologists and zoologists, as well as child psychologists (Lorenz, 1952; Harlow, 1961; Schaffer and Emerson, 1964).
The effect of these works can hardly be overestimated: it was immediate, and still continues.
Bowlby's report was abridged and published as a paperback (1953), thus becoming widely available to the lay public; in the year of publication and the five years following, more than seventy-five thousand copies were sold, and nearly as many in the next five years: an exceptional sale in Britain for a book not intended as a baby book for parents.
Theories of maternal need rapidly found a place in countless training courses for workers with children.
In England, James Robertson (1953, 1958), a colleague of Bowlby's at the Tavistock Clinic, started a campaign to persuade children's hospital wards to admit mothers together with their children, or at least not to restrict visiting in any way; some hospitals welcomed the idea, others resisted it, but meanwhile a Government committee was set up which in 1959 published the ‘Platt Report’ on the welfare of children in hospital, recommending ‘that all hospitals where children are treated will adopt the practice of unrestricted visiting, particularly for children below school age’, that ‘it is particularly valuable for the mother to be able to stay in hospital with her child during the first day or two’, and that ‘children should not be admitted to hospital  if it can possibly be avoided’.
Parents themselves thereupon set up a pressure group of their own (Mother Care for Children in Hospital , now the National Association for the Welfare of Children in Hospital ; which, with all the enthusiasm of maternal solicitude that has the acknowledged right on its side, and with the help of a sympathetic press, is gradually altering the atmosphere of children's hospital care.
Anna Freud (1943, 1960), who had been one of the first to call attention to the emotional difficulties of small children separated from their mothers, attacked from yet another angle, affirming the emotional need, not only in the baby but in his mother, to be together during the first weeks of the child's life, and criticizing maternity hospital practice that separated the two.
Clearly, parents generally must welcome the news that cuddling is not only nice but necessary; perhaps, however, we should spare a compassionate thought once more for the intellectual mothers of the thirties, whose sufferings as they tried to be ‘good’ mothers are now repeated in the knowledge that all their efforts only led them to be ‘bad’mothers: as one of our correspondents added, ‘Here is Bowlby, still out to make us feel guilty — about our rejection of the children we loved but were not allowed to love.’
Individualism and the ‘fun morality’
The widespread influence of Ribble, Bowlby and Spitz, although it was supported by new, more permissive baby books such as Benjamin Spock's Baby and Child Care (1946), cannot be entirely explained in terms of parents' reaction against the rigours of aseptic mothercraft.
Once again the trend must be seen in historical and sociological perspective.
Babies were not the only people whose rights were being demanded at the end of the Second World War; other groups, too, submerged in anonymous poverty through years of unemployment, had in wartime received for the first time their fair share both of work and of food, and were now making it clear that neither malnutrition nor the grinding degradation of worklessness could any longer be tolerated by the ‘lower classes’ of the victorious nations.
Perhaps, too, the final horrors of the war — Hiroshima, Nagasaki and the discovery of the concentration camps — shocked ordinary people, for a time at least, into a more humanitarian frame of mind; and perhaps, combined with this, was a determination to enjoy family life after the unhappy experience of war separations and before the more dreadful possibilities with which all mankind now has to live.
Both in Britain and in America, especially marked during the later 1950s and early 1960s, the voices of dissent began to rise — against McCarthyism, against the Bomb, against any established authority that tells individuals what to do and how to do it — voices that said, and continue to say, ‘They shan't push us around any longer.’
The protest of the human individual against the massive forces which control him is indeed a theme which can be seen in contemporary art, literature, music and drama, in the struggles  against racialism, poverty and war, in the popular movements of Western youth and in the renewed campaign for women's emancipation; so we can hardly be surprised if parents too begin to question the authority of the experts.
The beginning of this trend, in which the fundamental need of parents is to be happy in parenthood, can be seen in two ways.
In the first place, the tone in which advice is given changes from the strictly authoritarian to the friendly, neighbourly, perhaps big-sisterly approach.
The old bullying manner is completely gone; we now find a persuasive, informal atmosphere, supported by illustrations which reflect the text in their message that bringing up babies is hair-raising, maybe, but lots of fun for everyone — just as the clinical photographs and chaste drawings of the old baby books reflect their atmosphere of stern duty.
Where in the 1930s the mother was given solemn warnings as to what would happen if she disobeyed the rules, the mode now is to refer her, with continual reassurances however, to what might possibly result from some mistaken handlings: ‘Here's what happens once in a while when the needs of the child aren't recognized’(Spock, 1946, chapter on ‘The Two Year Old’).
Where formerly she was told that ‘the leading authorities of the day all agree…, now it is no more than suggested that ‘many doctors feel…’.
Spock is the supreme example of the friendly, conversational approach: just paternalistic enough to give confidence and reassurance, he is otherwise prepared to talk to the mother on equal terms.
He probably has no serious rival on either side of the Atlantic, though to a much smaller audience of discriminating parents the English psychoanalyst, the late D. W. Winnicott, speaks (1964) with a similar skill (as does Dr Hugh Jolly to readers of The Times ).
The second way in which this trend can be seen is in the content of advice given.
That it is more permissive goes without saying: permissive both to the child and to the parents.
But it is changed too in that it is not so much the details of infant care that are laid down as the principles which should be followed in deciding the details.
Parents are no longer told what methods to adopt, but rather the frame of mind in which to adopt them.
Flexibility is the keynote.
Infant Care (1958 edition) shows many examples.
On the baby's sleeping place: ‘Do whatever way disturbs your sleep least’; on his clothing: ‘Some mothers prefer…others think…’; on genital play: ‘This is a common thing, and can go unnoticed.
But sometimes it is disturbing to mothers, so if you feel uncomfortable about it you can try giving him a toy to hold while he's on the toilet seat’; and in general: ‘If you take it easy in caring for your baby, you will be doing him a great service.’
Flexibility serves one major aim: to allow parents to enjoy their role.
‘When you both feel light-hearted enough to enjoy your baby, you are making a good start’ says Infant Care on its second page, and Spock uses the same injunction, ‘Enjoy Your Baby’, as a subheading in his chapter ‘The Right Start’.
In Martha Wolfenstein's words (1955), ‘Fun has become not only permissible but required’; the modern mother is already  a creature whose ‘feelings of inadequacy are matched only by her undying efforts’, according to Johnson and Medinnus (1965), and ‘fun morality’ now ensures that ‘her self-evaluation can no longer be based entirely on whether she is doing the right and necessary things but becomes involved with nuances of feelings which are not under voluntary control ’(Wolfenstein, 1955, our italics).
1.4 System of Education (prior to the advent of the European)
J. Kenyatta
Education begins at the time of birth and ends with death.
The child has to pass various stages of age-groupings with a system of education defined for every status in life.
The parents take the responsibility of educating their children until they reach the stage of tribal education.
They aim at instilling into the children what the Gikuyu call , namely, educating the children in the family and clan tradition.
Apart from the system of schools which has been introduced by the Europeans, there is no special school building in the Gikuyu sense of the word: the homestead is the school.
The education of very small children is entirely in the hands of the mother and nurse.
It is carried on through the medium of lullabies.
In these the whole history and tradition of the family and clan are embodied and, by hearing these lullabies daily, it is easy for the child to assimilate his early teaching without any strain.
This is one of the methods by which the history of the people is passed on from generation to generation.
At the time when the child begins to learn how to speak, care is taken by the mother to teach the child correct manner of speech and to acquaint him with all important names in the family, past and present.
These are given in songs to amuse the child, who is never told that he is being taught.
Moreover, the child is left free to listen to these songs when he likes.
If the mother notices that he does not like certain songs she at once introduces others with different phrases and melody embodying the same teaching.
When the child is able to speak, he can answer many questions which are asked gently and naturally to test how much he has learnt.
Such questions as these might be asked: What is your name?
Who is your father?
What is his age-group?
What is the name of your grandfather?
And your great-grandfather?
What is the name of your grandmother?
What are their age-groups?
Why were they given such-and-such names for their age-groups?
This type of question goes back for several generations, and small children are able to answer freely without any effort or strain on their part.
These questions are never asked seriously, they are always taken in the form of amusement or conversationally.
In this way the history and traditions of the child's family (maternal and paternal) become a stimulating influence in his life and form a fitting background to his environment.
After passing the stage of infancy the education of the child takes a  different shape, the child is taught how to sit and walk properly to avoid having bow legs, for a straight figure is admired by Gikuyu, especially amongst the warriors it is one of the qualities of handsomeness.
A man or woman with bow legs is looked upon as an ugly person.
As soon as the child can walk the sphere of his education is extended.
The lullabies and other songs are continued to soothe children, especially when they are in a bad mood; but this age is considered the best time to teach the children how to use their hands in various spheres of tribal activities.
At this juncture the parents take an almost equal responsibility, and a system of co-education is introduced in the form of children's games.
The parents do not particularly choose the kind of games their children should play, they are left free to indulge in any games that appeal to them, providing, of course, that the game is not injurious to their health.
Anyone observing the children at their play will no doubt be impressed by the freedom which characterizes the period of childhood among the Gikuyu.
The children do most things in imitation of their elders and illustrate in a striking way the theory that play is anticipatory of adult life.
Their games are, in fact, nothing more or less than a rehearsal prior to the performance of the activities which are the serious business of all the members of the Gikuyu tribe.
The little boys indulge in fighting like big boys.
Running and wrestling are very common, and the best performer in these activities is marked out for leadership.
They play with small wooden spears, and shields made of banana tree bark, and arrows, sling and stones, and acquire no less proficiency in hitting the mark.
They play, too, the games of husbands and wives, and build little models and cattle-pens with the material lying nearest to their hands.
The little girls plait baskets of grass and grind corn, like their mothers, and make little pots of the local clay and cook imaginary dishes of the same material.
The boys play the role of husbands and behave in the same way as they see their fathers do in their respective homesteads.
Of course, not all their games have this aspect of preparation for the serious business of life.
Recreation is an essential part of adult activities and those of children.
When the child has grown beyond babyhood, the father takes charge of the boy's education, while the mother takes the whole responsibility of the girl's education and a part of the boy's education.
The father has to teach his boy various things.
As an agriculturist he has to take him in the garden for practical training.
He makes a digging-stick,moro,for his boy to play with while the father is doing the actual work of weeding or turning the soil.
Through watching his father in these activities, the boy gradually learns how to handle his digging-stick, and thus becomes a practical agriculturist.
While this training is going on, special attention is paid to acquainting the child with the names of various plants and roots and their uses, especially those which are used as antidotes for insect or snake bites.
If the father is a wood-carver, smith, bee-keeper, etc. he will teach the boy by examples in the same way.
Through moving in the forests and jungles with his father the boy learns  about numerous wild fruits and flowers, and comes to know those which are poisonous and those which are edible.
Along with these special tasks goes a very important general training.
The boy is taught about family, clan and tribal lands, and their boundaries are carefully pointed out to him.
Care is taken to teach the boy how to be a good observer and to reckon things by observation without counting them, as counting, especially of sheep, goats, cattle or people is considered as one of the gikuyu taboos,mogiro , and one which would bring ill-luck to the people or animals counted.
For example, a man with a hundred head of cattle, sheep and goats trains his son to know them by their colour only or by their size and type of horns, while every one of them has a special name.
To test the boy's power of observation and memory, two or three herds from different homesteads are mixed, and the boy is asked to separate them by picking out all that belong to his herd.
Sometimes some of the sheep and goats are hidden, and when the flock comes to rest at midday the boy is given a few minutes in which to inspect gothorima and report.
His report is very carefully noted by those in charge of the boy's training.
If he makes any mistake no harsh remark is made, but quietly he is asked to go through again and point out such-and-such a sheep or goat which has been purposely hidden.
By going through the inspection again he would at once notice his mistake.
The elder in charge of the herd would ask the boy to trace back in his memory and explain at what time and place he last saw the missing sheep or goat.
In this way the weak point in the memory training is noticed and corrected.
In the case of a hunter this training is far more intense, because the intricacy of forest paths and the difficulty of tracing animals demand the greatest power of observation.
During my boyhood my special task in the family was to look after our cattle, sheep and goats; therefore I had to go through this training, and afterwards taught my brothers.
The mother also takes the same responsibility in teaching her daughter all things concerning the domestic duties of a wife and managing and harmonizing the affairs of a homestead.
The girl's training in agriculture is the same as that of the boy.
The mother is in charge of the co-education of her children.
In the evening she teaches both boy and girl the laws and customs, especially those governing the moral code and general rules of etiquette in the community.
The teaching is carried on in the form of folklore and tribal legends.
At the same time the children are given mental exercises through amusing riddles and puzzles which are told only in the evenings after meals, or while food is being cooked.[…]
In all tribal education the emphasis lies on a particular act of behaviour in a concrete situation.
While the emphasis lies in the sphere of behaviour, it is nonetheless true that the growing child is acquiring a mass of knowledge all the time.
The very freedom which marks the period of childhood gives unrivalled opportunity for picking up all sorts of information about the environment; the child is not handicapped by attending school and  listening to formal instruction which is for the most part unrelated to his interests and needs.
As he roams the countryside he learns to distinguish a great variety of birds, animals, insects, trees, grasses, fruits and flowers.
His interests bring him in contact with these things, since they constitute the furnishings of his play activities.
He does not observe or understand them as lessons in natural history, but knows their names and as much about their habits and life-history as he needs for his purpose.
When the boy is with his father or the girl is with her mother in the garden, as they constantly are, they learn about the birds they see, the birds that are harmful to the crops, how they can be dealt with, and what birds can be eaten.
In the same way they learn the trees that are good for firewood or building, for supporting the yams or propping the bananas, those that resist white ants or make the best bee-hives, stools or grain mortars and pestles.
But here again the knowledge is so practical, so much preconditioned by behaviour, that it can be taught and is taught mainly by doing what they are told to do on particular occasions and by not being allowed to do or to touch certain things that are always within their experience.
Learning in the Early Years
The family is no longer entirely responsible for learning experiences during the pre-school years.
By the age of 5 the majority of children have now already attended one of the many forms of pre-school provision outside the family (e.g. nursery school, nursery class, playgroup, day nursery, child minder).
The diversity of provision is a reflection of the different functions it serves for children and their families (e.g. full day care for working parents, part-time nursery education, short-term group play experience).
It also reflects the different patterns of organization (e.g. State provision, local parental initiative, private arrangements), as well as variations in the resources available to ensure a high quality of care and education.
These trends provide a case study of the general theme raised in Part One, namely the functions of the family in children's early development.
The growth in pre-school services, which in no way matches parental demand, might be seen as clear evidence that some of the family's functions in child-rearing, even in the earliest years, are being taken over by professionals (e.g. nursery teachers and nursery nurses) and other ‘specialist’ child carers (e.g. child minders).
On the other hand, it might be seen as an opportunity to enhance family life by the more equal opportunities offered to women to take up employment, as well as bringing up a family; or by the enriched experiences children bring back into the family as a result of their attendance at nursery school or playgroup.
(There is a parallel here with Talcott Parsons' arguments about decline versus specialization, discussed in reading 1.
l.)
The readings in this section approach the same basic question from a number of different starting points.
First, Rudolf Schaffer (2.1) surveys research in psychology on the importance and character of early experiences.
He is particularly interested in the various features of childhood experiences that have been singled out by different theorists as the important determinants of adult personality: feeding regimes, toilet training, parental warmth, permissiveness and so on.
At the same time, a valuable critique is provided of the various approaches to investigation associated with these theories.
Schaffer's particular interest is in early mother-infant relationships.
Development is not viewed simply as the product of the child-rearing regime adopted by parents; it is an interactive process, where the child influences the mother's behaviour as much as the mother the child.
This model of mutual sensitivity and responsiveness becoming established between parent and child during the earliest months of life provides a background against which to examine the main issues of this section.
The starting point for the three readings that follow is the increased numbers of children under 5 whose parents both work, and who are cared for outside the family (whether in a day nursery or with a child minder) for  a major part of the day (25 per cent of children under 5 in the United Kingdom had working mothers in 1976, although only a small proportion of these were working full-time).
The authors are united in their concern for the quality of these children's early experiences, although they disagree markedly in the solutions they offer.
These readings have been selected in part because they illustrate well the convergence of research evidence and policy-making.
There is a considerable amount of relevant research to draw on, especially about the significance of early parent-child relationships introduced by Schaffer (2.1).
But it is a sign of the strong feelings provoked by this issue, as well as the ideological differences about the significance of the mothering role, that although all three authors are well versed in the research, they reach such different conclusions.
Mia Kellmer Pringle's paper (2.2) is based on a lecture given to a conference organized jointly by the Department of Education and Science (DES) and the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS) on the theme of ‘Low Cost Day Care Provision for the Under-Fives’.
The search for inexpensive ways of caring for the nation's children is in itself of interest, as evidence of the government's scale of priorities for spending!
Pringle argues against widespread extension of day care facilities.
She sees children as victims of recent trends which encourage their mothers to relinquish their mothering role, for part of the day at least.
She does not believe that day care can substitute for the one-to-one relationship between mother and child, and favours the introduction of greater financial incentives and other support for the family care of children.
Pringle's is a controversial point of view.
Some might say it presents an idealistic picture of family life; others that it is a reactionary attempt to turn the clock back on the women's movement; yet others might argue that she has gone beyond the available evidence in concluding, or at least implying, that delinquency might result from early day-care experiences.
One argument is indisputable: that unless there is investment on an enormous scale on the improvement of provision, the reality of day-care experiences for unknown but substantial numbers of young children whose parents find it necessary or choose to work, is likely to remain a cause of concern.
The numbers of places in day nurseries (the only state day-care provision) declined steadily after the Second World War, and has only recently increased by a tiny amount.
The gap in services has been filled by child minders who at their best can offer a high quality of care with all the advantages of a domestic setting similar to the children's own home, but because of the lack of resources, training and support for their work are often the last resort for parents.
Brian Jackson has been particularly responsible for highlighting the problem of the child minder, especially the ‘illegal’(unregistered) child minder.
Soon after starting work on a study of child minding commissioned by the Social Science Research Council (SSRC), Jackson wrote a short but influential article for New Society , part of which is reproduced as reading 2.3.
Since the article was  published, a number of schemes have been set up in an attempt to improve the quality of child minding.
Jack Tizard's article (2.4), like Pringle's, was written for a conference in 1976, and provides a summary review of the research evidence on the day care issue.
Current attitudes have been shaped by the influential report to the World Health Organization, by John Bowlby (1953,Child Care and the Growth of Love , Harmondsworth: Penguin) in which the ‘maternal deprivation hypothesis’ was introduced to explain the apparent retardation and emotional disturbance suffered by children in residential care.
Tizard points to the fallacy of generalizing from these studies to the issue of day care, and is able to cite examples of American research evaluations which suggest that day care can actually be beneficial for some children's development, and does not appear to impair children's relationships with their parents.
But these are conclusions based on well-resourced day-care centres, and generalization to, say, the child minders described by Jackson, is just as dangerous as generalizing from residential care.
The remaining readings in this section tackle the same basic question, about the quality of learning environments experienced by children in familial and extra-familial settings, but from a very different starting point.
As Tizard points out, whereas we argue about whether any extra familial care is desirable for very young children, and whether it can be financed on a low cost basis, once children reach the age of 5, full-time education outside the family is seen not only as desirable but as compulsory, and there is enormous annual expenditure by local authorities to make schooling available free of charge to all.
The relative maturity of children at different ages can only partly explain this ambivalence in attitude and government policy about care and education outside the family.
The readings by Snow and Wells (2.5 and 2.6) examine the role of the family and the school in teaching children language skills.
They offer a challenge to any simplistic view of the relative skills of the ‘lay’ parent and the ‘professional’teacher, by demonstrating that while parents may never be conscious of the teaching strategies they use to help their child acquire language, they are in a very important sense, their children's teachers.
Of course, the word ‘teaching’ traditionally has connotations of formal instruction of a closely supervised group of children, which is hardly appropriate to most family settings, although with recent trends in primary education towards informal individualized teaching methods, the parallel is much more valid.
Snow and Wells demonstrate that parents (usually!) respond sensitively and appropriately to their child's initiation.
Snow's article illustrates Schaffer's argument that mothers ‘dovetail’ their behaviours to that of their infants.
She traces the origins of language interactions in the communicative patterns of earliest infancy, suggests some valuable features of what is sometimes dismissed as ‘baby talk’ and with extensive reference to the research literature, reviews a whole range of features of adult language that are thought to assist the child's task of  language learning.
The paper by Wells reports some findings from a British longitudinal study of child language acquisition that has made extensive naturalistic recordings of adults and children's speech both at home and school.
According to Wells, the data from his research contradicts crude generalizations that are often made about some children as being ‘deprived at home’ of those language experiences that will prepare them for schooling, and assumptions that the school is a ‘rich language environment’.
He provides a careful analysis of the relationship between the functional and structural characteristics of different types of discourse.
The final article in this section, by Midwinter (2.7), is addressed to more general questions about professionalism in education, and social and welfare services in general.
He traces the origins of contemporary attitudes to professionalism and public services, to the Victorian period, and argues that the model we have inherited is outmoded and stands in the way of improving professionally relationships.
Many of the themes in this article are taken up again in Part Seven.
2.1 Child Rearing and Early Experience
R. Schaffer
What happens in childhood is of interest for two reasons.
First, because we wish to find out about children as such; second, because we believe that events early in life play an important part in shaping adult personality.
The first needs no justification.
Whether our interest is practical or theoretical, whether we set out to provide the ‘correct’ treatment for children of various ages or whether we wish to understand the processes underlying their behaviour, we must describe and experiment systematically and objectively in order to arrive at worthwhile conclusions.
What kind of toys ought one to design for 1 year olds?
Is it realistic to teach 3 year olds number concepts?
How and when does the child learn to control his aggressive impulses?
There are many such questions which all those in contact with children can pose and which the psychologist can in due course be expected to answer.
The search for better methods of child care and of education, and indeed for ways of simply ‘keeping happy’, need no excuse.
The second reason for an interest in child development is perhaps not so self-evident.
It is contained in the old aphorism ‘the child is father to the man’, and expresses the belief that a child's experiences in the early years will leave a mark on him for the rest of his life.
The explanation for adult personality, in other words, is to be found in the individual's first encounters with the world, at a time when he is thought to be in a highly impressionable state.
And these encounters, of course, involve primarily the mother.
The search for the determinants of personality
The belief that early experience determines adult behaviour is so widespread that it may well be regarded as common sense.
Probably most parents subscribe to this view, and while they may not deliberately choose particular methods of child care to bring about a specified long-term outcome, their belief in the association may well make them feel an added responsibility.
But what of the actual evidence to justify this belief?
Much of it has come from work with animals, for here it is possible to arrange particular experiences at particular ages and subsequently test for their effect on the behaviour of mature animals.
Thus infant mice have been subjected to electric-shock treatment and their emotionality assessed later on  in comparison with non-shocked animals.
Chimpanzees have been reared in darkness for varying periods after birth in order to test their subsequent perceptual capacity.
Dogs kept in isolation as puppies have been compared with normally-reared animals on various problem-solving tasks.
And in one experiment rats were exposed throughout infancy to the music of either Mozart or Schoenberg and then given musical preference tests in adulthood (with the result that animals brought up on Mozart showed a definite preference for that music, whereas the Schoenberg-reared group gave no indication of a hankering after the familiar music!).
Much of this work does show a definite effect: though there are still many questions about the precise links between early events and subsequent outcomes in various species, belief in the compelling nature of early experience is powerfully reinforced by this body of findings.
Yet what applies to a rat or dog need not hold for a human being.
Unfortunately the evidence here is so far much more sparse and much less clear, for experiments with children raise obvious ethical problems-at least when they involve such extreme treatments as isolation, shock or Schoenberg.
‘Experiments of nature’, the naturally occurring fluctuations of life experience, have therefore been resorted to, but though these have raised some intriguing questions they have so far provided few conclusive answers.
Does the first relationship established by the child serve as a prototype for all subsequent relationships?
Do nuances within this relationship continue to reverberate throughout life?
Are the daily frustrations encountered by the infant traumata that irreversibly shape his behaviour?
These are ambitious questions, whose answers might have considerable implications for the way parents approach child rearing.
Mothering as physical care
Freud, more than any other writer, believed in the importance of early experience.
Freud, however, was not content merely to make the general assertion; he went further in stipulating the kinds of experience that would produce particular kinds of results if encountered at specified stages of development.
Thus, according to Freud's ‘libidinal theory’, the child progresses through a number of phases (oral, anal, genital), in the course of which he is particularly sensitive to certain kinds of stimulation.
During the oral phases, extending over the first year or so of life, his main concerns involve activities like sucking, swallowing and biting; and the nature of his oral experiences during this period will have considerable repercussions in the long as well as the short term.
Should a phase generally be gratifying he will successfully pass through that one to the next; should it be frustrating he will remain fixated at this stage and as an adult manifest a particular personality constellation, such as the ‘oral character’, distinguished by such features as excessive dependence, passivity and ‘mouth habits’.
Similarly, the child fixated at the anal stage will develop an ‘anal  character’, whose most marked traits are said to be orderliness, parsimony and obstinacy.
Adult personality is thus directly related to the way in which infantile physiological urges are channelled.
Whether the child receives breast or bottle, whether he is fed on demand or by schedule, the age at which he is weaned and how suddenly, and the severity of his toilet training — these are the kinds of influences that Freud considered to be major determinants of personality growth.
Variations in such practices would therefore account for later behaviour.
Such a theory, predicting associations between childhood and adult features, is important on at least two grounds.
First, it would help us to understand why people differ from one another and firmly point out the causes of these differences.
And second, if borne out, it would enable parents to choose among particular infant-care practices and foster the kind of personality they wish.
Investigating Freud's theories
Unfortunately Freud's evidence for his propositions was somewhat indirect, being derived from the ‘memories’ of adult patients, whose difficulties and characteristics he believed could best be accounted for by the libidinal theory.
At best, therefore, Freud's views must be regarded as suggestions that need to be followed up by systematic research.
Accordingly, during the 1930s and 1940s a large number of psychologists turned their attention to just this.
Does breast feeding leave the child with some sort of psychological advantage over bottle-fed children?
Is self-demand feeding more likely to produce a confident and non-neurotic personality than rigidly scheduled feeding?
Is early weaning a traumatic event whose effects will last for life?
Are there indeed links between toilet training and the ‘anal character’?
Such questions occupied developmental research workers for a long while, and their results were eventually pulled together in a number of reviews, such as that by Bettye Caldwell.
Their conclusions may be summarized quite simply: there is no evidence to show that specific infant-care practices have an unvarying psychological effect on the child that manifests itself in later years.
Freud's hypotheses are not upheld: if the child is father to the man it is for reasons other than missing out on the breast and a too early acquaintance with the potty.
Why this failure?
It is true that many of the experiments in this area were grossly inadequate in method: they failed to ensure that the individuals they studied were similar, apart from the single factor being scrutinized; they relied unduly on mothers' memories for information about early events; their various findings could not be compared because of disagreement about what should be counted as ‘early weaning’ or ‘harsh training’, and so on.
Yet this alone cannot account for the negative  results, for the weight of evidence is such that the general conclusion can hardly be challenged.
Any investigation which covers a long span of time is bound to encounter certain special problems.
In particular, if one is examining the effects of some early experience on adult behaviour, one must take into account the events in the intervening period.
One might wish to examine the effects of the father's death during a child's early years on the development of masculinity, and accordingly compare a group of adolescent boys who had this experience with a group who did not.
To do so without taking into account whether, within the former group, the mother remarried or not, or whether or not uncles, grandfathers or older brothers were able to step into the gap and provide the child with male company, would be to neglect some possible important influences.
Investigations with animals avoid this problem, for there one can ensure that the ‘treated’ and the ‘untreated’groups would have identical intervening experience.
Human beings, on the other hand, can hardly be so regimented.
It may be argued that the effects of physical-care experiences, though obscured later on by subsequent events, do at least have an impact at the time,and that much of the variation in infant behaviour can be accounted for by differences in training practices.
In fact, even this association has not been clearly upheld.
To take one example: it has frequently been said that a child's attachment to his mother develops out of his physical dependence on her.
In the early months of life, according to this view, he learns that she provides food and other bodily comforts, therefore comes to value her presence, and in due course will want her in her own right.
If this is so, it should follow that the more gratifying a mother's physical-care practices are, the greater should be the child's developing attachment to her.
Peggy Emerson and I tested this association.
We took measures of the intensity of attachment of 18-month-old infants to their mothers and related them to measures of feeding rigidity, age at weaning, length of the weaning period, age when toilet training began, and severity of toilet training.
We found no relationship in any case.
We noted, moreover, how infants sometimes form strong attachments to fathers, grandparents and older siblings who may never have participated in routine care.
Clearly the view that sociability arises primarily in the context of feeding cannot be upheld; the physical-care experiences examined cannot account for variations in behaviour-not even behaviour at the time.
To the psychologist searching for the determinants of personality this sort of outcome is disappointing; to the parent, on the other hand, it should be good news.
If personality were irreversibly fixed by particular child-rearing practices the individual would remain for ever at the mercy of specific experiences in his past.
As it is, mothers can be assured that their decision to bottle feed rather than breast feed their baby (to take one example) is highly unlikely per se to have any implications for his personality in later years.
Even during infancy itself, whatever the physical advantages of breast feeding, there are no distinctive psychological concomitants.
The same applies to the other aspects of early physical care: nature, it appears, has arranged things rather more flexibly and kindly than Freud believed.
Mothering as a set of attitudes
The practices discussed so far refer mainly to specific events experienced by the child at specific ages.
It may be, however, that the reason for the failure to link these up with child behaviour is that they are too specific, and that they are given meaning only in the wider context of parental attitudes.
The fact that a baby is weaned early, according to this argument, matters less than the reason for this decision: whether it reflects a cultural norm, or stems from the mother's revulsion at physical intimacy, or expresses an urge to hurry the child towards independence.
Is the child accepted or rejected, brought up in a tolerant atmosphere?
Does he encounter warm or cold relationships in the home?
These are more pervasive influences, not usually confined to any one time, and may be said to define the personal milieu in which the child spends his early years.
One and the same practice may be performed by a nurturant or a hostile mother, may occur within an easygoing or a rigidly authoritarian home, or may take place against a background of love or of hate.
Perhaps these are the crucial influences that shape the child's personality development.
Parental attitudes and their measurement
During the 1950s and early 1960s a lot of effort was devoted to attempts, in the first place, to identify and measure parental attitudes and, in the second place, to relate them to characteristics of child behaviour.
Thus a great deal of psychometric expertise went into constructing questionnaires and interview schedules that would yield clear-cut dimensions along which parents could be ranged.
For example, in what was a most influential study at the time, Robert Sears, Eleanor Maccoby and Harry Levin obtained reports from the mothers of 379 5 year olds on the rearing practices they had adopted at various phases of their children's lives.
They asked not only about feeding, weaning and toileting practices, but also about such matters as the mothers' ways of handling dependent and aggressive behaviour, their methods of disciplining, their feelings towards pregnancy, overt expression of affection, and adjustment in marriage.
They also asked about the children's behaviour.
A number of dimensions of child rearing emerged from this material, and of these two are worth special mention because they have been found by other investigators too.
The first dimension has been labelled warmth-coldness , and is based on, for instance, the affection the mother shows the child, the extent to which she is demonstratively playful, her  acceptance of the child's dependency, and her use of reasoning in disciplining him.
The second dimension,permissiveness-restrictiveness , describes, for instance, her tolerance of aggressive and sexual behaviour, her insistence on ‘good manners’ and obedience, and her use of physical punishment.
Perhaps the most notable of other attempts to describe parents in this fashion was undertaken by Earl S. Schaefer.
It was based on the construction of a questionnaire, the Parental Attitude Research Inventory (PARI), in which parents were asked to indicate their agreement with such statements as ‘A child will be grateful later on for strict training,’ and ‘Children should realize how much parents have to give up for them.’
Again two main dimensions emerged from parents' answers, called love-hostility and control-autonomy but referring essentially to the same features as the dimensions described by Sears and his colleagues.
Thus a ‘model’ of parental characteristics was put forward, in which the combination of the two independent dimensions yielded four types of parents.
It is true that other investigators found further dimensions which they considered important (such as emotional involvement-calm detachment ), yet by and large the above two were confirmed by most.
However, the difficulties of this approach became apparent in attempts to relate these parental characteristics to child behaviour.
Sears, Maccoby and Levin had described a great many such relationships: the greatest upset in children resulting from severe toilet training, for example, was found when it was combined with a cold, undemonstrative attitude on the part of the mother; children experiencing some rejection tended to show more dependent behaviour than accepted children; the greatest aggressiveness resulted from a combination of a highly permissive attitude and occasional severe punishment, and so on .
These findings were widely accepted as ‘true’ and universally representative.
To warrant such claims, however, results must, at the very least, be replicable, and in this respect they failed.
When Marian Radke Yarrow, John Campbell and Roger Burton used the same techniques to examine dependence, aggression and conscience formation, they were unable to confirm the findings previously obtained.
At the same time it became increasingly apparent that research using instruments like the PARI was not producing clear-cut relationships: on the basis of attitudinal measures alone it has proved difficult to predict child personality.
Parental attitudes, like early physical-care practices, have not turned out to be the clear-cut determinants of personality development one had hoped for.
What went wrong with attitude research?
There are a number of reasons to account for this conclusion.
In the first place, there is a gap between say and do : however cooperative a mother, it may be genuinely difficult for her to provide undistorted information about her behaviour and feelings as they impinge on her child.
There are  ways of minimizing such distortions but, in questionnaires about child rearing especially, ‘social desirability’ tends to play a large part in determining the answers given.
No wonder that comparisons between questionnaires on attitudes and direct observations of behaviour have produced few significant results: in one study, for example, there were fewer correlations between the two than one would expect by chance!
And as far as the child is concerned, it is the mother's behaviour that will impinge on him, and not some abstract concept.
In the second place, the correlations that are produced are merely statements about associations, and tell us nothing about the direction of cause and effect.
Yet parental attitudes have generally been treated as though they ‘cause’ children's behaviour.
As we shall see, children are just as capable of affecting parents, thus producing a much more complex picture of the interaction.
Finally, an attitudinal measure represents a highly summarized statement.
To say that a mother is ‘permissive’ neglects the fact that her attitude may vary from one area of behaviour to another: she may be highly permissive about behaviour towards visitors and yet utterly intolerant when it comes to toileting.
An attitude may, moreover, fluctuate over time, being influenced by experience as to what ‘works’.
And, in addition, attitudinal studies have tended to neglect the setting in which mother and child interact: the fact that physical punishment occurs at mealtimes does not necessarily tell us anything about its use at bedtime.
Summary statements are useful in everyday speech, where we are continually describing people as intelligent or aggressive or generous or nice.
In the reports of social workers, psychiatrists or teachers, such global terms can hardly be avoided; for them the labels and importance attached by research workers to facets of parental behaviour are likely to be of considerable use.
We see how limited these global concepts are, though, when we expect them to tell us something about how children will actually behave.
This they cannot do, mainly because they take out of context the parental characteristics they are studying and then average out all fluctuations over time and situation.
Attitudes were originally selected as possible determinants of child development because they were of a general and abstract nature; but their use as anything but abbreviated labels has now been abandoned just because they are so abstract and general.
Is early experience important?
What are we to conclude about the implications for his later personality of the way in which a child is treated during his early years?
Are early experiences of special significance just because they are early, and is the child more malleable at that time?
The notion that parents can exert a particularly profound influence during the first few years — an influence that will remain throughout life  and cannot be eradicated by subsequent experience-is certainly widespread.
At its most extreme form it was expressed by J. B. Watson in 1925: ‘Give me a dozen healthy infants, well formed, and my own specified world to bring them up in, and I will guarantee to take any one at random and train him to become any type of specialist I might select — doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant chief, and yes, even beggarman and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and the race of his ancestors.’
There may be few today who are quite so confident about the precision with which children can be shaped, yet with respect to at least one of the above vocations, that of thief, many current theories of delinquency still concur that the roots of the condition are to be sought in the child's early years.
And, more generally, faith in the permanently formative influences of the child's first encounters with the world persists among both parents and professional workers.
Yet faith rather than fact is what such a belief is built on.
Human development is rather more complicated, rather less rigidly determined than such a view suggests.
Although one would dearly like more supportive evidence, what we have so far indicates that isolated experiences rarely if ever leave permanent traces — however traumatic and however early they may be.
And perhaps this is just as well, for were it not so, and were we to believe that personality became irreversibly set in the first two (or three, or five) years of life we should have to believe, first, that any child harmed then was beyond help and thus clinically not worth bothering about; and, second, that children in later years were not vulnerable and that experience then was of no consequence.
Both such beliefs would be highly dangerous if translated into practice: they over-value the effects of early experience and undervalue the role of later experience.
This danger is well demonstrated by the early efforts made to help culturally disadvantaged children, many of which simply provided each child with a dose of relevant training during the pre-school period in the expectation that this on its own would give him the required extras for normal cognitive development.
The speedy ‘wash-out’ effect that set in showed clearly how unrealistic it is to expect the developmental course to be changed when just one period is singled out for attention and no effort is made to follow up that experience and integrate it in an individual's total life pattern.
Continuity and discontinuity in development
It is easy to assert that a child's early experience is important, but considerably more difficult to substantiate.
What experience?
How early?
Important in what way?
The belief in the overriding role of early experience has usually been based, implicitly or explicitly, on a ‘critical period model’, which suggests that there are fixed developmental stages during which the child or animal  is particularly sensitive to certain influences.
The clearest example of such sensitivity is the ‘imprinting’ phenomenon.
According to early ethological studies, it seemed that the young of certain birds like ducks and chickens would follow the first moving object they met and form a lasting attachment to it; also that this attachment could take place only within a sharply limited period early on in development, and that it would affect all subsequent relationships.
If, for instance, the animal became imprinted on a tennis ball it might subsequently attempt to mate with other tennis balls!
If it were kept isolated during the critical period nothing would prevent it from becoming an affectionless psychopath for the remainder of its life.
Let us first note, however, that ethologists no longer find such an all-or-none view tenable — even when applied to lower animals like ducks.
The limits of critical periods have not been found to be as immutable as was formerly thought, for by manipulating the animals' experience they can be extended considerably.
Nor is the learning that occurs at that time as immediate and permanent as was previously thought, for much depends on the precise experience itself.
As a result, the term ‘sensitive period’ has come to be preferred, for it seems, as Robert Hinde has put it, that we are merely concerned with changing probabilities of certain forms of learning, and that periods of maximum probability may be surrounded by periods of reduced probability.
When we turn to human development there is even more doubt about the usefulness of the critical period concept.
It is certainly true that the individual is more sensitive to particular types of influence at some developmental stages than at others, but to say that tells us little, either about the extent to which the period can be shifted or about the reasons for the increased sensitivity.
The main problem, however, is a methodological one, for in human development specific events to which one may wish to attribute some formative influence hardly ever occur on their own but are usually embedded in a continuing context, a whole network of associated influences.
Thus the death of his father is not an event that impinges on a child only at one particular point: it may go on producing shock waves through its continuing effect on the mother, which in turn may bring about a different relationship with the child; in addition there may be economic difficulties as a result of which the mother has to go out to work, a new home has to be found, and an altogether new lifestyle adopted.
One event may thus produce a multitude of effects that continue to reverberate for many years.
To attribute any subsequent pathology in the child to that single event would be misleading, for it is but one link in a chain of traumata, any one of which — or, more likely, the sum total of all — may be responsible for the child's condition.
No wonder investigators have found it more profitable to examine this problem in animals, where it is much easier to programme experience and ensure that only single events are studied without the influence of others.
We can now appreciate why care has to be taken in making statements about the role of the child's first relationship and its influence on later personality development.
To suggest, for example, that adult maturity is built on a foundation of ‘basic trust’ that must be established in infancy (as Erik Erikson did) is to put forward an interesting idea which is, in practice, extraordinarily difficult to substantiate.
The odds are that a relationship that engenders such trust in infancy will continue to engender it in later childhood too, and who is to say at the end of it all that one period was more crucial than another in bringing about the final result?
Similarly where no such trust has been brought about: if, say, a child's family disintegrates it may well be but the beginning of a whole sequence of misfortunes and unsatisfactory care arrangements in institutions and foster homes.
Just occasionally, however, drastic discontinuities in a child's upbringing do occur and are thus of special interest in attempts to understand the role of early experience.
One such example is provided by Wayne Dennis, who observed infants reared in a creche in the Lebanon.
There, as the result of a regime which involved very little adult attention, few toys, and being left all day in bed in a bare room, the infants suffered extreme deprivation.
When tested at the end of the first year they were found to have developed on average at about half the rate that is usual, though there were indications that at birth they had been potentially normal.
However, some of these children were subsequently adopted, and when followed up some years later showed a remarkable recovery with an average IQ of 85.
Those adopted before the age of 2 years had an average IQ as high as 96, while those adopted later scored around 80.
The children not adopted stayed in the original creche until they reached the age of 6, when they were transferred to two other institutions for boys and girls respectively.
The girls' institution was just as restrictive in its general regime and just as impoverished in its provision of personal attention as the creche.
When tested at ages 12 to 16 years, these girls were found to have an average I Q of 54.
Thus, they have remained at the same level of retardation throughout their childhood.
The boys' institution, on the other hand, was run on very different lines, providing far more stimulation and facilities like play and educational equipment, film shows, and trips outside the institution.
These boys, when tested, were found to have an average IQ of 80, thus showing a significant degree of recovery from the level reached at the end of the first year.
Both the adopted children and the institutionalized boys thus show that the deprivation of intellectual and social experience in infancy had not produced irreversible consequences, however drastic the effects at the time.
Our second example comes from observations by Jerome Kagan and Robert Kleinl of a group of Guatemalan children living in an Indian village in an isolated, mountainous area of the country.
Again discontinuity of experience marks the lives of these children, despite the fact that they remain in their own homes all along.
The discontinuity this time  stems from the child-rearing practices found in this particular setting.
During infancy children tend to be kept most of the time in the small, dark interior of their hut, where they are rarely allowed to crawl on the floor, rarely spoken to or played with (though always kept near the mother), and where few objects for play are available.
If the mother travels to market she leaves the infant behind, as the outside sun, air and dust are considered harmful.
Observations of these infants revealed a picture of alarming pathology: they hardly moved, were fearful, barely smiled and were extraordinarily quiet.
Many would not turn to a sound, nor would they smile or babble when spoken to.
Various tests suggested gross retardation by the end of the first year.
In short, these infants were very like those in the Lebanese creche.
Yet this depressing picture turns out to be quite unpredictive of later development.
In their second year these children become able to walk, they leave the hut and begin to participate in the life outside.
All at once the range of available experiences is vastly increased, and it is not long before the apathetic, listless and relatively incompetent infant is transformed into an active, gay, intellectually capable child.
In other words these Guatemalan children show, as do Dennis's institutionalized infants, that retardation during the first year or two of life is reversible, and that early experiences, however drastic at the time, do not necessarily set up patterns of behaviour that cannot subsequently be modified.
Predicting developmental outcome
The above two examples give body to the suggestion by Alan Clarke that early learning, in itself, is of no more consequence than learning at any other stage of development, and that it will bring about long-term effects only if it is repeatedly reinforced throughout subsequent childhood.
Without that reinforcement, early learning will fade: single, delimited experiences rarely produce permanent effects.
In a similar vein, B. A. Campbell and J.Jaynes have argued that an early experience can be perpetuated and incorporated into the adult personality only if it is periodically reinstated ; that is, if a small amount of partial practice, or repetition of the experience, occurs throughout childhood.
This applies, presumably, to the case where one misfortune sets in train a whole sequence of further misfortunes, each confirming the child's expectation of what life has to offer him and each giving him further reason to adopt whatever behaviour — flight from reality, antisocial tendencies, and so forth— he used as a way of dealing with the original situation.
Under such circumstances one can predict the final outcome with rather more confidence, for a child in this situation is sustained and encouraged in the response he originally adopted.
But just how constant is a child's environment, even under the most normal circumstances?
It may take drastic discontinuities, of the kind  described above, to highlight the fact that the environment over a period must be taken into account before one can attempt to predict the course of personality development, yet children reared under normal home circumstances are generally regarded as remaining under such constant environmental conditions that this consideration does not hold.
Mother, in other words, is thought to be always the same mother, parental influences are regarded as invariable throughout childhood, and an assessment of the parents' psychological characteristics at one point is thought sufficient to typecast them for good.
Yet can we really take it for granted that parents are so utterly changeless in their behaviour and attitudes to their children?
Those few studies […]that have reassessed parental characteristics at various ages of the child have shown that even in the course of a few months during infancy there may be drastic changes in a mother's behaviour-sometimes resulting from changes in the infant's behaviour, sometimes brought about by extraneous factors.
A mother, after all, does not live in a vacuum, and all sorts of influences — the arrival of another child, new vocational interests, increasing maturity, and so forth— may well bring about subtle yet important changes in her relationship to the child.
Most important of all, however, are the changes that stem from the relationship itself: an over-anxious mother sees her new baby prosper, gains confidence, and treats him with ever-increasing assurance.
Or, alternatively, a mother encounters a persistent feeding difficulty in the baby, fails to resolve it, and as a result loses her initial equanimity and becomes tense and fearful with him (and if that, in turn, then makes the feeding problem even worse one is left with a vicious spiral of the kind that can only be resolved by some drastic outside intervention and which clearly shows, moreover, the difficulty of disentangling cause and effect when confronted by the end result).
These examples are of short-term changes, and it may well be that long-term changes are even more marked.
Of course there remains a core of consistency which would normally outweigh by far the fluctuations.
Nevertheless, to conceive of parents as utterly static in the child's psychological life is likely to distort the picture grossly.
A child's development always takes place within a context of contemporaneous events, the most important of which result from the parents' activities.
And it appears that these activities need to be reassessed periodically if one is to understand the child's developmental course.
The relationship as an interaction
It is because the context of the child's development is always changing that one cannot predict later behaviour on the basis of earlier events.
According to explanations based on the critical period model, early events have such great impact that one need not take anything else into account.
This view, it appears, is too simple-minded: a baby does not become a  different kind of adult for being bottle-rather than breast-fed, for being weaned early rather than late, for encountering one kind of attitude rather than another at some particular time.
Single events rarely cause a major restructuring of the child's personality: they occur in the context of a continuous interaction with the environment which itself is not static and which may modify, strengthen or weaken the consequences of what has happened already.
Only very rarely will a particular experience have such massive effects that it overrides all else, producing identical consequences for any child — at least, very rarely in human development, for it is likely that the effects of early experience seen in animal experiments are in most cases largely due to the enormous scale of the experiences involved.
It seems improbable that anything comparable to the traumata commonly employed in psychological experiments with mice, rats and dogs would be encountered by human children.
What follows from the normal range of experience depends very much on the effects produced by the child's altered condition on the parents and, in turn, by the way in which their parental reaction impinges on the child.
This applies even to such comparatively gross factors as minimal brain damage: in one family its effects may be modified and normalized; in another they may be exaggerated and become the starting point of considerable behaviour problems.
The labels parents attach to particular behaviour patterns often reflect this: thus one set of parents may see a grossly inactive baby as ‘placid’ and happily accept him as that, while another set might see the same child as irritatingly ‘lazy’and accordingly try to force him to behave differently.
Knowing that a child has, for instance, minimal brain damage, without knowing the nature of his environment, will not tell us how he will develop.
So we need a ‘transactional model’ rather than a critical period model if we are to understand the course of child development — transactional in the sense that we recognize the constant and progressive mutual modifications of parent and child at all stages of growth.
The fact that a child is weaned early (or undergoes a period of separation, or has minimal brain damage, or loses a parent through death) will not by itself tell one about the eventual outcome.
The child is too much part of his immediate social environment to justify disregard of the effect that he has on his caretakers and of the effect that their reaction in turn will have on him.
Both parents and child operate within a system of mutuality where the behaviour of one produces effects on the other that in turn modify the behaviour of the first.
One has to consider the whole network of interacting influences; not, as the critical period model attempts to do, skip all but the first and last link.
Conclusions
The two approaches to the study of the mother and child relationship we have discussed so far-that based on physical care and that dealing with attitudes — each originally hoped to reveal the major determinants of  children's personality development; neither, however, has succeeded in this task.
As a result, two changes have taken place in recent years in the way in which the mother-child relationship is being studied.
In the first place, instead of searching for the long-term consequences of early family experiences, a switch has taken place to the study of immediate effects.
The problem of bridging the gap between early experience and later personality has for the time being been shelved, and questions are being asked instead about what is indeed the logically prior problem: whether and in what way infants of various ages are affected by specified environmental happenings.
Let us first (so the reasoning goes) consider the immediate impact of mother and child on one another before we try to stipulate the relationship between infant experience and adult behaviour.
The second change follows on from the first.
Once mother-infant interactions came to be studied in detail it became clear that we needed to reshape radically our ideas about socialization-about how children are integrated into a social world.
Formerly, socialization had been seen as a kind of ‘clay moulding’.
The child, it was thought, came into the world as a formless, inert blob of clay which was then moulded by parents, teachers, society, or whatever other forces he happened to come into contact with, and the shape that he eventually assumed was therefore entirely due to the characteristics others had decided to implant in him.
This view, we now know, is misleading: probably more than any other single factor it is responsible for past failures to understand the socialization process.
As detailed examinations of mother-infant interactions show, from the beginning the baby is active, not passive; his behaviour is organized, not ‘absent’; and even to the earliest social interactions he brings certain characteristics which will affect the behaviour of other people towards him.
A mother's task is thus not to create something out of nothing but rather to dovetail her behaviour to that of the infant's.[…]
References
2.2 A Policy for Young Children
M. Kellmer Pringle
During recent years, demand has been building up for greatly increased facilities for full-time substitute care.
Because of pressure from many different lobbies, government has for some time been considering in what way to respond to it.
If it were decided to increase greatly the provision of group care in day nurseries, then a big investment would have to be made in buildings and staff training.
Hence, such a step would set the pattern for at least a generation to come.
If the decision were in favour of subsidized family day care — developing what is now called child minding-this would also require a substantial financial and training commitment but be less costly in terms of bricks and mortar.
A combination of these two main types of substitute day care for young children might also be considered.
As I see it, we are at a crossroad where far-reaching decisions must soon be made by women, by local authorities and central government.
For individuals, they are decisions about their personal life-style.
For government, central and local, they are decisions about supporting the family; promoting the optimal care of children; and determining the best — or perhaps more realistically, the least detrimental — type of care and educational provision for the under fives to supplement maternal care.
Although care truly shared by both parents may one day become the norm, this day is unlikely to dawn within the next ten to fifteen years; therefore I will omit this option from my present argument.
Before these decisions are made by individuals and by government, I would urge that a number of basic questions be asked and reliable answers be sought.
Not only is there at present much special pleading which largely ignores the needs of children; but also, I believe, there is a large silent majority whose views, though unfashionable, deserve a hearing.
Among the questions which should be asked are the following:
1 What are the reasons for the demand for full-time day care?
2 What are the arguments against it?
3 How big a demand is there?
4 What would be the cost of high quality day care?
5 What are the high quality day care models?
What are the main reasons prompting the demand for full-time day care?
Devaluation of motherhood
Possibly the most potent reason lies in present day, paradoxical attitudes to child rearing and to children, which are most marked in relation to infants.
Their care is simultaneously over-romanticized and undervalued.
The glamorization of motherhood is at its most blatant in advertisements, but the madonna and child image is all-pervasive, including teenage and women's magazines.
In fact, a great deal of attention and joy are focused on the newborn baby and its mother, but this soon evaporates.
Just when the mother is in greatest need of support, attention is likely to have waned — a few weeks after the actual birth.
By that time, she may be growing exhausted from her new and taxing responsibilities, broken nights and perhaps feeding difficulties.
These are probably made worse by post-natal depression and feelings of loneliness.
The new father will by that time have realized more fully the extent of his wife's preoccupation with the baby and resent its unexpected effects on their relationship.
The fashionable view of describing babies as dull and boring further adds to the young woman's sense of wasting her abilities and failing to fulfil her potential, especially if she has enjoyed the benefits of higher education.
And so children come to be portrayed as unwelcome and irritating interruptions to more interesting paid work outside the home, particularly a professional career.
Economic need
The second reason most often quoted is economic need, both the country's and that of individual families.
It is claimed that the labour of women is required for the creation of wealth and that in certain industries female labour is essential.
But surely children, being the adults of tomorrow, are the most valuable resource there is?
And if a woman (or man for that matter) devotes, say eight years to the care of two children, there remain at least thirty more years of outside earning capacity.
The economic argument is as fallacious as that of denying the need for women to have higher education which will be ‘wasted’ if she becomes a homemaker and mother.
Surely it is more essential that she should be well educated, as research has shown the mother's education to be more important to the child's own later achievement than the father's.
Moreover, far from being an ‘unproductive’ diversion from the labour market, bringing up a family should ‘count’as relevant experience.
Surely it would be a professional asset in many spheres of work, including teaching, social work, medicine, nursing, child care and psychology?
The teaching profession has recently made a beginning in this direction, allowing one salary increment for each three years of child rearing.
The family's economic need is particularly pressing at a time of inflation.
Of course, family allowances, tax benefits and preferential housing allocation are all designed to ease the cost of dependent children.
However, this financial help is too limited in relation to actual expenditure.
It fails to recognize that child-rearing is both a vital and demanding job which deserves adequate remuneration.
Its unique contribution to the community should be recognized — which incidentally would help to raise its status — so that no mother of under-fives should have to go out to work for financial reasons.
[…]
The state should give substantial financial inducements to mothers of pre-school children to care for them at home; because of the economic situation, this may, to begin with, have to be on a sliding scale according to need.
The finance required would not be wholly new in any case, since considerable expenditure is, at present, devoted to day nurseries, and very much more to residential nurseries in cases where single mothers cannot afford to look after their children.
For example, in France, a special salary is paid to women who worked before marriage.
Both married and single mothers receive it, the amount being highest for infants under 2 years of age.
Isolation and boredom
The third reason for demanding day care is the social isolation and boredom of mothers.
But surely there is nothing inevitable about ‘a solitary female raising her children exclusively and alone’?
Many middle-class mothers share the care of their children on an informal basis of friendship, as well as more formally through the pre-school playgroup movement.
In working-class areas, neighbours similarly look after each other 's offspring.
Recent research has demonstrated that even in deprived areas or in new overspill housing estates, it is possible to encourage cooperative ways, given some professional encouragement and support to grass-root demands.