

INTERACTION BETWEEN SCIENCE AND RELIGION: SOME PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS
Introduction
During their history, the natural sciences have been invested with religious meaning, with antireligious implications and, in many contexts, with no religious significance at all.
The object of this book is to offer some insight into the connections that have been made between statements about nature and statements about God.
As we noted in the introduction, however, problems arise as soon as one enquires about the relationship between ‘science’ and ‘religion’in the past.
Not only have the boundaries between them shifted with time, but to abstract them from their historical contexts can lead to artificiality as well as anachronism.
How, for example, do we deal with that late nineteenth-century evolutionist Henry Drummond, who insisted that it was wrong to speak of reconciling Christianity with evolution since the two were one?
In a glowing vision of The ascent of man (1894), Drummond acknowledged the Darwinian struggle for life, but he also referred to a struggle for the life of others.
The former was essential to the evolutionary process, as individuals competed for resources.
But, Drummond argued, so too was the latter: Once the human mind had evolved, self-sacrifice, cooperation, and maternal love would each contribute to the survival of societies in which those virtues were encouraged.
Christianity and evolution were ultimately one because both denoted a method of creation; both had as their object the making of more perfect beings.
Because altruistic love was germane to both, he could argue for a  perfect union.
Evolution embraced progress in spirit as well as in matter.
Many of Drummond's contemporaries did know how to deal with him.
His secular critics saw the misguided attempt of an evangelical Christian to adapt his theology to an insuperable threat from science.
Nor, despite a close friendship with the evangelist D. L. Hoody, could he pacify the more conservative evangelicals in his audience.
‘Many fell upon me and rent me,’ he complained, after addressing a Northfield conference in 1893.
It is not clear, however, that the historian need follow their example.
From a late twentieth-century perspective are we not more likely to disregard than dissect him?
It would be easy to do so on the basis that his fusion of science and religion was really a confusion.
Our own century has seen so many movements against the conflation of scientific and religious language that we may, on purely philosophical criteria, judge him to have been misguided.
By those who treat scientific and religious discourse as two distinct language games, or who detach doctrines of creation from statements about the physical world, Drummond's attempt to integrate his faith with evolutionary science would be dismissed as an unfortunate error.
The problem for the historian, however, is that sophisticated twentieth-century distinctions may not always be the most sensitive instruments for understanding the issues as they were formulated in the past.
There were Henry Drummonds in every generation who did make connections between their theology and their science.
If we begin with too cavalier an attitude toward them, we may miss a certain richness in our intellectual heritage and one that had a profound bearing on how the word science was understood, by both practitioners and their public.
Consider, for example, three contrasts commonly drawn by scholars when comparing our modern scientific age with earlier times when magic prevailed.
Science, it is said, operates within a world-view that regards natural phenomena as the product of impersonal forces.
By contrast, religious and magical systems involve personalized gods, spirits, or demons.
Whereas the scientific enterprise is legitimated by agreed testing procedures, the theological enterprise has been characterized by dogmatism.
Whereas religions have required  worship, ceremony, and sacrifice, these are forms of activity alien to Western science.
On such grounds science and religion are commonly differentiated.
Closer inspection of the history of science, however, suggests a more complex picture.
Science may be concerned with impersonal forces, religion with personalized gods; but the very word force carried religious meanings, even for Isaac Newton (1642–1727) who, in describing the operation of a gravitational force in mathematical terms, also ascribed it to an omnipotent God.
By his critic Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716), he was accused of making the action of gravity a perpetual miracle.
The contrast between self-criticism in science and an uncritical spirit in religion cannot be made absolute.
Scientific theories have often been cherished when in the eyes of their critics they ought to have perished.
Recalling a symposium held at St. Louis in 1961, the distinguished organic chemist Herbert C. Brown has commented on the reaction when he suggested that many of the proposed nonclassical structures for carbonium ions had weak experimental support.
He had hoped for a critical reexamination of the field.
Instead, many fell upon him and rent him.
His suggestions were treated as ‘a heresy, triggering what appeared to be a ‘holy war’ to prove me wrong.’
Conversely, a spirit of self-criticism and renewal can hardly be said to be absent from the religious sphere when one of the problems faced by institutionalized orthodoxies has been to contain the eruption of reform and sectarian revolt.
There may be no obvious equivalent in science of the call to worship in religion.
And yet, there were those in the late seventeenth century, Robert Boyle (1627–91) and John Ray (1627–1705) among them, who envisaged scientific inquiry itself as a form of worship.
The image of nature as temple, the scientist as priest, was explicit in Boyle.
just as fine music was best appreciated by the trained musician, so God's craftsmanship in creation could be celebrated by the skilled anatomist.
There was even revelation in this temple of nature.
Insights that a modern chemist might attribute to serendipity were ascribed by Boyle to ‘pregnant hints’ received from a greater chemist than he.
There is, therefore, a strong case for bringing an open mind to the richness of the subject.
The main purpose of this chapter is to identify some of the levels on which statements about  nature and statements about God have coexisted.
We can then consider the implications of this analysis for one of the general views identified in the introduction — that there has been nothing but conflict between science and religion.
The Diversity of Interaction
The very possibility of a rational science of nature is usually considered to depend on a uniformity in the relations between cause and effect.
In the past, religious beliefs have served as a presupposition of the scientific enterprise insofar as they have underwritten that uniformity.
Natural philosophers of the seventeenth century would present their work as the search for order in a universe regulated by an intelligent Creator.
A created universe, unlike one that had always existed, was one in which the Creator had been free to exercise His will in devising the laws that nature should obey.
A doctrine of creation could give coherence to scientific endeavor insofar as it implied a dependable order behind the flux of nature.
To say that religious belief could function as a presupposition of science need not entail the strong claim that, without a prior theology, science would never have taken off.
But it does mean that the particular conceptions of science held by its pioneers were often informed by theological and metaphysical beliefs.
When natural philosophers referred to laws of nature, they were not glibly choosing that metaphor.
Laws were the result of legislation by an intelligent deity.
Thus the philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650) insisted that he was discovering the ‘laws that God has put into nature.’
Later, Newton would declare that the regulation of the solar system presupposed the ‘counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful Being.’
Figure I. 1.
Illustration from page 44 of Johannes Kepler's Astronomia nova (1609).
The imposition of order on a wayward planet.
Kepler considers the orbit of Mars in the context of differentiating between three competing models of the world system: the Copernican (in which all the planets — earth included — orbit the sun), the Ptolemaic (in which sun and planets orbit a stationary earth), and the alternative geostatic system of Tycho Brahe (see Fig.
I.2), in which the planets — but not the earth — revolve around the sun, which in turn orbits the earth.
Kepler was to argue that the divinely ordained order behind the appearances was best revealed by supposing Mars to have an elliptical orbit, with the sun stationary at one focus of the ellipse.
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
Figure I. 2.
Illustration from page 45 of Johannes Kepler's Astronomia nova (1609).
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
A doctrine of creation could underwrite the scientific enterprise in a second respect.
If the human mind had been created in such a way that it was matched to the intelligibility of nature, then the possibility of secure scientific knowledge could be affirmed.
Some two hundred years after Descartes had formulated his concept of mechanical laws, a proven capacity to discover the laws of nature and to express them mathematically was taken by the first systematic historian of science, William Whewell, as evidence of an affinity between human and the divine mind.
As the astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) had put it, in exposing the geometry of  creation one was thinking God's thoughts after Him.
The idea of a First Cause, Whewell suggested, was not extracted from natural phenomena.
Rather it had been assumed in order that those phenomena could become intelligible to the mind.
In addition to providing presuppositions for science, religious doctrines have also offered sanction or justification.
This has been a recurring function as scientists have repeatedly had to justify the place of science in their culture.
Proponents of scientific inquiry would often argue that God had revealed Himself in two books — the book of His words (the Bible) and the book of His works (nature).
As one was under obligation to study the former, so too there was an obligation to study the latter.
According to a manuscript of that great diplomat for science, Francis Bacon (1561–1626), the rise of experimental science was sanctioned not merely by religion, but by God Himself.
For, in the book of Daniel (12:4) there is a prophecy that seemed to speak of a time when many would pass to and fro and knowledge would be increased.
Recent improvements in navigation and the expansion of commerce persuaded Bacon that the time had come.
He knew that the Genesis account of man's fall from grace could be read as an indictment of a thirst for knowledge.
But he was able to anticipate that objection by suggesting that the prohibition applied only to knowledge sought in self-aggrandizement, not to that which was of service to humanity.
A religious sanction of a different kind was offered by Thomas Sprat in his History of the Royal Society (1667).
Sprat suggested that, of all pursuits, the study of experimental philosophy was most likely to engender a spirit of piety, perseverance, and humility — the hallmark of Christian virtue.
The contemplation of God's works could be a constructive diversion from the unhappy doctrinal disputes that had torn Christianity apart since the Reformation.
Science could offer both sanctuary and its own brand of sanctification.
Many years later when another scientific institution was founded in Britain, the British Association for the Advancement of Science, a similar refrain was still to be heard.
Speaking in 1833, the Cambridge geologist and cleric Adam Sedgwick referred both to the wisdom of God as manifested in creation and to the wisdom of the association in seeking to transcend political and religious divisions.
Otherwise the ‘foul demon of discord’ would find his way into ‘our Eden of philosophy.’
Natural philosophy had its own garden of Eden, the arguments of natural theology providing a sanction for its preservation.
Figure I. 3.
Cartoon by George Cruickshank from page 209 of Bentley's Miscellany , vol.
C, 1838.
The necessity for scientists to find a justification for their endeavors is thrown into relief by this cartoon, which refers to a model exhibited before section B of the ‘Mudfog Association,’ a satirical creation of Charles Dickens who lampooned the British Association for the Advancement of Science with his ‘Full Report of the Second Meeting of the Mudfog Association for the Advancement of Everything.’
In his satire of the pretensions of mechanical science Dickens proclaims the value to society of automatons filling the role of policemen.
Hence the images in the cartoon; for, in Dickens's account, the robot policemen were to be kept on shelves in the police office until required.
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
If religious beliefs have supplied presuppositions and sanctions for science, they have also supplied motives .
The analysis of human motives is, of course, a precarious undertaking; but some of the connections made in the past between scientific and religious ideals were strong enough to bear reconstruction in such terms.
It has certainly been claimed that values associated with ascetic Protestantism provided new motivation for scientific inquiry, particularly in Holland and England during the seventeenth century.
A Protestant emphasis  on improving the world, under the aegis of providence, could confer dignity on scientific activity that promised both glory to God and the relief of human suffering.
Conceptions of a better world over which Christ would reign for a thousand years (the millennium) were later secularized to yield visions of a purely earthly utopia, in which a perfect human society might be possible in the absence of coercive measures.
Notwithstanding the unbridled optimism of many such visions, it cannot be denied that one source of the modern idea of progress was this millenarian theology of puritan reformers anxious to transform the world in readiness for Christ's second
The possibility of religious motivation behind scientific inquiry is perhaps most visible in systems of natural theology in which scientific knowledge was used to establish the existence and attributes of God.
In polemics against infidels and skeptics, who were commonly thought subversive of a stable society, science could be an impressive ally.
Noting that the lens and pupil of the eye were ‘so finely shaped and fitted for vision that no artist can mend them,’ Newton asked whether blind chance could have known sufficient of light and its refraction to have effected the design.
To one who had made a special study of refraction, the answer was obvious.
There was a Being who had made all things and who was to be feared.
A motive for the study of nature could therefore exist in the desire to confirm a God to be feared.
But also a God to be praised.
In John Ray's The wisdom of God manifested in the works of creation (1691), there was a sense of exultation in the wonders of nature.
So marvelous was the migrating instinct of birds that he could only ascribe it to the superior intelligence of their Creator.
Nor did Ray merely exploit the inexplicable.
It had been scientific ignorance, he suggested, that had permitted the clumsy models of the universe characteristic of Ptolemy's astronomy.
With the advent of the Copernican system, the universe, according to Ray, had acquired a new elegance, more in keeping with what might be expected of a divine architect.
Claims for religious motivation behind the pursuit of science are difficult to test, but there have been circumstances in which they seem appropriate.
Where a protagonist may have political reasons for wishing to differentiate one theological position from another, he may place a high value on scientific results that assist the differentiation.
In late eighteenth-century  England, much of Joseph Priestley's motivation as a religious dissenter came from a desire to establish a form of Christianity that could withstand rational criticism.
European philosophers who had rejected the Christian religion had, he believed, rejected a corrupt form.
His aim was to reconvert them to a Unitarian Christianity devoid of superstition.
The doctrine of the Trinity — that God is three persons in one — had infected the early Christian church through contact with Plato's philosophy.
Because science could help to eliminate superstition, there undoubtedly were connections in Priestley's mind between scientific activity and the promotion of a religion shorn of Platonist corruption.
The rapid progress of scientific knowledge, he declared, would be ‘the means under God of extirpating all error and prejudice, and of putting an end to all undue and usurped authority in the business of religion as well as of science.’
What Priestley called the business of religion could enter scientific debate on yet another level.
It could reinforce prescriptions for an appropriate scientific method.
Each science in its infancy has had to establish the assumptions and procedures by which it could claim to extend our knowledge of nature.
These have been the subject of intense debate, with religious preferences sometimes intruding.
To say that religious beliefs have infiltrated discussions of scientific method is not to say that they have directly affected scientific practice, for statements about methodology have often been rationalizations, used to justify a research program already in existence.
Such rationalization is, however, of great interest to the historian because it reveals something of the social processes involved in gaining respect for scientific work both inside and outside a scientific community.
In the 1830s, the British geologist Charles Lyell argued that to establish geology as a rigorous science, it had to be assumed that the forces that had sculpted the earth's surface in the past were identical, both in kind and intensity, to those acting now.
But there were contemporary geologists who had misgivings.
Was it not too restrictive to preclude the possibility that forces of greater intensity had acted in the past?
In expressing that objection, other contemporaries were undoubtedly swayed by the realization that Lyell's axiom would so greatly increase the age of the earth that it might threaten even a generous reading of Genesis.
When the Scottish physicist David Brewster protested against Lyell s principle of  uniformity, he invoked biblical considerations to justify an alternative methodology.
In earlier periods, this role of religious belief in regulating scientific methodology was extremely common.
The colorful chemical and medical reformer Paracelsus (c. 1493–1541) suggested that, in creating the world, God had left a magic sign on every herb — a clue to its efficacy.
In some cases the divine signature was perfectly legible: The thistle would relieve a prickly cough.
In others a little more imagination was required: This may not sound much like science, but it represented a significant departure from the book learning of his day.
For Paracelsus it implied a departure into the hills with a stout pair of boots to explore, decode, and harness the magic power.
It implied empiricism of a sort.
Empiricism of a different sort was practiced by Kepler, who welcomed the astronomical data of Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) as a means of confirming preconceived beliefs about the geometry of the universe.
The data were vital, but so was the preconception that the planetary orbits could be inscribed within, and circumscribed without, the five regular Greek solids.
It was empiricism of a sort, but regulated by Kepler's fusion of a Pythagorean harmony with a Christian doctrine of creation.
It was a brand of empiricism that his critic Marin Mersenne (1588–1648) renounced as not empirical enough.
Mersenne argued that, because the structure of the solar system is only one of infinitely numerous possibilities (and therefore ultimately dependent on the choice of the deity), it would be wrong to cherish a preconceived pattern.
A more open mind was required to discover which of the many possible patterns God had actually chosen to instantiate.
Such references to the freedom of the divine will were often used in the seventeenth century to justify attacks on rationalist theories of nature, whose authors presumed to know how God must have shaped the world.
Figure I. 4.
Plate from page 177 of Michael Maier's Atalanta fugiens (1618).
To learn nature's secrets, the chemist follows in her footsteps.
In the accompanying text, Nature is the guide, reason the staff, experience the spectacles, and reading the lamp, all prerequisites of successful inquiry.
Reproduced by courtesy of The Bodleian Library, Oxford; Shelfmark Vet.
D2. e. 18.
The term modern science usually connotes a complete openness to empirical testing.
Scientists in the past, however, experienced difficulty (and there are contexts in which they still do) when experimental criteria failed to discriminate  decisively between two or more theories.
Recent work in the philosophy and sociology of science has emphasized that experimental results are rarely adequate for making a definitive choice between competing theories.
Not uncommonly there have been problems in replicating both experimental procedures and the results claimed for them.
Certain problems have long been acknowledged even in popular accounts of scientific practice where emphasis is placed on the role of aesthetic criteria in theory selection.
How often one hears that when two theories look equally plausible, one opts for the simpler.
In the process of theory selection, religious (and antireligious) preferences have again intruded.
The criterion of simplicity could itself be referred, as it was by Newton, to a God who had ensured that nature did nothing in vain or, as it was by Michael Faraday in the nineteenth century, to a God who had ensured that the book of his works would be as simple to comprehend as the book of his words.
An example from the astronomical debates of the early seventeenth century may illuminate this selective role of religious belief.
In 1600, the renegade monk Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake for numerous heresies, including the proposition that the universe is infinite and that it contains an infinite number of worlds.
One of the reasons why this proposition was distasteful to many of Bruno's contemporaries was that it deprived humanity of a privileged place in the cosmos.
In resisting Bruno's vision, Kepler did all he could to protect the cosmic identity of his own solar system and (in accordance with his religious beliefs) of humanity's special place within it.
Despite the Copernican transformation, Kepler could still argue for a unique earth.
It was the planet with the central orbit in a system that had as its focus a symbol of the living God: the most resplendent sun in the universe.
Bruno's vista of an infinite plurality of star systems, scattered through an infinite universe, was unacceptable because of its relativistic implications.
Accordingly, when Kepler first heard of Galileo's telescopic observations, he was alarmed lest the satellites reported should be planets orbiting another sun.
How great his relief when he learned they were moons of Jupiter!
His insistence that our sun should be preeminent also predisposed him toward the belief that previously invisible stars, now revealed by Galileo's telescope, had been too small rather than too distant to be seen.
In such a way have religious beliefs sometimes shaped the interpretation of scientific data.
They have operated, too, in less subtle ways, sometimes fulfilling an explanatory role before being overtaken by more sophisticated scientific developments.
We can speak here of the constitutive role of religious beliefs — in the sense that they have constituted an explanation for phenomena that have subsequently proved explicable without theological reference.
For Newton there was no satisfactory account of why the planets should orbit the sun in the same direction and in roughly the same plane: This aesthetically pleasing scheme could only be explained by appealing to God's initial design.
When Laplace, late in the eighteenth century, applied his nebular hypothesis to the problem, deliberately dispensing with concepts of design, it could look as if Newton's God had been made redundant.
Propositions deduced from Scripture have also fulfilled an explanatory function.
The legend of Noah's ark once purported to say something about the geographical distribution of animals.
For the Oxford geologist William Buckland the flood was still constitutive of the earth's physical history in the 1820s.
The concept of separate creation, which Darwin found inadequate, had often been presented as a biblical view.
It is this constitutive role of religious belief that so often comes to mind when the words science and religion are juxtaposed; for the explanatory pretensions of the world's religions have made them vulnerable to scientific advance.
This is one reason why it has become routine among Christian writers to warn against a god-of-the-gaps.
Past precedents indicate that conflict will assuredly arise, if statements about God are used to fill the gaps in scientific explanation.
Figure I.5 Illustration following page 122 of Athanasius Kircher's Arca Noë (1675).
Preparing to board and ark in which there was room for every species.
Courtesy of Dr. Janet Browne and reproduced by courtesy of the Wellcome Institute Library, London.
It should not be assumed, however, that when religious beliefs have functioned as primitive science, it has always been to the detriment of further inquiry.
They could stimulate investigation before being discarded.
Take the case of Noah's ark.
A conventional view would be that the proliferation of new species, discovered between 1650 and 1750, sank the ark by the sheer weight of their numbers.
Certainly, by the 1740s, the Swedish taxonomist Linnaeus found it incredible that the fifty-six hundred species he had named could have been crammed into the elaborate vessels designed by biblical literalists.
And yet, in the preceding century, the legend had played its part in stimulating inquiry into the geographical distribution of species.
It had focused discussion on the plausibility of explanations based on dispersal from a single point.
The desire of biblical literalists to show that the story could have been history acted as a spur to the study of zoogeography, even though the eventual, and ironic, outcome was that they sank their own ship.
And even when the ark was abandoned, it still left its mark on the science.
Linnaeus himself retained a dispersal of all species from a single mountain, formerly surrounded by sea.
Figure I. 6.
Illustration between pages 108 and 109 of Athanasius Kircher-s Arca Noë (1675).
Some of the carefully calculated compartments in Kircher's ark.
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
If religious concepts have sometimes functioned as primitive science, the converse has also occurred.
As religious beliefs have constituted science, so scientific creeds have constituted an alternative religion.
Scientists themselves have often drawn parallels between the experience of a scientific vocation and certain forms of religious experience.
In late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Europe, it was not unusual to hear naturalists speaking of their scientific awakening in terms that might be used of a religious conversion.
One could experience a sense of ecstasy at the disclosure of nature's secrets and a sense of the sublime in contemplating its works.
Whenever scientific rhetoric assumed the form of a counterreligion, it could easily become a substitute religion, as it began to do in France during the revolutionary era.
Later champions of a scientific naturalism would sometimes refer to the ‘church scientific,’ as if to emphasize their usurping the role of the clergy in the arbitration of cultural values.
Charles Darwin's advocate T. H. Huxley made science the subject of what he chose to call ‘lay sermons.’
When one of the most energetic spokesmen for applied science in nineteenth-century Britain, Lyon Playfair, addressed the members of a mechanics institute in 1853, he unashamedly declared that ‘science is a religion and its philosophers are the priests of nature.’
It would not be difficult to extend this analysis and to identify other types of interaction.
A concern with theological questions has sometimes prompted new lines of scientific inquiry, as when Richard Bentley (1662–1742), wishing to use the latest science to defend his Christian theism, asked Newton whether he thought it possible that the frame of the world could have been produced, from a uniform distribution of matter, by mechanical principles alone.
His question prompted a fresh line of reasoning, Newton acknowledging that he had barely considered the point before receiving his letter.
The point we need to consider is whether, in the light of such diversity of interaction, it is appropriate to focus   exclusively on the impact of science on religion.
Standard treatments of the subject are often preoccupied with that formulation, as if the streams of relevance and implication could flow in one direction only.
But if religious beliefs have provided presupposition, sanction, even motivation for science; if they have regulated discussions of method and played a selective role in the evaluation of rival theories, the possibility of a more wide-ranging, and I hope rewarding, inquiry opens up.
This is not to deny that the custodians of institutionalized religion have often done their best to censure what they perceive to be damaging scientific conclusions.
But it is to suggest that an image of perennial conflict between science and religion is inappropriate as a guiding principle.
We shall now consider further reasons why this is so.
Conflict between Science arid Religion
With reference to the effect of scientific innovation on religious belief, two propositions are often juxtaposed.
First, when there has been confrontation, it has been religion that has yielded in the end.
Second, despite recurrent concession, the religion itself has survived.
This may indicate that the conflict has been over peripheral matters, that a core belief in a transcendent power could retain its plausibility, untouched by changing conceptions of the physical world.
Or it might suggest that the religious symbols, by which men and women have conferred meaning on their lives, meet such pressing psychological needs that they remain impervious to scientific frames of meaning, which, in the last analysis, only dictate how things are and how they came to be so, without pretending to answer the why and the wherefore.
Or it might suggest that, despite a total lack of plausibility in their claims for knowledge, religious movements have survived either through institutional inertia, or insofar as they assist in conferring a sense of identity on national or local communities.
For one of the founders of the sociology of religion, Emile Durkheim, history showed beyond doubt that religion had come to embrace a progressively smaller sector of social life.
Political, economic, and scientific functions had gradually freed themselves from religious control.
At the same time, there was something eternal in religion, destined to survive all the particular symbols in which religious thought had successively enveloped itself.
A fully secularized society was a  contradiction in terms, for there could be no society that would not feel the need to uphold the collective sentiments that gave it its unity and individuality.
One reason why there can be no simple answer to the question whether there has been irresolvable conflict between science and religion is that the answer may well depend on which of these types of explanation is favored.
So much depends on the prior plausibility ascribed to core religious beliefs.
And in religious communities, perhaps more than any other, the experiences and perceptions of the insider will contrast with those of the outsider.
What for the insider might be the purification of a defensible religion by its exposure to scientific criticism, would for the outsider be one more step along the path to destruction as an inherently implausible account of human destiny was shown up for what it is.
Despite the impossibility of an objective assessment, there are, however, considerations that suggest that the conflict has been exaggerated in the interests of scientism and secularism.
Because it has also been underplayed in the interests of religious apologetics, a degree of critical detachment is required.
In his History of the conflict between religion and science (1875), J. W. Draper put forward a principle of interpretation that still enjoys popular support.
The history of science, he wrote, is a narrative of the conflict of two contending powers, the expansive force of the human intellect on one side and the compression arising from traditional faith, and human interests, on the other.
Draper was an English scientist who became the first president of the American Chemical Society.
Living through the post-Darwinian debates, he invariably took up the cudgels on behalf of scientific rationalism.
He had even spoken — interminably — at the famous meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, held at Oxford in 1860, when Huxley allegedly scored his victory over Bishop Wilberforce with the retort that he would rather have an ape for an ancestor than a man who used his privileged position to pronounce on matters he knew nothing about.
For Draper, the Darwinian debates had focused attention on a crucial issue — whether the government of the world is by incessant divine intervention or by the operation of unchangeable laws.
One reason why his historical narrative, and others like it, must not be read uncritically stems from the fact that he projected current issues backward in time.
Far from being  impartial, he had an obvious target.
Whereas science had been unstained by cruelty, hands in the Vatican had been steeped in blood.
Draper's history was a diatribe against the Roman Catholic Church.
It reflected in part his reaction to the encyclical Quanta cura of 1864.
The accompanying ‘Syllabus of errors’ had deemed erroneous the belief that public institutions devoted to reaching literature and science should be exempt from the Church's authority.
Liberal protests notwithstanding, it had been announced in 1870 that the pope, speaking ex cathedra, is gifted with infallibility when defining doctrines to do with faith and morals.
Such developments were, for Draper, red rag to a bull — hence his recourse to history for the counterattack.
A parade of martyred scientists would show by whose hands the real errors had been committed.
Although he differentiated his position from that of Draper, suggesting that the struggle had been between science and dogmatic theology rather than between science and religion, A. D. White insisted that there had been a theological and a scientific view of every question, invariably at odds.
He, too, had lived with the Darwinian controversies and indulged in a similar backward projection.
As with Draper, White had a personal investment.
He was smarting from the clerical opposition that had been marshaled against his nonsectarian charter for Cornell University.
The prominence he had given to instruction in science had evidently made matters worse.
He was forced to conclude that there was ‘antagonism between the theological and scientific view of the universe and of education in relation to it.’
The result was A history of the warfare of science with theology in Christendom (1895), suffused with foolish remarks by uninformed priests, but hardly a model of discrimination.
To understand why Draper and White wrote as they did is not of itself sufficient to impugn their conclusions.
Their arguments have to be judged on their merits.
On closer inspection, however, they turn out to be deeply flawed.
They share a defect in common with all historical reconstruction that is only concerned with extreme positions.
They neglect the efforts of those who have regarded scientific and religious discourse as complementary rather than mutually exclusive.
Their preconception that, as science has advanced, phenomena once considered supernatural have yielded to naturalistic explanation, is not without support.
But it assumes a dichotomy  between nature and supernature that oversimplifies the theologies of the past.
If a supernatural power was envisaged as working through , as distinct from interfering with , nature, the antithesis would partially collapse.
Or, in the vocabulary often employed by earlier natural philosophers, an explanation in terms of secondary causes need not exclude ultimate reference to a primary cause.
Anthropologists who have studied witchcraft among African tribes have commented on the reaction to suggestions that the disease of an individual may be the result of a virus, not of witchcraft.
A common reaction is, Who sent the virus?
This is instructive because it shows how an explanation in terms of secondary causes is not perceived to exclude a customary reference to the will of a person.
The significance given to explanations in terms of natural causes depends on higher-level assumptions embedded in a broader cultural framework.
In the history of Western culture, it has not simply been a case of nature swallowing supernature.
Something had to happen to change the higher-level assumptions if conflict between science and religion was to achieve that self-evident status proclaimed by Draper, White, and their successors.
There is, here, a philosophical as well as an anthropological point.
It was made by T. H. Huxley who, for all his anticlericalism, nevertheless acknowledged that there were limits to the conflict he had himself been stirring.
There was a wider teleology not touched by the doctrine of evolution.
For it was always possible to argue that a primordial molecular arrangement had been designed in such a way that the universe, as we know it, would be the outcome.
In that sense, Huxley suggested, evolution had no more to do with theism than had the first book of Euclid.
A complementarity between scientific and theological interpretation was still possible, even if he himself preferred to remain agnostic.
The conflict histories were flawed in a further respect.
The scientific achievements of the past were crudely evaluated according to their contribution to later knowledge.
A more sensitive approach requires that scientific innovations be judged against the background of prevailing knowledge at the time they were announced.
The kind of history in which later knowledge is made the yardstick by which to judge earlier theories is now widely recognized as profoundly unhistorical.
In the minds of those who practice it (and it is still  quite common in scientific textbooks), the scientists of the past are effectively divided into heroes and villains.
The former anticipate later developments, the latter fail to see the light.
Given a cast of heroes and villains, there was no question but that clerical opponents of fruitful innovation would be placed among the latter.
And if some brilliant anticipation of later theory failed to make its mark, there was a convenient explanation to hand: the opposition of ‘the Church.’
The problem is that such accounts overlook the dialogue between established and innovative science.
In criticizing scientific novelty, existing theories are usually available as a resource.
Consequently, a case could usually be made out on scientific grounds for resisting hypotheses that appeared premature.
It would, for example, be quite wrong to imagine that opposition to the Copernican theory derived only from religious prejudice.
In 1543 an earth-centered cosmos was the physical orthodoxy of the day, supported by philosophical arguments that, at the time, were peculiarly compelling.
Until an effective principle of inertia had been formulated, the earth's motion was contradicted by common sense.
Surely, if the earth were moving, an object dropped from a tower would no longer hit the ground immediately beneath the point of release.
Prevailing Aristotelian philosophy also affirmed a fundamental division between two regions in the cosmos.
Beyond the moon all was perfect and immutable.
Beneath the moon, all was corruption and change.
To wrench the earth from the sublunar region and to place it among the planets was to violate the entire cosmos.
Certainly the Catholic Church had a vested interest in Aristotelian philosophy, but much of the conflict ostensibly between science and religion turns out to have been between new science and the sanctified science of the previous generation.
Appeal to ecclesiastical censure as a way of explaining the misfortunes of scientific theories is a card that can be overplayed.
Galileo seems to have felt that his difficulties with the Catholic Church had their origin in the resentment of academic philosophers who had put pressure on ecclesiastical authorities to denounce him.
A conventional conflict thesis can also conceal vital distinctions between different religious traditions and between liberal and conservative representatives of those traditions.
One has to ask whether different pressure groups within the Roman Church became equally hostile to Galileo, or whether, as some believed at the time, he was a victim of a Jesuit plot — of an act of revenge for insults he had meted out to prominent members of that order.
The pope under whose jurisdiction he eventually fell, Urban VIII, had once been a friend and ally.
Even after he had been summoned to the Holy Office in April 1633, Galileo could still arouse sympathy in high places.
The commissary general in charge of the prosecution, Firenzuola, apparently admitted that he did not consider the Copernican system unacceptable.
The pope's nephew, Cardinal Barberini, appears to have shared with Firenzuola the suspicion that the trial had more to do with personal revenge than doctrinal necessity.
The issues in this famous case are extremely involved and we shall consider them further in Chapter III.
But the need for discrimination is plain enough.
During the 1620s the opinion had been expressed in Catholic circles that the Copernican system ought not to be condemned.
To do so would constitute a stumbling block to the reconversion of Protestants who favored the new astronomy.
In assessing the attitudes of religious thinkers to the natural sciences, discrimination is required in another respect.
For there is a difference between hostility and indifference.
Many spokesmen for the Christian religion have echoed the conviction that St. Basil expressed with his statement that a life of meekness and piety knew higher concerns than whether the earth was a sphere, cylinder, or disk.
Sometimes the investigation of nature has sunk to the bottom in a stratification of priorities.
Another of the early church fathers, Tertullian, observed that it had ‘served Thales of Miletus quite right, when, star gazing as he walked…, he had the mortification of falling into a well.’
It was easy for Draper and White to mock the church fathers for their naiveté on matters of natural philosophy, forgetting that they did have higher concerns — forgetting, too, that their naiveté often reflected the pagan wisdom of their day.
According to Draper, no one had done more than St. Augustine to bring science and religion into antagonism.
It was he who had made the Bible an arbiter of human knowledge.
Yet Draper failed to mention that, in his exegesis of Scripture, Augustine had not been a hide-bound literalist.
In fact he had specifically warned against taking the ‘days’ of Genesis literally.
Because eggs and seeds took time to develop, reflecting a ‘wonderful constancy in an established order, the creation narrative had to be read with care.
Drawing  on a Stoic concept of seeds, which he applied even to the origin of Adam and Eve, he had a sense of natural order that could hardly be considered hostile to further inquiry.
He may have shown indifference with his remark that Christians need not be ashamed if they knew nothing of the number and properties of the elements.
But he could also be dismayed if Christians were heard by pagans to be talking nonsense about nature.
To reduce the relationship between science and religion to one of conflict may also obscure the possibility that, when students of nature were persecuted by ecclesiastical authorities, it was for theological heresies rather than for scientific heterodoxy.
Two examples have frequently been pressed into the mold of religion versus science: the burning of Michael Servetus (c. 1511–53) in Protestant Geneva and of Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) by the Roman Inquisition.
Servetus is remembered for his description of the lesser, pulmonary, circulation of the blood.
Rejecting Galen's theory, that blood passes directly from right to left ventricle, he proposed a vital role for the lungs, where a vital spirit emerged from the mixture of air and blood.
His insight, however, was achieved in a theological work discussing the relationship between ‘spirit’ and air.
His concern was to understand the dispensation of God's Spirit to mankind.
But he was burned in 1553 not so much for attacking Galen, as for attacking Calvin.
Geneva was still technically under the Holy Roman Empire where the Justinian code allowed burning for those who denied either infant baptism or the divinity of Christ.
Servetus had denied both.
Calvin himself had no doubt that Servetus should be executed, but he was actually unsure whether burning, as recommended by the town council, was the appropriate sentence.
An advocate of Copernican astronomy, an infinite universe, and a plurality of worlds, Bruno has often been seen as the archetypal scientific martyr.
Although his proposal of plural worlds was considered heretical, it is difficult to believe it was that which determined his fate.
A renegade monk, he made no secret of his unorthodox Christology.
It was rumoured that he had declared Christ a rogue, all monks asses, and Catholic doctrines asinine.
Behind his hostility lay a conviction that the Roman Church represented a corruption of an earlier, undefiled religion that he associated with the Egyptians.
Bruno was familiar with the collection of texts  known as the Corpus Hermeticum , then attributed to an Egyptian philosopher, Hermes Trismegistus.
Where some saw in the Hermetic texts an anticipation of Christianity, Bruno saw an alternative.
Indeed, he hoped they would provide the basis of a religion that could unite the warring factions of the Church.
His world-picture was colored by a magical philosophy that almost became his religion.
He described Moses as a magus who, learning his magic from the Egyptians, had outconjured the magicians of Pharaoh.
The true cross, for Bruno, was the Egyptian cross — full of magic power for tapping astral influence.
The Christian cross was a weak derivative.
The evidence suggests, not surprisingly, that his interrogators were more concerned by his theology, by matters of church discipline, and by his contacts with other known heretics, than by his Copernicanism.
The dependence of the conflict thesis on legends that, on closer examination, prove misleading is a more general defect than isolated examples might suggest.
Consider the case of Charles Lyell, who lectured on geology at King's College London in 1832 and 1833.
Appointed to the chair of geology in April 1831, he had resigned by October 1833.
The anecdotal view has been that his brevity of tenure reflected animosity from an Anglican establishment, disturbed by Lyell's rejection of a recent, universal flood.
It was not, however, that simple.
Even the one bishop who had been apprehensive, Edward Copleston, acknowledged that the progress of geology could be accommodated by a readjustment of biblical interpretation.
His principal concern had been pastoral — that Lyell might abuse his position of responsibility by drawing conclusions of general human significance, not strictly deducible from his science.
Lyell resigned not because of some inherent conflict between science and religion, but because he enjoyed neither the prestige nor the remuneration he had expected from the post.
His lectures would have been more lucrative had they attracted more women.
But it was during his tenure that the College Council debarred them.
With the prospect of a depleted income, Lyell considered that his energies would be better spent in completing his Principles of geology .
His resignation arose not so much because an audience was to be debarred from geology, as because women were to be debarred from the audience.
Women were in the audience when T. H. Huxley and Bishop  Wilberforce had their encounter at Oxford in 1860.
One fainted, according to some reports, and had to be carried out — so tremendous had been the spectacle of a man of God slain by a man of science.
The bishop had asked whether Huxley would prefer to think of himself descended from an ape on his grandfather's or his grandmother's side, thereby touching the sensitive nerve of female ancestry.
Huxley's retort that he would rather have an ape for an ancestor than a bishop — or words to that effect — has come to symbolize not merely the conflict between Darwinism and the Bible but the victory of science over religion.
‘The Lord hath delivered him into mine hands’ was a phrase that came into Huxley's mind, as he reminisced about the incident later.
But it was thirty-one years later and recent scholarship has questioned whether the anecdote might not have been a retrospective invention.
Contemporary accounts were certainly not unanimous in recording a triumphant Huxley and a humiliated bishop.
Huxley had turned the tables admirably, according to Sir Joseph Hooker, but he had been unable to throw his voice over so large an assembly.
He had not dealt with the bishop's weak points nor, according to Hooker, had he carried the audience with him.
One convert to Darwin's theory, Henry Baker Tristram, who had applied the concept of natural selection to larks and chats in the Sahara desert, was actually deconverted as he witnessed the debate!
There was, undeniably, an issue: whether the nonspecialist had any right to expatiate on scientific matters.
But that is precisely why the legend, once created, would become part of the folklore of scientific professionalism.
From popular texts on the Darwinian revolution, one would never suspect that another clergyman spoke out during the Oxford meeting of the British Association.
Frederick Temple, headmaster of Rugby School, and future archbishop of Canterbury, preached the official sermon on 1 July 1860.
Taking a more liberal line than the bishop, Temple argued that the finger of God was to be discerned in the laws of nature, not in the current limits of scientific knowledge.
Tacitly, he made room for Darwin's science and was even said by one observer to have espoused Darwin's ideas fully.
The point is that memorable anecdotes can create false perspectives.
Wilberforce was not the only representative of Anglican opinion, and even he was not as obscurantist as is sometimes  implied.
His printed review of the Origin of species attracted Darwin's comment that ‘it picks out with skill all the most conjectural parts, and brings forward well all the difficulties.
The fundamental weakness of the conflict thesis is its tendency to portray science and religion as hypostatized forces, as entities in themselves.
They should rather be seen as complex social activities involving different expressions of human concern, the same individuals often participating in both.
In its traditional forms, the thesis has been largely discredited.
It is, in fact, so easy a target that scholars reacting against it have constructed a revised view that has also been driven to excess.
If past conflicts can be spirited away, it is tempting for the religious apologist to step in and to paint a more harmonious picture.
After all, if religious beliefs did furnish presupposition, sanction, and motivation for science, they might be looked upon more favorably in an otherwise secular society.
The argument sometimes takes the form of a diagnosis — that much of the perplexity of our modern age is due to the severance of science from the religious values that once shaped it.
Christians, both Catholic and Protestant, have argued thus, as have Muslim scholars looking back to a golden age when Islamic thinkers were at the forefront of the physical sciences.
This apologetic use of revisionist history is, however, so full of pitfalls that it, too, deserves critical attention.
Harmony between Science and Religion
Religious apologists have often argued that when science and religion are properly understood, they can be in perfect harmony.
The implication is that such conflicts as there have been in the past were merely the result of misunderstanding.
Historical analysis showing that at least some of the conflict has been exaggerated can be used to support the argument.
The problem is, however, that claims for inherent harmony are vulnerable to the same kinds of objection as claims for an inherent conflict.
The idea that there is some correct and timeless view, against which historical controversies can be judged, can prove an insensitive guide to the issues as they were perceived at the time.
When the history of science is hijacked for apologetic purposes, it is often marred by a cultural chauvinism.
The realization that religious beliefs were relevant to the rise of science  is transformed into the more parochial claim that a particular religion, or religious tradition, was uniquely propitious.
Thus one often encounters the claim that a large number of Quakers (and other dissenters) contributed significantly to eighteenth- and nineteenth-century physical science and that Jews have been preeminent in mathematics, physics, and psychiatry in the twentieth century.
It is wise for the historian to be suspicious if claims for a special relationship are superimposed upon such alleged correlations.
This is not to deny that there may be good reasons why members of religious minorities should have sought a career in science and why they excelled in particular areas.
But these reasons may have little to do with intrinsic features of their religion.
In eighteenth-century England, for example, the practical sciences may have appealed to some dissenters because they were denied access to other professions.
Cultural chauvinism can have insidious effects on the historiography of science.
Even when they have not been beating a religious drum, Western historians have been censured for their myopia in treating modern science as if it were an exclusively Western phenomenon.
Significant contributions by Arab scholars are easily overlooked if there is the preconception that science was uniquely the product of a Hebraic-Christian culture.
In the centuries preceding the scientific renaissance in the West, Muslim scholars did far more than merely reproduce their heritage from the Greeks.
In algebra they developed a concept of polynomials and pioneered an algebraic geometry that has traditionally been ascribed to Descartes.
Different types of experimentation were introduced as a conventional barrier between theoretical science and the practical arts was weakened.
A fruitful marriage of mathematics with physics was achieved by Alhazen (c. 965-1040) for whom optics became a study of the geometry of vision.
By the early fourteenth century, al-Farisi was constructing experimental models — glass spheres filled with water to simulate rain drops — for the mathematical analysis of the rainbow.
Not surprisingly, Muslim scholars see in sixteenth-century Europe not a scientific renaissance but a reactivation.
Because the history of science has become embroiled in religious polemics, it is important to appreciate that the chauvinism appears not only between religions but within them.
In claims that one tradition rather than another led to scientific innovation, one often detects an apologetic intention.
One of the most prolific writers on Islamic science has insisted that most, if not all, the seminal contributions of Arab scholars are to be ascribed to a Shi'ite gnostic tradition.
The rival theology of Sunni Muslims, particularly that of the Ash'arites, then suffers by comparison.
Similarly, the thesis of Western historians that Protestant Christianity was more conducive to the expansion of science than Catholicism has often carried a hidden agenda.
The great defect in such writing is that it is often structured by questions of the form Who discovered such and such a fact first? or Who first anticipated such and such a concept?
Although the underlying message is quite different from the conflict thesis of White and Draper, there is that same streamlining of history into heroes and villains.
Religious apologists have also fallen into the same trap as White and Draper in projecting backward a model — in this case of harmony — that, although consonant with their own reconstructed religion, may not fit the religious beliefs of the past.
The danger consists in imagining some essence of Christianity, for example, that, because it may be shown to be immune to scientific criticism today, is assumed always to have existed and therefore, properly understood, is always impervious to criticism.
Apologists wishing to stress the harmony between science and religion may gloss over those facets of Christianity as it was that distinguished it from Christianity as they now wish it to be .
They may wish to say that their religion no longer needs a geocentric universe, a physical location for heaven and hell, a personal devil, or even divine intervention in the physical world.
The danger is that they may minimize, or even overlook, the importance of such beliefs for the Christian societies of the past.
However con descending contemporary apologists may be to archaic conceptions of divine intervention, it is almost impossible to exaggerate the extent to which belief in such intervention once permeated European societies, creating popular images of the disruption of nature that could hardly have been congenial to a critical science of nature.
Apologists wishing to exploit a revisionist history of science invariably stress the profoundly religious orientation of many prominent scientists.
While it is true that many of the great names of the past have been theists rather than atheists, their orientation has often been unorthodox when judged against the norms of their day.
Idiosyncrasy has been at least as common as conformity.
The originality of a critical mind, expressing itself in creative and sometimes idiosyncratic science, has often manifested itself in theological deviation.
The eighteenth-century chemist and Unitarian minister Joseph Priestley (1733–1804) was as keen to remove spirits from Christianity as he was from chemistry.
A mind used to questioning scientific hypotheses might experience discomfort with contentious elements in a classical creed — just as Newton, before Priestley, dismissed the doctrine of the Trinity as a Platonist corruption of a biblical Christianity.
One of the points to emerge in later chapters will be that eminent scientific figures have rarely been typical representatives of the religious traditions in which they were nurtured.
The apologist has a problem even where expressions of religious belief have an orthodox ring.
For the cynic will always say that the scientists of the past simply feigned their belief in order to escape persecution.
As a general rule, this cynical objection is far too crude, not least because it often rests on a false assumption — that it is impossible for theological statements to be both placatory and genuine.
Nevertheless, such statements were sometimes placatory and social pressures toward conformity could be strong.
As late as 1865, the botanist J. D. Hooker wrote a revealing letter to Darwin in which he complained of the stance taken by their contemporary, Alfred Russel Wallace, who had wondered that scientists should be so afraid to say what they think.
‘Had he as many kind and good relations as I have,’ Hooker wrote, ‘who would be grieved and pained to hear me say what I think, and had he children who would be placed in predicaments most detrimental to children's minds…he would not wonder so much.’
The point is not that the theological pronouncements of scientists are to be discounted but rather that they do sometimes have to be seen as efforts at mediation.
What may look like a straightforward affirmation of harmony between Christianity and science may turn out to have been a counter in a dialogue between new and entrenched religious positions.
The apologist who extracts the affirmation for his own purposes may overlook the dynamics of the dialogue.
In the writings of Galileo, for example, he would find a clear statement of compatibility between Copernican astronomy and Catholic Christianity.
In his Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina (1615), Galileo argued that the language of the Bible had been  accommodated to the minds of the uneducated, with the consequence that texts that superficially implied a stationary earth and a moving sun were not to be treated as literal scientific descriptions.
Beneath the surface Scripture had deeper meanings to which a knowledge of nature might help to give access.
There was room for both science and religion since the Bible taught how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go.
Its jurisdiction was principally on moral and spiritual matters.
But this affirmation has to be seen in context.
When Galileo wrote his letter, he was already on the defense.
There were already rumors that the new astronomy was incompatible with Scripture, and he had already been denounced from the pulpit.
Statements of harmony, as with statements of conflict, have to be placed in their context.
They may define positions that have often been repeated, but they cannot be given a timeless quality.
The Galileo affair illustrates a further difficulty for the apologetic use of history.
In criticizing the conflict thesis, we noted that a misleading sketch of opposition to science can be traced if the sample is confined to religious extremists.
Everything depends on where the circle is drawn.
But it is possible to draw so tight a circle around an enlightened few that the picture becomes distorted in the opposite direction.
There was indeed a range of enlightened opinion within the Roman hierarchy at the time of Galileo's trial; but the trial itself was not averted.
The point is that it is not just a case of drawing circles around thinkers whose stance one may happen to approve.
To understand the events in question, it is also necessary to consider in whose hands political power was concentrated.
It was not always the more enlightened who got their way.
Galileo was fighting against a religious bureaucracy, which, through an elaborate mechanism of censorship, sought to control the boundaries of legitimate opinion.
As we shall see in Chapter III, the threat from the Protestant churches was an integral part of the political complex.
The use of history to identify a privileged standpoint from which science and religion could always be harmonized runs into trouble for yet another reason.
The diversification of the sciences and the theoretical changes within them make it extremely difficult to locate a unique set of principles by which harmony could be guaranteed.
Among the physical scientists of the seventeenth century it was achieved by stressing the harmony of the universe itself — a divinely conceived  harmony, expressible in mathematical terms, and which, Copernicus had declared, it was the duty of the astronomer to display.
By the nineteenth century, however, and especially in the life sciences, the metaphysics that had underpinned the work of Copernicus, Kepler, and Newton had become obstructive.
The idea that living organisms had been structured according to a divine plan, transparent to the human mind, still featured in the work of eminent naturalists.
It was defended in Britain by Richard Owen and in America by the Harvard professor, Louis Agassiz.
Although it was not incompatible with the view that new species had arisen during the earth's long history, it was incompatible with evolutionary theory as conceived by Darwin.
Agassiz expressed his sadness that Darwin's theory had so quickly won acclaim, while Darwin could find in Agassiz's idealism nothing but ‘empty sounds.’
A metaphysics stressing the invariance of divine ideas created dissonance where it had once created harmony.
Figure I. 7.
Engraved title page from Marin Mersenne's Harmonie Vniverselle (1636–7).
An intimate relationship between musical harmony and the mathematical representation of physical data was epitomized by the correlation, ascribed to Pythagoras, between string length and pitch.
To halve the length of the string, for example, was to raise the pitch by exactly one octave.
In the seventeenth century, Mersenne undertook a systematic experimental inquiry, showing that pitch depended on frequency of vibration, which in turn was determined by the length, tension, and thickness of the string.
Concepts of universal harmony could be sustained on the basis of verifiable relationships between regular motion and pleasing sounds.
Reproduced by courtesy of The Bodleian Library, Oxford; Shelfmark M. 3. 16.
Art.
The strong claim that some one religious tradition was uniquely propitious for science also has its difficulties.
The problem is that, although certain doctrines may have licensed scientific inquiry, others within the same tradition could stifle it.
This ambivalence certainly existed in seventeenth-century Christian theology.
Although a doctrine of creation could countenance the search for order behind the flux of natural phenomena, the doctrine of Adam's Fall was sometimes used to suppress it.
Fears were expressed by puritan divines that to thirst after natural knowledge was to run the risk of elevating reason at the expense of faith.
And if human reason had been impaired by the Fall, what guarantee was there that one could think God's thoughts after Him?
Everything hinged on how such doctrines were formulated.
As we saw earlier, Francis Bacon was able to turn the doctrine of the Fall to advantage: Science would help restore that dominion over nature lost to humanity through Adam's sin.
In assessing whether a particular doctrine might have encouraged scientific inquiry, such ambivalence must be taken into account.
Even the claim that the natural order reflected the contingency of a divine will could pull in two directions.
It could be used, as it was by Bacon and Mersenne, to justify an empirical rather than a rationalist approach to nature.
But it could also be used to dismiss the claims, even of empiricists, that they knew how nature works.
For if God could have made the world work in any number of ways, would it not always   be presumptuous to pretend that one had actually pinned Him down?
That was an objection with which Galileo had to contend.
Figure I. 8.
Illustration from page 207 of Johannes Kepler's Harmonices mundi (1619).
In Kepler's construction of the solar system, each planet had its own melodic line associated with a changing speed that increased as it approached its closest point to the sun.
The less the variation in speed, the more monotonous the theme.
Kepler even conjectured that, by a backward projection from current orbital positions, it might be possible to determine the age of the earth — on the supposition that the most harmonious sound would have corresponded to the original creation.
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
In revisionist histories constructed for apologetic purposes, it is not usually denied that there were conflicts in the past.
But it is often implied that these were the result of particular social and political circumstances.
Once these contingencies are removed from the picture, no — or very little — substantive conflict remains.
Now, there is no denying that past controversies were rooted in circumstances that were peculiar to the age in which they occurred.
But to suggest that the conflict was over political rather than intellectual matters is to introduce a false antithesis.
The fact is that ideas about the relationship between science and religion have themselves been weapons in these political confrontations.
To explain the intellectual polarities by reference to historical contingencies is not necessarily to explain them away.
The debate over human origins in nineteenth-century Britain provides a helpful example.
Historians have correctly pointed out that to understand the kind of exchange that took place between Huxley and Wilberforce it is important to recognize that a major social transformation was taking place in which the clergy were losing their domination of the  intellectual life of the nation.
One symptom of this was their increasingly marginal involvement in scientific activity — a trend reinforced by the establishment of professional elites within the scientific movement.
When the British Association for the Advancement of Science had been founded in the early 1830s, clerics had constituted some thirty percent of its membership.
In the period 1831–65 no fewer than forty-one Anglican clergymen had presided over its various sections.
Between 1866 and 1900 the number was three.
During that latter period, the function of science in British society was increasingly perceived in terms of national prosperity, economic strength, and military security.
Formidable writers on science, such as Huxley and Darwin's cousin Francis Galton, still stressed a moral utility for their subject, but the traditional arguments for its religious utility were wearing rather thin.
It would be unwise to interpret the exchange between Wilberforce and Huxley without taking this social transformation into account.
Huxley had every reason to bash a bishop.
It would be in keeping with his desire to promote the status of the professional scientist and to exclude clerical interference.
But because there were social and political reasons for Huxley's aggression, it does not follow that there were no substantive intellectual issues.
To suggest that the struggle was not between science and religion but over cultural leadership may expel the conflict through the front door, but it still returns through the back.
Earlier in the chapter, reasons were given why the mythology surrounding this event should be questioned.
In the words of one historian, the legend was a one-sided effusion from the winning side.
But, in such a statement, the fact that were sides has crept in round the back.
And the apologist who might wish to make Huxley the aggressor should know that one observer, the zoologist Alfred Newton, clearly reported that it was Huxley who had first been chaffed by the bishop.
The purpose of this chapter has been to establish three propositions: that religious beliefs have penetrated scientific discussion on many levels, that to reduce the relationship between science and religion to one of conflict is therefore inadequate, but that to construct a revisionist history for apologetic purposes would be just as problematic.
To enhance the standing of a particular religion or religious tradition by making it the mother of science may be short-sighted in  at least two other respects.
It may overlook the fact that science could become a very rebellious offspring; and, as an apologetic strategy, it could easily backfire if science (as some believe it has been) were to be devalued in public estimation through association with polluting and exploitative technologies.
Much of the writing o science and religion has been structured by a preoccupation either with conflict or with harmony.
It is necessary to transcend these constraints if the interaction, in all its richness and fascination, is to be appreciated.
In the following chapter, we shall examine this interaction more closely for the period during which the foundations of modern science were laid.
SCIENCE AND RELIGION IN THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION
Introduction
In the creation of our modern world-view, few periods of Western history have been as decisive as the hundred fifty years that followed the publication, in 1543, of Copernicus's sun-centered astronomy.
During that period, what had been an earth-centered cosmos exploded into an infinite universe.
The achievements in this age of genius have become legendary.
In the physical sciences alone, there were momentous changes.
When Kepler refined the Copernican system, he broke with centuries of tradition in suggesting that the planets moved in ellipses, not in circles.
In his own colorful expression, he had laid a monstrous egg.
Through his telescope Galileo observed more things in the heavens than had ever been dreamed of: moons of Jupiter and myriads of stars invisible to the naked eye.
At a more technical level, the motion of bodies was subjected to mathematical analysis, concepts of inertia were formulated, and, as a fitting climax, Newton formulated his inverse-square law r- or gravity, which explained the planetary orbits.
In the words of his contemporary Edmond Halley, he had penetrated the secret mansions of the gods.
We continue to speak of a scientific revolution because earlier systems of belief were emphatically overthrown.
In the philosophy of Aristotle, which had dominated the intellectual life of Europe since the thirteenth century, there had been a clear division in the cosmos between the perfect spheres beyond the moon and the corrupt sublunar sphere at the center of which stood the earth.
By the end of the seventeenth  century, in Newton's science, the terms of reference had changed.
There was now a universal law of gravitation.
Because it applied to all bodies everywhere, the universe had at last become a universe.
To divide it into two parts, heaven and earth, might still be admissible, as it was for Newton, when discussing theological and political symbolism.
But the closed, partitioned, and spherical cosmos had had its day.
We speak of a revolution; and yet this intellectual transformation took so long to accomplish that there is no straightforward parallel with a political revolution.
During the hundred fifty years in question, there was so great a diversity of views about nature that, on closer inspection, it becomes difficult to achieve a succinct characterization.
There is, however, one that has found favor among many commentators.
The scientific revolution, it is often said, saw the separation of science from religion.
The object of this chapter is to consider whether this assessment is accurate.
It may be seductive, but it is also deceptive.
The concept of a separation of science from religion during the seventeenth century implies that during preceding centuries there had been a fusion.
And it also implies that where there had once been marriage, there was now divorce.
But how closely do these inferences match the reality?
It is true that, from the thirteenth to the sixteenth century, the pursuit of natural knowledge was often subordinate to theological concerns.
But a relationship of subordination is not the same as one of fusion.
It is also true that, during the seventeenth century, the domains of science and theology were differentiated in new and challenging ways.
But a differentiation is not the same as an ultimate separation.
In this chapter, I hope to show that these distinctions are important and not merely a play on words.
New patterns of differentiation were often sought with a view to the reintegration of scientific and religious belief.
It is even possible to argue that the scientific revolution saw an unprecedented fusion of science with theology, resulting in more secular forms of piety.
The Separation of Science from Religion?
The image of a separation between science and religion during the scientific revolution is certainly attractive.
It conforms to our modern secular perception of what ought to have happened.
The great achievements of the seventeenth  century seem to testify to a new independence of scientific inquiry.
There were even explicit statements to the effect that science and religion should not be mixed.
Francis Bacon took that line when he suggested that, in seeking to understand the immediate causes of physical phenomena, the experimental philosopher should not be diverted by metaphysical considerations concerning the purpose of the phenomenon in question.
To understand this protest, it is important to appreciate that Aristotle had made the quest for final causes, for ends or purposes, the highest aim of the student of nature.
To answer the question Why does a stone fall to earth?
Aristotle would look for an answer in terms of purpose.
The stone falls in order to return to its natural place, made as it is from the element earth.
This would be one example of what we call teleological explanation.
Aristotle had implied that an explanation was never complete unless a final cause had been specified.
As he rather paradoxically put it, the final cause had to be first.
It had pride of place.
But not for Bacon, who spoke of final causes as barren virgins.
And not for Descartes either, who expelled them in order to concentrate on the immediate mechanical causes of natural phenomena.
This rejection of final causes from physical explanation is often identified with a separation of science from religion because one of the traditional links between nature and God was apparently broken.
The traditional view was expressed by Sir Thomas Browne in his Religio medici (1642).
Every created thing had a purpose.
There was some positive end both of its essence and its operation.
And this, he wrote, ‘is the cause I grope after in the works of nature; on this hangs the providence of God.’
To reject final causes from the study of nature would apparently leave providence hanging.
A separation of science from religion has also been seen in a diminished authority for the Bible in matters of natural philosophy.
It is encapsulated in Galileo's quip that the Bible teaches how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go.
The English Copernican John Wilkins also found it necessary to revise concepts of biblical authority in order to make room for scientific propositions that seemed at odds with the plain meaning of Scripture.
As he did so, he fell foul of reactionary figures such as the Aristotelian schoolmaster Alexander Ross.
Wilkins had implied that the Bible was not to be taken as a scientific text since the Holy Spirit had used a form of words comprehensible to the common man.
What worried Ross was  a dangerous bias.
It seemed that Wilkins, and other Copernicans, allowed certain astronomical discoveries to confirm the truth of Scripture, but they would not let Scripture pronounce on matters of astronomy.
Ross's complaint was that astronomy was more in need of confirmation from Scripture than vice-versa.
It is difficult not to see in such debates a growing independence of science from biblical constraint.
Wilkins even argued that where Scripture was silent on a given issue — the plurality of worlds, for example— this was license to consider the possibility, not to exclude it.
An interpretation that stresses the separation of science from religion in the seventeenth century is far from implausible.
A new intellectual independence can also be correlated with longer-term social trends.
Although there were notable exceptions, the most eminent philosophers of nature were not members of the clergy but were lay figures who developed their own theologies.
This was a continuation of that trend away from a clerical domination of scholarship that had been accelerated by the appearance of the printing press.
Superimposed on this was the organization of scientific activity in societies and academies — institutions with codes of practice that often outlawed political and religious disputes.
The Accademia dei Lincei, to which Galileo belonged, was one of the first scientific societies to claim equal status alongside other institutions of learning.
Later organizations, such as the Royal Society, founded in England in 1660, could be even more ambitious in their goals.
‘You will please to remember,’ its secretary, Henry Oldenburg, told the governor of Connecticut in 1667, ‘that we have taken to task the whole universe, and that we were obliged to do so by the nature of our design.’
In one of the informal groups that preceded the foundation of the Royal Society, one finds that affirmation of independence that gives weight to the separation thesis.
Of meetings which had begun in London in 1645, the mathematician John Wallis could say: These remarks indicate the scope that existed by the mid-seventeenth century for differentiation between the sciences.
And the reference to an avoidance of theology may well suggest that a separation from the queen of the sciences had already been achieved.
The need for differentiation was clearly felt by seventeenth-century philosophers.
When the French thinker Blaise Pascal joined those who, in revolt against Aristotle, were prepared to admit a vacuum in nature, he drew a distinction between theology and the natural sciences based on their respective sources of authority.
A reverence for antiquity, though an appropriate stance for theology, was inappropriate for natural philosophy where reason and the senses held sway.
It is also clear that traditional syntheses between science and faith were badly shaken by new conceptions of nature.
The disintegration of an older order, at once exhilarating and disturbing, was most famously expressed by the poet John Donne.
His An anatomy of the world (1611) contained the lines: All was in pieces, ‘all coherence gone.’
If we are looking for a separation of science from religion in the seventeenth century, we shall surely find it.
The difficulty is that, however strong in outline, the characterization turns out to be weak in detail.
A finer brush is required to depict the intellectual debates of the period, as distinct from merely documenting achievements or contrasting new with old cosmologies.
Even some of the century's most notable achievements were presented in theological terms.
As we shall show in greater detail later, Descartes justified his principle of linear inertia by ostensibly deducing it from the immutability of God — a God who conserved the simplest kind of motion in the world.
A mechanized universe, dear to both Descartes and Boyle, was often valued as a vehicle for emphasizing God's sovereignty over His creation.
As long as matter was considered to be inert, its motion could be ascribed to the divine will.
A universe that ran like clockwork also evinced design.
Although Boyle agreed with Bacon and Descartes that the quest for final causes would be injurious to science if it jeopardized the search for physical causes, the great beauty of a mechanical philosophy was that, properly understood, it allowed one to have both.
To ask how a piece  of machinery worked was not to deny that each part had been designed with a function in mind.
It was Boyle's contention that if William Harvey had not asked himself about the purpose of valves in the veins, he might well not have discovered the circulation of the blood.
For all that he warned against the mixing of science and religion, Bacon remained convinced that scientific conclusions had still to be limited by religion.
On issues such as the size and eternity of the universe, his own faith played a selective role, setting the conditions for admissible theories.
An eternal universe, for example, was incompatible with a created universe — a universe that Bacon supposed would one day be liquidated by its Creator.
And, as we saw in the previous chapter, he gave science a religious sanction, in that it promised the restoration of a dominion over nature that had been God's intention for humanity.
Even on the issue of biblical interpretation, the concept of a total separation would be too crude.
Galileo's conception of biblical authority will be examined later in the chapter.
But we shall not find a consistent position in which the tasks of biblical exegesis and scientific inquiry were no longer mutually relevant.
Galileo was even prepared to give the Bible jurisdiction over scientific hypotheses that had not been rigorously demonstrated.
Both he and Wilkins were able to invoke past precedent for their concepts of biblical accommodation.
The image of a revolutionary break is, to some degree, a distortion.
Long before Wilkins sought to popularize the Copernican system, the Protestant reformer Calvin had declared that those who wished to learn astronomy should not look to the Bible.
Nor was Wilkins a layman championing a secular cause.
He was a moderate clergyman, with puritan sympathies, destined to become a bishop in the Church of England.
Even if the most eminent natural philosophers of the seventeenth century were laymen, it would still not follow that all connections between science and religion were severed.
Robert Boyle once said that one of the reasons why he had chosen not to be ordained was to preempt the criticism that his pious remarks about nature merely reflected a vested interest.
To be a layman, even to be anticlerical, is not necessarily to be irreligious.
Similarly, a consensus within early scientific societies, that theological and political discussion should be excluded, must be interpreted with care.
Clearly, a new  independence was being asserted.
But the exclusion of theology could be inspired by purely pragmatic considerations.
Given the divisiveness of religious opinion, heightened in England by a civil war, it would be expedient to avoid any issues that might jeopardize a union of scientific interests.
This would not, however, prevent individual members of these early societies from holding distinctive views on the relationship between their scientific and religious beliefs.
For these reasons we shall drop references to the separation of science and religion during the scientific revolution.
A change in the status of natural philosophy was certainly achieved, but by differentiation from, and reintegration with, religious belief rather than by complete severance.
From the thirteenth to the sixteenth century, the study of nature had, in various ways, been subordinate to theological interests.
Rather than identify a point in time when some separation was effected, it is more constructive to locate successive shifts in the degree of subordination and the grounds of differentiation.
The sequence was extraordinarily complex because in one shift — toward a magical philosophy of nature — a new integration of scientific and religious motifs actually discouraged differentiation of the kind that Descartes and Boyle, through their mechanical philosophies, were later to effect.
There was no linear process either of differentiation or secularization.
The Subordination of Science to Theology
In this section, we shall examine what it means to say that the study of nature was subordinate to theology in the period that separated the two Bacons, Roger (? 1214–94) and Francis (1561–1626).
Different patterns of subordination will be distinguished with reference to the work of Roger Bacon, to the synthesis of Aristotelian philosophy and Christian theology achieved by Thomas Aquinas (? 1225–74), and to a critique of the Aristotelian world-picture by Nicole Oresme (c. 1323–82).
Roger Bacon has enjoyed renown, both for an emphasis on firsthand experience of nature and for an advocacy of mathematics that, for the thirteenth century, was remarkably energetic.
His promotion of mathematics illustrates at least two senses in which the interests of the natural sciences could be subordinate to those of theology.
First, there was  subservience in that Bacon looked toward the pope for patronage.
He had much to gain if he could persuade a powerful patron that mathematics, and especially his own, could be of service to Christendom.
Second, it was the theological uses of mathematics on which Bacon waxed eloquent.
There was subordination, but not a complete fusion; for Bacon was perfectly aware of subject boundaries, differentiating mathematics itself from grammar, perspective, experimental science, and moral philosophy.
The special value of mathematics lay in its applicability to all other sciences.
Of what use was mathematics to medieval Christianity?
Bacon's contention was that the theologian had to know the things of this world if he wished to understand the Scriptures.
Consequently, mathematics could assist that understanding — an urgent matter if, as Bacon sometimes implied, all knowledge was ultimately to be found in the Bible.
A knowledge of geometry was to be highly prized because it could help one to visualize the geometrical forms alluded to in Scripture.
As the servant of astronomy, mathematics was peculiarly fitting for theological study, since, as Bacon put it, ‘throughout the Scriptures we are called away from terrestrial…and awakened to heavenly things.’
Mathematical astronomy could assist in correcting the calendar.
Through its involvement in astrology it could also contribute to the governance of the Church, proving the truth of Christianity, forecasting the future, and predicting the course of disease.
Through astrology, Bacon believed, it was possible to investigate the great sects of human history: Jews, Chaldeans, Egyptians, Saracens, and Christians.
More urgently, one could be forearmed against the Antichrist, the powerful, personal opponent of Christ who (as in 1 John 2:18) was expected to appear before the end of the world.
Through astrology one could be forewarned of the exact time of his coming.
Since the Antichrist would use mathematical knowledge in exercising malignant power, it was vital for the Church to be prepared.
Bacon could argue that Antichrist would invoke stellar influences and magic words having the power to produce physical effects.
The ultimate justification for mathematical research was to equip the Church with a countermagic of its own.
Knowing the things of this world was certainly subordinate to theological concerns.
Because the very act of knowing involved divine grace and illumination, because it was not the fruit of work alone, the subordination was marked  indeed.
By taking a particular view of the elements, Bacon even set out to show that human bodies could remain in hellfire for eternity.
Subordination of another kind may be discerned in the works of Thomas Aquinas.
References to his synthesis sometimes give the impression that he achieved a complete fusion of Aristotelian with Christian doctrine, as if the two were rendered fully compatible.
It is important to realize, however, that the introduction of the Aristotelian corpus into medieval Christendom had occasioned alarm because it contained doctrines that clashed with Christian belief.
Aristotelian philosophy affirmed that the universe is eternal, that objects in the world are not dependent upon God for their existence.
As interpreted by the twelfth-century Muslim commentator Averroes, it even denied the freedom of the will.
It could also be construed as a naturalistic rival to supernatural religion, in that it presented the world as a closed system in which the deity was little more than a physical hypothesis to explain motion or change — a world in which there was no room for a higher human destiny.
Accordingly, three popes — Honorius III, Gregory X, and Urban IV — issued decrees forbidding or restricting the teaching of Aristotelian metaphysics.
Strictly speaking, it was impossible to effect a fusion of Christianity with Aristotle — as Aquinas was well aware.
In selecting those facets of Aristotle's teaching that he considered illuminating, he was guided by the demands of his faith.
In this respect, Aristotelian metaphysics remained subordinate to Christian doctrine.
From his commentary on Aristotle's Physic , it is clear that Aquinas could never regard the Greek philosopher as an authority on matters of faith.
Discussing Aristotle's argument for the eternity of the world, he protested that motion had not always existed.
‘According to our faith,’ he wrote, ‘nothing has always existed except God alone, Who is altogether immobile.’
This subordination is reflected in a change of emphasis that Aquinas brought to the study of metaphysics.
Aristotle had been primarily concerned with the problem of motion, broadly understood as a process of becoming.
Aquinas took the problem of existence, of being, as the fundamental issue.
And the whole of metaphysics was directed toward knowledge of God.
If the world had not first existed in the mind of God, it would not exist at all.
And perfect knowledge of the world was  impossible without knowledge of its cause.
Because, for Aquinas, there was a limit to what could be known of God by reason alone, and a point where faith and revelation had to take over, physical knowledge was subordinate to metaphysical knowledge, and ultimately to faith.
Knowledge of nature was, however, granted a degree of autonomy.
It was still possible to study natural objects without infringing on the theologians' treatment of those same objects as signs of God.
Although there was no clear distinction between philosophy and the particular sciences, the subordination of metaphysics to theology did not necessarily entail an obstruction to the study of nature.
Aquinas himself saw no finality in the solutions offered by either Aristotle or Ptolemy to the problems of planetary motion.
Empirically based hypotheses were subject to revision; for, as he put it himself, the facts might be explained in another way as yet unknown to men.
Because he made that statement when discussing the concentric spheres with which Aristotle had built the cosmos, he was evidently aware that authoritative world-pictures were not inviolable.
A third example, revealing yet another kind of subordination, takes us to the University of Paris where two fourteenth-century scholars, Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme, considered the possibility that the earth may rotate on its axis.
Oresme's analysis shows that, within the scholastic tradition, there was room for new ideas, even if they were no more than conjectures.
To demonstrate the possibility of the earth's rotation, Oresme had to counter the common objections.
That we see planets and stars rising and setting proved nothing since they could be relative motions.
That the surface of a rotating earth would experience a great wind rested on the assumption that the air could not rotate with the earth.
How, on a rotating earth, could an arrow shot upright return to the spot from which it was fired?
With remarkable prescience, Oresme recognized that, if shot from a rotating earth, the arrow would have a motion compounded of two simultaneous motions.
Because it would continue to share in the earth's rotating motion, even after leaving the bow, it would fall to its origin even if the earth were moving.
Oresme even drew an analogy with what would happen on a moving ship, as Galileo was later to do.
Some arguments actually favored the rotation.
A spinning earth eliminated the excessive speed of rotation currently ascribed to the outer spheres.
Indeed, the outermost, ninth sphere might be dispensed with altogether since it was only required to produce the daily motion of the planetary spheres and fixed stars — an economy that would be in keeping with a God who did nothing in vain.
What was the outcome?
Did Oresme propose a rotating earth?
Not at all.
He clung to the traditional view, stating that the problem was scientifically indeterminate.
Why would he not commit himself?
Because the whole critical exercise was subordinate to a theological objective.
His purpose was to demonstrate not that the earth did spin but that it was impossible for human reason to prove that it did not.
And if reason and experience could not settle so basic a question as this, how much less could they be relied upon to arbitrate on matters of faith?
The relations between Christianity and science have indeed been complex, with religious motives acting as both catalyst and inhibitor, sometimes simultaneously.
In this case a trenchant critique of Aristotelian orthodoxy was both motivated and (to our eyes) deflected by religious concerns.
This subordination of criticism to a Christian theory of knowledge did not, however, preclude a degree of differentiation.
The arguments invoked by Oresme to spin the earth had an integrity of their own.
Some were later exploited by Copernicus in his attempt to establish that the earth both turns on its axis and revolves around the sun.
The popular notion of a complete fusion of Christianity and Aristotle, obstructive to all criticism, cannot stand.
A critical impulse could also derive from the clash between Aristotelian dogmatism and a Christian emphasis on the omnipotence of God.
Aristotle might affirm that it was impossible for another cosmos like our own to exist.
But surely, if God were omnipotent, He could make as many as He liked?
In 1277, the bishop of Paris, Etienne Tempier, had condemned no fewer than 219 propositions that he considered prejudicial to divine omnipotence.
One was that God could not make several worlds.
The fourteenth-century Franciscan William of Ockham went further in declaring it probable that God could make a better world than this.
In his reasoning he referred to Augustine's assertion that God could make a perfect man who would not wish to sin.
That God could create other worlds identical to ours was, for Ockham, beyond question, for God had the power to produce an infinite number of identical individuals.
From the fourteenth century onward there was undoubtedly a tradition in which Aristotle was continually being challenged.
In the works of the fifteenth-century German theologian, Nicholas of Cusa, the universe was even deprived of an absolute center.
The possibility of earthlike planets was considered, and he envisaged illustrious extraterrestrials close to the sun.
On the moon might be lunatics!
To affirm the possibility of plural worlds was not, of course, to affirm the reality.
Although it became heretical to deny that God could have created other worlds, it was as dangerous to say that He had .
Nevertheless the subordination of science to theology had not resulted in a sterile fusion.
Many of the arguments later deployed in smashing the geostatic cosmos had already been forged.
Magic, Science, and Religion
To approach the scientific revolution with preconceived notions of what constitutes science and what constitutes religion may help in streamlining historical reconstruction.
But to do so always runs the risk of missing the point in particular intellectual debates.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the ambivalent role played by the magical philosophies of the Renaissance.
The displacement of an Aristotelian world-picture was not simply the result of some modernizing movement of the seventeenth century.
A critical impulse and a dream of power over nature sprang in part from natural magic — a somewhat disparate constellation of beliefs and practices (including forms of alchemy and astrology) rooted in the conviction that there were hidden,natural powers in the cosmos that could be tapped and channeled to human advantage.
Partly inspired by a set of texts known as the Hermetic Corpus, the elite magicians of the Renaissance rejected what they saw as stultifying in Aristotelian science: a neglect of the particular for the general and an indifference toward practical application.
For the Elizabethan magus John Dee (1527–1608), it was as imperative to study the specific characteristics of everything in nature as it was to understand the controlling influence of the stars.
The invisible powers of nature were analogous to the visible powers of the magnet, which could act at a distance and penetrate matter with its rays.
The objection that the scientific revolution saw the separation of science from both religion and magic hardly clears the air, because  religious beliefs played a role in the assault on magical practices, with hard-headed Protestants putting magic and Roman Catholic rituals in much the same category.
It is tempting to draw sharp contrasts between magic and science, just as it is between science and religion.
It is sometimes said that whereas occult sciences, such as alchemy and astrology, were static in their theoretical content, modern science has been progressive.
Whereas practitioners of the occult would explain everything by magic, modern science has recognized the limitations of its knowledge.
Whereas the esoteric practices of the alchemist were insufficiently specified to be repeatable, modern science has been characterized by the repeatability of control experiments.
Whereas there were entrenched, almost sacred, propositions within the web of magical belief, modern science keeps such entrenched assumptions to a minimum.
Using such stereotypes, one can then argue that the occult sciences of the Renaissance could contribute nothing to the new sciences of the seventeenth century.
The problem is, however, that real history rarely conforms to later stereotypes.
It is more appropriate to accept the view of D. P. Walker that magic was always on the point of turning into art, science, practical psychology, or, above all, religion.
It is the fact that it could turn into science, and promote a beguiling vision of mastery over nature, that has forced historians to reconsider the usual antithesis between occult and rational mentalities.
In the works of Paracelsus, for example, a new status was given to chemistry and medical practice was re-formed, from within a magical philosophy that was intensely spiritual in orientation.
Figure II.
1.
Illustration from Thomas Norton's Ordinall of alchimy (1652).
The picture illustrates the transmission of the secrets of alchemy from master to student by an oral convention.
In his account Norton claims to have arrived at the Elixir of Gold but to have had it stolen by a servant.
He then turned to the Elixir of Life, only to have the magic formula stolen again, this time by a woman.
Hence his resignation: Reproduced by courtesy of the Science Photo Library, London.
Magic and medicine were often in the same melting pot.
To make the most of beneficial planetary influences had been a principal object of Marsilio Ficino (1433–99), one of the first scholars to give the practice of magic the semblance of respectability.
Effective treatment required that the body be in a receptive state to beneficial forms of spirit, which could remedy deficiencies resulting from temperament or life-style.
For those of melancholy or saturnine disposition, the means had to be found for inducing receptivity toward Jovian or solar influx.
Music, verse, diet, and scent could all be used.
The powers residing in herbs, stones, and aromas were both natural and divine.
As a gift of divine origin, there was nothing sacrilegious in their use.
That magic could be both proto-scientific and protoreligious is most transparent in the literature of the Paracelsians where a critique of traditional, Galenic medicine was developed within a magical philosophy that demanded an initiation into the secrets of chemistry.
The task, assigned to humanity by God, was that of transforming, by chemical means, the raw products of nature into a state that made them serviceable.
For Paracelsus, the religious dimension was paramount.
The alchemist's work amounted to nothing less than the redemption of the physical world.
As Christ had brought spiritual redemption to humanity, so humanity in turn must redeem the whole of nature, which, as a consequence of Adam's sin, was also fallen.
Chemistry was given new status as the art of separating the pure from the impure.
And the challenge was social as well as religious; for Paracelsus both exalted the laborer and cut across the educational divisions that conventionally separated physician from apothecary.
Figure II.
2.
Title page from an English edition (1658) of J. B. Della Porta's Natural magick , first published in Latin in 1558.
The list of contents for this popular compendium shows the wide range of practices discussed under the heading ‘natural magic’: from domestic and craft skills to the conduct of new experimental investigations; from the display of nature's marvels to the imitation of natural processes.
Reproduced by courtesy of The Bodleian Library, Oxford; Shelfmark Douce P Subt. 107.
The theology of Paracelsus celebrated the mercy of a God who had granted the human mind sufficient illumination to cultivate nature and to extract those gifts necessary for subsistence.
It was also a thoroughly Christocentric theology because it was through Christ that the light of grace had entered the world as the profoundest expression of divine mercy.
Humankind, reborn into the life of Christ through baptism, was under obligation to continue Christ's redemptive and healing ministry.
This association of the humanity of Christ with the purifying goals of the practical chemist underlines the artificiality of retrospective analyses that seek to place magic, science, and religion into separate compartments.
The historical reality during the sixteenth and much of the seventeenth centuries was usually some kind of amalgam, such as that expressed by Martin Luther in his evaluation of alchemy: As the earthly alchemist purified through fire, leaving the dregs at the bottom of the furnace, so, at the Day of Judgment, the divine alchemist would separate all things through fire, the righteous from the ungodly.
Figure II.
3.
Circular plate from Heinrich Khunrath's Amphitheatrum sapientiae aeternae (1598); ‘The oratorium.’
An intimacy between prayer and alchemical practice is suggested by this plate in which the ‘oratorium’(the place of prayer) stands opposite the ‘laboratorium’(the place of work).
The musical instruments symbolize an underlying harmony behind nature's powers, to which the successful alchemist must himself be attuned.
Reproduced by courtesy of The Bodleian Library, Oxford; Shelfmark R. 1.9.
Med.
When one reads a Paracelsian recipe for an amulet to ward off the plague, when one learns that the prime ingredient is a paste requiring eighteen dried toads, one could be forgiven for rejecting continuity between magic and science.
Because there were discontinuities as well as continuities, it makes good sense to say that modern chemistry emerged through a dialectical process in which the enthusiasms of the Paracelsian chemists were tempered by their critics.
Nor was it through magic alone that the impulse arose to gain power over nature.
Recent research has shown that the chemical  experiments of the magician were often in the contemplative mode: devised to bring out divine harmonies and correspondences between metals and planets.
Conversely, to enter the chemical laboratory envisaged in 1606 by Andreas Libavius — a respectable Lutheran humanist, critic of the Paracelsians, and author of what has been described as the first chemical textbook — would be to enter an open house in which the products of the furnace were investigated with a sense of responsibility for the welfare of one's fellow men.
The magician, with his emphasis on private illumination, was not alone in seeking control of nature's powers.
But this is not to dismiss his vision as an irrelevance in the forging of a nascent science.
There was a degree of continuity in the sense that specific advances in understanding were achieved from within a magical framework.
In rejecting the Galenic theory that diseases arose from an internal imbalance of the four humors, Paracelsus switched attention to agents invading the body from outside.
These were envisaged as seedlike entities, introduced through air, food, and drink.
Carriers of specific diseases, they invaded specific organs.
Accordingly, Paracelsus developed the view that diseases are localized and require specific cures — not the elaborate mixtures commonly prescribed as cure-alls.
The practice of blood-letting, associated with the Galenic theory that disease arose from an imbalance of the four humors. he duly rejected in favor of specific chemical remedies.
Not that Paracelsus always found the right ones: One wonders how many unfortunates owed their demise to his prescription of mercury to clarify the spleen.
Yet there clearly were affinities between the Paracelsian approach to disease and later models — not least in the insistence that a chemical cure should always be sought rather than accept the physicians word that certain conditions would remain incurable.
The analytical techniques, employed by the Paracelsian chemists to extract their active ingredients from otherwise dangerous chemicals, contributed to the excitement of a science that the young Robert Boyle would embrace with an almost religious fervor.
In 1649 he confessed that he had been transported and bewitched by Vulcan.
There is a further reason why the image of a revolutionary break from both magic and religion will not do.
Statements made in the seventeenth century about the desirability of separating science from religion have to be read against a background in which the excesses of an enchanted universe  were straining credulity.
When Francis Bacon, Boyle, and others warned against the mixing of science and religion, they were, in part, reacting against the worst excesses of Renaissance magic.
Thus the Paracelsians, who boasted that their account of creation as a process of chemical separation was the only legitimate interpretation of Genesis, incurred Bacon's displeasure not only for their hijacking of the Bible, but also for the implication that knowledge of nature was in need of biblical support.
Similarly, for Boyle, there was a sense in which matter had to be divested of spirits and other inherent powers in order to be seen in proper spiritual light.
The critical point is that religious beliefs were often invoked to sharpen an attack on the more extravagant features of an enchanted universe.
At first sight, it may not be clear how this could be so.
After all, it is possible to argue that the most influential magicians in Catholic countries were the clergy.
Insofar as they condoned popular religious rituals, belief in the efficacy of relics, supplication to saints who would reinforce earthly petitions, and the use of images of the Virgin Mary to halt the rain or even to solve political problems, their sacred system could serve as a template for rival systems of magic.
When Cornelius Agrippa (c. 1486 — c. 1534) had discussed Christian prayers and ceremonies in relation to magic and pagan religions, he had regarded them all as examples of the same basic activity.
How, then, would a learned Roman Catholic scholar discriminate between the religious practices of his Church, which were acceptable, and magical practices, which were not?
With difficulty — to judge from the efforts of the Catholic scholar Martin del Rio, who actually addressed the issue.
He had to say that any effect produced by a talisman around the neck was to be ascribed to the devil, whereas effects due to Christian amulets came from God's goodness.
Sacramental formulas in Christian worship were effective, not because any power resided in the words themselves, but because God had promised a certain effect only if such words were pronounced.
In addition, del Rio rejected the theoretical basis on which various forms of magic were practiced, including the concept of planetary correspondences.
It is difficult to escape the conclusion, however, that hard-headed Protestants found it easier to attack what they did not like in magic without compromising their religion.
One such was the sixteenth-century critic Johann Wier who, in condemning every kind of magic, included in his denunciation those Catholic practices he considered superstitious: most forms of exorcism, the consecration of bells, and the use of relics or recitals from Scripture to cure disease.
His Protestantism was an intensely private religion in which the effects of devotion were directed inwardly to produce change of heart or mental illumination.
He still had to distinguish the miracles of Christ from the effects of magic, but this he did by stressing that the former were beneficial whereas the latter, especially in the case of witchcraft, could be detrimental.
Protestant critics, looking for a religion denuded of magic, would enlist the Bible on their side.
Thus Thomas Erastus (1523–83) appealed to the first chapter of Genesis to demonstrate that God had created plants before planets.
Consequently, the former could not owe their form to the latter, and so magical correspondences between them were eliminated.
For Erastus, God, not the heavens, was the giver of form.
It was He who had instructed the animals to multiply; He had given no instructions to the stars.
The God of the Bible was not a God who had delegated control of the world to celestial intelligences or other ‘Platonic godlets’ as Erastus called them.
A biblical literalism could therefore assist in the disenchantment of nature.
A particular brand of Protestant religion correlated with a science that was at once emerging from, and emancipating itself from, the organic and spirit-filled world of the magician.
The refusal of Erastus to derive the forms of bodies from the stars, or from anything within nature, pointed toward the empiricism of Bacon, for whom the only guides to knowledge were experience and the bible.
Because the forms of bodies depended entirely on the will of God, it was impious, as well as impossible, to construct a science of nature based on preconceived opinion.
This association of empiricism with piety underlines the difficulty facing theses that affirm a separation of science from religion in the seventeenth century.
It is, however, perfectly consistent with the view that the content and practice of both were differentiated and reassessed in new and portentous ways.
just as religious beliefs intruded in the critique of magic, so they intruded too in the presentation of new scientific concepts.
In the next section we shall examine three examples in more detail.
The Theological Presentation of Scientific Innovation
The principal problem with the separation formula is that many significant innovations in seventeenth-century science were introduced with theological connections to the fore.
Our three examples are J. B. Van Helmont's development of the Paracelsian theory of disease, Giordano Bruno's revolutionary claim for a plurality of worlds, and Descartes's presentation of a concept of linear inertia.
In Van Helmont's contribution to medical theory, it is possible to discern a positive debt to a devout belief in God.
It is visible in his challenge to the academic learning of his day.
He attacked the dominance of formal logic because it reflected a misplaced confidence in the powers of human reason.
Nature had to be investigated, not subsumed under logical categories.
His attitude was one of religious pragmatism.
It was important to make available the hidden resources in nature that God had created for suffering humanity.
There was even the suggestion that it was in the nature of God's goodness that there would be a cure for every disease, an optimism that was not always in the best interests of physicians to share.
Van Helmont envisaged the natural world as a system of seedlike entities, seminal spirits that penetrated matter giving it specific properties.
In fact all matter had within it a divine spark of life.
The word gas , which he coined, had its origins in this view of the world in which the animation of matter depended ultimately on God's creative role.
A conception of nature in which matter was suffused with spirit allowed Van Helmont to articulate his contributions to physiology.
His belief that specific principles were responsible for each phase of digestion lay behind his discovery of the action of acid in the stomach and alkali in the duodenum.
In his analysis of disease, he presented a similar critique of the four — humor theory to that of Paracelsus, developing the view that diseases should be treated as specific disorders of specific organs requiring specific chemical remedies.
A further contribution stemmed from his insistence on the individuality of organic function.
A characteristic archeus — a kind of overseer — was postulated in each organ, responsible for organizing its chemical and metabolic activity.
Failure of the archeus followed the intrusion of some alien ferment, leading to disease  of the organ.
With this conceptual framework, Van Helmont opened up neglected avenues of pathological research, and chemical cures were sought as part of a fully causal therapy.
The religious grounds of Van Helmont's philosophy became explicit in his attack on Aristotle.
He could not accept that the goal or end of a process, the final cause, was the principal cause.
With God there was no priority of causes.
The ends for which the seeds, the natural causes of things, acted were not known to themselves but to God alone.
‘From a necessity of Christian philosophy,’ he wrote, ‘a final cause has no place in nature.’
Scriptural authority was a further resource in his assault on Aristotelian philosophy, for there was no reference in Genesis to the creation of fire, which he wished to see excised from the elements.
What there was in Genesis was a clear statement concerning the Creator Spirit hovering over the waters, and this provided the model for Van Helmont's conception of matter, with water as its primary form.
The immediate reason for his assault on Aristotle was his hostility toward the Jesuits whose presence in Flanders, in the wake of the Spanish conquest, he vehemently resented.
When antagonized by Jesuits proffering supernatural explanations for cures that he considered natural, he would retaliate with ‘let the divine inquire concerning God, but the naturalist concerning nature.’
With such remarks a differentiation between two forms of study was implied.
But it would be misleading to speak of separation given the religious foundations of his natural philosophy.
Van Helmont's integration of science and religion was not exactly orthodox.
His attack on a prominent Jesuit and his expansion of natural magic to embrace the allegedly miraculous powers of sacred relics led to denunciation by the Louvain medical faculty in 1623 and a subsequent appearance before the Spanish Inquisition.
His heresies spelled prison.
A similar pattern, though etched more deeply, may be seen in the case of Bruno.
His infinite universe, with its infinite worlds, looks at first sight like the apotheosis of free thought — untrammeled by theological constraint.
Yet, on closer inspection, the key to understanding his extrapolation of Copernican astronomy turns out to be an innovative theology that he took extremely seriously.
To detach his innovations from the metaphysical theology in which they were embedded would  be a violation of his integrity as a thinker.
His theology was, however, deeply unorthodox and, as we saw in Chapter I, he paid the highest price for wishing to supplant contemporary Roman Catholicism with an alternative religion, which he believed was of older pedigree.
The unique features of Bruno's universe arose from an original blend of several philosophical traditions.
He was attracted by the atomic theories of antiquity, which had themselves been associated with the possibility of plural worlds as different combinations of atoms passed in and out of being.
He was attracted too by the reasoning of Nicholas of Cusa, who had imagined a universe with no center and in which space was homogeneous.
The Copernican system, Bruno believed, fitted perfectly in such a universe and provided a model for other planetary systems extending to infinity.
Space was unbounded; for, repeating the question of Lucretius, Bruno asked what would happen if one thrust one's hand through the supposed boundary.
An infinite universe containing infinite worlds was philosophically the most coherent.
It was also theologically the most coherent.
If divine omnipotence had been really displayed, the deity would have had to create those other worlds that Bruno's scholastic predecessors had acknowledged He could have (but actually had not) made.
God's infinitude, so Bruno argued, could only be expressed by creating infinite worlds — worlds that were real, not hypothetical.
It was not enough that God could have done what Aristotle had deemed impossible.
The immensity and perfection of God required that it had been done.
A physics of the infinite was the correlate of a theology of the infinite, however heterodox that theology was perceived to be.
In effect, Bruno was arguing that divine attributes could be given physical meaning — as Newton was to do later when he reconstructed space in terms of God's omnipresence.
Such transformations of metaphysical axioms into prescriptions for the natural world were extremely common in early modern science.
In Bruno's case, the transformation eventuated in an infinite universe.
In the case of Descartes, it eventuated in laws of motion, one of which resembles the principle of linear inertia that was so basic to Newton's analysis of the relationship between force, mass, and acceleration.
At first sight, Descartes may seem an unpromising example.
Critical of the quest for final causes in nature, he was inclined to distinguish  between revealed truths that were beyond the realm of intellectual inquiry and scientific truths that were not.
He developed a mechanistic interpretation of nature so extensive in scope that, to all appearances, the physical world acquired a complete autonomy.
His rationalist mentality is commonly seen as a secularizing force, despite the fact that one of his aims was to combat a pervasive skepticism.
Descartes's mechanical philosophy will be examined in detail in Chapter IV.
For our present purpose, however, it is sufficient to note that he did not describe the physical world as autonomous.
There may have been few spiritual insights in his system, but in his Principles of philosophy (1644) he did insist that bodies continue in existence only because God preserves them in being.
And this had implications for their motion: Because God is immutable, the bodies He created would remain in the same condition unless they were subject to external causes.
His conclusion was that a moving object, so far as it can, goes on moving.
That it goes on moving in a straight line, rather than in circles, followed from what Descartes described as the immutability and simplicity of the conserving operation.
Motion was conserved in the precise form in which it occurred at the instant of its preservation.
The instantaneousness of God's preservation underwrote the linearity of the inertia.
What we may recognize as a scientific principle was enunciated via the theological concept of divine immutability.
The point, of course, is not the validity but the form of the argument.
A physical insight was presented in a context where science and theology were far from separate.
Differentiation on certain levels did not prevent fusion on others.
Differentiation and the Difficulty of Separation
In this concluding section, we shall look at three quite different examples to see how difficult it was for scholars to achieve a total separation, even assuming they wanted it.
Our first example, Robert Boyle, did not.
But he was puzzled to find  in the writings of Descartes that argument for the conservation of motion that we have just described.
After all, Descartes had decreed that God's purposes in nature were not accessible to reason.
Boyle felt there was an inconsistency.
Unless one presumed to know God's purposes, how could one know that He might not achieve them by varying the quantity of motion?
In common with Descartes, Boyle developed a mechanical philosophy in which the properties of bodies and the interactions between them were explained in terms of material particles and their motions.
In common with Descartes, he visualized the universe in terms of clockwork rather than as a living organism.
Like Descartes, he denied the autonomy of the clockwork: Divine preservation held it in being.
In rejecting Descartes's theological argument for a physical principle, he did, however, extend the process of differentiation between the provinces of science and religion.
Yet the differentiation, once again, was conducted by reference to theological as well as empirical principles.
Boyle's essays reveal an unprecedented series of distinctions, of the utmost importance in the promotion of natural philosophy.
One finds a sharp differentiation between God and nature, between different types of knowledge and the degrees of probability to be accorded them.
There was a clear distinction between the book of God's words and the book of His works.
He distinguished between different kinds of final cause, some of which, like the purpose of the eye,could be identified.
He also insisted that the belief that everything was made for human benefit should not intrude when assessing the merits of rival theories.
In contrast to Van Helmont's involvement of God's power within matter through the agency of seeds, Boyle wished to divest nature of all inherent powers, making brute matter subservient to God's immediate will, controlled in its motions by laws externally imposed.
In such a universe God's sovereignty could be celebrated.
But for that very reason, the differentiation achieved by Boyle cannot be equated with separation.
The powers that others had invested in nature, Boyle placed in God.
Forms of words that suggested, for example, that nature abhorred a vacuum were abhorrent to him, because they amounted to a deification of nature.
In contrast to Van Helmont's deduction of a water — spirit ontology from Genesis, Boyle resisted a constitutive role for biblical texts.
Chemistry was not to be conflated with theology, for God was the Author, not the  Spirit of creation.
In contrast to Van Helmont's confusion of the two books, Boyle distinguished them but without setting them in opposition.
The study of Scripture, he suggested, did nothing to hinder an inquisitive man's delight in the study of nature.
The study of nature had an integrity of its own, as one sought to uncover the laws that governed the clockwork.
But there were still the strongest links with the defense of Christianity; for the excellence of the machinery could only confirm the excellence of its Maker.
Organic models of nature had often been sustained by analogies between microcosm and macrocosm, between man as an organism and the rest of creation.
In criticizing such analogies, Boyle again resorted to theological argument.
He was adamant that man had been made in the image of God, not in the image of nature.
Insofar as he separated science from religion, he — like Francis Bacon — was reacting against what he perceived to be excessive conflation in certain spiritualist philosophies.
Among the Paracelsians there had been an emphasis on inner illumination, which could be perceived as a threat to established forms of religion.
Such an emphasis on the inner light might also threaten the collaborative aspects of scientific research, which Boyle considered essential for the public good.
His separation of science and religion was more accurately a differentiation in which theological arguments played a prominent role.
Our second example takes us back fifty years, to the second decade of the seventeenth century when Galileo was struggling with the question to which Boyle gave so easy an answer: whether the study of Scripture need hinder the study of nature.
Galileo knew only too well that it could, if the province of biblical authority were not scrupulously defined.
In his writings, a mutation occurred in the analogies customarily drawn between the two books.
The search for signs of God in nature had often been based on the assumption that the two books had been written in essentially the same language.
Galileo, however, achieved a telling differentiation when he argued that nature had a language all its own.
The book of nature, he insisted, had been written in the language of mathematics.
No amount of theologizing could be a substitute for mathematical analysis.
In evaluating the Copernican system, for example, mathematical criteria should take precedence over interpretations of Scripture, which may have become normative but only through ignorance.
The differentiation went one stage further because Galileo found it necessary to distinguish two senses in which a biblical text could be construed.
If it referred to the natural world, it could be construed as a statement in the language of commonsense observation, accommodated to the understanding of all men and independent of scientific theory.
On the other hand, there would be a deeper meaning, which wise expositors had a duty to uncover for the benefit of those above the common herd.
An advantage of the first point was that it allowed Galileo to say that the sacred scribes had intentionally refrained from imparting complex scientific knowledge, despite having it at their disposal.
In this way, apparent contradictions between Copernican astronomy and biblical texts would be eliminated.
If Scripture referred to the sun's motion, and even to its standing still during the miracle of Joshua's long day, this was merely the everyday language of common sense.
It described the appearances but could not be prescriptive against true astronomical knowledge.
This theological argument for differentiation was to assume the greatest importance in spreading the Copernican theory.
But it was not an argument for ultimate separation.
In fact, Galileo's Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina (1615) shows how difficult it was for him to pursue such an argument, even had he wished.
The irony is that he referred to the mutual relevance of science and religion in at least three different respects, each of which magnified, rather than resolved, his difficulties.
First, instead of being content to rest his case on the distinction between commonsense and scientific language, he insisted that certainties in science, having once been established, should be regarded as aids in biblical exegesis.
And not merely aids, but the ‘most appropriate aids.’
The wise expositor, in short, had to be one such as Galileo, having a sound knowledge of the natural sciences — a somewhat startling implication for custodians of a traditional theological education.
The second difficulty arose from a proposition in St. Augustine in which Galileo saw some mileage.
Demonstrated truths concerning physical matters could not contradict the Bible.
Consequently, any teaching about nature that clearly went against Scripture could not be a demonstrated truth.
In fact it could be declared false.
Galileo was attracted by the implicit contrast between physical propositions that were  demonstrated and those that were merely affirmed.
As to the former, Galileo deduced, it was necessary for divines to show that they did not contradict the Scriptures.
As for those ‘not rigorously demonstrated,’ anything contrary to the Bible involved by them was to be considered ‘undoubtedly false.’
The problem lay with this last inference; for it was not entirely consistent with Galileo's earlier argument for differentiation.
Here, he is allowing the Bible a degree of jurisdiction over scientific statements, which, though merely affirmed in the first place, might after all turn out to be demonstrable.
Galileo had his reasons; for he wished to say that it was up to his clerical opponents to prove that the Copernican system had not been demonstrated.
But the irony is considerable.
To those who believed that he had not rigorously demonstrated the earth's motion, it would look as if he had condemned himself.
As to demonstrated propositions, Galileo had written, it was the duty of wise divines to show that they did not contradict the Bible.
The third respect in which Galileo's theologizing backfired arose from his taking that office upon himself.
Not content to rest his case on the prudence with which the Holy Spirit had left astronomy out of the Scriptures, he proceeded to show that the miracle of Joshua's long day made more sense if the text was read from a Copernican standpoint.
Joshua's command to the sun to stand still was best understood, according to Galileo, as a command to halt the sun's rotation on its axis — a rotation in which Galileo took special interest since it was required by his interpretation of the sunspots.
Because the sun's rotation drove the planets around, the whole system would have come to a gentle halt for the duration of the miracle.
By contrast, the sun could not have stopped, on the Ptolemaic interpretation, without violating the interconnected motions of the spheres.
Galileo's argument reflects neither an ultimate separation of science from religion nor the use of science to impugn the miraculous.
The reference in Joshua 10:13 to the sun standing still ‘in the midst of the heavens’ was surely more consonant, Galileo suggested, with the Copernican than with a geocentric system?
His point was that, even if physical propositions were a matter of faith (which he wanted to deny), the Copernican system would have the edge.
It was a clever but risky move.
Moreover, to tie a biblical text, even conjecturally, to a particular scientific theory was the very tendency he  had warned against.
On one interpretation, Galileo was trying to protect his Church from condemning a theory that, by its evident truth, would prove an embarrassment if not embraced.
If there is any truth in this, it only magnifies the irony, for it was the very zeal with which he executed his mission that would activate the machinery of condemnation.
Our third example concerns Newton's contemporary, Edmond Halley (c. 1656–1743), whose efforts to investigate the earth's history independently of Scriptural authority show how difficult it was to achieve a full separation even by the end of the seventeenth century.
Even in a Protestant society, social and institutional pressures still tended toward integration.
In fact it has often been said that Halley's reputation for atheism may have cost him the Savilian chair of astronomy in 1691–2.
This was probably not the whole reason; for his levity and jocularity were well tuned for making enemies.
The chair was, however, under the control of the archbishop of Canterbury, Tillotson, and the bishop of Worcester, Stillingfleet, both of whom were alive to the dangers of unbridled scientific speculation.
So there were pressures that would have encouraged Halley to wear an orthodox face in public.
These were intensified by the fact that he had been accused of believing that the world would continue to exist for eternity.
The striking point, however, is that instead of merely denying the charge, he had set out to vindicate himself by finding a scientific reason why the world could not be eternal.
He chose to make a serious attempt at integrating scientific and religious perspectives, even though his clerical critics would almost certainly not have welcomed the intrusion of science into their domain.
Despite pressures for differentiation, the result was the very opposite of separation.
By adopting the view that the motion of the planets would be retarded by the ether through which they moved, Halley constructed a scenario in which the solar system would eventually collapse.
The world would not be eternal.
The reason that has been given for saying that Halley's attempt was serious, rather than merely placatory, is that he confessed in public that his efforts had not, after all, produced decisive results.
Despite his proposal that the earth was spiraling toward the sun, he could say that there was still no conclusive evidence derived from nature to prove that the earth had a beginning and would have an end.
His argument may have turned out indecisively, but Halley evidently  believed that scientific data were relevant to theological questions.
In his pronouncements, science was no longer subordinate to theology in the way it had been for Roger Bacon, Thomas Aquinas, or Nicole Oresme.
But it was not bereft of theological significance.
His attempt to prove a point of theological orthodoxy by scientific argument may have heightened the suspicion in which he was held, but it hardly points to a successful separation of the two spheres.
I have argued in this chapter that conventional references to such a separation during the seventeenth century are defective in two respects.
They imply an earlier fusion, when it is more accurate to speak of subordination.
And they imply divorce when what was achieved during the seventeenth century was a differentiation often conducted on theological grounds.
The question we have not yet addressed is the nature of the process whereby the natural sciences were released from their subordination.
In the next chapter, we shall see whether insubordination in science was encouraged by insubordination in religion, whether the Protestant Reformation had contributed to the conditions in which a re-formed philosophy of nature could flourish.
THE PARALLEL BETWEEN SCIENTIFIC AND RELIGIOUS REFORM
Introduction
Allied with Francis Bacon's proposal that a properly organized and properly conducted science could increase the power of the English state was his observation that a new vitality in the sciences had coincided with the Protestant Reformation: This was, of course, a Protestant view of the matter.
But it raises the question whether a celebration of the sciences might have been one means of differentiating Protestant cultural values from those of Roman Catholicism.
And if — as many historians have argued — there were connections between Protestantism, capitalism, and the rise of science, we have to ask what form these connections took.
If the sciences were less subordinate to theology at the time of Newton than at the time of Copernicus, had the Reformation in religion created favorable conditions for a reformation in science?
The possibility of a parallel between scientific and religious reform is the principal theme of this chapter.
We shall also be concerned with the problems that arise in testing a historical hypothesis of this kind.
One immediate difficulty is that the weight attached to it by different historians has varied enormously.
At one extreme are those who would say that Protestantism was more propitious for science than  Catholicism only in the sense that it was less obstructive.
They would stress the doctrinal fluidity within some, if not all, Protestant movements and the absence of a mechanism of censorship as centralized or as effective as that supervised by the Holy Office in Rome.
At the other extreme are those who have argued that specific Protestant doctrines gave a direct and positive stimulus to scientific research.
The doctrine of the priesthood of all believers, for example, might have encouraged independence of thought on the interpretation of nature as in the interpretation of Scripture.
Among many intermediate positions would be the view that puritan ideals resulted in a higher value being placed on certain forms of science, notably those promising practical benefits, as in agricultural and medical reform.
If Protestantism was more Conducive than Catholicism to the expansion of science, one would expect this to manifest itself in a greater receptivity toward new and controversial ideas.
This suggests that a good test would be to take a potent scientific innovation and compare its reception in Protestant and Catholic communities.
It is suggestive, for example, that in Copernicus's native Poland, a sun-centered cosmology was taught in Protestant schools many years before it was taught to Catholics.
Galileo was humiliated in Rome in a manner that has no exact parallel in Protestant countries.
Accordingly, we shall begin with the Copernican innovation as a test case.
This has the advantage that we can examine two major issues at the same time: the extent to which the Copernican revolution destroyed hallowed perceptions of humanity's place in the universe, and the extent to which Protestant audiences were more receptive.
The results of the test are instructive, but as much for the complications they reveal as for any neat conclusion.
The Challenge of a Reformed Astronomy
There can be no doubt that the heliocentric astronomy of Copernicus did pose a challenge to a cosmic geography that Christian theologians had largely taken for granted.
The voice of reaction was heard well into the seventeenth century.
Here is an English schoolmaster and divine, Alexander Ross:
The answer, of course, was that the motion of the earth was not a common matter — that it required considerable proficiency in mathematics to appreciate the arguments in its favor.
It also required a feat of imagination that was exceedingly difficult for those imbued with Aristotelian physics.
On the Copernican model, the earth was placed among the planets.
Yet this move was inconceivable on the basis of an Aristotelian cosmology with its fundamental division between the sublunar and superlunary regions.
Defenders of a traditional cosmology simply could not allow that the earth was made from the same materials as the planets, for the latter were composed of a fifth element not found in the corruptible, sublunar world.
To adopt the Copernican system entailed a rethinking on matters of biblical interpretation, but it also involved a reconsideration of what was meant by terms like corruptibility.
Here is Ross again, in one of his outbursts against the Copernican John Wilkins:
Ross protested that the earth was ‘no wandring star except in the wandring heads of Galileans.’
His reasoning shows that the incommensurability between the two systems extended to such theological issues as the location of heaven and hell.
An attraction of the older cosmology was that heaven and hell were as far apart as possible — the former beyond the outermost sphere, the latter in the bowels of the earth.
To set the earth revolving around the sun was to set all hell on the move.
The analogy between earth and planets also raised delicate questions about their habitability, creating discomfiture on such doctrinal matters as whether extraterrestrial beings might not be in a similar spiritual state to humankind, and whether God's Incarnation in Christ was truly unique.
The incommensurability of the two worlds has been well expressed by C. S. Lewis with the observation that, in the  pre-Copernican universe, as man looked upward, he looked inward to a harmonious and animated world in which all celestial movement derived from the spheres, and the motion of the spheres from an inner drive on the part of the primum mobile to share in the perfection of God.
By contrast, in the post-Copernican universe, man looked outward on the night sky and, if he was Pascal, expressed terror at the eternal silence of infinite space.
To look into the universe of Dante was like being conducted through an immense cathedral.
To look out upon the infinite worlds of Bruno was to be lost on a shoreless sea.
Yet it is possible to exaggerate the implications of the new cosmology.
The notion that humanity was dethroned from a central place in creation requires careful qualification.
Moreover, it was possible to reconstruct a universe in which Christian doctrines remained intact, even if the imagery through which they had been expressed was gradually discarded.
During a long process of assimilation, the means were found for reinvesting the physical world with spiritual significance.
One such arose from a technicality associated with the Copernican system.
If the earth were in orbit, it would surely be possible to detect stellar parallax — a change in the perceived position of one star relative to another as a consequence of the earth's motion through space.
Failure to observe this effect implied that the diameter of the earth's orbit must be negligible compared with stellar distances.
Accordingly, there was a sense in which humanity remained close to the center, if not at the center itself.
Such reasoning assumed the centrality of the sun.
But this was an assumption that Kepler, for one, was happy to make.
In Kepler's interpretation there was even a sense in which the earth remained central: Just as the sun had occupied the central orbit in the sequence radiating out from earth, so now the earth enjoyed that same centrality with respect to orbits around the sun.
Figure III.
1.
An engraving, dating from 1493, showing the cosmography of a geocentric world system.
Here one sees a typical synthesis of physical and theological motifs in a pre-Copernican cosmos.
The sublunary spheres corresponding to the four elements are succeeded in the superlunary region by the concentric spheres of the sun and planets.
Presiding over the cosmic hierarchy are God and a corresponding hierarchy of angels.
Reproduced by courtesy of J-L Charmet/Science Photo Library, London.
Even if men and women were removed from the center of the cosmos, this was not necessarily to diminish their status.
The center of the geocentric cosmos had not been salubrious.
It was the point to which earthly matter fell, the focus of change and impurity, the physical correlate of humanity's fallen state.
To be placed on a planet was to move upmarket.
It was to be delivered from a dump that was, in reality, diabolocentric.
Galileo was certainly conscious of this, rejoicing that there was an escape from the refuse.
Kepler, too, spoke of an  enhanced status for the earth: At last it enjoyed legal citizenship in the heavens.
Not surprisingly, John Wilkins was to say that a prevalent objection to the Copernican system was not man's dethronement but an elevation above his true station.
And it was an elevation actually experienced.
Among the Copernicans there was exhilaration at the thought that man, in his astronomical understanding, had now surpassed the ancients.
Figure III.
2.
Diagram from Nicolas Copernicus's De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (1543), folio 9 verso.
There were highly technical reasons why Copernicus believed that a heliostatic model for the universe would ease the task of predicting planetary positions.
He also stressed the elegance of a system in which orbital periods increased in sequence according to the distances of planets from the sun.
The daily rotation of the earth on its axis had the advantage that it eliminated the need for the huge outermost sphere to revolve every twenty-four hours.
In the text adjacent to the diagram, Copernicus justified his innovation by invoking ancient authorities (including Hermes Trismegistus) and by stressing that the center was the most fitting place fur the lamp of the universe.
Reproduced by courtesy of The Bodleian Library, Oxford; Shelfmark 3 Delta 426.
Need human significance depend on cosmic location?
Was not a sense of religious destiny derived from sources that were essentially insulated from the effects of interchanging sun and earth?
Was mankind not made in God's image?
Was there not the assurance that God had demonstrated a concern for humanity, irrespective of spatial coordinates?
It is difficult to believe that the Copernican innovation did not encourage questions of this kind.
But it hardly prevented conciliatory answers.
In the long run, one may see the seeds of a secularized universe.
But in the short run, as John Donne observed, men lived and believed just as they had before.
The universe had, after all, been of unimaginable size before.
The smallness of the earth was arguably felt more vividly in the medieval than the modern system, for there was then an absolute standard of comparison — the immense size of the outermost sphere.
A hundred years before Copernicus published, Nicholas of Cusa had argued that man's distinctiveness consisted not in his location but in his ability to cultivate a state of learned ignorance.
True wisdom recognized the limitations of knowledge.
The mental powers, which made that spiritual quest possible, were the fount of human uniqueness — not a cosmic position.
In such a manner it was possible to disconnect spiritual significance from spatial co-ordinates.
Having contemplated the relativity of all motions within the universe, Nicholas would have been astonished by any suggestion that a moving earth was destructive of a Christian world-view.
Even the problems posed by a plurality of worlds were negotiable.
John Wilkins insisted on the distinction between a plurality of worlds within one universe and a plurality of distinct universes.
Although the latter would be prejudicial to a Christian monotheism, the former would not.
The silence of Scripture on other worlds simply became a license for their admission, in that they were not explicitly denied.
As for the doctrinal impediments, Wilkins pointed out that intelligent inhabitants need not be like humans.
Even if they  were, they had not necessarily fallen from grace.
And even if they had, who could say that Christ had not died for them also?
It is a mistake to minimize the impact of the new cosmology, but resources were available to protect a spiritual destiny.
Our question was whether it was easier for Protestant than for Catholic scholars to embrace the new system.
In seeking an answer, three points emerge.
First, there are too many complications to allow the conclusion that individuals were more or less likely to be receptive according to whether they were Protestant or Catholic.
Second, if they were sympathetic, they were more likely to enjoy freedom in publicizing their science if they were Protestants.
Third, the fortunes of the new cosmology were more deeply affected by the antagonism between Catholic and Reformed Christianity than by the doctrinal peculiarities of either.
In this there was an indirect effect of religion on science.
Receptivity toward a Reformed Astronomy: Testing a Hypothesis
To compare receptivity toward the Copernican innovation as a means of testing the hypothesis that Protestantism created a more favorable climate for science leads to few definite conclusions.
But the reasons for this are instructive because they illustrate difficulties that arise in analyzing attitudes to almost any new scientific theory.
The first concerns the pretensions of the theory itself.
Is it envisaged as a calculating device, a mathematical model geared only to prediction?
Or does it purport to describe the way the world is?
This distinction is basic to an understanding of what was revolutionary in the Copernican achievement.
Whereas the role of the astronomer within the Ptolemaic tradition had been custodian of mathematical, predictive devices, Copernicus transformed that role by importing physical arguments into the astronomer's domain, thereby raising questions about the real motion of the earth.
Because hypotheses, construed as provisional descriptions of reality, had occupied a place in physics, Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo transgressed traditional subject boundaries by allowing an astronomical hypothesis this representational role.
To say of a particular astronomer or churchman that he was prepared to accept the Copernican system as a hypothesis is therefore to say something  deeply ambiguous.
One could accept the mathematical models of Copernican astronomy without even considering whether the earth really moves.
Or one could treat the hypothesis as a provisional truth-claim.
The nice complication then arises that to entertain the Copernican system seriously as a potentially true physical description, and subsequently to reject it, could be a more radical position than to accept it in the former sense.
At the Lutheran University of Wittenberg, parts of the Copernican system were accepted as improved tools for predicting the angular position of planets.
But with the exception of Georg Joachim Rheticus (1514–74), who had been seduced by the harmony that an exchange of earth and sun could bring to the sequence of planetary periods, the Lutheran circle inspired by Philip Melanchthon (1497–1560) played down the cosmological aspects of De revolutionibus no less than Catholic observers.
Not until the 1570s was this emphasis called into question by a new generation of astronomers, including Tycho Brahe and Kepler's teacher Michael Maestlin (1550–1631).
Through their teaching and their textbooks, the Wittenberg astronomers did at least promote Copernican mathematics, but it would be wrong to portray them as receptive to a new cosmology.
Much the same distinction was to assume importance in the Galileo affair, for when Niccolo Riccardi wrote to the Florentine inquisitor about the license for Galileo's Dialogue , he indicated that the pope, Urban VIII, would only allow ‘mathematical considerations of the Copernican positions.’
Between 1543 and 1600 only ten Copernicans have been identified in the strong sense of having advocated the earth's physical motion.
Seven were Protestants, three Catholics.
It is difficult to draw any hard conclusions from this, especially when one of the Catholics, Diego de Zuñiga, who taught philosophy and theology at the University of Salamanca, adopted the Copernican system in the context of expounding Job 9:6.
The text referred to the power of God in shaking the earth ‘out of her place.’
In contrast to scholars, both Catholic and Protestant, who developed the concept of biblical accommodation, de Zuñiga saw a literal congruence with what Copernicus had proposed.
A further complication is that included in the Copernican theory were several proposals.
One could therefore accept some and reject others.
An attractive option was to accept  the reality of the earth's axial rotation, thereby avoiding the cumbersome daily rotation of the outermost sphere, but to dismiss its orbital revolution, thereby saving its central position.
Such a model is to be found in the work of Nicolai Reymers Baer, official mathematician to the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II.
Baer, better known as Ursus, claimed originality in 1588 for a scheme in which planets other than the earth revolved about the sun, while the earth merely spun on its axis.
He would not confer other motions on the earth, as Copernicus had, because this would violate a cherished Aristotelian principle that bodies could not have more than one natural motion.
The idea that planetary orbits were centered on the sun — which, with its attendant planets, revolved about a stationary earth — was also formulated in 1588 by the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, with the consequence that claims and counterclaims of plagiarism were elaborated by both parties.
Ursus differentiated his scheme from that of Tycho by insisting on the daily rotation of the earth.
Tycho accused Ursus of stealing his idea that the sun revolved about the earth, carrying the planets with it.
For our purposes, the important point is that variants of these intermediate or compromise schemes were propounded by both Protestant and Catholic scholars.
Tycho was a Protestant, beholden only to the king of Denmark, Frederick II, who had granted him free use of a small island to pursue his astronomical studies.
But the retention of a central earth, coupled with the mathematical advantages to be gained by having other planets orbiting the sun, commended his system to Jesuit astronomers who, by 1620, were making it their own.
In rejecting the full Copernican scheme, Tycho had been swayed by biblical considerations and by the failure to detect stellar parallax, which, if Copernicus were right, would entail an enormous gap between the outermost planet and the closest of the stars — a gap that he, and Catholic scholars too, found unacceptable on aesthetic grounds.
The viability of the Tychonic system makes it impossible to divide the intellectual world-of the early seventeenth century into pro- and anti-Copernicans, still less to countenance the remark of one historian that the English Civil War was fought between Copernicans and Ptolemaics.
The multiplicity of mathematical models did, however, have consequences for the perception of astronomy as a science.
It could  reinforce that conventional distinction between astronomy and natural philosophy, which allowed one to be skeptical concerning any claims for physical representation that the mathematical astronomer might make.
This type of skepticism had been sustained by the knowledge that the mathematical devices used by Ptolemy could not be squared with the homocentric spheres of Aristotelian cosmology.
And, as with Ursus, it was a convenient posture when disparaging other people's systems.
By the end of the sixteenth century, however, this rigid distinction between astronomy and natural philosophy was beginning to collapse, until with Kepler the quest for physical causes had become part of the astronomer's task.
The shift that Kepler represents was not merely the collapse of a traditional boundary between two academic disciplines.
The suggestion that an astronomical innovation might require a new physics was subversive of a  hierarchy in which physics had enjoyed greater prestige than astronomy.
This subversion was largely achieved by astronomers enjoying the freedom of court patronage, rather than by those in university posts where traditional boundaries acted as constraints.
In Kepler's defense of Copernicus, mathematical, physical, and theological considerations all carried weight.
The orbital motion of the earth provided a causal explanation for why the planets appeared to meander across the sky.
If the astronomer could display the harmonious motions underlying the appearances, he surely deserved gratitude for revealing the divinely ordained harmony.
Kepler knew that the argument for skepticism was persuasive.
If the same set of appearances could be saved by each mathematical model, then why should one be privileged as that which corresponded to physical reality?
The history of astronomy also disclosed a succession of hypotheses, which made claims for physical truth look precarious.
In reply, Kepler argued that although several different systems might appear to be equally powerful in predicting a specific range of phenomena, each would nevertheless be distinctive in generating further predictions peculiar to itself.
These could then serve as the basis for further testing, allowing the best candidate for a true representation to emerge.
He also argued that, despite the manner in which hypotheses were supplanted by others, astronomers could, and had, reached  agreement on certain fundamentals.
There had been progress.
Were such arguments for astronomical realism the exclusive property of Protestants?
Again, there are too many complications to permit a straightforward answer.
Kepler's theology was Protestant; but it was also idiosyncratic, in that the doctrine of the Trinity was given physical meaning in the structure of the cosmos.
The central sun symbolized God the Father; the surface of the spherical universe, God the Son; the intermediate space, God the Holy Spirit.
In this respect, a heliocentric cosmos was a direct expression of a Trinitarian theology.
But the realism to which Kepler's arguments pointed was also embraced by Galileo, who — for all his anticlericalism — at least claimed to be a devout Catholic.
To compound the difficulty, a skepticism concerning the propriety of scientific realism on astronomical issues continued to be fashionable among radical Protestants as well as conservative Catholics: So wrote John Milton in Paradise lost .
Applying our test has generated complications rather than answers.
In another respect the test proves defective.
What if there were Protestants campaigning vigorously for the empirical sciences who nevertheless rejected the Copernican theory?
They would be disqualified by the test and yet might still testify to some correlation between Protestantism and science.
Peter Ramus, the sixteenth-century humanist and champion of educational reform in the French universities, would be one example.
Whereas contemporary French Catholic institutions devoted only one-sixth of their curriculum to what might be termed science, Ramus allocated a half, praising the value of the mechanical arts.
Committed to an ideal of ‘astronomy without hypotheses,’ he nevertheless chided Copernicus for having employed the ‘most absurd fable in order to demonstrate the true facts of nature from false causes.’
In his Apologie or declaration of the power and providence of God (1627), the Oxford scholar George Hakewill insisted that  there were no theological grounds for supposing that his contemporaries were any less capable of lasting achievement than the ancients.
There was no reason why God should not have reserved opportunities for fresh discoveries to be enjoyed by a later generation.
Here was a Protestant vision amenable to an emerging concept of scientific progress.
But in that progress, the Copernican theory had no part; for Hakewill rejected a moving earth and showed no inclination to disband the celestial spheres.
Even more striking is the example provided by Francis Bacon, that most ardent apologist for useful science — but not for a Copernican universe.
Although he wanted a physical astronomy that would deal with real motions, there were too many ‘great inconveniences’ in a system that saddled the earth with three separate motions: an orbital revolution, an axial rotation, and a change in the orientation of the axis itself.
Bacon described the triple motion as ‘incommodious’ and protested at so radiant and exalted a body as the sun having to suffer the indignity of immobility.
Any hope that responses to the Copernican innovation might prove a sensitive indicator of Protestant and Catholic attitudes to the value of natural philosophy is clearly frustrated.
It does not follow, however, that the division between Catholic and Reformed societies and the antagonism between them were irrelevant to the fortunes of the Copernican system.
On the contrary, there were numerous indirect effects of the rupture within Christendom that are vital to an understanding of Galileo's predicament.
Reformation and Counter-Reformation: Indirect Effects of Religion on Science
The great painter Albrecht Dürer rejoiced that Luther had delivered him from a ‘terrible distress,’ from bondage to rituals that the Catholic clergy prescribed as necessary for salvation.
The liberating message of Luther's theology was that salvation could be obtained only by faith, not by works — faith in a God whose love for humanity had been demonstrated in the person of Christ.
This Christocentric theology not only kindled the renewal of a Christian spirituality.
By implying that salvation was the responsibility of the individual, by insisting that the only mediator between God and man was Jesus Christ, Luther had posed a political as well as doctrinal threat to the power of the Catholic clergy.
His  vehement denial that God's favor could be earned through the sacraments, or bought by donations to an often grasping priesthood, had set up vibrations through Christendom, eventually winning him the protection of lay powers having a vested interest in a deflation of the papacy.
By writing his tracts in German, Luther had appealed to an unlearned audience as well as to sympathetic scholars.
A million copies are estimated to have been in circulation by 1524.
An affirmative response meant the repudiation of one's religious heritage, which happened time and again as monks who had sworn obedience to the pope became his mortal enemies, as nuns who had taken vows of celibacy entered matrimony, and as priests denounced the Catholic Mass as an abomination.
Calvin's theology, no less than Luther's, illustrates that same capacity within Christianity for self-criticism and renewal.
God's sovereignty was reaffirmed in a manner that made salvation by works untenable.
Not that good works were unimportant.
They were a Christian's duty in the disciplined life of his church.
But so great was the gulf between the righteousness of God and the depravity of man that the hope of salvation, made possible by the obedient and sacrificial death of Christ, was ultimately dependent upon divine rather than human initiatives.
Calvin's doctrine of election had the consequence that no earthly priesthood could arrogate the authority to determine whether an individual was of the elect.
Christ alone knew his own.
Any claim of the clergy to have control of one's spiritual destiny was effectively undermined.
The Christian took the sacraments in the hope that, as he received Christ, so Christ would receive him.
But those who claimed to know that they were chosen, Calvin viewed with suspicion.
In the doctrinal disputes, power struggles, and eventual warfare unleashed by the Reformation were forces that had a profound bearing on how a controversial scientific innovation, such as that of Copernicus, would be perceived.
Its initial presentation indirectly reflected the growing polarities within Christendom.
In an anonymous introduction, the editor of De revolutionibus , Andreas Osiander, had implied that the earth's motion was to be construed as nothing more than a convenient hypothesis.
This intervention has often been seen as a nasty piece of clerical obstruction, the anonymity of Osiander's remarks compounding the crime by deceiving the reader into believing they were by Copernicus himself.
Recent scholarship suggests that the tactic of anonymity may have been employed for the best of reasons.
By the early 1540s, Osiander had become notorious for his antipapal blasts, issuing from the church of St. Lorenz in  Nuremberg .
To have placed his name on the work of a loyal Catholic canon would have cast suspicion on Copernicus himself.
The printing of De revolutionibus took place during a tense period when the freedom of Protestants and the independence of  Nuremberg were being threatened by Catholic authorities.
Every precaution had to be taken to ensure that the book would be read, not burned.
The dialectics of Reformation and Counter-Reformation had another indirect effect in that, during the second half of the sixteenth century, attitudes toward biblical interpretation hardened.
A fundamental issue was whether religious authority was ultimately vested in an ecclesiastical succession or in the Bible alone.
The consequence was that intransigent positions were soon staked out on the correct modes of biblical interpretation.
Within Protestantism a shift occurred — away from the exegetical principles of the Reformers themselves toward a more legalistic attitude.
The respect in which this shift affected attitudes toward the Copernican system may not be immediately obvious because Luther and Calvin had both made disparaging remarks about the new astronomy.
Whether Luther really referred to Copernicus as a fool has been doubted, but in an off-the-cuff dismissal he remembered that Joshua had told the sun, not the earth, to stand still.
Superficially at least, Calvin was even more disparaging.
In a sermon on 1 Corinthians 10:19–24, he rebuked ‘those dreamers who have a spirit of bitterness and contradiction, who reprove everything and pervert the order of nature.’
There are some, he continued, ‘so deranged, not only in religion but who in all things reveal their monstrous nature, that they will say that the sun does not move, and that it is the earth which shifts and turns.’
Calvin's target, however, was those who, in a spirit of contrariety, argued out of‘pure malice.’
That he could even think of illustrating that perversity with purveyors of a contrary cosmology suggests that his opposition was born of the common conviction that a moving earth violated common sense.
There is no reason to suppose that he was sufficiently interested in the Copernican system to set biblical authority against it.
The important point is not whether Luther and Calvin  happened to make peremptory remarks, exuding a lifetime's confidence in a pre-Copernican cosmology, but whether their exegetical principles implied an inevitable clash as the new system gained in plausibility.
Calvin's did not.
In his commentary on Psalm 136:7 he observed that the Holy Spirit ‘had no intention to teach astronomy’ but had used popular language ‘that none might shelter himself under the pretext of obscurity.’
Nor was Luther tied to the verbal inspiration of Scripture in any way that demanded a strict literalism when interpreting verses that referred to the natural world.
It has been well said of the Reformers themselves that the Bible was the sole norm and guide in matters of faith and conduct, not in everything under the sun.
During the later years of the sixteenth century, however, a Protestant scholasticism came into existence, perpetrating a less flexible approach to the meaning of God's ‘word.’
Through the systematization of Reformed doctrine, and through polemics with Rome, the Bible became a set of proof texts.
educational reforms, was quite prepared to marshal the Scriptures against a plurality of worlds.
To imagine other worlds was to imagine that Christ might have died and been resurrected more than once, or that their inhabitants might be restored to eternal life without a knowledge of the Son of God.
But Genesis delivered the coup de grace, for it was stated that God had rested on the seventh day, not that he had immediate y started work on other worlds.
It must not be supposed, therefore, that the desire of Protestants to dissociate themselves from Catholic Christianity automatically created a disposition in favor of free thought.
And just as Protestant attitudes were shaped by the engagement with Rome, so the Catholic Church itself was deeply affected by the need to repel the Protestant heresies.
The facility with which Protestants interpreted the Bible for themselves — opening, it seemed, a Pandora's box of subversive opinions — led to a declaration at the Council of Trent that was to create particular problems for Galileo, seventy years later.
At its fourth session in April 1546, it was decreed that no one should dare interpret the Scriptures ‘contrary to the unanimous consensus of the Fathers.’
This ruling did not demand a strict literalism, but since the fathers and later commentators had interpreted the relevant passages of Scripture in geostatic terms, Cardinal Bellarmine would later argue that  it was imprudent to abandon that consensus.
Galileo would protest that the earth's motion was not a matter of faith.
But Bellarmine had a reply at the ready: ‘For if it is not a matter of faith from the point of view of the subject matter, it is on the part of those who have spoken.’
Despite expressing a willingness to reconstrue Scripture if the earth's motion were proved, Bellarmine would not relent.
We have already seen how Galileo argued, on theological grounds, for the differentiation of scientific and theological propositions, and how he created difficulties for himself in the process.
In order to complete his case he had to challenge this deference to a patristic consensus — which he did by observing that the church fathers had taken the motion of the sun for granted because the alternative had not, in that era, been laid before them.
In which case they could not be said to have decided the issue for themselves, let alone for others.
One may perhaps speculate on other respects in which Galileo's predicament was affected by the dynamics of Protestant — Catholic engagement.
An argument for clemency toward him could be grounded in the belief that it would be a tactical error to declare Copernican doctrines heretical, because that might discourage Protestants from returning to the Roman fold.
On the other hand, the fact that Protestant heretics were associated with the new astronomy could intensify the suspicion in which it was held.
Galileo's association with Paolo Sarpi who, as leader of a Venetian revolt against the Roman Curia, was perceived as a crypto-Protestant could not have helped his case.
Part of the justification for censorship in the first place stemmed from competing conceptions of the priesthood.
Against Protestant tendencies to emphasize the priesthood of all believers, Catholic scholars would reaffirm, as Bellarmine did, that many believers had neither the spiritual capacity nor the mental endowment to protect themselves from literature that might be damaging to faith and prospects for eternity.
As for Galileo himself, the fateful urgency with which he mobilized the earth could reflect a genuine desire to uphold the reputation of Catholic scholarship.
It would not do, he once wrote, for others to think that there were no Catholics capable of appreciating the Copernican arguments.
He may even have considered that to establish the superiority of the Copernican over the Tychonic system would be to reaffirm the superiority of Catholic over Protestant science.
He  certainly never missed an opportunity to underline the Catholicism of Copernicus or to exaggerate his connections with Rome.
It is important not to underestimate these indirect effects of religion on science.
The defensive measures taken by the Catholic church against what was perceived as a Protestant cancer altered the criteria of truth, allowing authority on scientific issues to be wrested from scholars and vested in a Roman bureaucracy.
In condemning Galileo, Pope Urban VIII was condemning a former friend.
That he was prepared to do so may reflect yet another aspect of the Catholic — Protestant contest.
Urban's pro-French foreign policy during the Thirty Years War had left him in an exposed position when Richelieu joined forces with Protestant Sweden to thwart the restoration of Catholicism in Germany.
Instead of condemning the alliance, Urban insisted that the war was one of state, not of religion, inviting the criticism that he was putting political expediency before religious necessity.
It is not impossible that his severity on Galileo was one way of saving face — an attempt to placate prominent Jesuits still smarting from wounds that Galileo had inflicted on their colleagues in earlier debates about the nature of sunspots and comets.
Relationships had been soured by Galileo's protracted debate with Horatio Grassi, the leading mathematician of the Jesuit College in Rome, who had followed Tycho Brahe in treating comets as real, self-luminous bodies located beyond the moon — in contrast to Galileo's theory that they were merely optical effects, produced by the reflection of sunlight in thin vapors.
And there had been a long-standing feud with Christopher Scheiner, who had incensed Galileo by borrowing his telescopic discoveries for his own ends.
In order to bolster his suggestion that sunspots were not (as Galileo affirmed) blemishes on the sun but small satellites in orbit around it, Scheiner had exploited Galileo's own discovery of the satellites of Jupiter.
If a planet could have its satellites, why not the sun!
Scheiner was still in the wings at the time of the trial.
The Question of Intellectual Freedom: Galileo and Wilkins
The indirect effects of religious controversy on attitudes toward science have been stressed because they indicate the contingency of those attitudes at particular times and places.
One  cannot generalize about a greater receptivity among Protestant clergy toward the new cosmology.
As late as 1679, Lutheran orthodoxy in Sweden could still be obstructive.
Biblical objections were wheeled out by the theological faculty at Uppsala against a young scholar, Nils Celsius, who had tried to minimize them.
In Denmark, too, Lutheran clergy found it difficult to adapt.
In 1661, when C. N. Lesle published on the mobility of the earth, he was considered by fellow clergy to be guilty of a dangerous departure.
A resilient alliance between Protestant theology and Aristotelian philosophy, which had established itself in different parts of Europe, remained particularly strong in Scotland during the first half of the seventeenth century.
In 1626, James Reid of Edinburgh University considered the possibility of the earth's axial rotation, suggesting that Scripture sometimes described phenomena as they appeared to the senses, rather than as they really were.
In so doing he triggered a theological storm that led to his resignation.
In certain European countries, however, notably England and Holland, the freedom with which scholars could defend the Copernican system stands in striking contrast with the repression faced by Galileo.
England in the 1640s saw the Copernican texts of Galileo, Kepler, and the Dutch astronomer Philip van Lansbergen (1561–1632) read with increasing approval.
In Holland there were pockets of resistance.
Gisbertus Voet (1588–1676), first rector of the University of Utrecht, was a notable critic.
But Lansbergen's defense of Copernicus had already made considerable headway during the 1620s.
That Lansbergen's opponent, the Catholic theologian Libertus Fromondus, spoke disparagingly of the ‘Calvinistic-Copernican’ system suggests that a parallel was beginning to take shape between scientific and religious reform — at least in the minds of critics.
Descartes was to enjoy a freedom to publish in Holland that was denied him in France.
As for the Copernican system in America, it has been observed that the New England clergy were its principal propagators.
On the issue of scientific freedom a contrast can therefore be drawn between certain Protestant cultures and those under Roman Catholic jurisdiction — a contrast exemplified by the careers of two Copernicans: Galileo himself and the most fervent popularizer of the system in England, John Wilkins.
Although they belonged to different generations, and though  Wilkins was deeply indebted to Galileo for his telescopic observations, the comparison is nevertheless illuminating.
Galileo ended his days under house arrest; Wilkins ended his a bishop.
An initial reluctance on the part of Galileo to publicize the Copernican system should not automatically be ascribed to fear of clerical censure.
In a letter to Kepler of 1597 he was more concerned by the prospect of being dubbed a fool by that ‘infinite number of fools’ who found a moving earth derisory.
If, during the first decade of the seventeenth century, he was not yet an outspoken Copernican, he was nevertheless a virulent critic of Aristotle, soon arousing the hostility of Ludovico delle Colombe who, in seeking to protect the immutability of the heavens, had to endure Galileo's exposure.
Colombe was to lead the academic attack on Galileo between 1610 and 1614.
This was the period following Galileo's move from Padua, where he had held the chair of mathematics since 1592, to Florence where he had been appointed philosopher and mathematician to Cosimo II, grand duke of Tuscany.
Had he suspected, when he left the Venetian state, that his Copernicanism might one day bring him into confrontation with papal authority, he might have thought twice before leaving a region in which dissident scholars could flourish and where printers, for commercial reasons, were already disobeying papal rules.
But at that stage he may have valued the intellectual stimulus that a closer intercourse with Jesuit astronomers seemed to promise.
It was not long, however, before he learned of a meeting at the house of Archbishop Alessandro Marzimedici, at which strategies for dealing with Copernicans were reviewed.
One present, possibly Colombe, had apparently asked that Galileo's opinions be condemned from the pulpit.
Whereas academic philosophers with a vested interest in preserving the Aristotelian world-picture were united against Galileo, there was no such unanimity among his clerical contacts, some of whom gave constructive advice.
When asked about the admissibility of change in the heavens, Cardinal Carlo Conti replied that the Bible did not support Aristotle.
He even referred Galileo to de Zuñiga's commentary on Job in which the Copernican system had been countenanced.
Conti's opinion was that reconciliation could be achieved, but only so long as the Scriptures were understood to speak the language of common people.
Unfortunately for Galileo, though there was no unanimity of reaction, there were clerics who would not leave the issue alone and who, by their denunciation, drew attention to its divisiveness.
A young Dominican, Tommaso Caccini, embarrassed more discerning members of his order when, from his pulpit in December 1614, he lampooned Galileo, and all mathematicians, as magicians and enemies of the faith.
The problem for Galileo was that, once suspicions were aroused, the machinery of censorship could be switched on at a moment's notice.
He had to work in the knowledge that he could be reported to the Inquisition at any time, when his writings would become the subject of serious scrutiny.
He was in this predicament by February 1615 when his letter to Castelli (which in expanded form became the letter to the Grand Duchess Christina) was examined by the Inquisition in Rome.
The prospect of censure intensified what, for Galileo, was fast becoming a dilemma.
On the one hand he was receiving advice from Cardinal Barberini (later Pope Urban VIII) that he should steer clear of theological issues; on the other he was advised that Cardinal Bellarmine would welcome his comments on a passage in Psalm 18 that appeared inconsistent with Copernican doctrine.
Trapped with one foot in and one foot out of the sacristy, it was during 1616 that his personal liberty was put at risk.
When a papal commission decided that a Copernican cosmology was unacceptable, the pope's instruction to Bellarmine was that Galileo be required to abandon his Copernican beliefs — with the threat of jail if he refused.
The minimum this required was that Galileo should be warned that a heliostatic universe had been found formally heretical and that he must no longer hold or defend it.
If he agreed, the threat of proceedings against him would be unnecessary.
The maximum requirement was that Galileo should be warned by the Commissary of the Inquisition that if he were to hold, defend, or teach the Copernican doctrine in any way, he would be imprisoned.
There is much debate as to whether he was actually threatened with prison, as the document in the Vatican file reported.
At his trial he would protest that, although he could remember being told not to hold or defend the Copernican system, he had no recollection of an injunction against teaching it.
Whatever passed between him and Bellarmine in 1616, his freedom to champion a moving earth had clearly been curbed, even if at that stage  — as Bellarmine confirmed in a signed affidavit — there had been neither abjuration nor penance.
The decree of 1616 did attempt to discriminate between books that aimed to reconcile the earth's motion with Scripture and those that remained within the confines of astronomical hypothesis.
Those of the first category, including a recent work by the Carmelite monk Foscarini, were to be destroyed.
But those of the second, including De revolutionibus itself, were merely suspended, pending correction.
As time passed, however, the Church censors began to act as if the distinction were of no importance.
Furthermore, the very censorship under which Galileo was operating increased the nervousness of his opponents.
There was mounting anxiety among the Jesuits lest Galileo had a decisive argument against the Tychonic system, which he was bound to conceal.
The controversy with Grassi over the nature of comets created an atmosphere in which Galileo and the Jesuits finally became locked in an intellectual trial of strength.
Any vestige of friendship Grassi might have retained was to disappear when he saw a letter from Florence claiming that the Jesuits would be powerless to answer Galileo's arguments.
His reported reaction was that if his order could answer a hundred heretics a year, they would not be beaten by one Catholic.
Meanwhile that one Catholic entertained the hope that his freedom to defend the Copernican system might yet be restored.
With the appointment of his friend Barberini to the papacy in August 1623, there were high hopes that an avowed patron of the arts and sciences might lift the restriction.
But it is a measure of the difficulty Galileo was working under that, despite several audiences with the new pope, he was unable to ease the ban.
Some clarification was, however, secured.
Reassurance was given that he was free to discuss the rival systems as long as the arguments were confined to mathematical astronomy.
The dialogue form of what became the Two chief world systems (1632) was a brilliant response to these restrictions, Galileo probably calculating that it would protect him from censure, even if his impartial discussion pointed to far from impartial conclusions.
By incorporating his favorite argument from the tides — incontestably a physical argument — he nevertheless transgressed the second of the two conditions.
Figure III.
3.
Frontispiece to Galileo's Dialogo i due massimi sistemi del mundo (1632).
In Galileo's text, representatives of the Copernican and Ptolemaic systems (Salviati and Simplicio respectively) defined their positions in conversation with an ostensibly neutral third party (Sagredo).
Salviati does his best to convert the reactionary Simplicio, who habitually resorts to arguments based on Aristotle's physics and commonsense observation.
Galileo's controversial argument that the tides were the result of the combined motions of the earth, creating a jolting effect similar to that produced when a water-carrying barge hits the quayside, was conceivably vulnerable to the skeptical reply that tidal effects could be the result of other mechanisms that an omnipotent God might have devised.
Perhaps to assist in conferring the semblance of impartiality on his treatment, Galileo placed this papal argument in the mouth of Simplicio — a tactic that tragically backfired.
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
The issue of censorship arose again in connection with a  license to print, which he was fortunate to obtain since he knew exactly what he had done.
To one correspondent, Elia Diodati, he described his book as a most ample confirmation of the Copernican system by showing the nullity of all that had been brought by Tycho and others to the contrary.’
That he did not escape a final censorship has been attributed to Urban's discovery of the 1616 injunction, as recorded in the file, and to his realization that Galileo had exceeded his perception of what had been allowed.
Because it transpired that Galileo had not mentioned the 1616 prohibition when applying for his license, Urban felt betrayed on several counts.
That the tides were a physical consequence of the combined motions of the earth, as Galileo maintained, was the very argument he had outlawed.
And to add insult to injury, one of his own arguments celebrating the omnipotence of God had been placed in the mouth of Simplicio, that character in the dialogue who, as the spokesman for naive common sense, had been the subject of ridicule.
Despite an extrajudicial bargain that, if Galileo confessed his error, he would be treated leniently, the final censorship was a sentence of life imprisonment.
Although this was commuted to house arrest, Galileo remained embittered in the belief that the other side of the bargain had not been kept.
What Federico Cesi once wrote of the members of his Lincean Academy applied to Galileo with a vengeance: ‘All we claim in common is freedom to philosophize in physical matters.’
There can be no denying this was an issue.
It is doubtful whether it was ever such an issue for Wilkins.
Like Galileo, he was committed to the Copernican system as a cosmology and not merely as a mathematical hypothesis.
As with Galileo, he wrote in the vernacular to reach a larger audience.
For rejoinders to the commonsense objections against a moving earth, Wilkins was indebted to Galileo, as he was for striking analogies between the earth and moon.
On the issue of intellectual freedom, however, contrasts begin to appear.
Wilkins took the silence of the Bible, on a question such as the plurality of worlds, not as a ban but as an invitation to entertain the notion.
Such license had effectively been denied Galileo who, by his friend Ciampoli, had been advised to suppress remarks that might imply extraterrestrial life: Would they not invite awkward questions such as how descendants of Adam and Eve could have reached the moon?
For the publication of his pro-Copernican Discourse concerning a new planet (1640), Wilkins had to obtain a license.
But in Protestant England, even in Oxford under the chancellorship of Archbishop Laud, he encountered little resistance.
His previous announcement of a Discovery of a world in the moon (1638) had already enjoyed two printings in its first year and a third in 1640.
His proclamation that the moon might be habitable was bound to attract criticism from Aristotelian diehards such as Alexander Ross.
But such retaliation seems to have been powerless to harm him.
There were threats to his academic career, but they came from a different direction.
Having been appointed warden of Wadham College Oxford in 1648, he was criticized by less moderate puritans who objected to the manner in which he turned the college into a haven for those with Anglican and Royalist sympathies.
His biographer has stressed the consistency with which he avoided extreme political alignments and maintained a steadfast dislike of religious persecution.
Following the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, the same spirit of moderation lay behind his efforts to bring religious dissenters back to the Anglican fold and to oppose legislation that disadvantaged them.
If the failed attempt to oust him from Wadham in 1654 was the work of stricter puritans who suspected him of reducing Christianity to morality, so in the 1660s his ‘club for comprehension’ evoked the censure of high churchmen.
As a religious moderate, he was attacked by extremists of different hues, but not, it would seem, because of his science.
If he was persecuted, it was as a result of his avoiding persecution.
He was ‘prepared for the embracing of any religion,’ one critic wrote, ‘rather than incur the hazard of persecution.’
Figure III.
4. (opposite ) Frontispiece from the combined edition (1640) of John Wilkins's Discovery of a world in the moone (1638) and Discourse concerning a new planet (1640).
Copernicus, on the left, raises the possibility of the earth's motion, Galileo produces his telescope, and Kepler expresses a desire for wings that he might visit the new world — as indeed he had dreamed of doing in his unpublished Copernican text Somnium .
The sun is portrayed as source of light, heat, and motion.
Reproduced by permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library.
Wilkins's survival as warden of Wadham, his move to the mastership of Trinity College Cambridge in 1659, his  becoming bishop of Chester in 1668, and his appointment as Lent preacher to the king suggest that there was nothing particularly hazardous in being England's most conspicuous Copernican.
His differentiation between ‘divine’ and ‘natural’knowledge found receptive ears.
The former related to the quest for spiritual happiness, the latter to the sciences which, in their practical application, helped to constitute a third category of ‘artificial’ knowledge.
Once again, however, it was differentiation without separation.
Natural knowledge was concerned with the frame of the universe, but, as such, it disclosed the course of providence in the physical world.
Indeed, one of Wilkins's arguments in favor of the Copernican system had been that the alternative — imputing a daily rotation to the heavens — would be to argue ‘improvidence in nature.’
The desire to see beauty, convenience, and harmonic proportion in the universe had clear religious overtones.
In extending the principle of biblical accommodation and the scope of natural theology, Wilkins enjoyed a degree of liberty that Galileo had been denied.
It is important not to exaggerate the oppressive effects of Index and Inquisition.
The Counter-Reformation did not prevent Italian scholars from making original contributions in classical scholarship, history, law, literary criticism, logic, mathematics, medicine, philology, and rhetoric.
Nor were they isolated by the Index from European scholarship.
Prohibited books entered private libraries where they would be consulted by those prepared to break the rules in the interests of learning.
One such collection was in the hands of Galileo's Paduan friend, G. V. Pinelli.
One can lose a sense of perspective if the condemnation of Galileo is taken to epitomize the attitude of Catholic authorities toward the natural sciences.
Relatively few scientific works were placed on the Index.
The attempt to put a stop to the moving earth stands out because it proved so tragic an aberration — a personal tragedy for Galileo and, in the long run, a tragedy for the Church, which overreached itself in securing a territory that would prove impossible to hold.
One can lose a sense of perspective, too, if one overlooks the positive side of Catholic educational programs.
The Jesuit order, which had been established as the intellectual vanguard of the Church, made many enemies; but its educational institutions were greatly admired.
A distinctive prominence was given to mathematics — not least because its value in  astronomy, navigation, architecture, and surveying gave it particular relevance to those training for missionary work overseas, or to those preparing for high military or government service.
The official condemnation of the Copernican system did put constraints on what could be taught, though the option of presenting it as merely a mathematical hypothesis was still open, and increasingly taken during the course of the seventeenth century.
The important point, however, is that Jesuit scholars were active in other branches of science and particularly so in the emerging fields of electricity and magnetism.
It would be a caricature to portray them as hide-bound Aristotelians.
In his commentary of 1646 on Aristotle's Meteorologica , Niccolo Cabeo reproached those who never questioned Aristotle's teaching: They were grammarians, not philosophers.
The scientific texts produced by Jesuit scholars were sometimes short on theory.
This may reflect the belief that catalogs of data were more appropriate fur teaching purposes or that there were pressures to shy away from controversial ideas.
Even those who saw the need for theoretical models sometimes exulted in a pluralism that had the effect of giving priority to none.
Francesco Lana, a pupil of the renowned Athanasius Kircher, confessed that he would use many models to express the truth to which the science of natural things could attain.
What one model lacked, another would supply.
If such eclecticism counts as a limitation, it hardly detracts from the achievement of Jesuits as patrons and teachers of science.
Of the 195 members of the Paris Academy of Sciences to be honored with an official eulogy before the Revolution of 1789, at least twenty percent had received a Jesuit education.
Two generations before the Paris Academy was founded, a Protestant crusader for educational reform had already conceded that the state of learning had been ‘much quickened and strengthened’ by Jesuit schools.
‘If only they were ours,’ Francis Bacon had lamented.
Protestantism and Practical Science
We have been exploring the idea that Protestantism helped to create a climate in which the scientific enterprise could gain momentum.
With reference to the fate of the Copernican system, we have encountered many complications, even in a test case that, because of Galileo's trial, might seem to  have been loaded from the start.
We cannot, however, leave the discussion with the ostensibly greater freedom of Protestants to subscribe to a new cosmology, because there are stronger claims in the literature for a parallel between scientific and religious reform.
Prominent among them has been the thesis of the American sociologist Robert Merton to the effect that the values associated with Protestant asceticism gave a positive stimulus to the practical sciences.
In conclusion we shall briefly consider Merton's thesis and the difficulties that arise in testing it.
Connections between ascetic Protestantism and the growth of capitalism have been extensively discussed ever since Max Weber drew attention to three ethical maxims commonly derived from Calvin's theology.
These were that one should be diligent in pursuing one's religious calling; that one should renounce material satisfaction; and that one's time should always be used constructively.
To abide by these norms was not a way of earning salvation, for in Reformed theology there was no way that salvation could be earned.
But to follow these maxims was the duty of the Christian whose ultimate destiny was in God's hands.
It is not difficult to see how capitalist entrepreneurship might prosper under such ethical norms: not by making monetary gain an end in itself but as an almost incidental product of thrift.
Merton's thesis was that a godly involvement in the affairs of the world would also encourage the growth of science.
There could be real connections between the spiritual injunction to glorify God and a quest for knowledge that would not only demonstrate the Creator's power but also alleviate suffering.
To study the book of nature was a permissible use of the gift of reason that differentiated humanity from the beasts.
It was also effective as a diversion from sensuality — from bags, bottles, and mistresses, as Robert Boyle would put it.
With examples drawn from seventeenth-century England, Merton argued that the social utility of both science and technology was increasingly recognized where puritan values held sway.
His thesis does not exclude the importance of wide socioeconomic forces.
Economic expansion in seventeenth-century Europe, and the growth of the mining industry in particular, are given special prominence in an analysis that made generous allowance for the role of technical problems in defining areas of scientific research.
Nor did Merton imply that the actual discoveries of a Boyle or a Newton could be  directly ascribed to the sanction of science by religion.
The argument is not that Protestant religion constituted a primary, independent variable on which science depended, but that, through reciprocal interaction, a higher value was gradually placed on the practical sciences.
Put another way, puritan values helped to create an audience receptive to programs for the improvement of man's estate.
A guide to the vast literature on Merton's thesis will be found in the bibliographic essay, but it is important to note that variants of it have survived intense criticism.
There is evidence that Protestant millenarianism, enjoying a resurgence during the civil war period in England, could provide a framework within which Bacon's program for the empirical sciences gained an extra impetus — despite the fact that Bacon himself had been hostile to any religious movement that might threaten the fragile monarchy to which he had constantly vowed allegiance.
A letter from John Beale to Samuel Hartlib in the late 1650s shows how the integration could be effected through the hope of a restored dominion over nature:
For some Protestant thinkers, experimental science promised a way of reversing the effects of the original curse, a way of making a better world that might in some small way mirror the perfection of God's heavenly kingdom, a way of restoring the world to a condition fit for Christ's earthly rule.
Affirmations of a strong parallel between religious and scientific reform are not difficult to find.
Thomas Culpeper remarked in 1655 that, as Reformed theology rejected a pope in religion, so a reformed science rejected a pope in philosophy.
It was easy to claim, as did Thomas Sprat in his History of the Royal Society (1667), that the two reformations had this in common: Each prized the original copies of God's two books, nature and the Bible, bypassing the corrupting influence of scholars and priests.
It is difficult to discount the evidence that Protestant theology provided important resources for those who saw in experimental science the key to human progress.
Merton him  self could not discount statistical data, which indicated that, of the foreign associates of the French Academy of Sciences during the period 1666–1885, only eighteen had been Catholics, against eighty Protestants — despite Europe's far larger Catholic population.
Detailed studies of English science during the period of the puritan domination have also revealed plans for a national agency to supervise technological innovation — plans that had taken shape in the mind of Samuel Hartlib.
The English nation, wrote the parliamentarian soldier Walter Blith, ‘might be made the paradise of the World, if we can but bring ingenuity into fashion.’
An efflorescence of scientific publication in the period 1645–1660 — especially in agriculture, mathematics, and medicine — suggests that ingenuity did, for a while, come into fashion.
Because good works were required of a puritan as a duty of thanksgiving, the appeal of Bacon's arguments to the intellectual leaders of the English Revolution can be readily understood.
Bacon had insisted that the ‘rule of religion that a man should justify his faith by works applies also in natural philosophy; knowledge should be proved by its works.’
The case for strong parallels between religious and scientific reform can therefore be made to appear quite plausible.
But, in seeking to test the correlation, problems soon arise.
The most obvious test would be to identify the religious allegiance of Europe's most illustrious natural philosophers of the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
A high preponderance of Protestant ascetics might then be suggestive.
This is not, however, what one finds.
Indeed, catalogs of Catholic contributions have been compiled to challenge the view that a Protestant spirituality provided distinctive motivation for scientific work.
The value of such catalogs is that they prevent too parochial a view of the scientific effort.
But they do not decide the issue because many of the Catholic scholars listed may have experienced the frustration of censorship to a degree not experienced by their Protestant contemporaries.
In one such list the Jesuit astronomer Christopher Scheiner is included for his discovery of the sunspots.
But there is no mention of the fact that Scheiner was put under pressure by his superiors to curb his anti-Aristotelian conjectures.
A second difficulty with this most obvious method of testing is that, even if a preponderance of Protestants were to emerge, it would not follow that it was their religious convictions that supplied the motivation for their science.
Merton  himself was aware of the problem when he raised this question: Merton's answer was that both processes were at work, but to an unknown extent.
The problem in a nutshell is whether particular forms of scientific and religious commitment might not separately depend on ulterior forces of social and economic change.
It is striking, for example, that detailed studies of the relations between religious dissent and the promotion of science in eighteenth-century Britain have located the correlation in expanding northern towns such as Manchester where the ulterior forces were population growth, increase in wealth, a certain social and geographical isolation, a zest for political reform, and a concern for moral values prompted by the seamier side of city life.
To establish a correlation is not necessarily to establish a connection.
Perhaps a more sensitive test would be to examine the writings of puritans who did take an interest in science in seventeenth-century England to see what connections they did make in their schemes for reform.
But there are problems even with this more sophisticated test, because it could be argued that to examine those who were as a matter of fact interested in science is to skew the sample.
If the object is to determine whether a puritan spirituality was conducive to scientific activity, it would surely be necessary to take into account the far larger body of puritans who were not so enthralled by the book of nature.
The problem then becomes that when the puritan literature of the early seventeenth century is examined, the seeds of what might prove a flowering of science are difficult to find.
To puritan divines such as William Perkins and William Pemble, it was not self-evident that the works of science were good works.
An awareness of God's contrivance in the intricate designs of nature might confound the atheist, but it did not point him toward the God who had entered into covenant with sinful humanity.
There was nothing in natural knowledge that, in Pemble's words, could ‘set straight the wryed and distorted image of God in us’; nothing that might assist the soul in  achieving its sanctification.
Add to this the imperfection of scientific knowledge, and it would then take a low place in the stratification of priorities.
For puritan divines, the salvation of the human soul was of overriding importance, which suggests that some readjustment of priorities might be necessary for those who valued the study of nature.
Perhaps a more decisive test would be to examine the composition of England's first enduring scientific institution, the Royal Society, founded shortly after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660.
In fact such a test has been performed to challenge Merton's contention that there was a puritan majority among its early members.
From a sample of 162 eventual fellows of the society who had been over sixteen in 1642, and therefore old enough to have taken sides in the civil war, and discounting foreigners not in England during the war years (and a further 22 for whom there is inadequate documentation), 38 fought for, or supported, Parliament, while 85 were royalist in 1642.
The high proportion of royalists looks embarrassing not only for Merton's thesis but for variants of it which have claimed that it was the political radicalism (not the puritanism) of the parliamentary radicals that made them receptive to revolutionary science.
As few as one in twenty of the sample could be described as a utilitarian scientist of puritan middle-class background.
Only three ministers in the sample were puritan enough to be ejected from their livings after 1660.
The author of the test, Lotte Mulligan, has therefore concluded:
But how decisive are such statistical data?
Because the early Royal Society contained many passive members, encouraged for their lucre or social luster, would it not be a more sensitive test if the sample were restricted to the active nucleus?
Of the ten most active fellows (including Robert Boyle, Jonathan Goddard, Henry Oldenburg, William Petty, John Wilkins, Lord Brouncker, Walter Charleton, John Evelyn, Sir Robert Moray, and Christopher Wren), the first five had collaborated with the parliamentarian regime, suggesting a higher proportion of puritan involvement than that indicated by the larger sample.
And to compound the difficulty of how best  to interpret the statistics, the author of the test has conceded that physicians, instrument makers, naval experts, agricultural reformers, and general applied scientists are more often to be found among the parliamentarians in the sample.
The suggestion that the typical science enthusiast was Anglican and not politically radical does not of course affect the wider generalization that Protestant cultures were more amenable to freedom of thought.
But it may imply that the kind of Protestant spirituality, for which the term puritan is commonly used, was not the only catalyst for the expansion of science.
Perhaps a certain detachment from puritan enthusiasm, an insistence on moderation and toleration on religious issues, defined the mentality that most often coincided with an interest in science in seventeenth-century England.
John Wilkins, whom we encountered earlier, would illustrate this alternative correlation.
Willing to side with Parliament against Charles I, he had not wished to see the king executed.
Wishing to rid the Anglican Church of the influence of Archbishop Laud, he would not go along with more zealous reformers who wished to break away.
Deeply committed to the pursuit of mathematics and the physical sciences, he stood up for the universities when they were attacked by vituperative radicals such as Cromwell's army chaplain, John Webster.
The moderate Anglicanism for which Wilkins stood is sometimes described as ‘latitudinarian,’ to indicate a breadth of mind and an attitude of religious toleration, at variance with the demands of puritan enthusiasts, whose overbearing self-assurance on the finer points of doctrine could be distasteful.
The idea of a correlation between a latitudinarian and a scientific mentality can be appealing.
They could be bound together by the belief, found in Bacon, that religious controversies were an impediment to science.
There could be a suspicion of dogma, whether religious or scientific.
And science itself might be seen as an instrument of religious union in that all parties could agree on the existence of a Creator whose power was visible in nature.
In Wilkins one finds an elaborate and adaptable theory of knowledge, which differentiated between fundamental truths, provisional hypotheses, and areas of uncertainty in both scientific and religious domains.
But we are still left with the problem of testing.
And in this case it is particularly acute because to set up a typology in which science correlates with religious moderation risks the objection that what one means by moderation  is going to change according to political circumstances.
With the proliferation of puritan sects during the 1640s and 1650s, there was so great a range of extreme demands, from the nationalization of land to the emancipation of women, that it would be surprising if the natural philosophers had not begun to appear as moderates.
Following the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, it would have been surprising if apologists for the newly founded Royal Society had emphasized a puritan lineage.
In his History of the Royal Society (1667) Thomas Sprat reclaimed the name of Francis Bacon from the hands of puritan visionaries and reaffirmed the role of an inductive method, which, by promoting consensus rather than disputation, was at one with the quest for political stability.
The main thread running through this chapter has been the difficulty of testing hypotheses that link the reform of science to the reform of religion.
That there are the difficulties we have uncovered does not mean that the hypotheses linking Protestantism to the expansion of science are necessarily false.
But it does suggest the need for caution when faced with claims that a particular form of Christian piety was uniquely propitious.
Certain developments in seventeenth-century science did prove more difficult for Catholic authorities to assimilate.
A Copernican cosmology, as defended by Galileo, is the outstanding example.
In the following chapter we shall encounter another: the recovery of an atomic theory of matter, which played a significant role in the mechanization of nature.
But such is the fascination of the story that we shall find Catholic scholars in the vanguard of those who sought that very mechanization.