

1913
The man who was to kill her mother rode calmly up the drive of the great house.
He was mounted on a chestnut thoroughbred who was already becoming over-excited at the thought of the day ahead.
His companion rode side-saddle, a beautiful dark-eyed girl in a shiny top hat and immaculate riding habit, mounted on a pure bred iron-grey Arab.
As they rounded the final bend in the long drive and the house came into view, the man reined back his horse, as did his companion.
‘I always think,’ the man said, ‘that Brougham is almost impossibly perfect.’
‘I actually prefer Chatsworth,’ the girl replied.
‘If I had to choose.’
‘Too grand,’ the young man said.
‘Superb but much too grand.
The charm of Brougham is that one can live in it.’
They lingered a few moments more to admire the Palladian house which stood before them, beyond an ornamental lake crossed by a fine stone bridge, lying in a fold of the rolling parkland, as if held in the palm of a vast green hand.
‘What I love about it,’ the young man said, leaning forward in his saddle, ‘is its symmetry.
The balance of the two wings, those wonderful colonnades, and of course that exquisite pillared portico.’
‘Yes,’ his companion agreed, adjusting her top hat, ‘it's very pretty.
But I really would rather have Chatsworth.’
The young man's horse, grown fretful with the wait, pawed the ground and started to back away.
‘Come on,’ said his rider, ‘or we shall miss all the gossip.’
As always with the opening meet there was a splendid turnout, with every invitation issued by the 4th Earl of Deverill, master and owner of the Brougham Foxhounds, having been eagerly accepted.
The weather was perfect, and a small army of servants, dressed in plum coloured livery, moved through the mounted followers carrying stirrup cups borne high on silver salvers.
The brindle hounds, John Deverill's speciality and obsession, stood well to order at one side of the drive with the whippers-in waiting as patiently as they could for the order to move off.
‘Wonderful weather, Lady Deverill!’ the young man called to his victim as he cantered through the iron gates and reined his horse back to a walk.
‘Perfect, I'd say!’
Lady Mary smiled at the young man as he doffed his topper to her, and walked her horse on, uncertain for a moment of her guest's identity.
She knew the girl who accompanied him well enough, but her companion's face escaped her.
‘That's one of the Stanhope-Murray boys,’ a friend told her.
‘Charming and utterly feckless and, let it be said, a bit of a ‘thruster’.’
Lady Mary laughed.
‘Thank you!’ she called over her shoulder.
‘I shall do my best to avoid him when hounds are running!’
Looking back at the crowd at the foot of the great stone double staircase, she suddenly caught sight of the familiar blonde head of her daughter and called the nursemaid, who was holding her up to get a better view of all the excitement, to bring her over.
The girl handed her charge to Nanny, who immediately straightened the child's dress and re-tied her hair ribbon.
‘Thank you, Rosie,’ Nanny said to her subordinate, before calling for a way through the throng of servants who had gathered to see hounds move off.
Lady Mary smiled when she saw her daughter, and bent down towards her from her horse.
‘Do you want to stroke Capers’ nose, darling?’she whispered.
‘You know how Capers loves you doing that.’
Nanny walked to the front of the handsome grey gelding and the child put out a small hand to rub his silk-soft muzzle.
The horse pushed his nose upwards and snorted, spraying the little girl and making her laugh with delight.
‘You see?’ her mother told her.
‘You see how much he loves you?
Nearly as much as I do, my darling,’ she added.
She bent down to kiss her child.
‘But not quite, because I love you far too much.’
The little girl would always remember that moment, and the picture of her mother, so beautiful and so elegant in her top hat and long dark riding habit, mounted side-saddle on her famous grey hunter.
It would stay with her for the rest of her life.
Nanny hoisted her higher in her arms as the huntsman blew his horn and the hounds moved off.
For a moment she lost her mother in the crowd of horses and riders and foot followers, as people jostled for the best position, or to ride alongside their fancy.
Then she saw her once more, as she checked her horse in the melee before easing him through to take up their regular position at the front.
There was one last wave as they crossed the stone bridge before swinging away right, up the long gentle pull which led to the first draw.
Lady Mary Deverill, now clear of the pack and alongside her husband, reined Capers back into a half-rear, blew her daughter an extravagant kiss, raised her hand in the air, and was gone forever.
Early on that morning that very same morning in October 1913, anyone walking or motoring down Westfield Drive, Boston, Massachusetts, would never have given any of the houses a second glance, so ordinary were they, and none more so than number 1015, a clapboard house like all  the others in the street, only one which was in even more urgent need of repainting than most of its neighbours.
The small grass lawn at the front was overgrown, the wooden verandah running from the porch along the front of the house had several posts missing, and the catch on the outer porch door was broken, so that it swung open and shut with a groan and a bang in the ever freshening wind.
A woman arriving at the house fiddled with the lock as she waited for someone to let her in, but finally, with a despairing gesture, gave up the attempt to fix it long before she was admitted.
Next door, in the house on the right, someone had been watching the visitor's arrival from the side of an upstairs window, a middle-aged woman with a startling mass of red hair piled high above a powdered face with a well rouged mouth and plucked and pencilled eyebrows, a woman dressed in a dark crimson gown, of the kind which some years before would have been described in fashionable circles as ‘tea gowns’.
She was holding a net curtain to one side with the gold-ringed fingers of one hand, while in the other hand she held to her mouth a long white ebony cigarette holder on which she drew constantly as she watched the visitor enter her neighbour's house.
Then she waited with a slight frown on her pale white face, as if she might learn something by waiting.
But when she heard or saw nothing more, she dropped the net drape back into place, to disappear once more into the darkness of her house.
Outside number 1015 the rest of the world came and went, while the porch door swung open and shut even more frequently, as the October wind strengthened, forcing the few passers-by to bend into what was now turning into a gale and to clutch at their hats.
So when the cry came, that first cry which heralds life, had anyone been passing the house at that moment, it is doubtful that they would have heard it.
What they might have heard however, had they been passing ten minutes later, even  above the noise of the traffic and the raging of the wind, was a roar of someone in pain, a great and agonizing cry.
The red-haired woman in the house next door most certainly heard it, and hurried to another upstairs window to look out the back, for the cry seemed to have come from the yard of her neighbour's house.
And sure enough, there her neighbour was, standing half dressed in his yard, with both fists clenched and raised to the skies as he demanded to know of his God why He had chosen to take his wife.
No-one ever told Artemis Deverill that her mother had been killed out hunting that fine October morning, knocked from her horse by the young Stanhope-Murray boy as he tried to thrust his way past her, jumping a hedge and instantly breaking her neck.
Later Artemis was told in many indirect ways that her mother was dead, but on the day of the accident she was kept in ignorance.
Of course, she was aware that something had happened, and that whatever it was, was wrong.
She knew this from the hushed voices of the nursery staff and from the comings and goings far below her in the great house.
Years later, all that she would remember of that fateful day were two things.
First, the sight of one of the huntsmen galloping at full speed up the drive, over the bridge and in through the ornamental gates, throwing himself off his still cantering horse, and running into the house through one of the entrances below the main staircase.
‘There's been an accident,’ one of the nursemaids, catching sight of him, called excitedly.
‘There must have been an accident.’
Artemis had been busy drawing, sitting on the window seat of the nursery, high up on the third floor of the family wing.
She was drawing a house, a house which had just four windows, one chimney and one door, while Nanny, full of nursery lunch, dozed by the fire.
Having finished it, Artemis then sat gazing at her drawing, trying to imagine what it would be like to live in a house with  just four windows, one chimney and one door, with just her mother, and perhaps even her father.
When she too heard the clatter of the galloping horse far below she went to the window, but there was no longer anything to see and only the sound of the nursemaids chattering.
The second thing Artemis remembered was being put to bed very early, so early that tea had hardly been cleared.
That night, unlike other nights, Nanny sat and stroked her head and held her hand.
‘There's been an accident,’ she kept saying.
‘There's been a dreadful accident.’
Artemis had a vague idea as to what accidents were.
They were things like a servant getting shot in the chest when a big party went out shooting, or a boat capsizing on the lake, nearly drowning the four occupants.
But this accident must be something far more serious, because all the nursery maids were crying, and so, when she looked through the bannisters on her way to bed, were the servants downstairs.
‘What is it please, Nanny?’ she tried to ask when Nanny was tucking her in.
‘Please, what has happened?’
‘Just go to sleep, child,’ Nanny replied.
‘Go to sleep and your papa will come and see you in the morning.’
Artemis lay in the darkened room.
Her father never came up to the nursery floor.
It was unheard of.
She knew then it was her mother who must have been hurt.
She called out for someone, but no-one came.
She called again and again.
Eventually Rosie, the youngest of the nursery maids, pushed the door open a fraction, a handkerchief to her face.
‘Go to sleep, pet.’
‘What's happened, Rosie?’
‘You'll find out in the morning,’ Rosie replied, her voice floating towards Artemis through the handkerchief.
‘You just go to sleep, pet.’
In the morning her father arrived up in the nursery.
Artemis knew it was him before she saw him, because even before he was in the room everyone stood up, and  Nanny as always straightened Artemis's dress, tugging at the back.
He dismissed the nursery staff with peremptory wave of his index finger, leaving only Artemis alone with him.
‘Yes,’ he said, after clearing his throat.
‘Look here, there's been a bit of an accident.
Couldn't be helped.
One of those things, I'm afraid.’
Artemis frowned, but said nothing, wondering what was to come.
Her mother had fallen off Capers, that much she knew.
And that was why everyone had been lying.
For a moment her father said nothing more either he just stood with his hands clasped behind him, looking up at the ceiling.
Artemis attempted a smile to reassure him that she at least wasn't going to let him down by crying, but he paid her no attention.
Instead, he turned away to stare at the picture of her mother which was on the chest of drawers.
He picked it up and held it away from him while he looked at it.
Then he replaced it.
Nice picture,’ he said finally.
‘Very nice indeed.
Anyway.
About the accident.’
He cleared his throat once more and resumed staring up at the ceiling.
‘Happened when we were out, do you see.
Nasty business.
And the long and the short of it I'm afraid is, your mother's gone.’
He turned and walked over to the window where he stood looking out with his hands clasped behind his back.
Artemis didn't understand what he meant, but dared not ask him.
‘So there you are,’ her father concluded, once again clearing his throat.
‘Terrible business, I'm afraid, but there you are.
These things will happen.’
He left without turning back, without looking at her.
When Nanny returned at last Artemis asked her what father had meant by saying her mother had gone.
Because I'm afraid she has, dear,’ Nanny replied.
She's gone where we all must follow.’
‘I see,’ Artemis said, without seeing.
‘But where, Nanny? she gone?’
‘She's crossed over, dear,’ Nanny sighed, ‘gone to Kingdom come.
Your poor mother has been gathered.’
‘Will I ever see her again, Nanny?
If she's gone?’
‘Of course you will, dear.
We all will.’
She nodded briskly.
‘Time for your walk.’
That night Artemis prayed silently to God that if she was going to see her mother, then she hoped it would be soon.
They buried Lady Mary Deverill without her daughter knowing.
It had been decided that the child was too young to understand and as a result she might suffer unpleasant after-effects, rather as people tend to do after eating something which disagrees with them.
So prior to the funeral, which was to be held in the church attached to the great house, Artemis was despatched with her nanny to Scotland, to stay with relations in a remote castle, where once more no reference whatsoever was made to the tragedy.
It was all intended for the best.
The reasoning behind it being that she would not be able to come to terms with the notion of her mother being dead, so by removing her from the place where the tragedy had occurred and allowing enough time to pass, she would better be able to come to terms with her loss.
It was also to be hoped, her father told her nanny prior to their departure, that by the time his daughter was returned to Brougham, the memory of her mother would already be fading.
In the very same week as Lady Mary Deverill was being laid to her final rest in the family churchyard at Brougham, across the Atlantic Ocean, in the statue packed graveyard of the Church of St Peter and St Paul, Westfield, Boston, Massachusetts, the recently bereaved Patrick Milligan entertained a very different hope from the father of the little girl in England.
For as he watched the cheap pine coffin being lowered into the frosty ground, Patrick Joseph Garrett Milligan vowed that the person responsible for the untimely death of his beautiful  wife Kathleen should live to regret, forever and always, the moment of her wretched birth.
On the eve of her seventh birthday, Nanny told Artemis that she had been invited downstairs that very afternoon to take tea with her father.
The thought of such a thing terrified the child.
She had hardly seen her father in all the weeks since returning from Scotland, nearly five months after the ‘accident’ as it was known.
Once the hunting season was over he had gone straight off to Ireland to fish, and then, on the outbreak of war, had promptly rejoined his regiment, and as their colonel-in-chief had made several sorties to France during the next three years.
When he wasn't abroad, he was at his house in London.
He rarely seemed either to have the time or the inclination to return to Brougham.
Artemis saw her father twice during all this time.
The first time she was playing marbles with Rosie in the saloon, when the double doors swung open and he appeared as if from nowhere, a tall and very upright figure, still in his colonel's uniform.
Rosie at once scrambled to her feet, the marbles she had in her lap dropping and clattering over the polished wood floors.
Artemis, down on her knees, just turned round and stared for a moment, before Rosie took her hand and pulled her to her feet.
‘Excuse us, your lordship,’ Rosie apologized.
‘But, like, no-one said you was home.’
‘Perfectly all right, girl,’ Lord Deverill replied, after a moment spent staring at Artemis.
‘That's perfectly all right.
Carry on.’
Then with a couple of brief nods at them both, he crossed the saloon and left through the other double doors.
Artemis and Rosie both stood in silent uncertainty for a moment before Rosie began to pick up the marbles and put them back in their small cloth sack.
Artemis helped her and they both instinctively began to hurry, lest Artemis's father should return and find them still  there, even though he had given his permission.
Then they ran out of the saloon and up the backstairs as quickly as they could, to resume their game in the safety of the nursery.
The other time Artemis saw him was one day when she and Nanny were returning from a walk by the lake.
Her father was just leaving in a blue Rolls-Royce.
The car didn't stop as it passed them.
It barely slowed down.
Nanny held Artemis aside and told her to wave, which she did.
Her father raised his hand once, hardly sparing a second glance.
Artemis, on tiptoes, saw there was another person in the back of the car, a woman with bobbed blonde hair, wearing a pale fur coat, and smoking a cigarette.
She too waved briefly at Artemis and smiled fleetingly, before the Rolls swept away and finally out of view.
And now Artemis was to go to tea downstairs with her father.
‘What shall I say?’ she asked Nanny.
‘You won't have to say anything,’ Nanny reassured her, smoothing down her best dress.
‘Speak when you're spoken to, but otherwise don't say a word.
Little children should just be seen, you know that.
Seen but not heard.’
‘I feel sick, Nanny,’ Artemis complained.
‘Of course you do, child,’ Nanny replied.
‘But never mind, never mind.
Just speak when spoken to, that's all.
Speak when spoken to and you'll be fine.’
Tea had been laid in the blue drawing room, a vast room dominated by two huge chandeliers and an enormous portrait of Henry VIII after Holbein, which hung over the fireplace.
Lord Deverill was standing down the far end of the room, staring out of a window across the estate.
The butler had opened the door to announce them, but even before he had finished, Artemis's father cut him short.
‘Thank you!’ he called.
‘That will do, thank you!’
Nanny left once she had pushed Artemis into the room.
There was no-one else there, just a maid, whom Artemis couldn't remember ever seeing before, waiting to serve tea.
‘Good,’ her father called from his window.
‘Come to tea, right?
Good.
So give her a lemonade, will you?
And a fancy or whatever.’
In response to his instructions, the maid pulled up a chair for the little girl, and Artemis carefully sat on the edge of it, her legs still too short to reach the floor.
The maid then shook out a large linen table napkin which she placed across the lap of Artemis's best frock.
Still her father stared out of the window.
‘Treating you all right, I suppose?’ he asked suddenly.
‘Yes thank you, Papa,’ Artemis replied, not understanding at all what her father meant.
‘Jolly good,’ he said.
‘Well done.’
There was a long silence, during which the maid offered her a muffin from under a silver dish.
Artemis took one and quickly started to eat it.
They never had muffins in the nursery.
‘So there you are then,’ her father said, breaking the silence.
‘So it's your sixth birthday tomorrow then.
Jolly good.’
‘No it's my seventh, Papa,’ Artemis said.
‘Tomorrow I shall be seven.’
‘Oh well,’ her father sighed, without looking round.
‘It'll all be the same in a thousand years.’
He paused and reclasped his hands behind his back.
‘Expect you'd like to make a day of it, yes?’
Artemis frowned at her father, away up the room and then nodded.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Yes please, Papa.’
‘Good.
Point is, won't be here for tea.
Got to get back to London.’
Her father took a silver case from his pocket and withdrew a cigarette, which he tapped on a thumbnail before putting it in his mouth and lighting it.
‘No, got to get back to London, do you see.
For dinner.
So thought we'd go for a ride in the morning.
Jenkins  says you're quite useful on that pony of yours.
Yes?’
‘I don't know, Papa,’ Artemis answered, brushing some cake crumbs off her dress.
‘What Jenkins says.’
‘I'd love to go riding though.
Please.’
Her father tapped the ash off his cigarette into his cupped hand and then blew it into the air.
‘Good.
That's all fixed then.
Good.’
He cleared his throat and continued to stare out of the window for a couple of moments longer.
‘Good,’ he said finally, then turned on his heel and left the room.
Since her father had not stipulated the exact time when they were to ride, Artemis was dressed and in the stables at first light lest she miss her treat by being late.
Jenkins, just too old for combat, was the only groom left at Brougham, but he was already up and mucking out the boxes, for he still had six horses to do.
The best half dozen hunters were still in, even though there was no hunting and no-one to ride them except Jenkins and a girl groom seconded from the village.
The rest of the animals had been roughed off and turned away in a distant paddock.
The young staff might have all gone to Flanders, but Lord Deverill's horses had not yet been volunteered.
‘I in't done Buttons yet, your ladyship,’ Jenkins apologized when he saw Artemis.
‘I just in't 'ad the time.’
‘It's all right,’ Artemis replied.
‘I'll do him.
I like doing him.’
They barely talked while Jenkins started to groom a tall strong chestnut for his master and Artemis groomed her dark bay pony.
They had both animals ready and saddled up in half an hour, which was as well, because five minutes later, on the stroke of half past seven, Lord Deverill himself arrived, accompanied by four couples of hounds.
‘Thought we might have a bit of sport,’ he announced generally.
‘Hounds could do with a run.’
‘Don't you go too bold now,’ Jenkins muttered to Artemis as he checked her girths.
‘Don't you go trying to do anything beyond you.’
‘Let her ladyship do that, man!’
Lord Deverill called as he swung himself effortlessly into the saddle.
‘Otherwise if she kills herself it'll be your doing!’
‘The catches be a bit tight on these little saddles, your lordship,’ Jenkins replied, continuing to check the buckles.
‘They're that tight they needs strong fingers.’
‘Ready?’
Lord Deverill asked his daughter, as if Jenkins had not even spoken.
‘Yes, Papa,’ Artemis said, as Buttons put in a good-natured buck.
‘Your hands are too high,’ her father said.
‘You're riding.
Not driving.’
Then he kicked his horse forward and led on out of the yard.
It was a beautiful November morning, cold but clear.
The hounds' and the horses' breath lay on the air, while a light frost still crisped the grass.
Artemis put her heels down, straightened her back and softened her rein, so that by the time she caught her father up, she had Buttons perfectly controlled.
Her father glanced down at her, but said nothing.
Instead he kicked his horse on into a canter behind the hounds.
Artemis followed suit and they headed away from the house up a long pull which led to a covert known as the King's Bushes.
As they rode, Artemis pushing Buttons on to keep pace with the free-striding chestnut, her father never spoke.
Whenever she rode out with Jenkins, he always called to her what they were about to do, whether they were going to trot, or canter, jump or gallop.
Her father said nothing.
He just, on occasion, looked over to see how she was going, and then rode on.
He didn't even nominate their first jump, which was a three-foot post and rails.
He simply put his horse at it, then rode on.
Fortunately Artemis had often jumped this particular fence with Jenkins, and Buttons sailed over it, which was as well since there was no other way forward.
Next they met a  small brook which Artemis and Buttons had also jumped previously, and which they flew again, and finally, before reaching the King's Bushes, they met a low but wide hedge.
Buttons reached for it and it wasn't until they were flying it that Artemis saw the four-foot drop the other side.
Ahead, her father's horse had pecked slightly on landing, throwing his rider up his neck.
Buttons landed perfectly and came away from the jump so well that by the time her father had collected himself and his horse Artemis and Buttons were alongside them.
‘Good,’ Lord Deverill said as they drew up.
‘Yes, that's the ticket.’
They waited a long time while the hounds drew the covert.
Artemis's father smoked a cigarette and said nothing.
Early on Buttons fidgeted, earning a look of disapproval from Lord Deverill.
Artemis sat back, heels down, and he quickly settled.
Then the absolute quiet of the early morning was broken by the sound of hounds suddenly giving tongue.
‘Right,’ Lord Deverill said.
‘Seems they've found.’
The hounds crashed out of the far side of the covert and swung away from Artemis and her father uphill.
Ahead of them, Artemis got her first view of a fox in full flight, and found herself hesitating.
Even from that distance, she could sense the feeling of panic as the animal flew across the open fields, its brush stuck out straight behind it.
Then there was no time for further thought, as Buttons, excited by the baying of the hounds and the sound of Lord Deverill's hunting horn on which he was blowing a thrilling series of quick notes, took hold of his bit and flew.
Artemis battled for control, but it was a fight soon lost, and from then on she was a passenger as her pony galloped in hot pursuit of horse, hound and fox.
Ahead, her father was riding alongside the hounds, at full stretch.
But he was taking a cautious line, mindful of the child behind him.
Instead of flying the hedges he went for gateways or gaps and Artemis, seeing what he  was doing, managed to steer her bolting pony on the same course.
They ran through field after field, with the hounds all the time slowly gaining on the fox.
And then suddenly, just as Artemis felt Buttons was beginning to tire and that she was regaining control, as they topped a hill and began the run down the opposite side, a hedge loomed up in front of her, divided by a solid looking five-bar gate which was firmly closed.
She was still some way behind her father's horse, whom she saw her father checking as he realized there was no way through.
The hounds, however, having wriggled under and through the gate, were still running, streaming away from them across the next field as the fox headed for the nearby covert.
Artemis saw her father turn his horse towards her and raise a hand.
‘Stop!’ he shouted.
‘Pull up, girl!
There's no way through!’
Artemis sat back and pulled on her reins as hard as she could.
But Buttons still had hold and if anything quickened as he galloped at the hedge.
Artemis could hear her father still calling to her to turn her pony, but there was nothing she could do.
The hedge was fast approaching, looking too big, far too big for Buttons to jump on his own.
So instead of closing her eyes and praying, Artemis opened them wide and kicked on.
Buttons arched his back and leapt.
Artemis threw the reins at his head so that nothing would check him.
She didn't even look down.
She just looked through her pony's ears at where she hoped he would land.
Which he did, a good two feet clear of the gaping open ditch which lay on the blind side of the hedge.
Lord Deverill, having watched in silence, seeing his daughter was safe, popped his big horse over the gate and galloped on to the covert where hounds had checked, and so too finally had Buttons.
‘I think the fox has gone to ground, Papa,’ Artemis said breathlessly, pointing into the woods.
‘In that hole over there.’
‘Fair enough,’ her father replied.
‘We'll give him best.’
Picking up his hounds, Lord Deverill turned his horse and started to walk away from the covert, followed by Artemis.
They left the field by a different route, going out through a hunting gate on the far side, before swinging back alongside the woods at the top of the park.
‘Good pony you've got there, young lady,’ Artemis's father said to her some time later, as they walked quietly on.
‘That was a quick thing, you know.
That was a dashed quick thing.’
And that was all that was said on the way home.
Artemis's father broke the silence now and then by humming tunelessly to himself, but he never spoke another word, not even after they had ridden into the yard and handed their horses over to Jenkins.
And Artemis had never been happier in all her life.
It wasn't until they had climbed the stone steps leading up to the house that she learned the truth of the matter.
‘That last hedge you jumped,’ her father said, breaking another seemingly endless silence as he stopped and stared up at the facade of the great house.
‘That was the hedge that accounted for your mother.’
Eleanor Mary Milligan, as she was hastily christened the same week her mother was buried, seemed to know from the moment she came into this world at number 1015 Westfield Avenue that in order to survive she must be good and quiet, and not be any trouble to her father or brothers.
In fact she was such a quiet baby that sometimes when her father came home drunk on Friday nights he would fondly imagine she had joined her blessed mother in heaven.
‘God love us,’ he would mutter as he stumbled upstairs, ‘and now wouldn't that be a thing?
Wouldn't it only be right that she should go, too?’
Some nights he would stand by Eleanor's cot, convinced she had stopped breathing, and do nothing.
He  never tried to wake her, instead he would just stand and watch and pray that the angels had in fact gathered her and justice had been done.
But then the baby would stir in its sleep and put up one tiny pink hand, perhaps seeking for something to hold on to.
Patrick Milligan would sigh despairingly as if God had deserted him, before wandering drunkenly off to his own, now single, bed, where he lay cursing his miserable lot before falling into a deep and whisky sodden sleep.
Having lost her mother the moment she was born, the baby needed a nursemaid, so Patrick Milligan had hired the rat-faced Mrs MacDonagh who lived opposite.
For the first month of her life Mrs MacDonagh had taken the baby into her own house, along with Eleanor's eighteen-month-old brother Patrick, and she had bottle fed the baby and kept an eye on her brother amidst the debris of her own life and the squalor of her enormous family.
Once the feeding routine had been established, the baby and her brother were returned home at nights, since Mr MacDonagh, who worked with Eleanor's father as a building worker, had threatened to leave home if his wife got up once more in the middle of the night to feed a child which wasn't their own.
So it was agreed that while Mrs MacDonagh would go on looking after the two youngest Milligans during the day, Dermot, Fergal and Mike, the eldest brothers, would take over as soon as they were back from school.
Not surprisingly, neither of the older boys appreciated their extra duties.
With their mother gone they already had more than their fair share of shopping and cooking.
Inevitably they took out their frustrations on Ellie and ‘Patsy’, as they had nick-named their youngest brother, leaving it to him to remember his sister's bottle when the others had left her crying, or to make endless attempts to keep her amused.
Mrs MacDonagh certainly had no love for children, even her own, and absolutely no time at all for young Ellie.
And forced as she was by circumstances to bring  her own dirty and vicious brood to work with her, she took a great pleasure in letting them loose on the two youngest Milligans, deliberately ignoring their torments and teases.
Patsy was a sickly child, growing very little in the first few years of his life.
Weak and under-nourished, he barely survived a dose of diphtheria, which left him weaker than before, and an even softer target for the torments of his three hefty brothers.
The greatest laugh they enjoyed was pretending Patsy was a little girl.
They would hide all his own clothes and, having forced him to wear his sister's, they would lock him out in the street to be chased and bullied by the neighbourhood gangs.
When they were feeling particularly spiteful, they would blindfold the ‘two sisters’ as they were known and, as darkness fell, leave them in some unknown part of the neighbourhood to find their own way home.
Little wonder that Ellie learned from an early age to defend Patsy in any way she could.
Certainly, no day of their early childhood ever ended without one or both of them being beaten up by someone.
Their father made no attempt to intercede.
On the contrary, he went out of his way to encourage his three eldest boys, the ‘broth’ as he called them, in their bullying.
‘Tell us,’ their father would ask the ‘broth’nightly.
‘And what have your sisters been doing today?’— The ‘broth’ would laugh, and while they were laughing would kick and pinch the two youngest under the table,— and while Ellie and Patsy were rubbing their bruises, steal the food off their plates.
This constant persecution only served to throw Ellie and Patsy together.
They came to the kind of unspoken understanding real twins enjoy.
They soon learned not to talk when just a look would do, and even when separated, each seemed to know instinctively when the other was in trouble.
This particularly infuriated Dermot, the pack leader, and sometimes he would knock Patsy  about so badly that finally his father told him off, not for hitting the little boy, but because Patsy's subsequent sobs kept Patrick Milligan senior from his sleep.
When her fourth birthday dawned, Ellie secretly hoped that it might be a day just a little different from all the others.
She had seen her three elder brothers enjoying their birthdays and being fussed over by their father, but neither  her nor Patsy's birthday had ever been celebrated.
When she woke up that morning, with just a small hope in the corner of her heart, she found Patsy already awake, sitting upright in the old cot they still shared, his dark brown eyes shining with excitement from under his mop of brown hair.
‘Happy birthday, Ellie,’ he whispered, handing her a gift.
‘That's for you.’
Ellie opened it.
It was a birthday card, hand-made by her brother out of cardboard.
He had painted a greeting on the front and inside had drawn a picture of an animal and signed his name.
‘That's a dog,’ he grinned.
‘In case you didn't know.’
‘Thank you, Patsy,’ Ellie whispered back.
‘I shall keep it for ever and ever.’
She tucked the precious card under her pillow and then got out of her cot to get dressed.
Both she and Patsy still had to sleep in a cot because their father had not bothered as yet to buy them each a proper bed.
They both got dressed, quickly and silently, and then tiptoed out of the bedroom and down the white painted wooden staircase.
It was a Saturday, their father was sleeping in, as were their three elder brothers, so for once they had some time to play by themselves, which they did in the yard.
They played hopscotch, their favourite, in the ever brightening sunshine, throwing a white pebble into the boxes they had marked out on the ground, and then trying to hop to where the pebble landed without touching any lines.
‘'Allo?’
A voice called to them from above.
Both children stopped playing and looked up to see who had called them.
It was their next door neighbour, the woman with the red hair.
She was standing and smiling down at them from an upstairs window.
‘Would you like some cookies maybe?’ she asked.
‘I 'ave made some.
So if you like, come and I will let you in the kitchen.’
Patsy looked at Ellie to see what they should do.
No-one had ever offered them cookies before, particularly not their strange-sounding neighbour, whom they hardly ever saw.
‘It's all right!’ the woman laughed, as if guessing their thoughts.
‘I shall not eat you!’
Then with a beckoning wave she disappeared from the window.
Encouraged by their neighbour's cheeriness, Ellie and her brother went round to the back of her house and shyly waited to be let in.
After a moment the woman threw open the door.
‘Voila !’ she said.
Neither Ellie nor Patsy knew where to look, because the woman was still in her dressing gown.
So they both stared religiously at the ground pink-faced.
Their father never opened their front door without first pulling on his coat, no matter what state he was in, and none of the boys were ever allowed to admit a visitor while they or anyone else was in a state of undress.
‘Good 'eavens!’ the woman laughed.
‘Whatever is wrong?
You have never seen a woman in her peignoir before?’
Ellie wasn't at all sure what a peignoir was, but if it was what the woman was wearing, no she most certainly had not.
Nonetheless, she remained silent.
‘Come, come,’ their neighbour said, taking them both by the hand.
‘Do not be shy.’
And she led them inside her house and through to her kitchen.
‘There,’ she said, taking a jar from the sideboard and placing it on the table.
‘Please.
You 'ave just as many as you like.’
Patsy looked at Ellie and Ellie looked at Patsy, but neither moved.
The woman waited with a smile on her face, then sighed and took a cookie out for herself, from which she then took a good bite.
‘OK?’ she asked.
‘They are not poison !’
Then she laughed out loud and turned away to find her cigarettes.
As she did both Ellie and Patsy stuck their hands into the jar together for the delicious looking cookies.
By the time their neighbour had turned back, her cigarette lit and in a long ebony holder, both the children's mouths were full of her home-made produce.
‘Ah,bon ,’ she said.
‘Now, I must introduce myself.
I am Madame Gautier.
And you are Eleanor, or Ellie.
And you, young man, you are Patsy — yes?’
The children nodded their agreement, their mouths too full of cookies to speak.
Madame Gautier watched them for a moment, drawing deeply on her cigarette.
It was perfectly apparent the children were half-starved.
‘You would like to eat them all, yes?’
‘Oh, no, Madam,’ Ellie said through her mouthful.
‘No we couldn't.’
‘Perhaps later, yes?
We cannot 'ave them go stale, you know.’
And as if to brook no further argument, Madame Gautier took a large paper bag and emptied the entire contents of the cookie jar into it.
‘Eh voila ,’ she said, twisting the bag up and over expertly, like a shop assistant.
‘Now go and enjoy them in the sun.
As you play your games.
And Ellie you 'ave a 'appy birthday, yes?’
Ellie looked back, astonished that this woman should know it was her birthday.
She was about to enquire as to how she knew, but Madame was already chasing them out good humouredly.
‘Allez, allez !’ she laughed.
‘Allez-vous en !’
There was still no sign back home that anyone else was yet up, so Patsy put the paper bag down where they were playing and the two of them resumed their game.
And whenever they stopped, they had a cookie.
They were utterly delicious, quite unlike anything either of them had ever tasted before, light, crisp and lemony, with a fine dusting of sugar.
A shadow fell over them and neither of them had to look up to know who it was.
They could both just feel his presence.
‘What have we here?’ their father asked, leaning down and picking up the paper bag.
‘And what might these be pray?’
‘They're some cookies, Da,’ Patsy said tremulously.
‘Yes,’ Ellie added as fiercely as she could.
‘They were given to me as a present.
For my birthday.’
Her father stared down at her before taking hold of her arm and pulling her to her feet.
‘Your birthday, did you say, child?
Your birthday?
How dare you, you miserable little spalpeen.
Your birthday indeed.’
‘Well so it is, Da,’ Patsy ventured.
‘It is.
It's Ellie's fourth birthday today.’
‘It is nothing of the sort!’ his father roared back at him.
‘Have neither of you a mind what day this is?
Have you no mind at all!
Tell me what day this is, Eleanor!
You tell me or I'll beat it out of you!’
‘It's my birthday, Da!’
Ellie shouted up at him.
‘And you're hurting me!’
‘It's the anniversary of your mother's death, you little scut!
That's what day it is!
And that's what this day will always be!
The day your blessed mother, may the Lord have mercy on her, was taken from me!
There'll be no celebrating this day.
Not now.
Not ever!’
Then he seized the bag of cookies, and on his way back indoors, threw them where he considered they belonged, in the trash can with the rest of the garbage.
For Christmas the following year, the month after the Armistice, Artemis was given a new doll.
She didn't much like dolls, and this one was no different.
It was far too pretty, like most dolls, with huge blue eyes in a ridiculously beautiful china face, and the most exquisite clothes.
Artemis much preferred things that were real, such as the injured squirrel she had rescued and nursed back to health, and her pet hen Jemima whose broken leg she and Rosie had mended, and who every now and then was allowed up to the nursery.
Dolls were wet, and this doll, Artemis decided, with its great round eyes and silly little mouth, was without doubt the wettest doll of all.
Even so, she had to pretend to like it, particularly because it had been given to her by her father.
Artemis could not remember him ever giving her anything ever before.
But it was quite definitely from him, because that was what was on the gift tag.
‘To Artemis, from Papa.’
She went over to where he was standing by the fire and thanked him.
‘You must thank me too, Artemis,’ said a voice from behind her.
‘Because really it's from me as well.’
Artemis turned and looked at the owner of the voice, a beautiful woman in a blue dress, with bobbed blonde hair.
Artemis frowned, trying to remember where she had seen her before, and then she remembered.
She was the woman in the pale fur coat in the back of the car that day with her father.
‘You see,’ the woman was saying, bending towards Artemis and putting a long cold finger under Artemis's  chin.
‘I chose it for you, darling.
Especially.
It's meant to be from me as well.’
Artemis looked up at her father and found him staring down at her with a deep frown, as if to say, Artemis felt, that she should have known.
‘I'm sorry,’ Artemis told the woman, moving slightly away from her so that the finger could no longer reach her chin.
‘But it didn't say on the card.’
‘Oh, John —’ the woman sighed, turning to Artemis's father.
‘John.’
It was a scold.
Artemis knew that from the way the woman had sighed.
Nanny often did that when she was cross with Artemis for leaving her clothes in a heap, or a dirty glass by her bedside.
‘Oh Artemis,’ she would sigh.
‘Really.’
The woman with the bobbed blonde hair was bending down towards her again.
‘It says Mama,’ she smiled, her teeth slightly yellow against her over red lips.
She also smelt of cigarettes.
‘Listen.’
She took hold of the doll and bent it slightly forward.
‘Mama,’ the doll croaked.
‘Mama.’
‘John?’ the woman said, looking back at Artemis's father.
‘Later,’ Lord Deverill said.
‘Not the time now, Bunny.
Later.’
The woman stared at him for a moment, without expression, and then with a little smile handed the doll back to Artemis.
‘Mama,’ it said, as Artemis carried it across to where her other presents lay.
‘Mama.’
There was a lot of whispering in the nursery at bathtime.
Artemis sat absolutely still in her bath, trying to hear what Rosie and the other maids were saying, but all she could hear were their silly giggles.
She asked Nanny what they had all been talking about as Nanny towelled her dry.
‘Not for me to say, dear,’ she replied.
‘All I've heard is rumours.’
‘What's a rumour, Nanny?’
Artemis wondered aloud.
‘A rumour is half a lie, darling.
‘They say so’ is half a lie.
That's what a rumour is.’
‘Fact of the matter is,’ her father told Artemis when he took her aside before lunch on Boxing Day, ‘you're to have a new mother.
Yes?’
‘No,’ said Artemis.
‘I mean, how?’
Her father paused and stared at her.
‘How, did you say?’ he asked.
‘You say how?’
‘What about Mama?’
Artemis said.
‘What about her?’
‘What will Mama say?’
Her father stared at her again, seeming even more baffled.
'Yes,’ he said.
‘Well I imagine she'll say good show.
Point is, do you see, whatever your Mama might have said, point is, it's time you had a new one.’
He walked away then and left Artemis trying to puzzle out what her father meant by putting her mother in the past tense.
She asked Nanny when they sat down to lunch.
‘You said Mama had been gathered, didn't you Nanny?’
‘That's right, child,’ Nanny answered curtly, clearly not wishing to entertain morbid — thoughts at such a festive time.
‘You said Mama had crossed over somewhere,’ Artemis continued, ‘but we'd all meet again.
But if we meet again now, and she finds I have another Mama —’
‘Sssshhh, child,’ Nanny said, between mouthfuls of goose.
‘You won't all meet now.
Not in this life.’
Artemis stared at the old woman's whiskery face.
‘But Nanny you said —’
‘No buts, thank you,’ Nanny interrupted.
‘Butts are for goats, not little girls.’
‘You still haven't said how I can have two mothers, Nanny,’ Artemis persisted, raising her voice and attracting the attention of a red-faced man at the main table.
‘They can,’ Nanny said firmly, ‘if their fathers choose to remarry.’
‘Gracious,’ said the red-faced man, turning to talk across to their separate table.
‘I had three mothers.
All quite beastly, too.’
‘I don't understand,’ Artemis said.
‘It's not for you to understand,’ Nanny said, stifling a small hiccup.
‘Your mother on the other hand —’ the red-faced gentleman smiled at Artemis.
‘Now your mother was a splendid creature.
Finest huntswoman I've ever known.
Loveliest creature ever to follow hounds.’
He picked up his wine glass and drained it.
‘I don't mind telling you,’ he admitted.
‘Cried me eyes out when she was killed.
Terrible business.
Cried my eyes out.
Howled like a wolf.’
‘Died?’
Artemis said, staring first at the red-faced gentleman and then back at her nanny.
‘But —’ she began.
‘Eat up, child,’ Nanny commanded.
‘You're lagging behind.’
‘But, Nanny,’ Artemis insisted.
‘What does he mean?
My mother isn't dead .’
‘Of course she is, child,’ her nanny replied impatiently.
‘What on earth else do you think happened to her?’
Artemis lay in bed that night, and wondered in the black, black dark.
Her mother was dead like the badger she had seen last week in the woods, with its hair all stiff, and its mouth curled open.
She had spent all afternoon trying to ask Nanny more, but Nanny had been in a funny mood, laughing one minute and crying the next, and not making any sense of anything she said.
At last she managed to tax Rosie who looked at her astonished.
‘But I don't understand, Lady Artemis!
All this time?
You mean all this time you thought your mother no, I just don't understand.
Whoever let you imagine such a thing?’
‘If they had told me Mama was dead,’ Artemis had told Rosie gravely, ‘I would have understood, you see.
But all this time, all this time I've thought — she was just gone.’
‘Nanny Brougham told you, I was sure of that.’
‘No.
All Nanny kept saying was that we would all meet again,’ Artemis insisted.
‘And that I mustn't worry.’
‘Well, now there's a thing,’ Rosie had said, with a shake of her head.
‘All this time, and there was you thinking.’
She gave another shake of her head.
‘Now there really is a thing.’
‘And now I'm to have a new mama, and I don't really like her one bit.’
‘She's very beautiful, Lady Artemis.’
‘No, she's not Rosie.
Really.
She's horrid.’
Artemis hated her mama-to-be as much as she disliked the doll she'd given her.
It took little time to decide that her new mama was just like the doll, with her big blue eyes, and her made up face and blonde hair.
She stared at the doll which Nanny had put on the shelf, and the doll stared back at her with cold blue eyes.
Artemis reached up and took it down off the shelf.
‘I hate you,’ she told it, tipping it back to make her talk.
‘Mama,’ said the doll, ‘mama.’
‘And I am not going to be your mama!’
She threw the doll with force back on to the shelf.
Perhaps it was the force, but the doll fell to its side, hit the wall, and then rolled off the shelf on to the floor.
Its china face was smashed in, and one blue eye had disappeared.
Artemis panicked.
Looking round for somewhere to hide the wrecked toy she climbed on to a chair and put the doll on top of the nursery cupboard.
‘Mama,’ it called faintly.
‘Mama.’
Much later, when she returned from her walk with Rosie, she found her mama-to-be inspecting the nursery floor with Nanny.
‘Hello, my sweet,’ she said, seeing Artemis.
‘I've come to see where you live.’
Artemis said nothing, struggling to get out of her coat and gloves, hiding the panic she felt.
‘Terribly gloomy up here, Nanny?’ the new chatelaine announced.
‘Really terribly gloomy, wouldn't you say?’
‘Yes, your ladyship,’ Nanny agreed.
‘Although the decoration is really not my providence.’
‘Province, no, I know, nor should it be.
No, it's mine.’
She turned to Artemis who knew what was coming before the question was asked.
‘Where's your new doll, my sweet?’ she demanded.
‘I don't know, because I don't like her.’
‘Great heavens, child,’ Nanny said quickly.
‘Where are your manners?’
But she wasn't quick enough for the woman who was to be Artemis's new mother.
‘And why don't you like her, my sweet?’
‘I don't like the way she says Mama.’
‘And where is she now?’
Artemis shrugged and pointed.
‘Up there,’ she said.
‘On top of the cupboard.’
The next Lady Deverill nodded for Rosie to fetch the doll down, which the nursemaid did, while everyone else waited in the growing silence.
Rosie handed the doll to her new employer, who when she saw the doll's broken face flashed a look of pure hatred at the child before her.
‘How did this happen, my sweet?’ she asked.
‘I hope it was an accident.’
‘Yes it was,’ Artemis agreed quickly, remembering another accident.
‘We were playing horses, and she fell off.’
A sudden noise from the cupboard followed by a distinct clucking distracted the next Lady Deverill's attention.
‘And what is that, please?’ she demanded.
‘Mice, your ladyship,’ Rosie put in.
‘We do get a lot of mice up here, you see.’
‘It sounded,’ said their visitor, ‘more like a chicken.’
She opened the cupboard door, to reveal a big brown hen sitting on a pile of clean towels.
‘That's Mima,’ Artemis said, hurrying to collect her hen before any harm could befall her.
‘I only put her in there for a minute.’
Where Jemima had sat, there now lay a large speckled brown egg.
‘You see she broke her leg,’ Artemis  explained.
‘And Rosie and I mended it.’
She stroked the chicken who clucked delightedly, as Artemis's future stepmother stared in horror at the egg.
‘I would hardly call that hygienic, would you, Nanny?’ she asked.
‘And I would hardly call this a way to run a nursery.’
‘The chicken hardly ever comes up here, your ladyship,’ Nanny stammered.
‘In fact I can't remember when the last time was.’
‘It's her Christmas treat,’ Artemis explained.
‘And there was a frost.’
‘You.’
The future Lady Deverill nodded at Rosie.
‘Take that hen out of here, and then wash all those towels.
And the chicken is not to come up here again, is that understood?
Ever.’
No-one said anything.
Rosie tried to take the hen from Artemis, but Artemis held on to her firmly.
Their visitor turned on her heel and went to the door where she turned back to hold the broken doll up to Artemis.
‘As for this,’ she said, ‘I am taking this, my sweet, to show your father who, I feel sure, will not want to let such a thing go unnoticed.’
She said the last word as two words.
Un noticed.
Very softly, almost sweetly.
Unnoticed.
‘These plates are cold,’ said Patrick Milligan senior, looking up from his place and staring down the table at his five-year-old daughter, who at once scrambled to her feet.
‘Sorry, Pa,’ she said.
‘Sit down,’ he commanded, ‘until I've finished talking.
I have told you time and I have told you time again, but you will not learn.
I will not have my food served on stone cold plates.’
‘Sorry, Pa,’ Ellie said again.
‘All right,’ her father conceded, but not referring to her apology.
‘All right, so you're only a child, and so you find it's just one more thing.
But you cannot have  enough reminding.
Your mother, may God rest her soul, your mother in all her born days never once served a hot meal on a cold plate.
And if you're to try and fill her shoes, which I very much doubt you'll ever do, but if you're to be even half the woman that she was, may God have mercy on her, then you'll need all the reminding I can give you.’
From the silence that followed, Ellie gathered her father had finished with her, so she climbed down from her chair and hurried up to her father's place.
‘Here,’ she said, ‘give me your plate, Pa.
I can hot it on the hob.’
‘Heat it, child,’ her father sighed.
‘Hot it indeed.
You heat plates, not hot them.
And you needn't bother, for it's too late.
The soup's ruined.’
But he ate it all the same, Ellie noticed, as she hurried back to her chair.
On her way past him, Dermot stuck a foot out and Ellie fell to the floor.
The ‘broth’ sniggered.
‘Be careful,’ her father said, glaring up from his bowl.
‘You want to watch where you put your feet.’
There was no way to keep the food as hot as their father liked.
Ellie knew this well, although she was barely five and a half years old, because she and Patsy had talked endlessly about the problem as they sat up in their cot while their father and the ‘broth’ played cards below them in the living room.
Between them they could think of no way to get the food Mrs MacDonagh had cooked that afternoon, and the plates she had left in the stove, from the kitchen to the table at dinner time without something getting cold.
‘We need a trolley,’ Patsy told her once.
‘Like we saw in the magazine.
If only we had a trolley.
One on wheels.’
But to have a trolley they needed money, their father's money, and when Patsy suggested the idea to him, their father laughed and asked them where they expected him to find that sort of money.
And so something was always cold.
Something was always not quite hot or right enough for their father, be it the plates, the pie, or the potatoes.
Today it was the plates.
‘It's such a simple thing, boys, wouldn't you say?’ their father asked, opening the subject up.
‘To keep things which are already hot warm at the very least.’
The ‘broth’ stared down the table at Ellie, and Ellie stared right back at them.
She was already determined that nothing should ever frighten her.
‘Now take this meatloaf, boys,’ her father announced after a long silence, for no-one talked unless directly addressed by the head of the family.
‘This meatloaf which that poor Mrs MacDonagh has cooked for us today, God help her.
You, Dermot, and Fergal.
You're both old enough to remember your mother's meatloaf.
And wasn't it just the best meatloaf you had ever tasted?’
The two eldest of the ‘broth’ agreed with their father, nodding and grinning at him with their mouths full.
‘Ah but poor Mrs MacDonagh, you see,’ their father continued.
‘Sure hasn't she enough on her plate without hearing complaints from the likes of us?
Still, you'd have to say she can't cook a meatloaf.
Not like your poor dead mother, me boys.
May the Lord have mercy on her soul, and that's for sure.’
He looked down the table and held up his plate, as did the ‘broth’.
Ellie had barely started her own meal, but now she and Patsy had to get up, as was their required duty, to collect all the dirty crockery and bring in the pudding.
It was a rice pudding.
‘Dear God above us,’ her father sighed.
‘I sometimes think with the amount of this stuff we have to eat we'll all turn into rice puddings!’
Nonetheless, he and the broth ate their pudding and then, pushing their chairs back, got up and left the two youngest to do the dishes.
Ellie stood on a chair at the sink to wash up, while Patsy waited patiently beside her on the floor, taking the plates carefully from her and drying them.
‘Would you like to hear a story?’ he asked his sister.
‘The one you like?
The one Madame tells you?’
‘Yes please,’ said Ellie.
‘The one about the house.’
It was the favourite of both.
‘Once upon a time,’ Patsy began, ‘in an old town, in an old street, there stood a very old 'ouse.’
Patsy loved to imitate Madame.
Ellie laughed.
‘Go on,’ she said.
‘Once upon a time,’ her brother began again, ‘in an old town, in an old street, there stood a very old 'ouse, such a grand 'ouse, the sort of 'ouse you do not find nowadays…’
Nanny stood on the bridge that spanned the ornamental lake and looked back at the beautiful house that had been her home for the last thirty years.
‘Well, child,’ she said to Artemis who was standing by her side dropping pebbles into the still water, ‘I must say it's going to seem a little odd not living here any more.’
‘Why are you going?’
Artemis asked.
‘You don't have to go.’
‘Oh yes I do, dear,’ Nanny answered grimly.
‘I've been given my marching orders.
The new broom is sweeping very clean.’
Artemis realized this was a reference to her new stepmother, but she preferred to try and keep dropping her gathered pebbles into the centre of the splash made by the last one she had dropped.
Her nanny had other ideas and took her by the hand.
‘Come along, child,’ she ordered, ‘and stop doing that.’
Together they walked slowly up towards the great house, Artemis lagging slightly behind to try and avoid conversation.
‘I really don't know,’ Nanny was saying ahead of her.
‘If you ask me, it's just change for change's sake.
First the nursery floor, then a new governess, then poor Rosie demoted to the kitchens —’
‘Why was Rosie sent to the kitchens, Nanny?’
Artemis asked.
‘Was it because of Mima?’
‘It most certainly was, child,’ Nanny replied.
‘Why else do you think?
No, I really don't know, so I don't.
It's just change for the sake of it.’
She slowed down and looked up at the house now looming high above them.
‘I must say,’ she sighed.
‘I did always think I'd end my days here, I must say.’
‘Where are you going, Nanny?’
Artemis asked.
‘Can I come with you?’
The old woman looked round at the child and smiled, suddenly touched.
‘Don't be silly, dear,’ she said.
‘You don't want to come with old Nanny.’
‘Yes I do,’ Artemis replied, having spotted her stepmother, sitting up on the stone balustrade, slowly swinging her shapely legs and smoking a cigarette.
‘I hate this place.’
‘Hullo you two!’ the second Lady Deverill called down.
‘No prizes for guessing what you two have been up to!
Hatching more little plots, I'll be bound!’
Artemis and Nanny started to make their way across to the wing.
The second Lady Deverill hopped off her perch and wandered down the steps after them.
‘I'm having a small lunch party tomorrow!’ she called, as she caught them up.
‘And one of your godmothers is coming, my sweet.’
She touched Artemis lightly on the shoulder as she said the last word, and throwing away her lipstick-stained cigarette butt, fell into step beside them.
‘I think it would be fun if you were there, don't you Nanny?’
Artemis's stepmother continued, having tapped Artemis again rather sharply on the shoulder as she said ‘you’.
‘Your godmother says she hasn't seen you in an age.’
‘Which particular godmother is this, Lady Deverill?’
Nanny asked.
‘Her Grace the Duchess of Wells perhaps?’
‘Lady Diana Lanchester,’ Lady Deverill replied sharply, before bending down to make her face level with Artemis.
‘A great friend of the first Lady Deverill's.
Of sweety-pie's   moth-er .’
As always, she carefully split a word into two distinct parts, dropping her voice in a conspiratorial way, as if uttering a mild obscenity.
Then she stood back up.
‘Have her downstairs and ready at a quarter past twelve, Nanny.’
She smiled at her stepchild and then for the last time dug her long finger sharply in Artemis's shoulder, but Artemis didn't flinch.
‘'By-eeee!’ her stepmother sing-songed gaily as she wandered off.
‘Don't be lay-et!’
At twelve fourteen the following midday, Nanny left Artemis, dressed in her favourite old sailor dress and dark blue stockings, in the charge of Porter, the new butler, who then escorted the child into the drawing room.
‘The Lady Artemis,’ the butler announced gravely, but after a brief stare at the new arrival everyone resumed their conversations.
The new Lady Deverill was the centre of a group by the fireplace, smoking her habitual cigarette and laughing at something a handsome man by her side was saying.
Artemis then saw her father standing by his favourite window, in the company of a tall dark-haired woman, whom Artemis found to be staring back at her.
She saw the woman summon a footman and point at her, and the footman duly arrived to collect Artemis and take her over to her father and his friend.
Artemis followed the footman across the faded rug, behind the backs of the guests.
She failed, however, to avoid her stepmother.
‘Gracious me, sweetie!’ she laughed rather too loudly, to attract the attention of her court.
‘But what 'as Nanny put you in?
What is that?’
She laughed again, and Artemis stared back at her, blank-faced.
‘It's my favourite dress,’ she said.
‘Stepmother.’
‘Well, I think it's high time you stopped looking like something out of the last century, don't you, my sweet?’ her stepmother said.
‘We'll get Papa to buy you something a little bit more a la mode .
Yes?’
Artemis just stared at her, then bobbing a curtsey, turned away and continued on her interrupted progress.
‘Hullo,’ the dark-haired woman said, introducing herself.
‘I'm Diana Lanchester, one of your godmothers.’
‘How do you do?’
Artemis curtsied again, and then stared up at the beautiful and elegant woman.
‘And I should pay absolutely no attention to your stepmother if I were you,’ she laughed.
‘I think you look like an absolute stunner, don't you, Bunjy?’
Her father grunted in reply, while Artemis frowned to herself, privately amazed that anyone should call her father, of all people, by a name as funny as Bunjy.
‘I don't suppose you remember me,’ her godmother said, taking another glass of champagne.
‘No I don't,’ Artemis said.
‘Not a bit.’
‘Why should you?’ her godmother replied.
‘I've been in America, which was the greatest fun.
Much more fun than England,’ she confided.
‘Not nearly so darned stuffy.
Tell you what, we'll go there together one day, I'll take you.
You'll love it.
It really is fun .’
‘Some chap or other told me once,’ Artemis's father suddenly said, ‘that somebody or other discovered America before Columbus or whoever it was who did, but decided it was best to keep it under his hat.’
Diana laughed uproariously.
‘Oh Bunjy you're wonderful!’ she said.
‘You always get things so wrong!’
Artemis frowned to herself once more, as in all her young life she had never heard her father say anything which was meant to be even remotely funny.
At lunch, she sat next to her godmother who told Artemis all about her late mother.
‘We were the best of friends, you know,’ she said.
‘And your mother was the best horsewoman I have ever seen.
Quite glorious out hunting.
Always took her own line, kept her horses fresh, and never jumped anything unless it was absolutely necessary.
But when we were young, she and I used to get up to the most dreadful pranks.’
Diana Lanchester began to tell Artemis about some of their escapades and soon had the child laughing quite helplessly, which earned a baleful glare down the table from the new Lady Deverill.
‘Do eat up, sweetie,’ she called to Artemis.
‘And don't laugh with food in your mouth, please!’
Artemis was quite sure she had committed no such breach of nursery discipline, but even so was careful not to laugh out loud again.
‘You know, when I was your age,’ Diana whispered, ‘at dos like this, your mother and I used to stick our food up the legs of our drawers.’
Artemis did her best not to burst out laughing once more, even though she had no food in her mouth.
‘Your grandfather caught us once,’ Diana Lanchester continued, ‘during a rather grand lunch for a Russian prince.
Of course we thought we were for it.
But in fact he wasn't even cross.
He agreed the food was so awful he asked us if we wouldn't mind hiding some of his.’
This time Artemis failed to control herself, and was forced to bury her laugh in her napkin.
‘Diana —’ her stepmother coo-ed down the table.
‘If that child is sick from laughing I shall hold you responsible.’
‘Quite right too, Katherine,’ Diana Lanchester smiled back at her hostess.
‘But I don't think she will be.
This goddaughter of mine is a splendid laugher.
In fact she's quite splendid altogether.
So splendid that I declare my godchild is an absolute motto.’
‘You'll never get higher praise than that,’ said a man the other side of Artemis.
‘If Diana thinks you're a motto, that's tops.’
‘Another thing your mother and I did,’ Diana went on, obviously enjoying defying her hostess, ‘was to hang all the chamber pots outside the third floor windows, just as Queen Mary arrived for her stay.
Luckily neither your grandmother nor Queen Mary saw them, but your grandfather did.
But then he never missed a trick.
Soon as the royal visitor had gone, he called us in and told us  never to do such a thing again.
Queen Mary had such an eye for antiques, you see, if she'd seen them, she'd have gone off with the lot.
Royal privilege, did you know that?
If they admire something, you darned well have to give it 'em!’
By now Artemis was quite helpless with laughter, and had to put her napkin to her face in case she made too much noise.
‘What fun to hear Artemis laugh,’ her stepmother's voice floated down the table.
‘She's such a serious child.
I didn't know she had a sense of humour.’
‘That's probably because you never say anything amusing, Katherine, darling,’ Diana replied.
The gentleman on the other side of Artemis laughed at that, but also into his napkin, adding ‘bravo’ in a low voice.
Diana was about to resume her conversation when once again her hostess cut in, addressing her stepdaughter with a glittery smile.
‘Did you enjoy your lunch, my sweet?’
‘Yes, thank you,’ Artemis replied.
‘Isn't she sweet?’
Katherine Deverill asked her guests generally.
‘But Artemis isn't just sweet, she's also a bit of a farmer.
She keeps hens, isn't that clever?
And that was one of  hers we've just eaten.
Wasn't it quite delicious?
Well worth all the trouble she went to, I'd say, of mending the silly thing's leg.’
Artemis stared down the table at her stepmother, who was smiling brightly at her.
‘It even had a name, that one, didn't it, what was it now?’ she asked.
Artemis said nothing.
‘Yes it did,’ her stepmother went on.
‘Let me see.
What was it called?
You know the one with the broken leg?’
‘Jemima,’ Artemis whispered, her eyes fixed on her lace table mat.
‘Speak up, sweetie,’ Katherine Deverill said, ‘I can't hear you.’
‘Jemima,’ Artemis said firmly.
‘Her name was Jemima.’
‘Jemima, of course.’
The whole table for some reason had fallen silent.
‘And wasn't Jemima delicious, everyone?’
Katherine Deverill smiled round at her guests.
‘You have to feed them corn,’ Artemis said to her godmother.
‘That's what makes them taste so good.
Rosie told me.
You have to feed them lots of corn.’
Immediately there was a loud laugh of relief from the guests, who at once took it that the child had come to terms with her charges' ultimate fate.
‘Well done,’ her godmother said to her, looking at her pale face intently.
‘You really are a motto.
And don't worry if you can't eat your pud.
I can stick it up the leg of my drawers.’
As soon as lunch was over, Nanny came and collected Artemis for her walk.
‘I hope you ate up,’ she said, sitting her on the stairs to change the child's shoes.
‘I hope you didn't fiddle with your food.’
‘No I didn't, I didn't ate up,’ Artemis told her.
‘Chicken, wasn't it?’
Nanny said.
‘Cook told me, chicken.’
Artemis said nothing, suddenly feeling sick and faint.
‘We'll go down the back way,’ Nanny told her, ‘and out through the kitchen gardens.’
She took Artemis down a back flight of stairs and along a corridor which ran under one of the colonnades, and then through the kitchen wing, along another long corridor with rooms in which Artemis had never been.
Someone ran up the corridor behind them.
‘Nanny?’ the voice called.
‘Wait!’
It was Rosie, red-faced from running, and from the heat of the kitchens.
‘We haven't got long, Rosie,’ Nanny said.
‘So you'd better hurry please, or we'll be for it.’
Rosie took Artemis by the hand and led her down the corridor to a small room right at the end.
She stopped outside the door.
‘Listen, your ladyship,’ she said.
‘Listen.’
Then she grinned at Nanny.
Artemis listened as she was told.
She heard nothing at all.
‘Stupid thing,’ Rosie said, with another grin, then kicked the door.
Now Artemis heard something, something feathery shaking itself, and then clucking, in a low, solemn cluck.
She turned to Rosie.
‘Don't be silly, it can't be,’ she gasped, her voice faltering.
‘Don't be silly?’
Rosie echoed with a laugh.
‘You 'ave a look then.’
Artemis opened the door.
There in a pool of sunlight which flooded the storeroom stood a fat brown chicken with one corkscrew leg.
She rushed in and gathered her beloved hen to her, burying her face in its feathers, as the hen began to squawk with surprise and excitement.
‘However did you do it, Rosie?’
‘Changed it for another, didn't I ?’
Rosie told her proudly.
‘Cook wasn't 'avin’ any of that nonsense.
She knew what her ladyship was up to, we all did, and we thought it was quite disgustin'.’
‘That's quite enough of that, thank you, Rosie,’ Nanny said firmly.
‘So did you, Nanny,’ Rosie protested.
‘You said yourself it was a terrible thing to do.’
‘Well, of course,’ Nanny agreed.
‘I mean serving up a one-legged chicken in front of all those guests.
I never heard the like.’
‘What a way of putting it, Nanny,’ said Rosie, laughing in disbelief.
‘I can't really thank you enough, Rosie,’ Artemis told her.
‘You don't 'ave to, Lady Artemis,’ said Rosie, and she smiled.
‘The look on your face is enough.’
Artemis looked at her and then, suddenly and quite accountably, burst into tears.
1923
It was Ellie Milligan's intention never to be caught crying in public again.
Ever since that night when, with their father away inspecting a distant building site, they had been left alone in the house for the first time, and the ‘broth’ had decided to wreak mayhem.
From somewhere Fergal had got hold of a bottle of hooch, and the three eldest sat round the kitchen table getting their first taste of hard liquor, and smoking their way through a packet of Camel cigarettes, while Ellie and Patsy, locked into the room with them, were forced to watch.
Ellie could sense there was going to be bad trouble, and it wasn't long in coming.
Patsy was naturally selected as the target.
‘Let's black him,’ Fergal suddenly announced, when they had all but drunk their way through the bottle.
‘Let's take all the little bastard's clothes off, and see how he looks as a nigger.’
‘No!’
Ellie shouted.
‘No you leave Patsy alone!
You leave him alone, do you hear!’
The ‘broth’ paid her no attention, but sat looking at their chosen victim, with crooked smiles on all their faces.
‘He's got lips like a nigger,’ Dermot said.
‘She's got lips like a nigger,’ Fergal corrected.
‘No,’ said Mike.
‘She's got lips like a negress .’
Patsy was standing quite still, back against the sink, watching his bully-boy brothers with his big dark eyes, as they stared stupidly back at him.
Fergal started to stand, pushing back his chair, and as he did so, Ellie made a bolt for the door.
Dermot got there before her.
‘And where do you  think you're going, sis?’ he asked.
‘To fetch a policeman, maybe?’
‘Go away!’
Ellie yelled.
‘Just leave me alone!’
She scrabbled at the door in one last and futile effort to unlock the door, but Dermot pulled her back.
‘What shall we do with this little vixen, eh?’
Dermot asked, twisting Ellie's arm up high behind her until, unable to bear the pain any longer, she started to cry.
‘Don't you ever do anything else 'cept grizzle?’
Mike asked, pulling her hair.
‘All you and sister Patsy do is just grizzle .’
‘Shut her under the stairs,’ Fergal ordered.
‘No!’ screamed Ellie.
‘No, not under the stairs, please no!’
‘Shut her under the stairs.’
Mike and Dermot dragged her off, still crying and screaming, while Fergal held Patsy by both his elbows, which he had pulled behind Patsy's back.
Dermot opened the half-sized door and Mike shoved Ellie into the pitch darkness.
‘You can grizzle and yell 's'much as you like under there, sis,’ Dermot said.
‘'Cos we're not lettin' you out till you learn to shut up.’
They bolted the door closed, top and bottom, and left Ellie crammed tight against all the junk that was stuffed into the tiny space.
She banged her fists against the door, and yelled and screamed, but the ‘broth’ had gone back to the kitchen.
They left her in there, wedged among the wooden boxes and brooms, and bric-a-brac, barely able to move one way or the other, for the next two hours, while they stripped Patsy naked, covered him all over with shoe polish, and locked him out the front of the house for a while to see what it was like being a naked little ‘nigger boy’ in Westfield Drive.
That was the night Ellie vowed she would never cry in front of anyone again as she lay among the boxes.
While Patsy silently and privately swore his revenge as he tried to scrub himself clean.
Now ten years old, Ellie was more or less expected to run the house day by day.
She was rarely at school, kept away constantly by a variety of excuses dreamed up by her father and brothers who all decided that an education was of less use to Ellie than a clean and tidy home was to them.
Even on Sundays she was expected to spend her day scrubbing, cleaning, cooking and tidying, once the family had attended Mass.
On this particular Sunday, Ellie had finished all her chores by mid-afternoon, and had the house to herself.
The ‘broth’ were all out in the park, where they would remain until tea time, and Patsy was over with a boy called Ed, who had befriended Patsy at school.
Ed was thin and undersized like Patsy, but he was fit and strong, because he boxed.
And he was now teaching young Patsy, unbeknownst to his elder brothers, the rudiments of the noble art of self-defence.
Best of all, her father was six blocks away, playing poker at Harry Reilly's.
That was his Sunday ritual: over to Harry's for cards as soon as lunch was eaten, and back at exactly a quarter after six, to read the Sunday papers and then sleep off the drink.
Ellie understood nothing about prohibition.
All she knew was that her father and his friends were never short of anything to drink.
Three o'clock exactly.
The old wooden case-clock at the foot of the stairs where Ellie was standing chimed the hour, as if to tell her she had two hours to herself before the ‘broth’ returned, and three and a quarter hours before her father did likewise.
Plenty of time to go quietly upstairs, take the key down from behind the faded watercolour of the lakes of Killarney, and slip it into the lock of her dead mother's bedroom.
And to step into the shrine.
For that's what her mother's room was, a reliquary for a woman gone, a monument to a long-dead wife.
Nothing had been moved, and nothing had been changed, not since that fatal October day, when Ellie had been born and her mother had died.
It was a room no-one ever came into, except the dead woman's husband, who  visited it religiously every Sunday morning before Mass, locking himself in for an hour, while, Ellie guessed, he dusted and tidied the shrine he had created, and prayed for the soul of the one departed.
Every time Ellie crept into her dead mother's room, she knew she should not be there, and she would hesitate on the threshold of the airless room, while the skin on her scalp prickled with a guilty excitement.
She hadn't meant to find the key.
It wasn't as if she had searched for it, determined to see what lay behind the forever locked door.
She had found it quite by accident, due to her diligence.
If she had not learned to clean so thoroughly she would never have taken each and every picture off the wall to dust both the picture and the wall behind.
And there was the key, carefully jammed into the frame of the old watercolour.
Ellie knew at once which door it must unlock, because the room at the end of the landing was the only room kept locked.
But still, for week after week, she never dared see if she was right, because she was afraid of what she might find within.
For a long time she imagined she might open the door and see the body of her mother, stretched out in death on her bed, her arms folded across her chest, her eyes still open and staring at the ceiling.
She knew that dead people could be kept in this state because the man who lived next door to Mrs MacDonagh worked in an undertakers, and Ellie had heard him talking about it to Mrs MacDonagh.
So it was many weeks before Ellie dared try the key in the lock.
And when she did, she eased open the door, but not before she had shut her eyes.
For an age she simply had not dared open them, until finally, unable to resist any longer, she opened and shut them again once and very quickly.
But there was nothing on the bed.
Nobody and no body.
Just a shiny pink counterpane, with a nightgown folded neatly in the middle of the bolster.
Over the back of a chair in one corner lay a dress, neatly hanging, while on the seat of chair lay a small pile of immaculate underthings.
The dressing table was laid out with hairbrushes, mirrors and small mother-of-pearl boxes, and on the table by the bed was a rosary, a missal and a photograph.
Arthur Leopold of County Cork had taken the picture, and the first time Ellie had tiptoed into the bedroom she had stood for a long time staring at the photograph, because it was the first time she had ever seen the likeness of her dead mother.
She was beautiful, small of face but with big dark eyes, just like Patsy's, and very serious looking, just like Ellie herself.
Ellie tried to imagine how her mother must have felt as she had left Ireland by boat, to sail the Atlantic and marry a man she had met only a handful of times.
Looking even more closely at the photograph and the innocence in her mother's eyes, Ellie had decided that her mother must have felt very shy.
Today she closed the door quietly behind her, and tiptoed over to the polished wooden closet, as she always did, to look at her mother's dresses.
She had learned when she had held the first costume up against her, that her mother had been small, hardly, it seemed, an inch or two taller than Ellie was now.
On subsequent visits, as she had grown bolder, Ellie had started trying some of her mother's clothes on, first over her own dress, and then over just her underclothes.
They were lovely clothes, beautifully made from fine materials, and if Ellie took a tuck with her hand at the back of the dresses, and turned the hems up a good six or nine inches, looking in the dressing mirror she could get more than a fair impression of how she might look once she too was a young woman.
At the back of the closet on a separate hook hung her mother's wedding gown.
Ellie had often taken it down before, but had never dared try it on.
But today, with more time at her disposal, she could no longer resist the adventure, and in a moment she was out of her own plain black Sunday dress, with its detachable white collar and cuffs, and into the sumptuous white silk which had clothed her dead mother once and for just a few short hours.
She found her mother's wedding shoes, and her headpiece and veil as well.
And then when she was fully dressed, she shut the closet door over and stood looking at herself in the mirror which was on the other side.
She stood dreaming, trying to imagine what it must be like to walk up the aisle to the side of a man who was waiting to marry you, and so enthralled was she with her imaginings that she never heard him.
She never heard the front door close, nor his foot fall on the stairs, nor even the bedroom door slowly opening behind her.
And then suddenly she saw his image in the looking glass.
‘And what's this?’ her father said, almost too quietly.
‘What have we here then?’
Ellie turned and looked at him, at a loss for any words.
‘Pa,’ was all she managed.
‘I didn't hear you.’
‘No,’ said her father, ‘I should imagine you didn't.
And I should imagine from looking at you, you didn't imagine I'd be home so soon either.’
‘I can explain,’ Ellie said.
‘Really I can.’
‘Is that so?’ her father asked.
‘Is that really so.
Well now.
Well now I'd often wondered what you got up to when I left you here.’
‘Pa — really —’
‘And now I know, Eleanor.
Now I know.’
He said nothing more for a while, leaving Ellie to stand waiting his instructions as he walked slowly round the room, as if to make sure nothing else had been violated.
‘You know full well you're not allowed in here, Eleanor,’ he said finally turning back to her.
‘No-one's allowed in here, you know that perfectly well.’
‘I know, Pa,’ Ellie replied.
‘I just didn't think —’
‘You just didn't think,’ her father interrupted.
‘That's about the size of it.’
‘I didn't think there was any harm,’ Ellie finished.
Her father looked at her and nodded, which was a sure sign that he disagreed with what she had just said.
‘If Harry hadn't been rushed off to the hospital with chest pains today,’ he continued, ‘then I'd still be at a loss as to know what my only daughter gets up to when my back is turned.’
‘I'll get out of these things,’ Ellie volunteered in the ensuing silence.
‘I was only dressing up.’
‘Dressing up,’ her father said thoughtfully.
‘Dressing up.’
‘Yes,’ Ellie concurred.
‘So I'll be out of these things in one minute.’
‘No,’ said her father suddenly.
‘You'll do no such thing.
You'll stay as you are and come downstairs with me.’
He took Ellie by her forearm, and marched her down the landing and the painted uncarpeted stairs into the living room, where he sat her in the big chair in the corner.
‘You're to sit there, do you hear?’ he instructed.
‘And you're not to move until I tell you.’
‘Why?’
Ellie asked, puzzled by the quite unpredictable run of events.
She had expected violence, she had thought her father would shout and roar at her, she was certain he would beat her.
But he had done none of these things Instead he had kept his temper, and not even threatened to raise his hand.
‘Why am I to sit here, please?’
Ellie repeated her question since her father had paid it no attention first time round.
‘Because I want the boys to see how pretty you are,’ her father told her.
‘And to see if you remind them of anybody.’
It was over an hour before the eldest boys came home from the park, during which time Ellie was made to sit quite still and not move.
After such a long wait, Ellie was so stiff and so fearful, that she was almost relieved  to hear them, laughing and jeering at each other, and then greeting their father, whom they were surprised to see home.
‘I've another surprise for you, me boys,’ their father said.
‘Next door in the living room.’
The ‘broth’ came through, followed closely by the tall figure of their father, who stood right behind his boys as they stood and stared at their sister.
‘Stand up, Eleanor,’ her father instructed.
‘So they may see how you are.’
Ellie stood, all but swamped by her dead mother's wedding dress.
‘Sure it's a little large,’ her father said, ‘but the impression's there all right.
Wouldn't you say so, Fergal?
Wouldn't you say there's enough of an impression there to remind you of someone?
Of someone we all loved very dearly?’
‘Yes, Pa,’ Fergal answered, staring hard at Ellie.
‘She looks the image of Mother.’
‘I knew you'd see it, me boy,’ his father smiled, putting an arm round his eldest's shoulder.
‘Couldn't you be looking at herself?
Isn't that all but a miniature of your poor dead mother, God rest her?
All but a miniature.
All but for her goodness and her grace.’
‘I don't get it, Pa,’ Dermot said.
‘What's Ellie doing all dressed up in Mother's clothes?’
‘Yes,’ Mike added, ‘what in heck's she doing, Pa?’
‘She's thinking, my boys,’ their father told them, ‘she's thinking of taking the place of your mother, because she's thinking she's become every bit as pretty as her, God rest her soul indeed.
And every bit as good.’
‘She can never be as pretty as our mother,’ Fergal said.
‘She could never be half as pretty.
Not even a quarter.’
‘Ah well,’ sighed his father.
‘Sure you know young girls.
Don't they just think the world of themselves?’
‘She could never be as good as our mother neither,’ Dermot growled, his eyes blazing with hate for his  sister.
‘Jeeze — if that wasn't mother's dress, I'd tear it right off her.’
‘What in heck is she wearing it for anyway, Pa?’
Fergal shouted, shaking off his father's half restraining hand and moving threateningly close to Ellie.
‘What are you doing in Mother's wedding dress, eh?
You little scut!
You tell me now, or I'll pull every hair from your head!’
Fergal already had hold of Ellie's long brown hair, and was jerking her head backwards.
‘Come now, boy,’ his father said, finally pulling his eldest son away, but not for a good half minute.
‘You know that's no way to treat a lady .’
Ellie saw the mockery in her father's eyes, as she saw the hate.
In all the eyes that were watching her, that's all she could see.
Undiluted hate.
‘Why do you hate me?’ she asked them, still managing to keep the tears from her eyes.
‘What have I ever done that makes you hate me like this?’
‘Tell her, Fergal,’ her father said tonelessly.
‘Tell her what she did that makes us feel no love for her.
You tell her, boy.’
Fergal walked slowly across to Ellie and put his face right up to  hers .
‘I'll tell you what you did, Eleanor Milligan,’ he hissed.
‘You killed our mother.’
‘How could I have killed her, Madame?’
Ellie sat in the half-light of their neighbour's drawing room, the dark curtains pulled some of the way across the windows to keep out the sunlight.
Madame Gautier did not like sunlight, as she had frequently informed her young visitor.
‘You should ignore what he say, chérie  ,’ Madame replied.
‘He is sadiste .’
‘What is that, please?’
‘What your father is, child.
Now 'ave a bon-bon.’
Madame Gautier held the small silver tray of chocolates out for Ellie, who unable to resist, got up and helped herself to another one.
‘Besides,’ Madame added, when she herself had also taken a sweet, ‘it is a complete nonsense.’
‘What is, Madame?’
‘To say you killed your mother.’
Madame rearranged her skirt as she sat back in her chair.
The skirt was silk lined and made a lovely sound whenever Madame moved, which Madame still found intoxicating, even to this day, a day long after she had ‘retired’ from the theatre.
Ellie also thrilled to hear it, for it sounded so glamorous, and put her in mind of some of the stories Madame had told her of her early days on the stage.
But today Ellie's mind was on other matters, such as what her brothers had meant by their accusation.
‘I just don't understand, Madame,’ Ellie confessed, ‘I never even knew my mother.’
‘I shall speak to that father of yours,’ Madame sighed, raising a small glass half full of dark amber liquid to her lipsticked mouth.
‘I shall go and tell 'im what a perfect swine he is.’
‘Oh no, Madame,’ Ellie frowned.
‘You can't do that.
He hates me coming here.
He says you give me ideas.
Ideas I really shouldn't have.’
‘What nonsense.’
‘I know.
But if you went and called .’
‘Yes, chérie  .
I know.’
Madame put her glass down to put a cigarette in her holder.
Ellie lit it for her with a match from a small silver box ‘Merci, mon petit chou ,’ said Madame.
‘I still don't understand how I'm meant to have killed my mother,’ Ellie frowned.
‘You did not,’ said Madame with a faint snort.
‘'Ow could you?
You were a bébé .
What 'appens is women 'ave bébés and sometimes they die.
This is a fact of our life!
But your mother she 'ad too many bébés .
She did not want to, but the church — the church say she must, and so do your father.
Your mother was too fine,très  petite, comme toi .
She was not like an 'orse who can 'ave bébés every year!
She was so small!
So fine!
And I say to your father, I say you will kill 'er!
I say.
as if with your own 'and!’
‘I don't understand?’
Ellie was becoming more and more confused.
‘Your mother did not need to be always enceinte, n'est ce pas ?
There are little what do we say? little preventions.
There are these ways.
And they are très nécessaire , if we women are not to die like this.’
‘How, Madame?’
Ellie asked, still entirely baffled.
‘If women are not to die how?’
‘Look,’ Madame sighed hugely.
‘There is no need for anyone to die like this.
And most certainly not your mother, and not you.
If your father 'e 'ad listened to the nurse and called for the doctor and not for the priest — puh!’
Madame shrugged and pouted her lips.
‘But your father —’ she leaned forward and whispered at Ellie.
‘Your father did not want to pay for the doctor, while the priest 'e comes free!
If 'e 'ad called the doctor then I say that no-one dies!’
‘So why does my father say I killed her?’
‘Ah bon ,’ Madame said, putting out her cigarette.
‘I tell you why.
If you are 'aving a bébé ’, and there is danger, the church say you must die, and the 'usband keep the bébé .
Not 'is wife — but the bébé ’!
This is good for the men, yes?
But not so good for the children who  soudainement  they 'ave no mother!
And it is not at all good for the mothers who  soudainement  are dead!
It is a rule of the church, the mother must die.
And who make the rules?
The men of course!’
Madame lit another cigarette and blew a long curl of blue smoke upwards from the side of her mouth.
‘So the church killed my mother?’
Ellie asked, cautiously.
Madame nodded.
‘Oui,’ she said.
‘Vraiment .’
‘Then I shall never go to church again,’ Ellie vowed.
Madame looked at her through a veil of smoke which she fanned away with a jewelled hand.
‘No, no,’ she said.
‘I think so.
I think you do.’
‘No, Madame,’ Ellie insisted.
‘I won't ever go to church again.
Not ever.’
‘You will go to church, and there's an end of it, do you hear me?’
‘Yes, Father.’
‘Well?’
Ellie said nothing, deciding to stare down at the polished wood floor instead.
‘If you do not go to church, child, you will be in the most deadly and moral sin.’
‘Yes, Father.’
‘And when you die, you will be as nothing.
You will be as worthless as a piece of dirt on the sole of my shoe.
You will be consigned straight to hell, where you will roast in eternal agony, never again to know any peace, and never to look upon the face of God.
Is that what you really want, child?’
‘No, Father,’ Ellie replied, without looking up.
‘I just don't want ever to go to church again.’
‘But why ever not, my child?’
By now the priest was becoming exasperated with the child who in turn was becoming ever more stubborn by the minute.
It was a boiling hot morning, he had three other appointments before lunch, and his head ached dully from the excess of Jack Daniels he had drunk the night before with the child's father, who had been beside himself with rage when he had arrived at the Presbytery.
‘She shut herself in her bedroom all day, Tom!’
Pat Milligan had ranted.
‘I'll not brook such disobedience!
How dare she!
I'll not have any child of mine disobeying not only me, but turning her back on God's own holy ordinance!’
‘She's a little girl, Pat,’ the priest had tried to reassure him.
‘Sure children get all sorts of crazy ideas, all sorts of ideas so they do.’
He had then put the bottle of whisky out on the table, in the hope that after a couple of shots, Pat Milligan's  rage would abate, and they could talk instead about the Red Sox's chances in next week's match against the New York Giants.
But Pat Milligan was in no mood to be mollified.
‘You're to come and see the child tomorrow, Tom,’ he ordered.
‘And you're to scare the living daylights out of her, do you hear?
I want her back at Mass next Sunday, and if you can't persuade her, then this belt of mine'll have to do the talking!’
The priest took his handkerchief out and wiped the beads of sweat from his brow.
It seemed there was nothing he could do to persuade the child to cease her disobedience, nothing he could say which would frighten her sufficiently for her to come to her senses.
She just sat there, mostly in silence, staring down at the floor, with her hands clasped tightly between her knees.
‘You know what will happen to you, child, if you continue to disobey your father,’ he said wearily, ‘and if you continue to fly in the face of God's will.’
‘Nothing that hasn't happened before, Father,’ Ellie replied, almost as wearily, but still refusing to look up.
‘Why, child?’ the priest said, deciding on another approach, one of pained bewilderment.
‘You've always been such a good little girl.
Such an obedient and faithful member of the flock.
So I find this, well, this rebellion of yours, for that's what it is, isn't it?
Some kind of rebellion now.
It just doesn't make any sense.
Unless of course it's something you've done.’
The priest leaned forward, in his best confessional manner.
‘Something you yourself have done and which you're afraid to confess.’
‘No, Father,’ Ellie replied, trying to manoeuvre herself away from the smell of stale whisky and nicotine.
‘It's nothing that I have done.’
‘Ah,’ said the priest.
‘Then it's something someone has done to you yes?’
‘Yes,’ Ellie agreed.
‘And who might this wicked person be?’ the priest asked.
‘You,’ said Ellie, finally looking at him straight in his watery red eyes.
‘You and my father.’
The priest frowned and pulled at his collar to try and gain some respite from the suffocating heat.
Then he tried smiling back at the serious-faced child, for this must surely be a tease.
Because he couldn't for the life of him imagine what he personally could have done to her.
That brute of a father, certainly.
But himself?
Never.
‘Come on now, child,’ he said.
‘You'll have to do better than that.
What in heaven's name has this poor old priest ever done to you, eh?’
‘You killed my mother,’ Ellie told him.
‘Instead of calling the doctor, my father called you, and you and the church killed her.’
The priest frowned and sighed, and then tried reasoning with the child, but only half-heartedly, his enthusiasm for this particular subject having long gone, so often had he had to cover this ground.
Finally, and seeing he was getting nowhere, overcome by an incipient lethargy induced by the excesses of the previous night and exacerbated by the heat, the priest slowly rose to his feet and picked up his hat.
‘Then there's nothing more I can say to you, child,’ he sighed, wiping his sweating brow with his hand.
‘There is nothing I can do or say to save you from the wrath of God, or indeed from the wrath of your own father, poor man.’
But for all Patrick Milligan's wrath, and for all the constant beatings he administered to Ellie with his thick leather belt, he was unable to break her will.
Ellie never returned to her parish church.
Even when her father beat Patsy for no reason other than to force his daughter to change her mind, Ellie stood firm, as privately Patsy had made her swear to do.
‘It's no good, Father,’ Ellie had said.
‘You can beat me till I die, I don't care.
Because I would rather die than ever again go to church.’
Finally her father stopped belting her every weekend.
‘Very well,’ he said, ‘but just remember what you are.
You are doomed.
You and your brother.
You both are doomed to the bottomless pits of hell.
You're no longer worthy, either of you, of the sight of God.’
Ellie listened, but said nothing, thinking that if indeed there was a God, and if he was anything like her father, then hell and its bottomless pits would be infinitely preferable to so-called heaven.
‘You really should be riding a horse,’ Artemis's stepmother said to her one morning as they waited for the hounds to move off.
‘You're getting far too tall for that pony.’
Artemis knew this to be true, but was more than a little reluctant to part with Paintbox.
Bought as a second pony after she had grown out of Buttons, he had proved himself such a marvellous jumper and such a resolute galloper, Artemis couldn't possibly imagine life without him.
‘Oh, I know what you're thinking, Artemis,’ her stepmother continued.
‘I was just the same at your age.
You couldn't possibly part with him, there'll never be another animal like him, and when your pony goes, there goes your childhood.
Well that's true, up to a point, but these things have to be faced.
And the point is you've suddenly grown rather tall and stringy, and as a consequence you look quite ridiculous on that thing.’
‘Paintbox can still carry me all day,’ Artemis replied.
‘He's terribly strong.’
‘That's not the point, Artemis,’ her stepmother said.
‘It's time you moved on to horses.
I shall have a word with your father about it.
I know he'll agree.
He thinks you've become quite the little horsewoman.’
The hounds moved off and her stepmother followed, leaving Artemis to consider her father's compliment.
It was the first he had ever paid her.
Normally when she had gone well, it had been her horse which had received the praise.
‘Pony went well today,’ he might say as they  dismounted.
‘Certainly jumps.’
Or after a fast thing, ‘That pony certainly keeps you out of trouble, yes?
Certainly knows a thing or two, that chap.’
But nothing was ever said to the rider.
And yet now, it seemed, he considered her to be a horsewoman.
Artemis was completely bewildered.
For her stepmother to tell her meant that she and her father must sometimes talk about her, and that her father had undoubtedly on at least one occasion said that he thought Artemis had some ability.
And if that was the case, then the idea for Artemis to move up to a horse must surely have sprung from him.
Because her stepmother would never have made such a suggestion.
Normally all she did was belittle Artemis's riding skills whenever she could.
As she moved off with the other mounted followers, Artemis determined that if her father thought it was time for her to stop riding ponies and learn to hunt on a horse, then so be it.
She would make the transition.
'Isn't he a little tall?’
Artemis asked, as she stood admiring her fifteenth birthday present, a stunning looking dark brown thoroughbred gelding which Jenkins had been instructed to lead up outside the house as a surprise.
Artemis wasn't afraid of riding tall horses, only anxious in case she might still be too short in the leg to get the best out of them.
‘He must be at least sixteen hands.’
‘He is sixteen hands exactly,’ her stepmother informed her.
‘And you won't be over-horsed, not since you are going to ride him side-saddle.’
‘But —’ Artemis started, appalled at the notion of not being able to ride such a  racy looking creature astride.
‘No buts, Artemis.
It's your father's idea, not mine.’
And then the second Lady Deverill turned to Artemis and smiled a small, closed smile.
‘I think,’ she added, ‘that your father wants to be as proud of you as he was of your  moth-er  .
So.
Happy birthday, my sweet.
And as an extra treat, Annellie Clyde is coming to stay for a week to teach you the rudiments.’
And that was that.
Artemis's father was away for a week's sport in Leicestershire, and apparently it was expected of Artemis that she should be ready and able to go out and ride her new horse side-saddle alongside her father on his return.
Fortunately Annellie Clyde was an inspired teacher and Artemis, besides being a very talented rider was also an extremely quick learner, so much so that the principles of riding side-saddle were learned by the end of day two, although without the help of Artemis's new horse, Hullabaloo, who had proved himself to be somewhat too fidgety and edgy to be included in the preliminary tuition.
But by the morning of the fifth day, rider and horse became a team, and by that afternoon Artemis and her teacher went for a stiff ten-mile hack.
On the morning of the sixth day, Hullabaloo and Artemis jumped a line of good hedges in perfect harmony, and by the end of the first week Annellie Clyde considered her pupil ready for her first full day out.
‘Whose mad fool idea was this anyway?’
Diana Lanchester demanded of her godchild when she saw her mounted on her new horse.
‘It would be hardly sensible on a quiet day, but you know how they run here.’
The hunt was met at Parks' Lodge from where, at this time of year provided the scent was good, it was inevitably a red letter day.
‘It's all right, Godmother,’ Artemis assured her, doing her best to stop Hullabaloo from fidgeting.
‘We'll keep at the back.’
‘Keep at the back?’ her godmother snorted in disbelief.
‘On that thing?
He looks as if he's about to come under starter's orders at Epsom!
You'll get off, if you've any sense!’
‘But he's lovely, Godmother!’
Artemis protested.
‘And he's got the most amazing jump!’
At that moment Hullabaloo suddenly spun and lashed out, nearly catching the horse behind.
Artemis sat him well, and quickly brought him back under control.
‘Has he seen hounds?’
Diana Lanchester demanded.
‘He doesn't look as if he's ever seen hounds before!
Where in heaven's name did you get him?’
‘My father bought him for me,’ Artemis replied.
‘For my birthday.’
‘Nonsense!’ her godmother called, as Hullabaloo began to spin again.
‘Your father would never be such a damn fool!’
‘He did, Godmother!’
Artemis called after her, ‘I promise!’
But her godmother was gone, making her way through the throng of horses to Lord Deverill's side.
Artemis reined her horse back again, but he was becoming more and more strung-up and excited by the minute.
‘You do look a picture,’ said a voice behind her.
‘Someone said they thought for a moment you were your mother.’
The second Lady Deverill, also riding side-saddle and turned out in a quite immaculate habit, pulled up alongside Artemis on a bay Artemis hadn't seen before.
‘I wish they'd move off,’ Artemis confessed, ‘before Hullabaloo causes a real hullabaloo.’
‘He looks frightfully well,’ said her stepmother.
‘You really do both look quite the thing.’
Then she suddenly dropped her voice and leant slightly forward.
‘Your Papa will be terr-ibly pleased.’
But Artemis was hardly attending.
She was too busy watching her godmother, who had reached her father's side and was having an animated conversation with him, albeit a somewhat one-sided one.
Artemis saw her father turn right round in his saddle and stare back to where she was, while her godmother was still haranguing him.
Then, just as Diana Lanchester detached herself and began heading back in Artemis's direction, one of the huntsmen blew for hounds to move off, and the day began.
Diana Lanchester didn't catch up with Artemis and her stepmother until Lord Deverill and his huntsmen  cast their hounds into a field of kale for the first draw.
‘Beautiful morning,’ the second Lady Deverill said.
‘Perfect scenting weather.’
‘I'm not in the slightest bit interested,’ Diana Lanchester retorted.
‘All I'm interested in is where you found that damn’ horse.’
‘Mine you mean?’
Artemis's stepmother enquired ingenuously.
‘This is a new chap.
Came from Buffie Stanford's.’
‘The horse Artemis is riding, Katherine.
Where did it come from?’
‘He's lovely, isn't he, Diana?
I rather fancied him for myself.’
‘Where did he come from?’
Diana Lanchester repeated.
‘Has he seen hounds?’
‘He was passed on to us by a friend, darling,’ the second Lady Deverill replied.
‘With a known history.
But I'm terribly sorry, you see, because he just isn't for sale.’
‘I don't want to buy the damn’ animal!’
Diana Lanchester said, raising her voice, and earning looks of disapproval from the gentlemen nearby.
‘All I want to know is what you think you're playing at!’
‘Playing at?’
Artemis's stepmother laughed.
‘Playing at?
Why should I be playing at something, Diana darling?’
‘Telling Artemis her father had bought the animal!’
Diana Lanchester replied.
‘John may be mad, but he'd never buy a horse as hot as that as a first horse for his daughter!’
By now the disapproving looks Diana Lanchester had been earning had turned to ones of open curiosity as those around became intrigued by the confrontation.
‘You bought it, didn't you, Katherine?’
Diana Lanchester demanded.
‘But where from?
And why?’
‘Darling, if you will persist in raising your voice while the hounds are drawing, sweetie,’ the second Lady Deverill sighed, ‘John will only send you home.’
‘He should send his daughter home, damn it.’
For a moment Artemis thought her godmother was  going to strike her stepmother with her hunting whip, which she was now holding half-raised.
But in fact the whip was for Artemis's benefit, and not her stepmother's.
‘But if he won't, I will.
Artemis,’ she said, hooking the end of her whip round Artemis's forearm, ‘take that animal back to the stables at once.’
‘But Godmother —’ Artemis began to protest.
‘This instance, do you hear?’ her godmother interrupted.
But it was already too late, because just as Diana Lanchester was issuing her orders, there was a crash of hound music as they found in the kale, and they were away, the fox streaming out of the vegetation and through a large hedge which led to the adjoining field.
Artemis's horse whipped round twice, plunged and bucked, and then with Artemis, much to its apparent displeasure, still well on board, took off after the leading group.
The first hedge seemed to pass miles below Artemis as Hullabaloo landed a good ten or twelve feet the other side.
Artemis, who had never sat such a prodigious leap on a horse, let alone one taken side-saddle, leaned well back and sat the jump well.
Through her reins she felt the horse cock his jaw in the hope he could take hold completely, but having sat enough ‘bolts’ on both Buttons and Paintbox, Artemis was wise to this, and she quickly shortened up her reins and then relaxed them, confusing the horse quite deliberately.
The manoeuvre worked, and by the time the second hedge loomed in front of her, Artemis had some semblance of control.
She knew this hedge well, having jumped it both ways innumerable times.
There was a ditch the other side of it, which should present no problems provided they met it on the right stride.
Hullabaloo had ideas of his own and put in a short one.
Artemis responded by sitting and kicking on hard, which drove the horse at the bottom of the fence so that he would have to take off or run into the obstacle head-on.
He took off.
They landed well over the ditch and as Artemis gathered him up, she looked ahead and saw that hounds, her father and his huntsmen were all swinging right and heading towards a line of big hedges in the Vale.
Normally Artemis would have responded by kicking on and flying the raspers behind the leading group, for to her way of thinking there was no feeling like it in the world.
But today, realizing the problems she might have in controlling her mount let alone in staying on should it prop at a hedge or peck on landing, she decided discretion was the better part of valour and shortening her left rein swung Hullabaloo away in the other direction to take what was known as the Funks' Run, which ran round a long ridge of elms, across the brook at its narrowest point, and then over a good two miles of open ground, with only one reasonable sized open ditch and hedge to be jumped at the bottom of the dip before a long run uphill which led back to the last of the Vale hedges.
Artemis had sometimes taken this run when out with her cowardly cousins, although she would always jump the open ditch and hedge while her cousins were fumbling with the gate.
It wasn't until she turned away from the elms that Artemis realized she was not alone.
She took a look over her shoulder and saw a horse and rider behind her and at full stretch, but with the sun in her eyes, Artemis couldn't distinguish who it was.
But whoever it was, they were determined to catch Artemis, for when Artemis stole another look she saw the horse behind was really stretching out.
This was just what Artemis didn't want, some thruster charging up behind Hullabaloo whom she had just got settled, and trying to make a race of it, particularly with the big hedge fast approaching at the bottom of the dip.
So she checked Hullabaloo, and, to her surprise, the horse came back to her, perhaps having now learned to trust his new jockey.
Even so, Artemis had no time to relax or to shout at  whoever it was still charging up beside her to slow down because the hill was beginning to flatten out into the dip and they were fast approaching the big open ditch.
Which was when the other horse got to Hullabaloo's quarters, a big, handsome bay, his bit covered in a white froth, his nostrils wide and red, and his eye set fast on the forthcoming obstacle.
His weight was suddenly on Hullabaloo's flank.
Artemis was being purposefully ridden off, across the corner of the hedge towards the closed gate.
She dare not look round at who was busily trying to kill her, but shout and scream she could and she did.
It made no difference.
The big bay three quarterbred was being driven hard into Artemis's lightly framed thoroughbred, and Artemis could feel the distress signals through her hands and seat as the horse shortened its stride in a desperate attempt to find a way out.
Which it quite failed to do.
Faced with either crashing into the heavy gatepost or jumping the dark gaping ditch off far too short a stride, Hullabaloo tried to put in an extra stride and met the obstacle entirely wrong.
A second later he lay dead on the far side of the hedge, his neck snapped in two, with his young rider lying prostrate in the grass beside him.
The second Lady Deverill, having pulled her horse off Hullabaloo at the last minute, leaving herself just enough time to put him right at the ditch and hedge, didn't even bother to stop and admire her handiwork before riding on up the hill to rejoin the hunt and tell her husband that there seemed to have been a rather fearful accident.
Ellie Milligan was scrubbing the back step when there was a knock on the front door.
Wiping her hands on her apron, she went to see who was calling so early in the day.
It was their neighbour Madame Gautier, dressed in a pale yellow linen coat and dress, with a matching cloche hat.
‘I am taking you out,’ she announced.
‘So 'urry now and change, please.’
‘I can't, Madame,’ Ellie replied.
‘I have all the housework to do, and the shopping.’
‘Nonsense,’ said Madame.
‘Your father is away until the end of the week I know, with the three eldest.
So you 'ave no reason to refuse.
Now 'urry.
I 'ave a cab waiting.’
Madame sat down in Ellie's father's chair, by the unlit fire, and took out a cigarette from her purse, while Ellie stood uncertainly by.
‘I cannot wait all the morning,’ Madame said, lighting her cigarette.
‘You have until the end of this smoke.’
Ellie ran upstairs, threw off her old blouse and skirt and her much darned stockings, and got hurriedly dressed in her Sunday best, yet another variation on the plain black dress with detachable collar and cuffs she had been wearing for as long as she could remember.
Then, having quickly brushed her hair, she rushed back downstairs just as Madame was throwing her finished cigarette in the fire.
‘Uhhh,’ Madame said disapprovingly, as she appraised Ellie.
‘This is something I should 'ave done a very long time ago.
Alors.
On va .’
Ellie was now eighteen years old, and in all those years  she had never travelled in a taxi-cab, nor had she ever been into the heart of Boston.
She had spent all her formative years within the confines of the outlying suburb of Westfield, where there were few if any shops for ladies.
Where she lived, there seemed to be nothing but barbers' shops and grocery stores, drab haberdasheries, hardware stores and endless pawnshops.
There were no stores like the ones she could now see flashing past the cab window, fine jewellers and milliners, bookshops and department stores, their windows displaying a variety of goods Ellie had only ever seen in the pictures of second-hand magazines.
‘Thank you!’
Madame called to the cab driver.
‘Stop 'ere if you please!’
The cab drew up outside an enormous emporium in the very heart of the town, and Ellie alighted while Madame paid off the cab.
The store was called O'Hara's, of which Ellie had often heard, mostly from Madame, and of which she had, of course, seen photographs in the newspaper advertisements.
But nothing had prepared her for the monumental size and sheer glamour of the building.
It seemed it was not a shop, or a store, but a palace, full of the stuff of dreams, stocked with fancies and sheer imaginings, desires and private caprices.
Ellie felt an elemental thrill as she stepped through the great swing doors, as if she was entering an ancient cathedral rather than a modern monument to commercial enterprise.
‘Ready-made,’ said Madame, as she guided Ellie towards the elevator.
‘I think this is our first port of call, yes?
I would 'ave preferred couture, of course.
But alas, as you say, we are not made with money.’
The first dress which was tried on her would have suited Ellie somewhat more than fine.
To her it was quite perfect, a light red costume made of silk, which seemed to cling to her like a second skin.
‘'Opeless,’ said Madame.
‘I do not know what I am thinking.
Go please — and take that off at once.
Then come with me.’
Back in her drab black dress, Ellie was escorted smartly out of the ready-made department and back into the elevator.
‘Have I done something wrong, Madame?’
Ellie finally asked, afraid the dream was already over.
‘No, no, chérie  ,’ Madame sighed reassuringly.
‘No I am the foolish one.
You need underclothes!
You cannot wear today's dress over such things as you 'ave on!’
Madame laughed, ignoring the stares of the elevator's other occupants, and Ellie's quite visible embarrassment.
‘You poor child!
You cannot feel like a woman in such 'orrible bloomaires!’
Ellie recovered her composure and understood perfectly well what Madame meant once she had tried on her first set of crepe de Chine camiknickers.
‘Voila !’ said Madame from her chair in the corner of the well-curtained booth.
‘Perfect.
You have such a good figure!’
Ellie had never really given her shape much thought up until that moment.
She was always in such a hurry, jumping out of bed and straight into her workaday clothes, that she had failed to take notice of the fact that she was growing into a very shapely young woman.
But now as she stood looking at herself in a full length looking glass, she could see that she had indeed what the magazines described as the perfect figure, firm round breasts, a narrow flat waist, good hips, a small posterior, and long slender legs which were greatly enhanced by the silk stockings the assistant had carefully rolled on to them.
‘We will take that, please,’ Madame ordered.
‘And the chemise and knickaires also, in triple ninon I show you in the display case.’
Ellie was ordered to keep her new lingerie on under her old black dress as they made their way back downstairs to the ready-made department.
Here Madame rejected the dress Ellie had previously tried on, in favour of a pale blue two piece, with a scalloped and belted waist, a calf-length pleated skirt, a large but neat bow to one  side of the neckline, and two very small bows on the elbows of the wrist-length sleeves.
‘Très chic ,’ Madame announced.
‘Très très chic .
Except for your feet.
And your 'ead.’
Shoes were no problem, and Ellie was soon fitted with a pair of navy blue leather shoes, with gently curving two inch heels.
The question of her hair, however, brought about a confrontation, Madame arguing that Ellie's long hair, even caught up as it was in a chignon, was completely out of fashion, and quite ruined the look Madame was trying to create.
‘Besides, chérie  ,’ she argued, ‘with such 'air you cannot wear an 'at!
The cloche is still the fashion, whether we like it or no, and with your 'air as it is!
What can you wear?
Nothing!’
‘My father will murder me, Madame!’
Ellie pleaded, as Madame marched her off to the coiffeuse two floors up.
‘The one thing my father likes about me, or rather about the only thing he isn't directly rude about, is my hair!’
‘Your father 'e can go smoke,’ Madame retorted, sitting Ellie down in a chair.
‘You are a beautiful young woman, not some old-fashioned Irish 'ousemaid!
Now please!’
Madame instructed the hairdresser who was now in attendance.
‘We will 'ave all this off, yes?
And waved.
But 'ere — the shingle — 'ere we will 'ave a curl.
No shaving you understand, but cut into a soft curl just 'ere.
Comme ça .’
Madame indicated the preferred style from a set of drawings in a folder and Ellie, attached as she was to her mane of dark hair, was forced to agree how chic the chosen style was.
Particularly when Madame bought her a matching pale blue cloche, cut quite high at the back, and with a deep brim on the right side, which practically obscured her right eye.
‘I 'ear,’ Madame laughed as Ellie examined herself in a mirror hand-held by the assistant, ‘that in London these new 'ats are lethal!
Because the way the English drive, on the wrong side, with the brim —’ and to illustrate her  point, Madame put a hand up to her right eye, ‘with the brim comme ça they cannot see the oncoming traffic!’
‘Such is happily not the case in Boston,’ the assistant said, making a final and quite unnecessary adjustment to Ellie's new hat.
‘No, no,’ Madame agreed happily.
‘Nor en Paris.
Where naturellement the fashion 'e start.
As always.’
‘But why is it important for me to be fashionable?’
Ellie asked as they climbed once more into the elevator.
‘Please don't think I'm ungrateful, Madame, because I'm not.
But I don't quite understand the purpose of this outing.’
‘Ah, the more we understand,’ Madame replied, ‘the less then our pleasures.’
‘But when am I going to wear these clothes, Madame?
It's not as if I ever go out.’
‘No no, ma choupette .
It is as if you 'ave never gone out, yes.
But this does not mean you not ever go out.
Today for an instance, yes?
Today you are out!
Today you are out to lunch!’
There was a young woman waiting for Ellie and Madame as they stepped out of the elevator, which now only they occupied, on the very top floor.
Ellie wondered to herself what new department she was being taken to now.
‘Madame Gautier?’ the young woman enquired.
‘Mr O'Hara is waiting for you.’
Mr O'Hara?
Ellie wondered with a shock.
The Mr O'Hara?
The name above the building?
‘Madame-?’ she began.
‘Quiet, chérie  ,’ Madame interrupted.
‘Just straighten your dress, and do not say anything too foolish.’
A young man in an immaculate dark blue suit took over from the young woman who had met them at the elevator and led them into a vast room, furnished with antiques.
Ellie understood this to be an office, because there were young men in dark blue suits and white shirts, and young women stenographers in dark blue dresses  with white collars sitting at mahogany desks carefully checking perfectly arranged papers, or moving silently across the deeply carpeted floor to file immaculate folders away in mahogany bureaus.
Every so often, as the young man led them across the room, a telephone would ring, but quietly, its bell having been adjusted to suit the tone of the office, and someone would answer the muted telephone in a lowered voice.
No-one stared at Ellie as if she had no right to be there.
If anyone caught her curious eye, they just smiled politely back and got on with their business.
Ahead of her, the young man opened one of a pair of tall deeply polished rosewood doors.
‘Your visitors, sir,’ he announced before stepping aside.
‘Madame Gautier and Miss Milligan.’
Madame swept in while Ellie hesitated, afraid that any moment she might wake up from a dream.
She looked to the young man as if for reassurance, and he smiled back and nodded for Ellie to go on in, which she did without, much to her surprise, suddenly finding herself sitting upright at home in bed, clutching her thin bedding around her and wondering how her mind could imagine such things.
‘Miss Milligan,’ a man said somewhere in the haze in front of her.
‘This is indeed a pleasure.’
Ellie saw him now, perfectly clearly, an elderly man, short, bespectacled, immaculately dressed and judging from the hand he was extending to Ellie, beautifully manicured.
His face was open and pleasant, with a skin as pink as a child's.
‘I'm very pleased to make your acquaintance, Miss Milligan,’ the man continued.
‘I'm William O'Hara.
But my friends all know me as Buck.’
Ellie shook his hand, which was small, soft and uncalloused, so unlike her father's, which was large, hard and leathery.
She looked round the room, unable to believe her surroundings.
Again, she had only ever seen pictures of rooms like this in magazines, in the homes of  film stars: enormous chambers furnished as this one was with deep wing chairs and buttoned leather chesterfields, warmed by a huge log fire blazing in the grate, and with every wall hung with various and ornately framed oil paintings.
One particular painting caught her eye, and Ellie found herself staring back at it, time and again as Mr O'Hara and Madame began to chat.
It was of a harbour on a rough and windy day, which some small sailing ships were trying to enter with, it appeared to Ellie, no little difficulty, while behind them a steamer was cutting through the seas at great speed.
‘I find that an astonishing painting, don't you?’
Mr O'Hara was now at Ellie's side, having arrived unnoticed, so deeply was Ellie involved.
‘Yes,’ said Ellie.
‘It's the most astonishing painting I have ever seen.’
‘It is indeed, and I have to say it's my own personal favourite.
It's by an English painter, William Turner, he painted it in 1822.
And what I like about it — no.’
Her host stopped and nodded courteously to Ellie.
‘No I'd prefer it if you told me what you like about it.’
Ellie stared at the painting some more, before she started to explain.
‘I love the movement of the sea,’ Ellie said.
‘These waves whipped by the wind.
And all the reflections in the water, and all these deep shadows.
I can almost feel the spray, and taste the salt in the air.’
‘I do so agree,’ said Mr O'Hara.
‘But what does the painting tell you?’
‘I don't know.’
Ellie puckered her brow and stood a little back from the canvas.
‘I sort of get the impression that these little boats, the sail boats, they're in trouble, because the wind appears to be blowing away from the harbour, so if they're trying to get in, they're not going to make it.’
‘They're not, are they?
Not unless they wait for the tide, or row in.’
‘But the steamer, you see.
Here.’
Ellie pointed.
‘Behind  this boat here, which is also in difficulty, the steamer is obviously having no trouble, and is going to make harbour easily, at least that's how it appears.
Judging from the excitement going on on the jetty.’
Ellie pointed again, indicating the figures on the pier, people waving and running, accompanied by a startled dog.
‘And these poor fellows,’ Mr O'Hara added, ‘they're in real bad trouble I'd say, wouldn't you?’
He indicated the fishing boat in the foreground, where the fishermen were struggling with a mass of unfurled canvas.
‘If they don't make sense of that lot soon, they're either going to go under, or at the very least collide with another boat.’
‘If I was any of those people,’ Ellie concluded, ‘I'd want to be one on the steamer, wouldn't you, Mr O'Hara?’
‘I most certainly would, Miss Milligan,’ her host agreed.
‘And I think that's what the painter was saying.
I think he was celebrating the coming of steam power, and showing the people of his time how much safer they were going to be on the seas, don't you?’
‘I'm afraid I hadn't yet made that conclusion, Mr O'Hara,’ Ellie replied.
‘Perhaps not, young lady,’ O'Hara smiled.
‘But I'm certain you soon would have done.’
They lunched next door in a wood panelled dining room, hung with more fine paintings.
‘Is this where you live, Mr O'Hara?’
Ellie asked.
‘I'm afraid so,’ her host replied.
‘Yes, most of the time.
But I'd far rather be at home.’
Madame Gautier looked up and caught Ellie's eye just for a moment, and the glance seemed to say, See?
See what the world can hold?
And then Madame Gautier picked up her Waterford glass and took a sip of her wine.
‘You always have such exquisite wines, Buck,’ she said.
‘As well as the most perfect food.’
‘You only deserve the best, Madame,’ Mr O'Hara replied.
‘I'm forever telling you that.’
And he smiled at her, but his eyes left Ellie's face for only one moment.
* * *
' Bon ,’ Madame said on the cab ride home.
‘You did so very well, chérie  .’
Ellie said nothing.
She just sat and stared blankly as the world outside her changed from one of elegance and opulence to one of uniformity and poverty.
She said nothing because she did not know what to say.
One minute she had been on her hands and knees scrubbing and the next she was being wined and dined by the owner of the largest store in town.
And he had never stopped talking to her.
He wanted to know what she thought about everything, because as he told her he found everything she had to say so interesting.
Ellie was in fact surprisingly erudite, due, Patsy used to tease her, to her missing so much school.
Because she had spent so much of her teenage by herself, she had found plenty of time to read the newspapers and the books Patsy would bring home from school, or take out for her from the school library.
But she had never realized quite how much knowledge she had assimilated until today, until she had been forced into conversation for the first time ever with a total stranger.
And obviously she had done more than hold her own.
‘Yes indeed,’ Madame sighed, lighting a fresh cigarette and blowing the smoke out of the side of her mouth, ‘yes, you did very well indeed.’
‘Why?’
Ellie suddenly asked her companion.
‘You see I just don't understand, Madame.
Why did you take me there?’
Madame adjusted the cigarette in her holder, and then took another deep draw on it before answering.
‘In life,choupette ,’ she said, ‘the most difficult thing is la choix .’
'I don't understand, Madame,’ Ellie frowned.
‘To make a choice, chérie  .
No —the choice,’ Madame explained.
‘And so often it is better for someone other to make the choosing.’
‘Are you saying I have a choice, Madame?’
‘We all have a choice,choupette, d'accord .
Either we grab 'im by the beard —’
‘Who, Madame?’
‘The mountain lion, chérie  !
Either we grab 'is beard, and teetaire on the brink!
Yes?
Of the cliff!
Or we die from boredom.
Old, and depressed.
And with nothing in our journaux except the jottings of regret.
You want to be an unpaid 'ousemaid for the rest of your life?
Or for the rest of what matter of your life?
Your youth?
Yes?
No, no, of course not,choupette !
No the only thing to regret is what we do not do, which is what happen!
We regret the part we 'ave left, rather than rejoice over the part we 'ave preferred!’
Madame then settled back in her seat and fell into a deep sleep for the rest of the journey, full of good food and wine, and liqueurs, while Ellie stared back out of the window and tried to make some sense of all that had just been said, and all that had just happened.
Patsy was horrified when he saw his sister's hair.
‘Now you look like everyone else!’ he complained.
‘You look like every other shop girl!’
‘No I do not, Patsy!’
Ellie retorted.
‘No shop girl could afford this style!
This style is the very height of fashion!’
‘You bet,’ Patsy said.
‘And where are you planning to show it off?
At Sunday lunch?
When Pa gets home?’
Ignoring her brother's last remark, simply because Ellie had not yet worked out an answer to that particular problem, Ellie started to clear away their supper things into the kitchen.
Patsy followed her out, bringing some dishes.
‘He'll kill you,’ Patsy said.
‘He'll murder you.’
‘I'm over eighteen, Patsy,’ Ellie replied, ‘and I can wear my hair as I want.’
Even so, Ellie made sure she was upstairs and well out of the way when her father returned on Saturday.
She didn't know what she was waiting for, a miracle  perhaps, because one thing she did know, and that was that Patsy was right.
It didn't matter how old she was, or what her personal wishes were, when her father saw what she had done to her hair he would undoubtedly try to murder her.
She heard her father come into the house and call out for her, and she called back that she would be down in a moment, as soon as she was dressed.
And then the miracle Ellie was still praying for happened.
There was a ring at the front door.
Her father called twice for her to come down and answer it, but Ellie pretended not to hear.
After a moment, she crept out of her room and looked round the corner of the landing, down the stairs.
Outside the front door, which was open, she could see her father standing talking to someone in the porch.
At first Ellie was not sure who it was, as her father totally obscured her view.
And then when he moved and Ellie could see who the caller was, she didn't believe her eyes.
It was Madame Gautier.
Her father turned, to look suddenly up the stairs, as if he could sense Ellie hidden there, listening.
So Ellie darted back to her room, and shut herself in, her heart pounding.
It seemed an age before she heard the front door close again, and then another age before her father finally summoned her.
This time, since there was no reason for further prevarication, Ellie straightened her dress and went downstairs.
‘And what time may we expect supper, Eleanor?’ her father asked, standing by the front window with his back to her.
‘It's ready and cooked, Pa,’ Ellie replied.
‘But what about the others?’
‘Your brothers won't be back until tomorrow,’ her father replied, still staring out on to the street.
‘They stayed on for the game.’
He said nothing more to her.
He just stood there looking out, his large leathery hands clasped tight behind  his back, while Ellie wondered what on earth it could have been that Madame Gautier had said to him.
‘Patsy?’
Ellie called up the stairs, still wondering at her good fortune.
‘Supper!’
Nothing was said over supper either, not one word.
Not only that but Patrick Milligan ate his meal without a word of complaint about either the temperature of the plates or the quality of the food.
He simply cleared his plate, drank his tea, and then got up and went out of the house.
It was left to her brothers to pass comment at lunch the following day.
‘Jeeze — who do you think you are?’
Dermot sneered.
‘Jean Harlow?’
‘Jean Harlow's blonde,’ Mike said.
‘No she looks more like one of those cheap broads in the chorus.’
‘Shut it,’ Patsy said.
‘Hey, hey!’
Dermot put down his knife and fork and stared at his kid brother.
‘Any of you guys hear what I just heard?’
‘Yeah,’ said Fergal.
‘I thought I heard a worm turning.’
‘Me too,’ Mike agreed.
‘Anyway, like I was saying.
I don't know about you fellahs, but I don't like having a sister that looks like a tramp.’
‘Shut it, Mike,’ Patsy said again.
‘I mean it.’
Ellie looked down the table at her father, expecting an intervention.
Normally at table he nipped any argument in the bud, at least until he had finished eating.
But today he just carried on eating his pot roast with his head down, paying no attention at all to his argumentative brood.
‘I don't think I heard you right, Patricia,’ Mike said, looking Patsy in the eye.
‘You heard me right enough,’ replied Patsy.
‘I think Sis's new style would look good on Miss Patsy, fellahs, don't you?’
Dermot asked.
‘I think she'd look very pretty.’
‘Prettier maybe than her trampy sister here,’ Fergal added.
‘I can't take you all,’ Patsy said.
‘So who's it to be?’
‘Patsy —’ Ellie started.
‘Just keep out of it, Ellie,’ Patsy said.
‘OK?’
‘That's right, tramp,’ Mike agreed.
‘Keep your slummy nose out of it.’
‘OK, Mike,’ said Patsy, rising.
‘In the yard.’
Dermot and Fergal gave a great whoop and rose with Mike and Patsy.
Ellie looked once more down the table to her father, silently praying he would put an end to it, and prevent what was sure to be a bloodbath.
But he was still to all intents and purposes uninterested.
For he just pushed his plate aside, wiped his mouth on the back of his hand, and getting up from the table once again went out of the house without saying a word.
In the yard, the protagonists were preparing for battle.
Patsy had his jacket and tie off, and was carefully rolling up his sleeves.
Although he was now nearly twenty, he was still considerably smaller than even Mike, who was nearest him in age.
He was also still considerably lighter, although as he rolled his sleeves right up to the top of his arms, Ellie for the first time was aware of the amount of muscle he seemed to have gained.
His brothers certainly were not as they formed a conspiratorial circle round Mike in the other corner of the yard, which all at once had become a boxing ring.
Dermot looked round briefly at Patsy and Ellie and then said something to his two brothers which made all three of them laugh.
‘You don't have to do this, Patsy,’ Ellie told her brother.
‘You don't have to do this for me.’
‘I'm not doing it just for you, Ellie,’ Patsy said, spitting into his hands.
‘Don't you worry, I'm doing it for both of us.’
Ellie squeezed her brother's arm, then turned to go.
She could never bear to watch her brothers fight, least of all when one of them decided to give Patsy a pasting.
‘No — don't go,’ Patsy said.
‘I'd like you to stay.’
‘I couldn't,’ Ellie replied.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘You'll be sorrier if you go,’ Patsy suddenly grinned.
‘For there'll be no second shots.’
‘Look out!’
Ellie cried, as she saw Mike hurling himself at the unprepared Patsy.
Patsy turned in plenty of time, nimbly, quick on his feet as a buck hare.
Then he jinked and side-stepped, and Mike crashed clumsily past him straight into the fence.
‘Now will you stay?’
Patsy asked.
‘You'll be missing something otherwise.’
‘You're mad,’ Ellie told him.
‘I've been mad for too long,’ Patsy replied, moving out into the centre of the yard.
‘And I'll stay mad till this is settled!’
Ellie stayed
It was no contest.
From the moment Mike put up his fists, the fight was over.
He moved in against his young brother, slowly this time, determined not to be made a fool of twice.
Patsy jinked away from him, on his toes, his hands held low, leaving his face completely exposed.
‘On the button!’
Dermot yelled.
‘Let's see the bastard bleed!’
Mike moved in even closer, and this time it seemed he caught Patsy flat-footed.
Certainly Mike had all the time in the world to launch a right hook, but Patsy also must have had all the time in the world to see it, for he simply swayed back on his heels and the punch missed by over a foot.
Still Patsy didn't put up his hands, inviting his opponent to take another swing.
He even moved in, thrusting his bobbing head well within range.
Mike met his brother's eyes and saw they were like steel.
‘Come on, cissy,’ Mike hissed, ‘put up a fight.
Make a show of it, come on — before I knock the shite out of you.’
‘OK,’ said Patsy, and hit him with a perfect straight left.
Mike didn't even see it coming.
One minute Patsy's hands had been by his side, the next moment Mike's nose was split and the blood was gushing down his face and flooding the back of his throat.
‘Jesus!’
Mike cried, ‘you bastard!
You sneaky bastard!’
‘You said you wanted a fight,’ Patsy replied, circling round his enraged brother.
‘If you didn't want me to hit you, you should have kept your mouth shut.’
He jabbed Mike again, suddenly, right under his nose.
‘That mouth,’ he said.
‘My — it's that big —’ Patsy hit him again.
‘I can hardly miss it.’
And he hit him again.
‘What in hell are you doing, kid!’
Dermot shouted from Mike's makeshift corner.
‘You gone to sleep or something!’
Patsy backed off and dropped his hands again, but not his mental guard.
He kept moving all the time, on his toes with his weight perfectly balanced, just as he'd been taught, down at the gymnasium, every Saturday and every Wednesday for the past five years, times when everyone thought he was busy doing something else.
The occasional black eye he had collected early on, when he was still at school, he had attributed to the fights he was always having in the playground, or on the street coming home.
And no-one had ever suspected a thing.
Because no-one was in the least bit interested.
Least of all his brothers, who were now watching with ever increasing dismay as Mike, the ‘broth's’ best fighter, was having the rings run round him by the family runt.
‘Wake up, you dozy bastard!’
Fergal yelled at Mike.
‘Pick him off with your right!’
But Mike was hurting too much already from the blow that had split his nose; he'd never been hit that hard.
And then the three straight jabs in the mouth — Mike could feel several loose front teeth, one of which seemed embedded in his swollen upper lip.
‘OK, Patsy,’ he mumbled as his young brother weaved round him.
‘OK so you got lucky.
So let's call it a day — OK?’
‘No,’ said Patsy.
‘It's not OK, Mike.
Not yet I'm afraid.’
Then again from nowhere came a punch, like iron, straight into Mike's solar plexus, knocking the breath  from him so completely Mike thought he was going to die.
He doubled over, unable to help himself, only to be immediately uprighted by another punch which rocked him back on his heels.
He stood there, his face awash with blood, his swollen mouth hanging open, but still conscious, still awake enough to see his younger brother's eyes as they fixed his own and lined him up for the coup de grace .
Which came mercifully swiftly, in the shape of another devastatingly accurate straight left, and then a perfect right uppercut which hardly seemed to travel more than a foot, but which was delivered with such a force that it lifted Mike up on to his toes, before toppling him backwards in a heap at his elder brothers' feet.
Eight punches.
That's all it had taken.
A straight left, three jabs, a right, another right, a straight left, and a right uppercut.
‘Christ,’ said Dermot.
‘Jesus Christ.
‘Jesus Christ Almighty,’ said Fergal.
Patsy turned to them, unmarked except for where he had been stained by his brother's blood.
‘OK,’ he said.
‘Who's next?’
‘You didn't learn to fight like that in the playground,’ Ellie said as she bathed Patsy's knuckles in onion water.
‘You're right,’ her brother grinned, and told her about the gymnasium.
‘I haven't lost a fight in three years,’ he said.
‘Look,’ said Ellie, wiping her hands dry.
‘If you were that fancy, we'd have heard about you.’
‘No you wouldn't,’ Patsy replied.
‘I fight under the name of Charlie Farrell.
No-one knows I'm a Milligan.
And no-one in the family follows boxing.
Least not amateur boxing.’
‘So why didn't you stand up to them before?’
Patsy shrugged.
‘Once I'd learned to fight, it stopped bothering me.
The only thing that gets me steamed up is when they have a go at you.
And I guess today — I guess they just went a little too far.’
Ellie leaned up and kissed her brother on the cheek, then she put both hands on his biceps.
‘I didn't even notice these,’ she said.
‘I should at least have noticed you'd got stronger.’
‘How?’ her brother smiled.
‘We don't share a room any more.
We haven't shared a room for ten years.
And I haven't put on much weight.
I've just gotten strong.’
‘I wonder what Pa will have to say?’
Ellie smiled.
Nothing, was the answer.
At least not to Ellie.
But that Saturday for the first time in his life, he invited his youngest son Patsy to attend the ball-game along with himself and his other three sons.
‘You must not be surprised if 'e choose to ignore you,choupette ,’ said Madame when Ellie next visited her.
‘You know they say the Irish, they ignore what they cannot hit or drink.’
Madame laughed and poured them both some more tea.
‘I think maybe the reason he isn't speaking to me,’ Ellie ventured, ‘is something you might have said to him.’
‘Me?’
Madame protested, the picture of innocence.
‘When you called last Saturday.’
‘He nevaire told you that.
That I called.’
‘I saw you.
From the landing.
Why did you, Madame?
And what did you say to him?’
Madame drank her tea and put the fine china cup carefully back on the saucer which she was holding in her other hand.
‘That, I think, is a matter between your father and myself,’ she replied finally.
'Pardon me,but-'
‘No,’ Madame rebuked her sharply.
‘Nevaire such a vulgarism!
I keep reminding you!
Nevaire ‘pardon me’.
‘Excuse me.’
‘Excuse me’.’
‘Excuse me,’ Ellie stood corrected.
‘But I thought-I thought my father and you weren't on speaking terms.’
‘Yes?’
Madame said, giving a small but definitely supercilious sniff.
‘That is not the truth.
The truth is I am not speaking to your father.’
Ellie was baffled.
At home Madame, if referred to at all, had always been the person who had been derided.
She had been called a despicable woman, a scarlet creature, a hussy, a jessy, and on the occasions when her father had taken drink, much worse.
His contempt for her had been occasioned, as Ellie understood it, by her father's disdain for Madame's previous occupation as an actress, since, as he said, he had always held the theatre to be nothing but a den of iniquity.
So why was it and how come that Madame was claiming that the opposite was true and that it was her father who was the person out of favour?
Madame must know, of course, but Madame was not telling.
‘If you search for truth,choupette ,’ was all she would allow, ‘you will find nothing but contradictions.’
What Madame did tell Ellie, however, was that Mr O'Hara was very keen to renew their acquaintance, which he had found all too brief.
If it was agreeable with Ellie, he would be delighted to escort her to dinner and the opera on Saturday.
‘What about my father?’ was Ellie's first enquiry.
‘Your father,’ Madame replied, ‘is not included in the invitation.’
‘You know perfectly well what I mean,’ Ellie said, ignoring Madame's tease.
‘What shall I tell him?’
‘Tell him you are going to dine at Auguste's before being taken to see La Traviata,’Madame instructed, ‘by one of the richest and most influential men in Boston.’
‘Why you?’ was her father's first question, echoing Ellie's own bewilderment.
‘My God — he has the whole of Boston to choose from!’
‘I think he's just being nice,’ Ellie offered rather feebly.
‘He's a very sweet gentleman.’
‘Trade knows no gentlemen,’ her father replied loftily, as if he himself was an important landowner instead of just the foreman of a modest building firm.
‘Money doesn't automatically confer breeding.’
‘So what shall I tell him, Pa?’
Ellie asked.
‘Shall I tell him no?’
‘You will tell him nothing, Eleanor,’ her father replied sternly.
‘Not until you have told me how you met him.’
Ellie told him the truth.
She had no alternative.
There was no point in trying to invent a story, because under these circumstances no made-up story could begin to sound even remotely plausible.
Besides, Ellie never told stories.
Ellie had always believed in the truth.
‘I knew it!’ her father roared in response.
‘I knew that Jezebel would have a hand in it!’
‘Madame simply took me out shopping and to have lunch,’ Ellie countered.
‘What could she possibly be having a hand in?
Please may I go?
Please?’
‘I want to know what is behind this first,’ he snapped, ‘because for the life of me I cannot understand why a man in his position should want to take up with the likes of you.
So I intend to find out exactly what is going on first, before I even consider giving my consent.’
Ellie groaned as she watched her father stride to the door, intent, it appeared, on confronting Madame.
But then he stopped, with his hand still on the door handle, and hesitated for what seemed an age.
And with good reason.
For Patrick Milligan knew what Madame's answer would be.
It would be the same answer she gave him when she forbade him to chastise Ellie on account of her newly-styled hair.
If that was what he wanted, she would no doubt tell him again, if he wished to forbid the outing, then perhaps it was time for Madame herself to break her long silence.
‘You can't possibly go,’ Ellie heard her father say finally, still with his back to her, and her heart sank.
‘Why not, Pa?’ she pleaded.
‘Why on earth not?’
‘Because, girl,’ he said, ‘you have nothing to wear.’
‘Madame said she'd lend me something,’ Ellie said, hardly able to believe her ears.
‘She said she could alter something of her's —’
‘No!’ her father thundered.
‘I'll not have any daughter  of mine going out second-best!
And certainly not in that hussy's cast-offs!’
He turned to Ellie, and reaching into his back pocket, withdrew a roll of bills.
‘Here,’ he said.
‘Go out and buy yourself something pretty.’
Then he turned and went out, leaving Ellie to stare speechlessly at the most money she had ever seen in her life.
And so began a friendship that before Ellie knew it had become a courtship.
William O'Hara, whom Ellie quite properly never called anything but Mr O'Hara, and who equally properly never called Ellie anything but Miss Milligan, escorted Ellie to the opera, to concerts, to Boston's fine art galleries, and to the theatre.
With the money her father had given her, Ellie, with the necessary help of Madame Gautier, had chosen and bought for herself her very first evening gown, a simply stunning and practically backless dress fashioned out of moire in the new fashionable colour of rose-opaline.
The night Ellie first wore the gown to the opera, her three eldest brothers all wolf-whistled her to the door and Patsy, his eyes like saucers, gave her a corsage of orchids and escorted her to the limousine which had come to collect her.
But of course one evening gown and one day dress soon proved to be a woefully insufficient wardrobe for someone who was being escorted around Boston as much as Ellie now was.
‘Please don't take this as an impertinence, Miss Milligan,’ Mr O'Hara said to her early on in their relationship, ‘but a girl as pretty as you, and one as elegant, should really have the clothes to enhance her beauty.
Now I know what you're going to say,’ he continued, holding up one expensively gloved hand to forestall Ellie's objections, ‘that clothes are expensive and that you do not have the means.
But I would consider it a great honour and privilege if you would allow me to help you overcome this disadvantage by making you a gift of whatever you may need.’
Ellie had of course tried to refuse, but Mr O'Hara would not hear of it.
So Ellie conceded, and went one day with Madame to Mr O'Hara's emporium and bought two more day dresses, another pair of shoes, and, very reluctantly, another gown for the evening.
Mr O'Hara smiled when Ellie showed him her selections upstairs in his private office, and sent them straight back downstairs to their various departments.
‘That was not at all what I had in mind for you,’ he said, pouring the three of them glasses of champagne.
‘Forgive me, but if I may say so, you have far too modest an opinion of yourself.’
‘This is what I am telling 'er always,’ Madame sighed.
‘But this girl she is too 'umble.
And too stubborn .’
‘Perhaps after lunch, Madame,’ Mr O'Hara suggested, ‘you and I might be able to persuade Miss Milligan otherwise.’
‘I am sure we can, Buck,’ Madame concurred, dropping her voice mock-conspiratorially.
‘Particularly if you give 'er some more champagne.’
Even if Ellie had been quite and utterly sober, she would have still found the clothes which were paraded after lunch for her sole benefit in one of the salons reserved for such occasions quite irresistible.
As it was, with two glasses of champagne inside her, and as the mannequins displayed the latest fashions from Paris and London, she felt she was once more in heaven, even more so two hours or so later as Mr O'Hara's chief assistants wrapped up the final choices: dresses, gowns and lingerie made of georgette, and flowered taffetas, moires, silks and satins, subtle lamés, artificial marocain and crêpe de Chine, in colours of white or pastel blue, cerise, pearl-grey, oyster and of course rose-opaline.
‘If I could perhaps have your address for delivery please, Miss Milligan,’ the chief assistant requested.
Madame gave the woman her own address.
‘Knowing your father, ché ,’ she whispered to Ellie, ‘perhaps it is a little more tactful.’
But even if Patrick Milligan had known the size of ‘Buck’ O'Hara's munificence, he would not have raised any objections.
Patrick Milligan knew a good thing when he saw it, as he told his ‘broth’, and their sister's relationship with one of Boston's most successful citizens was all of that.
‘What we must hope and pray for, me boys,’ he said one night as they dined alone on salad and cold meat, Ellie being out at a concert, ‘is for a state of some permanence.
Now I know it's a lot to expect, what with your sister still only nineteen, and the old a ‘Buck’ being every year of sixty five, so they tells me, but May and September's always been a heady mix, and the old fool seems besotted.’
‘Ellie'll not marry Mr O'Hara,’ said Patsy defiantly.
‘She's too much good sense.
She'd never throw herself away on some dirty old man.’
‘And sure why do you think she'd be ‘throwing herself away’, Pat?
Eh?’ asked his father.
‘How can you throw yourself away’ down a gold mine?’
The ‘broth’ laughed, but Patsy remained intransigent.
‘Ellie's not that sort, Pa, that's why,’ Patsy answered.
‘Ellie's no gold-digger.’
‘Well, as I said,’ Patrick Milligan said carefully, ‘it's a lot to expect, but suppose-.’
The head of the family rested his knife and fork on their heels and looked down the table.
‘Suppose they was to get wed, just suppose now-.’
Patrick Milligan was careful to keep it hypothetical, mindful of the dark look on Patsy's face.
‘Because to be fair, Pat, your sister has her own life to lead, and we must all respect that.
You've all of you, there's no denying it, you've all too often taken advantage of Eleanor, and so it's only right and proper now you should respect the fact she has a life of her own.’
‘You'll have to excuse me, Pa,’ Patsy said rising, ‘but I've business to do.
I still have a lot of premiums to collect.’
‘You're excused, me boy,’ his father said.
‘You're excused.’
Patsy went, using his work for the insurance company as a pretext, for in truth he could take no more of the hypocrisy.
‘As I was saying,’ Patrick Milligan continued, once his youngest was out of the house, ‘if the best came to the best, and your sister married the old codger, we could be in clover.
Sure people like O'Hara, they always need men.
They need people to look after their interests.
To protect them.
Particularly in these hard times.
If you see what I mean.’
The ‘broth’ was beginning to see what their father meant.
What he meant was they might be able to come off the building sites, and fall into a featherbed job, one in which they could wear nice suits and drive fancy cars, in return for looking after one very rich old man's ‘interests’.
‘Let me put it another way, boys,’ their father said, sitting back and wiping his mouth on his hand.
‘And this is just supposing.
Just suppose the old codger does get serious.
Suppose he does want to make the relationship permanent.
I mean, one can always make conditions.
When it comes to giving your consent to a girl who's not yet reached her majority, sure a father's every right to make one or two conditions, now wouldn't you say?’
The ‘broth’ all grinned and nodded.
Yes, they all said.
Yes indeed they would.
William O'Hara proposed to Ellie on the anniversary of their first date.
Ellie was rendered speechless.
There had never been a hint of any romance between them, although their friendship had deepened with each meeting.
Ellie provoked and stimulated Mr O'Mara with her inquisitive and questioning mind, and entertained him with her ever truthful and utterly pragmatic approach, while the kindness, respect and affection that he had accorded Ellie had enabled her to grow quickly and painlessly from a gauche teenager into a poised young woman.
But one who had given no thought to love.
‘I can see I've surprised you,’ Mr O'Hara apologized over dinner.
‘That was not my intention.’
They had been to see La Boheme , at which Mr O'Hara had cried quite openly, and which Ellie had sat through dry-eyed, but with a breaking heart.
Taking time to recover, the first course of their dinner had been eaten practically in silence.
‘I should have given you more time,’ Mr O'Hara continued.
‘Or perhaps I should not have asked you at all.’
‘No!’ said Ellie, almost too emphatically, afraid that even though she did not know her own mind, he might withdraw his offer.
And Ellie did not wish to lose Mr O'Hara, at least not as a friend.
‘You did surprise me,’ Ellie confessed, truthful as ever.
‘But then that's my fault.
I have obviously been taking you for granted.’
‘If you have been taking me for granted,’ Mr O'Hara argued, ‘then that is my fault.
I should have been more entertaining company.’
‘Nobody could be better company than you, Mr O'Hara.’
‘Nor anyone better than you, Miss Milligan.’
The waiter served them their next course, and neither of them spoke until he was gone.
‘I can't think why someone such as yourself should want to marry me,’ Ellie said eventually.
‘That is the very first foolish thing I have ever heard you say, young lady,’ Mr O'Hara replied with a smile.
Ellie looked down.
‘What I meant was —’ she explained quietly, ‘is that you can't marry me.
I'm — I'm from the wrong side of the tracks.’
Mr O'Hara stared at her then laughed.
‘So am I, Miss Milligan!’ he said.
‘Why heavens — so am I!
Except I am much more so than you!
Why, my family came from a two bit shack.
Right by the railroad.
Every time the express went by, we had to hold the windows in.
I had no schooling.
I was an errand boy, a boot black, a bellhop, a messenger boy — all before I was nine years old!
Then I went to work in a five and ten, and gradually worked my way up until I was managing a general store.
Age twenty  I was.
Manager of a store.
But still on the wrong side of town.’
He paused to take a sip of wine as he recollected the distant years.
‘And even though most would have been quite happy to get where I had got at that age, I believe that a man is nothing unless he believes he has greater possibilities.
Which I did.
So I borrowed some money and bought a store of my own, a tiny place, a cigar store, but in the right part of town, and in the right part of the right part of town.
On a corner.
If ever you're thinking of buying a store, Miss Milligan, buy one on a corner.
That way you get two fronts for the price of one.’
Ellie laughed and then smiled at her companion.
‘So don't you worry about being from the wrong side of the tracks, Miss Milligan,’ he reassured her.
‘In fact we probably wouldn't be such friends if you weren't.
And please don't worry either about the fact that you don't love me.’
Now Ellie really was knocked off balance.
If she was going to decline Mr O'Hara's proposal, it was going to be for that very reason.
‘But I don't,’ she said.
‘Why should you?’ he asked.
‘Because when people get married,’ Ellie tried explaining, ‘it's better if they love each other.’
Mr O'Hara smiled.
‘I don't wish to disillusion you, Miss Milligan,’ he said.
‘Nor do I wish to sound like a cynical old man.
But frankly when people marry it's often a far better thing if they don't love each other.
Oscar Wilde said it, you know.
Something along the lines that a man can be happy with any woman as long as he doesn't love her.’
‘Does the same apply to a woman with any man, Mr O'Hara?’
‘I'm quite sure it does, Miss Milligan.
At least in this case I am quite sure it would apply.
You see, the reason I want to marry you is a very simple one.
When, after an evening such as this, you go home, and I go home, I miss you.
I miss your wonderful company.
If I stay in  my apartment, or if I go home to my house, I am lonely.
I'm not lonely because I am bored, please understand.
I have never minded being by myself, and I consider those who do to be selfish.
No, I am lonely for you, Eleanor.
For the sunshine you have brought to a place where I thought the sun would never shine any more.
And I would like to keep that light shining, until the day I die, you see.
Because it's a long time since I felt like this, as good as I do now.
As good as you make me feel.
And I think in return for what you have given me, I should marry you.
And you will never want again.
Not for the rest of your life.’
‘You did not say no!’
Madame rose from her chair, appalled by the notion, her cigarette holder clenched between her teeth.
‘Tell me you did not say no, Eleanor!’
Ellie stared out at the full moon above the yard, above the wrong part of town.
Unable to sleep and seeing Madame's bedroom light still on, she had thrown a pebble against the glass and called her down.
‘Why did you introduce me to him, Madame?’
Ellie asked.
‘It can't just have been a whim.’
‘That is not important, Eleanor,’ Madame replied sharply.
‘What I do, I do.’
‘And that's no reply, Madame.’
Ellie turned and looked at her friend and her neighbour.
‘Do you find girls for him, is that it?’
‘I should slap your face for that.’
‘I shouldn't blame you if you did.
So go on.’
They stared at each other, a foot apart, eye into eye, the battered urchin from next door now a beautiful young woman in a gown by Patou, and the beautiful young woman from Paris now a battered old woman in much-mended peignoir .
‘I find girls for people, yes,’ Madame confessed, ‘but not for 'im.
Monsieur O'Hara, I find him company.
But most of the girls I find, they are so stupid.
And they take from him.
Take, take.
That is all they do.’
‘I've taken from him,’ Ellie said.
‘What's the difference?’
‘The difference is, chérie  ,’ Madame replied, ‘you 'ave given more, much more than you take.
And anyway, you do not take!
Monsieur O'Hara, he give these things to you!
You 'ave nevaire asked for anything !
Once!
These other girls — they take 'is 'and, they squeeze 'is cheek, they pat 'is 'ead, like 'e was a bébé !
And then they say — I want a new pair of shoes, Buck sweetie.
Can I 'ave a new gown, some silk pyjamas, some French lingerie, a fur coat!
You 'ave nevaire ask 'im for anything!
Not even a pair of gloves!’
The moon was now hidden by clouds as Ellie turned and looked back out of the window.
Madame came to her side, and slipped her arm through Ellie's.
‘Listen,’ she said.
‘I did this for you.
More than for 'im.
I knew 'e would like you, because you are a wonderful girl, and 'e is a wonderful man.
But this time, I do this for you.
Think.
And take this thought with you to bed.
Marry 'im.
Marry Monsieur O'Hara.
He will want nothing from you but your company.’
Ellie looked round.
‘Nothing at all,’ Madame continued.
‘'E will not want to make love with you, I promise.
That is, if you wish it, that will be part of the arrangement.
I know this.
I 'ave 'is word.
And Monsieur O'Hara, 'e is a man of his word.
So marry 'im, Eleanor.
And cross the tracks.
And live like a princess.
Like I always say you will, evaire since I first tell you stories, eh?
I say you will live one day like a duchess, because this is what you deserve.
And then when 'e die, everything, but everything, it will be your's.’
The clouds passed from the face of the moon, which now threw a clear cold light on the two adjoining yards.
Ellie stared out, and saw no future there.
What she saw was all past.