

For more than a hundred years thousands of children have dug in the firm sand and paddled in the sea on the safe Swanage beach.
Their parents have chatted, read the newspaper and lazed in the sun.
Only their dress — or lack of it — has changed.
Until Princess Victoria spent a night in Swanage in 1933 little had happened here since King Alfred's times.
Even his battle with the Danes off Peveril Point is only a story.
Of course, there was the continual ringing sound of the quarryman chipping away the stone at Tilly Whim or in the bowels of the earth under Cowleaze.
The one long straggly high street was always smothered in dust in the summer and with mud in the winter when the great stone carts lurched down from the quarries to the ‘bankers’— the place where the stone was stacked up along the shore.
But it was not until the late arrival of the railway a century ago that Swanage really woke up.
The stone ‘bunkers’ on the shore were swept away, the Parade took their place, a new pier was built with a proper promenade and the trippers flocked in by paddle-steamer and train.
‘Dear old Swanage’ has been ill-treated over the years.
But a view from the Downs or from Studland Hill overlooks the indiscretions.
It remains a beautiful and absorbing place, championed by so many loyal devotees.
Forming the landscape
The story of Swanage begins when the Isle of Purbeck was taking shape during the Ice Age.
The chalk hills to the north of the Bay and the limestone plateau to the south were formed some 25 million years ago, the result of unimaginable mountain-building pressure which also raised the Alps.
In recent geological time there was a post-glacial rise in the sea-level which gradually broke through the chalk barrier, leaving Old Harry in Purbeck and the Needles in the Isle of Wight 15 miles apart.
OLD HARRY at low tide in 1896 when his wife half collapsed.
Studland folk said it was Harry who fell.
Handfast Point was joined to the cliff by a narrow ridge at this time.
The sea attacks weak points, forming caves, then arches until eventually a whole section of cliff falls.
Pointed columns of chalk called the Pinnacles line of the cliffs near Ballard Point.
The formation of Purbeck left the so-called Island with a great variety of strata which resulted in the striking scenery of Swanage and its bays, cliffs and headlands.
The backcloth of the town from the south is provided by the chalk forming Studland Hill, now safe with the National Trust, and Ballard Point.
Thomas Hardy described ‘the Bollard’ as  ‘the cliff rounded off at the top in vegetation like a forehead with low-grown hair’.
Inland Nine Barrow Down (654′) continues west towards Corfe Castle.
A geological fault between Ballard Down and Godlingston Hill forms a wind gap affording the road from Swanage to Studland.
At the foot of Ballard Cliff the beach is covered by fallen rocks of chalk, changing to pebbles and shingle further south.
The main beach is sandy and normally sheltered but an easterly storm will bring up masses of seaweed which occasionally has to be carted away.
Charles Kingsley wrote: ‘In the centre of the bay the softer wealden beds have been worn away, forming an amphitheatre of low sand and clay cliffs.
The southern horn is formed by the dark limestone of the Purbeck marble.
A quaint old-world village slopes down to the water, over green downs, quarried like some gigantic rabbit burrow, with the stone workings of seven hundred years’.
The quarries on the skyline are now used as caravan sites.
Beyond Peveril Point, Durlston Bay displays cliffs of Purbeck stone covered with boulders and masked by landslips.
South of Durlston Head the coast turns westwards.
At Anvil Point and Tilly Whim forbidding cliffs of Purbeck-Portland stone continue beyond the Swanage parish boundary to Dancing Ledge, Headbury, Seacombe, Winspit and St Aldhelm's Head with many other abandoned cliff quarries.
Man is indeed fortunate to have chosen Swanage as a settlement, fashioned so beautifully by geological chance.
The Bagshot beds forming the heath are the youngest rocks.
The cretaceous rocks, the chalk spine with greensand and gault below.
The Wealden sands and clays in the vale.
The Jurassic limestone — upper, middle and lower Purbeck and Portland stone.
It was probably on the treacherous PEVERIL LEDGES of tumbled ‘marble’, burr and rag — jutting out into the sea like a jagged nail — that the Danish fleet, chased by King Alfred, was wrecked in a sea mist in 877.
The Peveril Point syncline forms the sharp folds of the Upper Purbeck ‘marble’ and burr.
The sea has worn  away the softer sands and clays between Ballard down and Peveril Point to form SWANAGE BAY.
DURLSTON BAY, consisting of layers of Purbeck limestone and clay, is the result of faults and numerous landslips caused by underground water and unstable conditions.
The settlement by the waters
The ancient Mill House and Pond are in the heart of the settlement of Swanage, first mentioned in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (877).
It clearly arose from the line of springs issuing from the rocky hillside, and also from the narrow crossing below the church over the otherwise broad flood plain or reputed lake.
The water drops into the Swanage brook as does another spring at Carrants Court further west.
Here at the former farm was a pond now covered, but the rivulet still flows alongside Court Road.
The WISHING WELL at the Tithe Barn Museum.
RUN DRY by E.J. Gregory, R.A.
Carrants Court with the pond and farm.
The farmhouse is the one with the front garden on the left of the road now called Court Hill.
The alluvial marsh was supposed to have been the site of an ancient royal swannery, and to have contributed the first syllable to the name Swanwic, mentioned in Domesday, though Old English ‘swan’ appears to derive from swineherd.
The story of a Danish admiral, Sweyn, having perished in the Bay is also given some credence.
East of the parish church and the old rectory is the Tithe Barn.
On either side of it are wells which are never dry; one is now the Museum's wishing well.
Other nearby springs supplied Frogwell below the Town Hall and the conduit which ran from Springfield into the brewery for more than a century on the perhaps appropriate site of the new Health Centre.
Swanage Pale Ale was renowned as the equal of Burton beer.
Leland, the Tudor antiquary, mentioned that at Swanage there was ‘a peere and a little fresh water’.
The clear spring near the present pier still gushes from the rock below the road and across Monkey Beach where the monkey boats landed for provisions and drinking water in days gone by.
The Brook — it appears to have no official name — springs from the Wealden water-shed some three miles west between Swanage and Corfe Castle and flows into the sea by the Mowlem.
Normally a modest stream, it occasionally becomes a torrent after a downpour and, when held up by a high tide-can give rise to flooding in the lower part of the town as, spectacularly, in 1914 and 1935.
The low-lying meadows, the Whistles, now skirted by Victoria Avenue, have often been flooded in winter.
An ancient wall formed the boundary between the High Street and the Brook.
The ‘great wall of Swanage’ as it might well be termed, can still be traced in considerable lengths, for instance alongside the lane running west from the Mill Pond, being the extension of Priest's Way.
Gates in the wall gave access to the lake from High Street properties such as the former New Inn, its floor levels dropping in stages to the garden wall.
STATION ROAD under water in November 1935.
The Brook flows under the shops opposite, built just before the First World War.
The furniture shop on the right is now Forte's corner restaurant.
THE BROOK, about a century ago, taken from the present King's Road opposite Springfield Road.
The meandering stream was later straightened and channelled through a culvert under the gardens of the new houses.
The original steam emerges and continues alongside the old Rectory, developing into a canal opposite the parish church.
Purbeck House can be seen above the High Street and part of the ‘great wall of Swanage’.
The same view, taken a little nearer to the Brook, in c.1980.
Tilly Mead on the other side of the stream is being raised with several feet of stone chippings.
In the distance, Panton's Brewery, closed down and demolished in 1893.
On the right is the station, opened in 1885.
Here the flood water cascades over the sea wall by the Parade during the same floods.
The boarding houses replaced the stone ‘bankers’ at the turn of the century.
The legacy of Domesday
On the hillside below Ballard Down nestles Whitecliff, mentioned in Domesday as Whiteclive.
Tradition claims that King John used it as hunting lodge.
In the 17th century the farmhouse was owned by the Cockram family and, more recently, the Earl of Eldon.
Due west is Ulwell, formerly an idyllic hamlet with its farm, mill and pond — the ‘owl well’ or perhaps the ‘holy well’.
Prehistoric graves have recently been discovered in the vicinity.
Godlingston Manor lies below the wood and hill of the same name.
It was a Saxon settlement and belonged to the families of Talbot, Rempstone and Carent.
Henry Bankes of Kingston Lacy and Corfe Castle bought the estate in 1765.
Ralph Bankes left it, together with all his other estates, to the National Trust on his death in 1981.
Domesday Book seems to have divided Swanage into parts.
The northern Swanwic formed a very large domain, formerly held by the wife of Hugh Fitzgrip.
In 14th century it was split into two portions, one held by the Carents, the other by the Talbots of Godlingston.
In Edward IV's reign John Carent married Isobel, heiress of the Rempstones, to whom the manor had descended.
WHITECLIFF may be on the site of a Roman villa.
Part of the present farmhouse is Elizabethan.
The entrance is from the north, with two quaint 17th century windows with rounded heads.
The garden walls appear to be more archaic than the house.
The semi-circular TOWER at the west end of Godlingston farmhouse has immensely thick walls and was probably a fortified stone house of c.1300.
The door appears to have been entered at first floor level.
The main house is long and low and dates from the 16th and 17th centuries.
It contained a great hall but was considerably altered following afire in 1871.
The other Swanwic estate was Carents Court, now only known as Court.
The former manor house passed to Bonds.
Dennis Bond wrote in his ‘chronology’ in 1639: ‘The 27th December there was such a wind that it did blow down divers houses and several woods.
I had at Carrans Cort blown down 30 great ealmes which had in them 50 tunes of timber.’
Alongside the spring the tree-lined from Carrants Court Led up the hill to Northbrook Farm where it joined the road from Church bridge.
The farm still stands, but not Eastbrook Farm which overlooked the shore.
However, Cauldron Barn Farm, inland on a ridge by the former windmill, survives.
All three farms were part of the large estate sold by Humphrey Waldron to Ilminster Free School in 1609.
Peveril as part of Kingston in Purbeck belonged to the Abbess of Shaftesbury.
Later it came to Lord Eldon.
Peveril appears to have taken its name from the Normans.
Back to Domesday.
A great part of the southern half of Swanage, named Sonwic, was held by Ida, Countess of Boulogne.
Her husband the earl was brother-in-law of Edward the Confessor and William the  Conqueror's cousin.
At an early date these lands were parcelled out into farms or manors, each extending from the High Street to the sea.
The first, Sentry Fields, belonged to the Friar of Frampton.
During the 18th century it was bought by a stone-merchant, John Chapman, who built the mansion opposite the later quay.
Eightholds belonged to the Priory of St Vast, a Cluniac house in France, a later to Edmund Stafford, Bishop of Exeter.
It was leased to William Taunton who was termed Lord of the Manor.
Sir Charles Robinson bought the estate in 1875 and developed it, naming the new roads as Cluny, St Vast, Stafford, Exeter and Taunton.
Tilly Mead was the common field at the north end of Eightholds where is now Commercial Road.
Tilly Whim was at the southern end.
It seems unlikely therefore that Tilly was a quarryman as some have suggested.
Swanage Common Fields, the ancient strip system and sheep run, extended from Derrick Lane (now Chapel Lane) to the Town Ware (meaning hill brow above the cliff) at Anvil Point.
The adjacent Townsend Farm formerly belonged to Thomas cockram of Whitecliff.
Westward again was Carrants Court Cowleaze and then Newton.
This ancient farmhouse, the seat of the Cockrams since 1597, was bought by Sir Charles Robinson, art adviser to the later Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
He transformed it into a stately home and filled it with objets d'art from afar.
At his death in 1913 many of these were dispersed.
The house became a girls' school until 1980 when the grounds were developed for housing.
The last farms before reaching the parish boundary were California, Herston, Belle Vue, Benleaze — held by the Serrells of Langton Matravers — and Verney belonging to the Bankes family.
This view was taken from where the Mowlem now stands, looking towards the present Forte's corner.
This was then the site of Mr. Powell's first photographic shop, EASTBROOK FARM can be seen high up on the Hay Field which is now the Recreation Ground.
Some two hundred years ago Thomas Cockram refaced the entrance front of Newton Farm in Purbeck ashlar.
The most prominent feature is the gilt fish WEATHER VANE from Billingsgate (1850).
When the Market was rebuilt by George Burt in 1875, the fish left London and became the vane surmounting his new Purbeck House.
It became unsafe and found its way between the wars to Newton.
Church Hill
Crouching below the plain embattled tower these ancient cottages, built with traditional rubble walling stone and roofing tiles, gave the old grey town a natural but at the same time haphazard unit.
They unfortunately survived a demolition order in 1937.
After the war they were reconstructed, retaining their essential appearance.
CHURCH HILL with the Cross, which took the place of the town pump, in memory of Sir Reginald Palgrave,(1829–1904) Clerk of the House of Commons and brother of the poet.
Photo: H. Langmuir, LRPS.
Some of the old town cottages remain near the TOWN PUMP.
The Georgian cottage on the right is dated 1793.
Lower down the post-war rectory replaced bombed buildings in Paradise.
Tucked away behind the Parish Church is the MILL POND, with the old mill house and wheel, silent since 1928.
Photo: H. Langmuir, LRPS.
St Mary's Church tower presents an enigma.
How old is it?
Why is it so plain?
Was it a fortified building?
It has been suggested that the tower is older than Corfe Castle and was built as a defensive stronghold overlooking the lake and swannery.
A more recent view is that it was attached in the 14th century to a 13th century church.
It is known that the upper stage was added in the 17th century.
There are objections to the second view.
St Nicholas, Worth Matravers, was the mother church, Swanage being only a chapelry until 1487 when it became a rectory.
Before that the rector of Worth travelled the four miles along the Priest's Way to officiate at Swanage.
It would be surprising to find a chapel with such a substantial church tower so early.
Then again, the extreme thickness of the walls — nearly 5′ — and the lack of decoration are puzzling.
Fragments of Norman mouldings in the tower walls appear to be re-used material from an earlier building.
The Church is opposite the one possible crossing of the estuary.
A point of interest comes from the sale of land in 1823.
The area now covered by the post-war rectory was called Paradise .
It was on higher ground immediately north of the church.
Paradise derives from the French parados which is a mound behind a fortified place to secure from reverse attack or fire.
Do not miss the superb TOMBSTONE erected by Timothy and Mary Chinchen in the memory of their one-year-old daughter Katherine.
ST.
MARY'S CHURCH taken c. 1910 showing the new N. aisle.
The old cottages near the bridge have gone.
The lamp-post in the new King's Road is one of the type adapted from London cannon bollards.
Other relics of the 13th century fragments survive, but early accounts and prints show that the nave and chancel were widened, re-roofed and remodelled in the 17th century, with the inclusion of a three-decker pulpit.
In the late 18th century a new plaster ceiling and galleries were added.
The entire church was demolished and rebuilt in 1859 except for the tower.
The designer was T.H. Wyatt, the diocesan architect.
In 1907 a north aisle was added by the local architects Clifton & Robinson, almost doubling the area and detracting from the proportions.
Some of the windows incorporate mediaeval work, but the interior is unattractive and not helped by the masses of dreary pews.
The round Purbeck marble font replaced the hexagonal one dated 1663 which is now in St Mark's, Herston.
This simple church of 1869 was designed by John Hicks of Dorchester and completed by G.K. Crickmay of Weymouth.
Thomas Hardy was employed by both architects and may have been involved in the work.
The third Swanage C of E church, is All Saints, Ulwell Road, in New Swanage, consecrated in 1957.
The architects were Potter & Hare of Salisbury, who produced a spacious well-lit building with curved Purbeck stone gables.
The classic font of 1751 with pineapple finial was given by the parish of Melcombe Bingham.
The oldest part of the OLD RECTORY is the south-east side, perhaps 16th century, towards the Tithe Barn.
The north-east side bears the date 1677.
In the garden a footbridge meanders over the Brook — the only section remaining in its original course until it reaches the railway bridge.
The TITHE BARN MUSEUM is open to visitors in the summer months.
In 1685 five men were hanged at Wareham by order of the infamous Judge Jeffreys for participation in Monmouth's rebellion.
In the Museum forecourt is a morticed flagstone, formerly in the High Street, marking the spot where gruesome portions of their quarters were displayed as a warning to the in habitants of Swanage.
PARKER'S STORES, once a smithy, stands at the junction of the ancient Priest's Way and the High Street.
Photo: H. Langmuir, LRPS.
Designed by Mr Jennings of Bristol, the WESLEYAN CHURCH was opened in 1886.
Pevsner says: ‘The gothic front with an overstressed octagonal steeple and flowing tracery is spectacular, the side anti-climatically utilitarian.’
The spire was given by George Burt in memory of his grandmother.
Over the front entrance the faces of Reverend George Terry, the minister, and George Burt are carved in stone.
A substantial 18th century house known as Magnolia and formerly as the New House, stands at the top of The Narrows.
A somewhat pretentious TOWN HALL for little Swanage.
Crickmay was again involved and in contrast with the rest of the plain building he incorporated the ornate facade from the Mercers' Hall entrance in Cheapside.
The clock probably came from elsewhere in London..
Elaborately carved, the MERCERS' HALL ENTRANCE was designed by a pupil of Wren, and is dated 1670.
It was taken down 200 years later in order to widen Cheapside.
George Burt acquired it and removed it to Swanage.
The statues of Faith, Hope and Charity, with podgy cherubs, remained in London.
THE HIGH STREET 
Quarrying the stone
Some of the quarries under Carrants Court Cowleaze were over 100′ deep.
Standing all day on the wet clay floor under the dropping ceiling in the faint light cast by tallow candles was grim.
The quarrier worked with primitive tools — pick-axe, shovel and crowbar at the stone face; hammer, gouge, wedge, punch and mallet at the ‘banker’.
Approaching the town by the main road from Wareham, the A351, the visitor passes a tiled plaque: Welcome to Swanage.
It marks the boundary of the parish of Langtom Matravers.
On the right the post-war Greyseed council houses stand over abandoned quarries and on the left the school playing fields opposite the Royal Oak are on the site of the mediaeval Purbeck ‘marble’ pits.
From Herston, formerly a quarriers' hamlet, the mile-long High Street began, comprising virtually all the town-aspiring village of Swanage.
It followed the line of the narrow belt of Purbeck ‘marble’ to Peveril, where the Romans first used it for monuments such as the inscribed memorials discovered at Silchester and Colchester.
In the 13th century the ‘marble’ was carted to Corfe Castle, the centre of the masons, and shipped from Ower on Pool Harbour for cathedrals and churches throughout the kingdom, even to France.
It was not until the 17th century that Swanage became a port for tone.
Daniel Defoe wrote: ‘This part of the country is eminent for vast quantities of stone which is cut out flat and used for paving…
It is very profitable to the place, as also in the number of shipping employed in bringing it to London’.
During the 18th century thousands of tons of stone were won from Tilly Whim and cliffs further west, especially for harbours and fortifications.
John Claridge wrote in his report of 1793: ‘In the parishes of Swanwich (called Swanage), Langton and Worthe, upwards of 400 people are employed in digging and tooling the stone which is raised here from pits, some 20 others 40 feet deep; they are not open to the top, but are undermined and underbuilt; it is excellent stone for walling, floors, steps, tombstones, troughs, and feet and caps for rick staddles.
Another sort of stone is used for pitching streets, and some of the thin stones for covering of buildings…
The men earn about half a crown per day in summer, and two shillings in winter’.
The lime burnt from Purbeck stone was ‘preferred by plaisterers to any other in the kingdom’.
A block of stone being brought up the slide from an underground quarry at Herston.
There were stone steps on one side for the men.
Half way down was a stone arch over the tunnel entrance.
The ‘quarr’ wall enclosed open sheds facing different directions for all weather.
In the centre was the capstan consisting of crabstones, collar, post and ash pole ‘spack’ rotated by the horse or donkey during his circular plod to haul up the ‘quarr’cart and its load of stone to the surface.
A century ago the hillside from Greyseed through Benleaze, Herston, Newton, Court Cowleaze, Townsend, the Common Fields, Eightholds and Sentry was pock-marked by dozens of small quarries, mostly worked only by one family.
‘The quarry roads ran from south to north and formed a peculiar pattern, each having tributary tracks since each farm was separated from its neighbour by a continuous stone wall without gaps.
The payment of a royalty allowed way-leave only on the one farm, so that all the quarry roads on that piece of land ran into the main drove and so down into the highway’.
The stone was carted down in spanned wagons to the ‘bankers’ where the merchants stacked it until ordered.
Then the blocks were gain loaded on to carts, carried breast-high into the sea and transferred to small barges.
Finally the stone was off-loaded into sailing boats.
With the coming of the railway all this came to an end.
In turn the motor lorry has become the sole method of transporting stone.
Stone 1940 the stone has been extracted from the former ‘ridden-holes’— opencast mining — by bulldozer.
There are only one or two quarries in the parish of Swanage still working, the majority being in Langton and Worth.
At the extensive St Aldhelm's Quarry architectural stonework is carried out to the highest standards.
The discovery in the quarries of pre-historic footprints of dinosaurs — iguanodon or megalosaurus — has occurred from time to time, notably in 1963 when samples were removed to the British Museum, and again in 1980 when over 30 footprints were uncovered at Townsend during building work.
After a detailed survey a large area of stone was removed to the Dorset County Museum where it is given pride of place.
Thirty-two acres of the old Swanage quarries have been designated the Townsend Nature Reserve by the Dorset Naturalists' Trust.
It is connected by public footpaths with the Durlston Country Park.
Since 1984 an annual Swanage Festival in the summer has been staged as: The Heritage in Purbeck Stone, including visits to quarries, sculpture at the Quay, and exhibitions at the Town Hall and Tithe Barn.
The painting by H.T. Wells RA depicts HEADBURY QUARRY a little west of Dancing Ledge but the view of Tilly Whim early in 19th century would have been much the same.
Another type of derrick was a triangular ‘gibbet’.
The ‘him’ appears to have been a ship's wheel originally.
The ancient Globe Inn, the Wesleyan Ebenezer Chapel opposite, and some 18th century cottages form an attractive conservation area in Bell Street, Herston, formerly almost entirely a quarriers' hamlet.
THE BANKERS
The High Street
At the Black Swan we come to Townsend and Hopabout Lane (now Queen's Road) where there is an iron bollard bearing the words ‘City of London’, one of the many brought as ballast from the Metropolis by the contractors Mowlem and Burt.
From the Palgrave Cross at the top of Church Hill we continue down the High Street as far as Belmont — the centre of dissent — on the left.
The first chapel of the Independents was built on the site in 1705.
John Wesley preached here in 1787.
The second chapel became the meeting hall after the third one took its place in 1900.
As the United Reform (formerly Congregational) Church designed by Tom Stevens of Bournemouth, it displays the typical Victorian Perpendicular style.
In 1943 a bomb entered the apex of the south wall, passed through the building and demolished the north wall, completely destroying the organ.
The Methodists appeared later in Swanage.
Tradition says that in 1774 Mary Burt, George Burt's grandmother, carrying her baby, walked to Salisbury with two other women to bring John Wesley to Swanage.
He stayed the night at her cottage which stood just below Purbeck House.
Always known as Wesley's Cottage it was destroyed by enemy action in May 1941.
The first Wesleyan Chapel was completed in 1807.
Its spacious successor was opened in 1886.
The old chapel was demolished in 1907 to make way fro the Centenary Memorial Hall.
The 18th century BLACK SWAN at Townsend displays a fine array of wrought iron above its sign.
The NARROWS as it was before the war (right) and after the 1943 air-raid (below).
This provided the opportunity to widen the High Street.
One-way traffic was not introduced until the 1930s so passing was hazardous, especially when the stone-carts came down the hill.
The former CONGREGATIONAL CHAPEL (grade 2) was rebuilt in 1837 and remains a simple and charming building in the years before the Victorians let themselves loose.
Mr George Gollop of Poole drew the plans.
The Day Centre (1959) stands in the former narrows.
Pevsner says it is like an overgrown bungalow and with its generous lawns breaks up the texture of the old High Street and the adjacent 18th century Magnolia House.
The New Inn lower down on the left is no longer a pub.
At one time it was the Swanage headquarters of the Company of Marblers and Stonecutters.
Purbeck House on the right has been the Convent of Mercy since 1935.
The former billiard room was converted into the chapel.
Then the Burt family left the house in 1920 it was offered to the Council but unfortunately it was not taken up.
The building stood empty for fifteen years.
At the ‘Drong’ lower down the High Street the passer-by could look into the first-floor windows of the ancient cottages.
These were swept away in 1882 and replaced by the Town Hall.
The basement behind formed the firs fire station with its  antediluvian engine, and opposite was the police station.
Both are now in King's Road and of course much expanded.
The old Lock-up, or Blind House as it was called, no doubt through its lack of windows, is also behind the Town Hall but was originally in the parish churchyard.
The interesting inscription over the door is dated 1802.
We are now on level ground and on the left is the Salvation Army Citadel.
Somewhat like a dolls' house the building was formerly the Congregational Mission Hall opened in 1872.
The delicate stone arcade (1896 by Clifton) stands partly over the public pavement.
Almost next door was the old smithy and across the cobbled footway is the Red Lion.
The post-war hexagonal library fits in well enough with the street.
Opposite is Lloyds Bank by Clifton and Robinson in local stone, one of the best Victorian buildings in Swanage.
So we come to the Square where the old Round House leading to Institute Road was rebuilt.
The former ‘bankers’ were replaced by some shops with attractive Victorian verandah and with the substantial Trocadero buildings designed as a bank.
By the public garden here carriages lined up ready for a far up the hill to George's Burt's delectable Durlston Park Estate.
THE ANCHOR, the posting inn, is one of the oldest Swanage pubs.
Elijah Vacher, the inn-keeper appears on this early photograph.
CLIFF PLACE at one time led to the beach and the bankers.
On the corner of the passage-way is the Purbeck Hotel, rebuilt early in the 19th century and seen in view of Victoria Terrace.
In this view from the Round House towards THE SQUARE — a typical contradiction — can be seen the Trocadero on the corner of the substantial block of buildings which replaced the ‘bankers’.
The ‘Troc’ was the best restaurant in town before the war.
On the first floor one might sit at a table overlooking the Bay while enjoying a Swanage lobster salad or a delicious cream tea.
The BALLARD and OLD HARRY ROCKS form the northern arm of Swanage Bay..
SWANAGE BAY .
The Victorian CLOCK TOWER was erected in 1854 on the southern approach to London Bridge as a memorial to the Duke of Wellington, though there was not enough money for the proposed statue.
The tower was soon in the way of traffic and was taken down by Mowlem who brought it, minus the clock, to Swanage by sailing ship where it was re-erected in 1868 in the grounds of The Grove, later greatly extended as the Grosvenor Hotel, and now to be redeveloped as marine residences.
Photo: D. Haysom.
THE GLOBE, made in Mowlem's yard at Greenwich, was erected in 1887 by George Burt.
It is 10′ in diameter and weighs some 40 tons.
Its surface is carved in some detail and lettered to show the continents and oceans.
The inscribed tablets give astronomical information dear to George Burt's heart, and quotations from scripture and the poets.
Another tablet not far away reads: ‘The sea is His and He made it.’
There is no truth in the statement that the name of George burt appeared above the quotation.
Waverley the last sea-going paddle-steamer visits the area during the summer months.
Photo: D. Haysom .
An elegant watering place
William Morton Pitt of Kingston Maurwood, MP for Dorset and a relative of the two famous Prime Ministers ‘impressed with the beauty of the situation of Swanwich and the salubrity of its climate, and finding the shore of smooth fine sand to be admirably adapted for sea bathing, first conceived the idea of raising it to the condition of a watering place’.
Pitt began by converting John Chapman's reputed Manor House — which he bought when the Court of Chancery ordered the Dampier family to sell it in 1823 — into a hotel, clearing the ground in the direction of Peveril Point.
He built the Stone Quay both as a landing stage and promenade.
At first the hotel was encumbered with the inevitable stone bankers but soon the ground was laid out with a delightful garden ‘where a respectable band of musicians, formed in this place, meet every Tuesday and Friday  evening ’.
The hotel got off to a good start.
According to the Dorset County Chronicle at that time: ‘It is so well conducted and affords such excellent accommodation that there is every prospect of a successful season.’
The arrival of several noblemen's yachts such as the Black Dwarf belonging to Joseph Garland Esq RN was reported.
A list of distinguished visitors culminated in 1828 with a visit by the Duke of Gloucester from Lulworth Castle.
A variety of buildings followed in the fashionable Regency style, including stucco and slate.
The Preventive Station near Peveril Point consisted of eight tenements; the Rookery, part custom house, part shop, library and dwelling, was followed by Marine Villa with its charming wrought-iron trellis porches; first used as baths, billiard and coffee rooms, it became Pitt's private summer house.
Crescents and a new road to avoid the rutted High Street were planned but did not materialise, though Seymer Road, named after Pitt's second wife, Grace, was extended and he continued the planting of trees carried out earlier by John Dampier.
The last of a row of elms near the Rookery were cut down in 1898.
The centre of the Great House was built by John Chapman in 1721.
The wings were extended over 60 years later, possibly when John Dampier acquired the estate in 1781.
Morton Pitt added rooms on the south elevation in 1823 when he converted it into the ROYAL VICTORIA HOTEL.
The brick vaults were fitted out as hot and cold sea-water baths.
Princess Victoria waved to the people of Swanage from the little window within the pediment.
This elegant Regency terrace on SEYMER ROAD was developed by Morton Pitt in 1828, beginning with number one, ‘Belvidere’, at the top.
The year 1833 was a milestone for Swanage when Princess Victoria, with her mother the Duchess of Kent, spent the night of 7th August at the Manor House Hotel while on their West country tour.
It was here that the Princess was presented with a bonnet of straw-plait made by the ladies of Swanage who stayed up all night to finish it before the royal party left next day from the Quay to join the Royal Yacht in the Bay.
In honour of the Princess's visit, the name was changed by permission to the Royal Victoria Hotel.
The Prince Consort visited Swanage in 1849 in his yacht from Portland.
He landed at Durlston and expressed his delight at the beautiful scenery and pure air.
A monument was erected in 1862 to his memory.
It was demolished in 1971 but is to be re-erected opposite the Royal Victoria Hotel thus symbolically reuniting Albert the Good with is dear wife.
On 26 September 1856 the young Prince Edward, later Edward VII, stayed incognito at the hotel while on a walking tour with two friends.
It is said he had to put up with a sofa in the corridor until his identity was revealed.
Pitt was a great philanthropist and wanted to stamp out smuggling, which was rife.
He established a flax factory at Kingstone employing 200 people and a herring-curing plant in Swanage.
Unfortunately he got into financial difficulties and when he died in 1836 the estate was once again in the chancery.
The hotel and Peveril were brought by Lord Eldon of Encombe.
This photograph of SWANAGE BAY was taken over fifty years after Morton Pitt's brief sojourn in Swanage, yet there is surprisingly little change.
It is a picture of the 1888 regatta, but the yachts could have been sailing in the Bay in the 30s.
The stone ‘bankers’, the quay, the hotel and the Marine Villa are unaltered.
The only additions are the 30-year-old first pier and the clock tower seen in the distance.
Philip Brannon's charming drawing of the FORT AT PEVERIL POINT shows the first pier (1859) in the background.
But Morton Pitt's Preventive Station and the Battery would have looked much the same 30 years earlier.
A hoary quarryman wearing the traditional hard hat and ‘moleskin’ trousers, and a salty fisherman with sailor hat and jersey exchange gossip on the STONE QUAY built on the site of an earlier one by Morton Pitt as a promenade for the new hotel and a point of embarkation.
In 1933 Princess Victoria joined the royal Yacht from this quay.
The LIGHTHOUSE at Anvil Point in the Durlston Country Park.
Photo by courtesy of Durlston Country Park.
The sea crashes at the base of the Purbeck-Portland cliffs at DURLSTON.
Photo by courtesy of Durlston Country Park.
There is a horrifying similarity between these two views of Swanage beach: above, 1930, with its row of bathing tents, and below, 1944, with its concrete bollards.
Interest is shown in the plaque on the wall of 82 High Street, shown below.
In 1857 a Mr Beccles employed several workmen to excavate a cutting in the cliffs of Durlston Bay.
Some of the fossils uncovered proved to be previously unknown and this aroused great interest at the time of the publication of Darwin's ‘Origin of Species’.
The return of two sons of Swanage
John Mowlem, founder of the well-known London contractors, was born in 1788 in an ancient cottage at what is now Court Hill.
He was a poor quarry boy and worked at Tilly Whim.
But trade was slack so he made his way to London to seek his fortune.
Guernsey granite rather than Purbeck stone brought him wealth and he retired to Swanage in 1944 leaving his nephew George Burt to look after the firm in London.
John Mowlem set out to improve his native town.
Being appointed Waywarden he levelled the worst ‘knaps’ along the High Street, raised a part of Church Hill to a more even gradient and improved the pond below Carrants Court Farm where, as a boy, he drew water near his birth place.
His three major memorials were the ‘Alfred’ monument by the shore, the ‘Albert’monument at Court Hill and, most important, the Institute, built as a reading room ‘for the benefit and mutual improvement of the working-class’.
After fulfilling the founder's intentions for more than a century it was replaced in 1966 by the Mowlem Theatre, a typical post-war design which does little to improve the appearance of the humbler original.
John Mowlem believed that he descended from the de Moulhams who maintained Corfe Castle for several centuries and to whom had been granted lands near Godlingston.
In 1859 he bought the later Ilminster estate, now occupied by much of Swanage north of the Brook and extending to Ulwell.
New roads were developed soon after the arrival of the railway but fortunately the present recreation ground overlooking the sea was preserved from building.
There is now an elegant bandstand and a curious pile of Purbeck stone at the highest point, forming the War Memorial.
JOHN MOWLEM, 1788–1868.
GEORGE BURT, 1816–1894.
JOHN MOWLEM'S HOUSE, 2 Victoria Terrace, was one of the four houses newly erected in the lower High Street by his brother-in-law, Robert Burt, who lived with his family at number one, later Burt's Restaurant and now the White Horse Inn.
In the foreground can be seen the old-established straw-plait basket shop.
George Burt was born in the cottage, demolished in 1908, between Hixon's and Brown's fish shop.
On John Mowlem's retirement, George Burt became the king-pin of the London firm; later he was ‘King of Swanage’ too.
In 1857 he purchased a large Georgian house overlooking the High Street.
Here in 1868 his uncle died in his 80th year universally mourned.
After some years at the old house, George burt rebuilt it as a more imposing residence for his own retirement.
He then proceeded to fill the grounds of the new Purbeck House, and indeed most of Swanage, with discarded fragments form his London contracts.
Two imposing items which arrived in Swanage were the prominent Wellington ‘lock’ tower at Peveril and the 17th century facade from the Mercers' Hall in Cheapside which George Burt used for his new Town Hall.
In 1864 he purchased Sentry Fields extending from the top of Seymer Road to Durlston Head and developed it as the Durlston Park estate.
He intended to build terraces of houses right up to the Head but only the new Park Road was slowly completed, chiefly because of the steep hill.
There was, however, a market with a few shops, since discontinued: a new church, St Aldhelm's, now demolished; tennis courts, shrubberies, a zigzag path along the cliff, later obliterated by landslips; and sheltered stone seats known as ‘All the year round’.
Durlston Head culminated in the Castle and Great Globe erected in 1887.
George Burt provided Swanage with a pure water supply, gas, drainage and a railway.
Sir Charles Robinson considered him ignorant and an upstart and would not use his water, preferring to build his own reservoir at Newton.
But George Burt made a lasting impression on the place, after which it was no longer the old-world village it had been.
Crickmay, the Weymouth architect, produced the extraordinary edifice which is PURBECK HOUSE.
Its style has been described as ‘Scottish baronial’.
One critic thought it ironic that this building ‘of which the aim was so obviously beauty, should have achieved so startling an ugliness’, but after more than a century Swanage would hardly seem the same place without it.
The ancient HIGH STREET winds up between the Town Hall on the right and Purbeck House seen at the top of the picture.
Thomas and Emma Hardy in Swanage
Thomas Hardy first met Emma Gifford in 1870 at St Juliot's Rectory in Cornwall where he went as assistant to Crickmay, the Weymouth architect, to inspect the church for its impending restoration.
After four years' courtship they were married in 1874 — he was 34, she 33.
The honeymoon was spent in France.
After living in London for a while the couple spent a few days in Bournemouth and on St Swithun's Day 1875 they came by steamer to Swanage .
Emma Hardy
Thomas Hardy
Hardy wrote that the VIEW FROM WEST END COTTAGE ‘presented a happy combination of grange scenery and marine’.
But in winter, ‘As the darkness thickened the wind increased, and each blast raked the iron railings before the houses till they hummed as if in a song of derision’.
The cottage still has a panel of slender iron railings in front.
According to the Life of Thomas Hardy ‘they found lodgings at the house of an invalided captain of smacks and ketches; and Hardy, suspending his house-hunting, settled down for the autumn and winter to finish his fifth novel,The Hand of Ethelberta ’.
Hardy's description of Swanage is well-known: ‘Knollsea was a seaside village lying snug between two headlands as between a finger and a thumb.’
Emma Hardy's own diary-notebook is inscribed ‘West End Cottage, Swansea’.
It faced north, with a splendid view of the Bay and Old Harry over the former orchard-garden of the Royal Victoria Hotel, but now developed as ‘Peveril Heights’.
Their host at the cottage was William Masters — Captain Flower of the story — coxswain of the first Swanage lifeboat, the Charlotte Mary , launched while they were staying there.
Masters died soon after but his wife kept the house on.
At her death Hardy wrote a touching poem entitled The Lodging House Fuchsias .
Mrs Masters' fuchsias hung
Higher and broader, and brightly swung,
Bell-like, more and more
Over the narrow garden-path,
Giving the passer a sprinkle bath
In the morning.
She put up with their pushful ways,
And made us tenderly lift their sprays,
Going to her door:
But when her funeral had to pass
They cut down the flowery mass
In the morning.
The sojourn at Swanage seems indeed to have held magic times for the couple only a few months wed, in those days before the later estrangement.
There are several other local poems —Once at Swanage ,The Sunshade ,Days to Recollect .
They walked daily on the cliffs and shore.
Hardy noted in his diary: ‘Evening.
Just after sunset.
Sitting with E. on stone under the wall…
The sounds are two, and only two.
On the left, Durlston Head roaring high and low, like a giant asleep.
On the right a thrush.
Above the bird hands the new moon and a steady planet’.
The Hardys left Swanage early in 1876 but visited it again in 1892, when they attended a meeting of the Dorset Field Club and ‘were introduced to old Mr B(urt), ‘the King of Swanage’’.
The party was conducted by Mr Burt from the station to Durlston Head, ‘the owner of this magnificent property explaining points of interest’ on the way.
The members walked to the ‘handsome restaurant erected on the very summit of the Head’ where Mr Burt gave them all lunch.
George Burt was delighted that the Club had come to Swanage.
He believed there was a future for Swanage and therefore he had striven for a great number of years to improve it —(laughter)— but he was very glad that those who came from afar were pleased and satisfied.
(Hear, hear).
The club then proceeded St Aldhelm's Head and later tea was taken at Purbeck House, with a hasty glance at the treasures there.
And so Thomas Hardy returned to his house at Max Gate to continue work on his last grim novel Jude the Obscure ,Tess having appeared in the previous year.
One wonders what were Hardy's thoughts as he and Emma made that visit with George burt to Durlston.
For he later wrote the enigmatic poem To a Sea-cliff (Durlston Head)with its suggestion of estrangement even in the first year of their married life.
Emma sketched her husband ON BOARD THE HEATHER BELL while on a summer a trip to Ryde and round the Isle of Wight.
He looks somewhat gloomy and withdrawn.
The Heather Bell was acquired by George Burt and plied across the Bay during the 1870s.
Its bell is preserved in the Tithe Barn Museum .
DURLSTON CASTLE, designed by George Burt's architect friend Crickmay, was intended as a restaurant.
A Lloyd's signal station was to occupy the top storey, but the offer was not taken up.
However, ten years later one of Marconi's earliest experiments took place there.
His assistant dangled a 250′ length of wire over the edge of the cliff and heard a message sent by Marconi from a house near Bournemouth Pier.
Putting Swanage on the map
When John Mowlem retired in 1845 and returned to his birthplace, the railway had only reached Southampton.
To visit London again from Swanage he would travel by boat for the first part of the journey or by carriage along the rough road to join the Emerald coach at Wareham, both taking a whole day.
Two years later the railway was opened to Wareham and Dorchester.
Returning to Swanage on 7 July 1847, John Mowlem wrote in his diary: ‘Left London at half past twelve midday, and arrived at Wareham at 5 p.m. by Express train…
We were all fatigued enough for the rail road from Southampton is new and rough.’
John Mowlem was well to the fore with the proposal for a branch line to Swanage.
His Isle of Purbeck Railway succeeded in getting an Act of Parliament in 1863 but came to nothing in face of the local hostility and opposition from landowners.
Meanwhile the Swanage Pier and Tramway Company was inaugurated, with John Mowlem as chairman.
A few stumps of the 1859 pier built by the company remain, together with lengths of the tramway which ran from the pier-head to the coalyard and stone bankers as far as the Brook.
A scheme to continue the tramway for three miles to the stone quarries at Langton Matravers did not materialise.
A brick coal store was built about 1885 with a short branch from the tramway.
Of the four-wheeled coat wagons drawn by horses only one remained by the nineteen-thirties, then used for fish.
The building is now Playland, an amusement arcade.
George Burt's persistence was finally rewarded in 1885 when the London and South Western Railway arrived.
Cheap excursions brought the ‘trippers’, but the holiday-makers who stayed for a week or two were still quite ‘genteel’.
Nurse-maids with their children were a common sight but as yet there were a few hotels and most visitors took ‘rooms’ with the local inhabitants who cooked the food which their guests bought at local shops.
This drawing (1859) of the OLD PIER by Philip Brannon shows the paddle-steamer Rose,the first to arrive .
Contrasting with the earlier workaday pier with its tramway and lack of railings, the NEW PIER, opened in 1896, had a proper landing-stage, promenade and shelter.
Hordes of trippers — the ‘steamer people’— flocked across from Bournemouth.
The arrival of the railway spared off a second burst of development and the population rose rapidly, especially north of the Brook with the growth of the de Moulham Estate and New Swanage in the direction of Ulwell round the turn of the century.
After the first world war the line became part of the Southern Railway and on summer Saturdays special trains hauled by massive locomotives brought hundreds of holiday-makers from London and the North.
After the second world war more and more people came to Swanage by car.
The branch line was not immediately axed by Beeching, but the writing was on the wall, and on 3 January 1972 the last passenger train left Swanage ‘from a station little more than a ghost’.
However, the preservationists soon appeared on the scene.
Despite the lifting of the track and earlier opposition from the anti-railway camp, trains are running again and steam has returned.
In May 1985, on the occasion of the centenary, hundreds of people thronged the platform, many in Victorian costume.
George Burt's original address was read, the band played and the occasion was a huge success.
The railway is well on the way to reach Corfe Castle again and with faith will arrive once more at Wareham.
Meanwhile, the last paddle-steamer ceased with the Embassy in 1966.
Deterioration of the second pier was increasing fast and it was unfortunately closed in 1982.
A hovercraft service was inaugurated in 1968 but did not survive the 1972 season.
Waiting at the pier approach, perhaps for the more genteel, was a line of carriages read to take visitors to Durlston, Studland, or just along the seafront to Ulwell.
This photograph of the STATION was taken from the top of St Mary's Church tower soon after the opening of the railway.
The original goods' shed is only half its later length.
On the far right the Station-master's house remains as it is today.
The Durlston Country Park
In Burt's day an army of 50 men was employed to look after the Durlston estate, but after a century it had become neglected: overgrown with foliage, fallen walls and rusty wartime installations.
The 261 acre Country Park was opened in 1973 by the Dorset County council with the assistance of the Countryside Commission.
Since then much has been done to improve and protect the area including a new information and exhibition centre and picnic areas.
An extended parking area has enabled the restoration or eroded downland where formerly the grass had been all but lost to cars.
Display panels at the stone-walled redoubt below Durlston Castle give drawings of the many seabirds likely to be seen wheeling or nesting on the cliff including kittiwakes, fulmars and guillemots.
Holm oak and tamarisk withstand the wind and salt spray and give shelter to the birds.
There are many interesting plants and insects to be found.
Seapinks and samphire grow on the rocky cliffs.
In the more remote part of the Country Park the foundations remain of a signal station used during the Napoleonic wars as a look-out for the approach of ‘Boney’— a real threat in those days.
Just west of Tilly Whim caves is the lighthouse opened in 1881 following the loss of Wild Wave on Peveril Point.
It has bee modernised with a powerful automatic fog-horn known locally as Moaning Minnie.
The lighthouse is open to the public at certain times.
Guillemot
Kittiwake
Fulmar
Postscript
Although Swanage was a fishing village when Celia Fiennes ate the best lobster ever during her visit to Purbeck in 1608, only a few boats remain to lay down pots to take holiday-makers mackerel-fishing.
However, the yacht club flourishes, and the regatta is still held.
There are still some fine sailors here, not least the crew of the lifeboat.
There have been seven boats stationed here since 1875, the first four pulling-and-sailing types, the last three motor-driven.
The J. Reginald Corah , fully equipped with radar, was launched in 1975 and christened by the Duke of Kent.
Between 1875 and 1983, 481 lives have been saved.
For centuries Swanage meant stone.
Now the bankers and boats have gone, and the quarries are silent as the trade moves west.
The centre of the town also shifted.
The prospect of delightful gardens was lost and the Brook disappeared under bricks and mortar.
Between the two wars the hayfield became the recreation ground and the ancient White House on the sea front the Tourist Information Centre.
Bus services were extended to Bournemouth with the opening of the Sandbanks Ferry in 1925.
Swanage suffered badly during the last war, chiefly from ‘tip-and-run’ raids by bombers swooping in from the sea.
An ugly gash was carved out of the Downs after the war to provide a large car park, and a boat park was made by the lifeboat house.
Boarding houses and hotels have declined in number.
Two of the most prestigious, the ‘Vic’ and the Grosvenor, have closed.
Restaurants, self-catering accommodation and caravans have increased.
Paul Hyland, in the best book on Purbeck,The Ingrained Island , says: ‘Swanage is the craziest town I know.
It has the sublimity of long history, the charm of a fishing village, the ambition and pragmatism of a port, and the calculated grace of a watering place…
It sports the artistic pretensions of a poor man's St Ives, the garishness of a funfair and the red brick boredom of a retirement haven.
It contains modern buildings of flair like the library, as well as block-busting monstrosities like the Mowlem Theatre.’
What of the future?
The superb Bay and the outstanding beauty of its surroundings will surely endure.
The quality of the town, both of its environment and its life, is the keynote of its future well-being.
But that is easier said than done.