

Methodology
THE NATURE OF CHRISTIANITY
Christianity is a historical religion.
By that I do not mean simply that Christianity arose at a certain time in history.
Obviously that is true of all ideas and movements.
Nor do I mean that it bears the imprint of the time when it arose.
That too one may imagine must always be the case.
I mean that Christianity proclaims there to have been a revelation of God in history.
Therefore that time and that particular history in which the revelation is deemed to have taken place become integral to the religion.
Christianity cannot lose its reference to that history.
It will be clear that human religion need not in this sense be historical.
It could be believed that God, whatever was understood by God, was equally close to all times and places; that no particular period, and no particular events, were to be held to be more revelatory of God than others.
Of course people in one time or place might be more aware of God, or more able to formulate their awareness in a way which persisted through further generations.
But it would not be held that God revealed God's self to a particular people, or through a particular person, in a certain time in history.
Religion then would be founded on religious experience in general.
In conceptualizing what they meant by God, people in each age would be free to think again, starting from where they found themselves.
Such a religion might also contain certain philosophical ideas, ideas which could be deduced from a priori reason.
But history would not be central to the religion in the way in which history is central to Christianity.
Of course Christians also want to start in the present in speaking of their awareness of God.
Christianity has moreover incorporated philosophical ideas.
But that is not the end of the matter.
Christians, because of the type of religion which Christianity is, must always  refer to certain historical events, above all to the person Jesus of Nazareth.
Christianity has this necessary relation to history.
Of a worship service in which no mention was made of Christ, the bible was not read, and no reference made to God's dealings with the people of Israel or of the early church, we might well say that it was theistic (if mention was made of God), but it could not rightly be called Christian.
Christians believe in particularity.
That is to say they believe that God was in some sense differently related to particular events, or may be said in particular to have revealed God's self through those events, in a way in which this is not true of all other events or periods in history.
Above all they believe that that must be said of Christ which is to be said of no other human being.
However they may express his uniqueness, they must say of Jesus of Nazareth that there was a revelation of God through him in a way in which this is not true of you or me.
God is bound up with peculiar events, a particular people, above all with the person Jesus of Nazareth.
Therefore reference must needs always be made to this history and to this person.
Now I am not myself a Christian because I do not believe that there could be this particularity.
I do not believe, whatever I may mean by God, that it could be said of God that God was differently related to one age or people than God is related to all ages or people.
God is something which is always available, however much people in some ages, or some people in each age, may appear to be more aware of God.
To put this differently and more technically, I do not believe that the causal nexus of history, or that of nature, could be broken.
That is to say I do not believe that there could be peculiar events, such as a resurrection, or miracles, events which interrupt the normal causal relationships persisting in history and in nature.
I do not believe in uniqueness.
Thus I do not for example think that there could be a human person (which Christians must proclaim) who stood in a different relationship to God than do all other human beings.
True, Jesus of Nazareth may have been deeply aware of God; so have others been.
But he was no more than that, I believe, a person deeply in tune with God.
This is not a Christian position.
We turn then to the issue of the compatibility of feminism and Christianity.
Clearly there can be no reason why one should not be a feminist and a religious person, in the sense in which I am myself a religious person.
If one believes that God (whatever one may mean by God) is equally available to all times and places, then it is possible  to start in the present in acquiring one's religious sensibilities and formulating what one may mean by God.
Of course one may draw on the past as one will.
There is no reason to think that people in the past may not have had a profound understanding of God, an understanding which will illuminate one's own.
Again, people in other religions may likewise have had (though for myself as a westerner I find the most to be gained through looking at western religion).
But no necessary reference is being made to history, to any particular literature, or any particular person.
Presumably as a feminist one will only accept into one's formulation of one's religious position ideas which do not conflict with one's ethical position.
Christians however are not in this situation.
For Christians believe there to have been a revelation of God in history.
Therefore they must necessarily make reference to that history.
In a Christian service the bible will be read, the story told of God's dealings with the people of Israel and of His coming in Christ, and above all the resurrection will be proclaimed.
This history is not dispensable.
In a subtle way, therefore, the history of a past age, the relationships between people which are embodied in the scriptures which tell of that revelation, and the teaching of Him who is believed to be the revelation of God will be made present.
Moreover, these things will be brought into the present not as just any history or teaching, but as that through which God is supremely known.
Now that history is a patriarchal history.
The relationships between persons of which the bible tells are relations between people existing in a patriarchal society.
Women are either absent, or present fulfilling for the most part the roles which were assigned to women in that society.
The figure of Christ is that of a male figure, and that is not to be evaded.
God is conveyed through the use of metaphors which are male not female.
And that history is not to be disposed of.
It is necessarily present, and present as central to the religion.
Even if at a conscious level people think that of course that was a patriarchal age, and we now live in certain respects in a more enlightened age, the metaphors and symbols which are present will be impressed on people's minds.
The question then is not whether feminism and being a religious person are compatible.
That is clearly the case.
But whether feminism can be reconciled with Christianity is a very different question.
For Christianity is a historical religion, one which necessarily relates to history.
And the history to which it relates is a patriarchal history.
Moreover, that history and that revelation to which Christians  necessarily make reference are in some sense normative for the religion.
For it is that history, and that revelation, in which it is believed that God has made Himself known.
Christians may hold very different positions as to how far it is normative.
Some believe that it is normative in an absolute sense; that Christ revealed what is to be believed (for example about divorce) for all times.
Others are of a more liberal disposition.
They hold that the revelation was given through the cultural medium of one particular time, and that while the message may remain the same (for example that one should love one's neighbour) this may require a different expression in a different age.
Likewise, they are prepared to make allowance for the fact that certain scientific facts about the world were not known, or for example that the biological relation of woman to man was misunderstood.
But even Christians of a more liberal variety must necessarily make reference to a past age.
(Thus in the current debate about the ordination of women, both sides ask what does Jesus' message suggest is the right thing to do, what difference does it make that Jesus was a male human being, or what kind of a community was the early church?
Again they ask of what significance it is that the metaphors used for God in the Hebrew and Christian scriptures are overwhelmingly male?)
Christianity, as long as it remains Christianity, cannot lose its historical reference.
But suppose I am wrong in my basic presupposition that there cannot be particularity.
Suppose — to take the clearest example, which would make what I believe to be the nature of the world fall to the ground like a pack of cards — that there was a resurrection.
Not simply a resurrection in people's minds — I might well grant that but a resurrection as an objective fact of history, so that it could be said that the causal nexus of history and that of nature were broken (for there are not resurrections).
(Of course if there are resurrections, then my point is proved and there is again a regularity to nature; but then there is no particular reason for saying that Jesus is unique as Christians believe.)
Suppose there was a resurrection.
What follows?
The resurrection, for people who believe it to have taken place, is presumably an objective fact of history; one which they cannot circumvent even if they would.
Willy-nilly they are forced to concede that here is some fact or reality to which all else that they believe must necessarily conform.
So what of feminists, those who are convinced that Christian claims are true?
Their feminism must in some way be fitted to the  facts of Christianity.
There was a resurrection.
Christ is Lord, or in some sense unique.
God is known through the people of Israel and the history of the church.
The scriptures which tell of these events through which God is known become a unique book.
They may be liberal, but there is a certain minimum reference to a particular history, above all to a certain person, which is not to be avoided if one is to call oneself Christian.
But then there arises a theodicy question, a question to do with the justification of God.
How can God be seen to be good when one considers what history has been, and what it has meant for women that God has been conceived in primarily male terms?
True, it may well be that much good has come for women from Christian history and from Christ's moral teaching.
But why, if God be good, has any harm come to women?
For that God has been conceived as male, and that biblical teaching which arose out of a patriarchal society has been held to be the revelation of God, must surely be seen to be the underlying facts of western culture which have led to discrimination against women.
There is then a theological question posed for one who takes the feminist agenda seriously and believes in human equality, as to how this revelation can be a revelation of God.
The question then as to whether feminism and Christianity are compatible is that of whether the equality of women is compatible with a religion which has come from a past patriarchal age.
In this chapter I shall consider various answers given to that question.
I shall first look at a conservative response to the gap which exists between the past in its understanding of women and the present.
Basically conservatives see the past as normative and their view as to what women may aspire to is governed by that past.
I shall then look at various Christian feminist and liberal responses which try to bridge the gap between past and present.
Thirdly, I shall look at those Christian feminists who believe there to be no real gap, so that the problem is thereby solved.
The situation which women face is, they say, essentially that which women have always faced under patriarchy, so that women have no difficulty in finding a solidarity with other women across the ages.
Finally, I shall turn to a religious position such as my own which is not Christian, though religious and within the western tradition, in which the present is normative and the past is only drawn upon in so far as that seems to be appropriate.
Such a religious position alone, I shall suggest, is compatible with feminism.
THE CONSERVATIVE RESPONSE
One response which can be made to the gap which exists between the world in which Christianity came into being and the present world is to allow what is to be held to be essentially normative for the religion to reside in the past.
I shall call this response ‘conservative’.
There are different depths of conservatism possible.
An extreme conservative position would be to believe that, through the fact that God chose to become incarnate within a particular society, indeed through the fact that God chose a particular tradition and people, all aspects of that society are to be conceived to accord with the will of God.
In relation to the question of the position of women, it would follow that, since — it is thought — the new testament does not allow the headship of a woman, and through the fact that women did not exercise headship in that society, that a woman should be head of state is as wrong as that a woman should exercise headship within the church.
A more moderate (though perhaps less consistent) conservative position would be to differentiate between what is God's will for His people, and what is allowable in the world at large.
In relation to the example of the headship issue, it would follow that although a woman may not hold a position of authority in the church, she may be prime minister.
An intermediate case would seem to be that of whether, and in what sense, a father should be the ‘head’ of the Christian family.
But at least as far as the church is concerned, a conservative believes that what place a woman should hold was made known in the past and stands for all time.
The conservative outlook entails a particular conception of God (and of Christ), an understanding of which it cannot simply be said that it is held in common by all Christians: something I think often not recognized by conservatives themselves.
For it is assumed that God, who is conceived in highly anthropomorphic terms, has given what amounts to a blueprint to humanity as to what His will may be.
Listening on one occasion to a Greek Orthodox argue against the ordination of women, I had the distinct impression that his God, who seemed to reside immediately above the ceiling of the room in which we were gathered, had issued the most precise directions to humanity.
God's plan is held to be comprehensive, and has been set for all time.
God has given men and women differing roles within His creation, roles which do not change.
Within Catholic thought these different positions of men and women tend to be thought ‘natural’, and it is contended that the same gender arrangements are to be  found in all known human societies.
To say this is, it should be noted, is to make a theological point: since it is held that God is the creator, so that what is natural, and what is also found to be the case, must accord with what is God's intention.
These presuppositions are evident also in the way in which Christ is understood.
Through Christ, who was and is God, it is considered to have been revealed to us what is God's will.
Each of his actions acquires significance.
Christ, as God, was omniscient, his outlook not limited by the time in which he lived.
Thus Graham Leonard, a prominent English Anglican high church bishop, arguing against the ordination of women: ‘The Lord of the Gospels whom I know, love and seek to obey is not one who was socially conditioned in what he said or did.’
Jesus was an essentially free agent.
If then his actions simply accorded with what was the convention of his society, this was not because he had so to act, or failed to see that a certain convention was socially limited.
He could, as God, have chosen to act otherwise.
Thus the fact that he did not act otherwise is held to indicate that these social arrangements do indeed accord with the will of God.
It is thought that Jesus was peculiarly open to women, breaking in this with custom.
Since then, negatively, he did not number them among the twelve, it may be held to have been his intention not to do so.
Thus the Vatican Declaration against the ordination of women: ‘Jesus did not call any woman to become part of the Twelve.
If he acted in this way, it was not in order to conform to the customs of his time, for his attitude towards women was quite different from that of his milieu, and he deliberately and courageously broke with it.’
It is believed moreover to be the case that, as God, Jesus had what may be called a trans-historical knowledge.
His actions then (in this case in calling the twelve) did not simply relate to his immediate Jewish context, but are to be seen as a considered action undertaken in relation to his having founded the church.
From what subsequently came about in history, one may say what was his intention.
Thus it is sometimes said that, had Jesus intended that women should be priests in his church, he would have chosen his mother.
Not only is it believed that God, through creation and revelation, has made known His will for humankind, a will revealed to us supremely through the words and actions of Jesus Christ, but He has continued to guide His church.
A good reason then for thinking that it is not God's will that women be ordained is that the church has never done so.
That this is the case stands, quite independently of  the reasons which may have been given for not doing so in the past, reasons which may or may not appear cogent today.
Thus the Vatican Declaration can freely admit that the former reasons for not ordaining women are now discredited, while at the same time pointing to the constancy of the tradition.
In a matter as fundamental as that of the constitution of the church, God could not have allowed that error should have persisted over such a period of time.
Protestant conservatism has a different flavour from Catholic conservatism.
For one of Karl Barth's disposition it could never be said that because something has been perceived to be natural by humankind, therefore it is the will of God.
What is God's will is, for Barth, to be read out of the scriptures.
(Though one must wonder how far Barth was influenced in his interpretation of scripture by the conservative Swiss background from which he came.)
It therefore becomes imperative that the scriptures be interpreted so as to form a consistent whole.
Barth believes that the scriptures from Genesis forward imply the headship of man and the subordination of woman.
The order of salvation takes up the order of creation.
Other evangelicals, perhaps particularly from an Anglo-Saxon tradition, may be less consistent, speaking also of what is found in ‘nature’.
But for all Protestants it is the record of scriptures which is crucial.
They lack the Catholic sense that it is scriptures together with the unfolding tradition of the church in which authority lies.
I shall then turn to three examples which illustrate well the conservative mind-set.
Conservatives believe revelation to have been given in the past, as do all Christians.
But their understanding of revelation is that God has revealed what is to be the case, or what is truth, in very exact terms.
The revelation is seen to have been essentially unaffected by surrounding circumstances, or indeed the historical circumstances of that time are believed to be revealed to be God's will for humankind.
The revelation in that time, as it is believed to have been, is then transposed like a self-enclosed capsule into the present age.
It is not to be affected, or not essentially affected, by the norms and outlook of another age.
Likewise theological truth is held to exist in a sphere of its own, unaffected by scientific discoveries or knowledge which we now have which clashes with what is believed to be the biblical revelation.
But such an outlook does not mean that the conservatives are not in trouble.
For there is an inevitable clash between what they believe the place of women should be, and the beliefs of the surrounding world in which they are set, and which indeed they may themselves have to some extent appropriated.
The first example pertains to the failure, of Catholic Christians in particular, to contextualize the words and actions of Jesus in relation to the circumstances of the world in which he lived.
Conservatives thus hold what must appear, to those who do not hold to a conservative position, to be a distorted conception of what he was about.
Christians as a whole however may be said to have been slow to appropriate the results of textual criticism and historical research.
That this is the case may be thought not to be chance.
For Christians (inasmuch as Christians see a peculiar revelation to have taken place in Christ) tend to interpret Christ's words and actions in abstraction from any historical context, or, believing that God in Christ had a particular intention, they understand his words and actions in the light of later church history.
In what I say here I may well not be followed in every respect by one or another scholar, and there are matters open to a different interpretation.
Nevertheless, the gist of what we need to know if we are to understand Jesus' words and actions will be evident.
Jesus was a first-century Palestinian Jew.
As a good Jew, it would seem highly unlikely that he had any intention of founding a new religion, let alone setting up a ‘priesthood’ for it.
If (as he may well have done) he thought that he was the Messiah, then his choosing of the twelve would seem to have been a symbolic action, through which he should indicate to people who he was.
The twelve represent the twelve tribes of Israel, which are in the last days to be gathered in.
(Matthew says of them that they will sit on the twelve thrones of Israel, judging the twelve tribes.)
By definition no woman could have been among the twelve, since a circumcised male alone could represent a patriarch of Israel.
Furthermore, of the apostles it is said that they are to go out and bear witness to Jesus.
Under Jewish law the word of a woman was not counted that of a witness.
(Hence when the evangelist has the women discover the empty tomb, he does not have them witness to the resurrection but rather go and tell the men.)
There is no indication that there was any direct connection between the twelve (of whom it is said in Acts that they stayed in Jerusalem) and the advent of ministry in the churches in the gentile world.
Ministry seems to have grown up in a haphazard manner, basically in response to the need that various functions be performed.
St Paul was not ‘ordained’— and would not have known what the term connoted.
It is in the light of facts like these that Jesus' words and actions are to be understood.
I repeat: what I have said here might well be qualified by one or another scholar in this or that regard.
But the idea — current indeed in Anglican circles until the last century — that  Jesus ‘ordained’ twelve men (who became the first ‘bishops’), who subsequently laid their hands on the heads of others, and so forth down to the present day, can certainly not be allowed to stand.
One must interpret Jesus' actions in relation to his cultural context.
To read them through a lens drawn from another context, for example that of later church history, is to impose a construction on the material for which there is no warrant.
The result may be bizarre.
Thus to those conservatives who, arguing against the ordination of women, contend that Jesus ordained no ‘priestesses’, it must be said that neither did he ordain any priests!
Indeed the Levitical code was considered (for example by the author of the letter to the Hebrews) to have been both consummated and overcome in Christ.
Finally, of the argument that Jesus treated women well (and thus it is of significance that he did not ‘choose’ women — to be part of a symbolic number of people who in any case had to be male!), it must be said that it is quite unwarranted.
As we shall see later, there is every evidence that Jesus (though kind to women) was deeply culturally conditioned.
It would indeed be surprising were this not to be the case!
A second example of the conservative failure to consider cultural context and to relate theological belief to knowledge which we possess, is the contention that the church has never ordained women and cannot have been wrong.
Let us consider this question.
Why, one must ask, has the church not ordained women?
It must in the first place be said that women in the past were not for example doctors or politicians, so it is hardly surprising that they should not have held public office in the church.
(One holding my position might well want to say that, given the masculinist nature of the religion, no wonder women have been excluded from its ministry — but that is an argument as to why women should leave Christianity, not for ordaining them.)
But further it must be said, in response to the conservative position, that it was not simply a matter of whim or chance that women were not in the past ordained.
There were considered theological reasons, based on what was believed to be the case about the biological relationship of woman and man, as to why they could not be.
Understandings of human reproduction have varied (and one cannot here consider all such understandings and their consequences for what the relation of man to woman was held to be).
Moreover, it must be the case that biological beliefs have been intertwined with social reasons for not ordaining women.
Nevertheless, it is instructive to look at why, for example, Thomas Aquinas thought that women could not be ordained (for his views have clearly been highly  influential in the Catholic tradition).
It is not that the question of the ordination of women is being considered for the first time in our day!
Thomas' thought on the matter is complex.
It may or may not be that he would have thought it necessary for there to be a ‘natural resemblance’(such as the Vatican Declaration believes to be necessary) between the male Christ and the male priest.
This I shall consider below.
However, in the passage in which he specifically considers whether a woman can be ordained, his answering in the negative, it must be pointed out, is dependent on biological presuppositions which we now know to be false.
Priesthood, he says, signifies authority.
(A statement with which it should be said not all Christians today would necessarily agree, but let us grant him that.)
Now a woman is not such that she can signify authority; that is to say, she does not have the sign-quality 9 which could signify authority.
For woman, he says, is in a state of subjection (quia mulier statum subjectionis habet).
Thomas then proceeds to consider whether a slave (presumed male) could be ordained, giving the answer that obviously not while he remains a slave, for slavery cannot signify authority, but that slavery is a condition of external fortune, and if freed from his slavery, then he can be ordained.
Woman's defect is by contrast by nature.
But why does Thomas consider a woman to be defective by nature?
The answer is clear: it owes to the biological presuppositions which he takes from Aristotle.
(Indeed in the same passage in the Commentary he puts forward an argument — which might well be used in favour of the ordination of women!— that order pertains to the soul, and the soul is without sex; a point, interestingly, to which he makes no response.
Thus it is clear that it is owing to her body that a woman is defective.)
Thomas' biology is apparent in his discussion in question 92 of the Summa .
Aristotle had argued that the male semen gave ‘form’ to the ‘matter’provided by the woman; form here being a determining principle which shapes matter, such that in human beings the form is the rational soul, the particular characteristic which makes us human.
Thomas modifies this.
He wishes to assert that God gives the soul to the foetus.
Thus for him the male has a lesser role, simply preparing the matter contributed by the female, so that it is ready to accept the soul.
But it remains the case that the male is considered the superior.
He takes it for granted that in human generation the female is the passive principle, the male the active.
Further he comments that the male has the greater discretion of reason.
Again he follows Aristotle in believing that each child  ought to be male and that a female is the result of misadventure.
He writes:
Woman is defective and misbegotten, for the active force in the male seed tends to the production of a perfect likeness in the masculine sex; while the production of woman comes from defect in the active force or from some material indisposition, or even from some external influence; such as that of a south wind, which is moist, as the Philosopher [Aristotle]observes.
He adds that it is nature's intention, for the purposes of generation, that some foetuses should turn out female.
Yet this does not alter the fact that the female is essentially a misbegotten male, not another kind of human being.
We now know that, far from the male imposing form on female matter, making a human being what he or she is, foetuses come from an equal number of chromosomes from the male and from the female.
Far from a male being the norm for a human being and the female a potentially male foetus which miscarried, female and male are two different kinds of human being.
At least in relation to this argument of Thomas' against the ordination of women, it must be said that it does not hold water.
His presumption that, through her body, a woman signifies inferiority, rests on a mistaken biology.
One may think there to be very little point in simply reciting that ‘the church has never ordained women’ without enquiring into why this should have been.
(Unless, that is, one is starting from an a priori stance that the church cannot, in such a fundamental matter, have erred.)
A third example of the way in which conservatives hold theological beliefs to exist in abstraction from the rest of human knowledge is the discussion about male headship.
There are two passages in the new testament concerning male headship, one Pauline and one not.
Both argue directly from Genesis.
Barth, considered by many the greatest theologian of the twentieth century, comments that, according to Genesis, woman was taken forth from man, and created in relation to the man's reality, and not vice versa.
What sense, one must ask, the other side of Darwin, could this possibly make?
We may not know exactly how evolution took place, but it is at least now clear that humanity evolved in some way from the higher apes; that there were female and male of other species on the earth before the appearance of women and men.
It cannot then be that a man was present on earth before a woman, and the woman formed from him.
The two sexes evolved in relation the one to the other.
To contend that Genesis is ‘symbolically true’ does not help the conservative case.
It is not symbolically true: it is symbolically false.
A ‘true myth’ would have to symbolize women and men evolving in relation to one another, neither sex being present before the other.
Considering these three examples one has to ask after the nature of the conservative mind-set.
What is going on?
For we are clearly concerned with intelligent human beings.
It cannot be said of Barth that he did not know of evolution!
It does however strike one of some of the conservative authors, particularly Catholic, that they have abstracted their theological beliefs from other knowledge of which they must be in possession.
Perhaps it is the result of the almost exclusively ‘arts’ training which many theologians receive?
I take two examples.
The high church Anglican theologian Eric Mascall, writing in response to a report of a Lambeth subcommittee which commented that medieval understandings were based on false biological views, expressed himself thus:
In the absence of any details it is difficult to assess the force of these references to biology and sociology….(1) What, if any, were the false biological views in question?(2) How did it follow from them that women could not be ordained to the priesthood?(3) What are the views which have taken their place?….(7) Have the views about women which have now come to be held proved to be true?
This is clearly absurd.
Given that we may have yet more to learn about human reproduction, it must be said that it is not a case of ‘views’ which may or may not be right.
As we have seen, in the past false biological views led to false reasoning.
We do at least now know that in the formation of the new foetus an equal number of chromosomes come from the male and from the female, and that a female is not a malformed male foetus: this is not a ‘view’.
Then take Leonard's speech to the General Synod of the Church of England before the crucial vote on the ordination of women to the priesthood in 1978.
He said: ‘If both our Lord and S. Paul were so conditioned, what about us?
By what criteria do we judge that our conditioning in this century accords with the Divine will but that in the earlier generations does not?’
I find the remark significant for the assumption which is made that there was nothing harmful about the previous view of the relation between men and women; indeed the previous view may have accorded with the divine will and our present outlook not.
But  what I want to draw attention to here is the failure to understand that past social beliefs were formed within the context of false beliefs about the biological relation of woman and man.
I see that I (who had written the statement in favour of the ordination of women to the priesthood which was circulated to all members of the Synod before the vote, l5 a statement to which Leonard may well in part have been responding) wrote in the margin of my copy of his speech: ‘Have microscopes.’
The conservative outlook is then that of a peculiar kind of ‘faith’.
It is a faith that theology is God-given and self-enclosed, unaffected by humanity.
Thus Barth continues to read what he does out of Genesis, setting aside all else that he must know, for the text alone counts.
Thus the Catholic conservatives believe the church to be a God-given institution which cannot in major ways have gone astray.
Jesus is held to be God, his actions God's actions in history, to be interpreted without reference to his actual historical circumstances.
Taken in its own terms, the conservative position is unanswerable.
One might however comment that it is possibly the case that those theologians whose views are now quoted as the word of God, or whose theological reasoning is taken over without question, may not have believed theology to exist independently of human knowledge or social conditions.
Precisely they drew on what was common knowledge (that is to say what was believed to be knowledge) in their day.
Might not St Paul or Thomas Aquinas raise an eyebrow at the idea that their views continue to be cited, given the knowledge which we now have about the origin of humankind or the biological relation of woman to man? l6
One should not comment on how far the views which conservatives hold are a rationalization of a misogynist stance.
That must vary from individual to individual and there is no need to say that simply to hold these views (if one believes them to be the revealed will of God) is in itself misogynist.
What one should however point to is that the critique of western culture which in recent years has been mounted by feminists has not been understood or appropriated — and that in this there lies a certain blindness.
Conservatives proceed as though the past relation between women and men has been satisfactory, as though no one has been wounded by it.
As though it does not matter that half of humanity have been prohibited from realizing their potential.
But such a blindness follows from the belief that women have a ‘place’ in God's scheme; one which is natural, or God's will for them, and in which therefore they should find themselves  fulfilled.
As Karl Barth expresses it, woman is to man as B is to A; why should woman mind? 17 The idea that western religion has itself been a cause of attitudes which have deeply harmed women obviously cannot be given entrance by them.
For were this to be admitted to be the case, the belief that their religious position (in which women are subordinate, or hold a particular place) is of God would be undermined.
Nor is there any recognition of the fact that relations of super and sub-ordination are power relations which are in themselves wrong.
In not believing such relations to be wrong, conservatives are going against the whole ethos of the modern world, in which it has increasingly come to be held that humans should be treated as equals.
Conservatives may well believe that the abuse of their authority by men is wrong, but that relationships in which one sex is in such a position that it could so abuse the other are in themselves wrong cannot be admitted.
Yet it is the idea that men should have power over women, coupled with the belief that women have a particular ‘role’— much more closely specified than is any corresponding male ‘role’, that is coming to be questioned.
Thus conservatives — try as they may to isolate their theology in a cocoon separate from human knowledge, culture and society-are in trouble.
Indeed the pressure for change is not something which batters the conservative position from outside, it is a worm which undermines it from within.
For in that they are living in the modern world, and in so far (one must say) as they are good persons seeking to do what is right, conservatives must see much of the critique of past patriarchal relationships to be justified.
A notable example of this is the decree of the Second Vatican Council ‘Gaudium et Spes’ which speaks of the dignity of persons, men and women alike.
But when the church has spoken in these terms, saying in effect that women should not be discriminated against in the world, it becomes all the more problematical for it to appear suddenly to turn around and declare that women may not be ordained in the church!
The conservative stance then crumbles from within.
Or else it becomes an increasingly embattled stance, out of touch with the world.
It has been well said that to say the same thing in a different age is to say something different.
At one time the beliefs held about woman in the church, that she might not be ordained, that she was placed subordinate to man, that she had her ‘own’ sphere of motherhood, were simply at one with the beliefs of the world in which the church was situated.
There was nothing particularly remarkable  about these views; though some brave women in each age may have tried to overstep the limits set for them.
As we have seen, beliefs held about women were simply the logical corollary of biological views, or the understanding of the origin of humanity.
But to continue to proclaim these things, to continue not to ordain women, in the world of today, sets the church apart.
It leaves it in an indefensible position.
Indeed the kinds of arguments that are mustered (Jesus did not ordain women and that is a fact, the church has not ordained women and that is a fact, women in all societies have been subordinate to men and that is a fact) become no arguments at all when we realize the context in which Jesus did what he did, when we know that the biological views on which Thomas Aquinas' views were founded were false, and live in a world in which (in our western societies at least) women are coming to take their place as the equals of men.
ATTEMPTS TO BRIDGE
Christians of a liberal disposition and Christian feminists attempt to throw a bridge between past and present.
They must necessarily as Christians make reference to the past.
But they seek also to have a religion which is in tune with the world in which we live.
I shall here consider three such attempts to connect past and present: firstly, that which I shall call a ‘kairos’ approach, in which the past is basically normative but it is said that there can be development; secondly, that which I shall call the ‘golden thread’approach, in which a leading motif is lifted out of the past and applied in another situation; thirdly, that which I shall call an ‘a priori ethical’position, in which essentially authority is seen to lie in the present but there is not perceived to be any fundamental clash with the past.
I shall describe these approaches as ideal types, but in each case illustrate them by reference to the work of one or another theologian.
I shall suggest that there are fundamental problems with each.
The ‘kairos’ approach
I gave this approach this title following a pamphlet which reproduces a lecture given by the English Anglican bishop of high church disposition John Austin Baker to a conference of the Movement for the Ordination of Women.l8 I believe that it is (in less thought-out form) widely followed by proponents of the ordination of women, perhaps of a less radical variety, and certainly I would think that it appeals to  many men.
Having written a fairly scathing account of this approach in draft, I sent it to John Austin Baker (as I have also sent my account of their work to Christian feminists whom I discuss in this book for comment) only to receive a delightful letter from him which rescinded much that he had written, explained that he had been given the title, and essentially agreed with my criticism!
I shall press on however, for this pamphlet is the best exposition of which I know of what I believe to be a widely held position.
Baker considers the biblical theme of ‘kairos’, the time (unlike normal linear time) in which action is demanded or a time which is opportune.
The Israelites believed in a divine purpose in history, which unfolds stage by stage.
‘That history, because it is God's history, is a purposeful line; but because it is human history as well, it is also a zig-zag one.’
God is seen as one who can bring about such kairoi in history, and who has a will for humankind.
It is not even a question of God inspiring people to exploit these opportunities when they arise.
It is a matter of God actually creating the pregnant or opportune situation….
And let us be quite clear that the fact that any particular system doesn't go on for ever doesn't mean it wasn't God's will when it came in.
‘God fulfils himself in many ways’— because he does take history seriously.
He made it.
Thus, in relation to the ordination of women, the question to be asked is: ‘Is this the opportunity God has deliberately created for this new development in the life of Christ's Church?’
It is clear why this approach has appeal.
It is a particularly neat fit with Christianity itself.
Christianity is a historical religion; Christians believe that God is actively involved in history.
The kairos approach allows people to say that God is indeed involved in history and continues to be involved, bringing about in time something new.
Christianity is a religion in which there can be development precisely because it is a historical religion, tied to history.
Such thinking may have a particular appeal to Catholic Christians, who tend to think in terms of an evolving revelation.
At the same time the kairos approach apparently allows it to be said that the past has not been at fault; it is simply that God moves with humanity into a new age.
I believe this approach to be ethically incoherent.
The fact that I should think this, and thought this at the time when I was one of the leaders of the movement campaigning for the ordination of women, brings it home to me how difficult it was for me to work within that movement.
Consider what the kairos approach implies.
It is being  suggested, is it, that God saw nothing wrong with the past situation in which only men could be ordained?
That God has waited until this late hour to create a situation in which it is right to ordain women also?
That God has perhaps changed His mind?
The kairos approach makes God both immoral (if God saw nothing wrong with the previous sexism of the church's stance) and fickle.
The conservative position, in which God has created a fixed place for woman in an ordered universe, is actually not in the same way morally objectionable and is much more coherent.
The kairos approach, whereby God in God's good time brings into being a new situation, can only be morally credible if one fails to see in sexism the evil which it is.
Of course the response which is likely to be made to such objections is that God works with human beings, so that only when human society has reached a certain stage of development does it become appropriate to ordain women.
But this also is ethically incomprehensible.
For according to the kairos approach, God is to be seen as deeply involved in the direction of human history!
Now sexism is so fundamental an evil that it becomes very difficult for anyone who has grasped this to envisage that God could be said to have been involved with human history.
Of such a God one may well say, with Alice Walker's Celie, that he ‘just sit up there being deef’.
l9 Moreover, the kairos approach cannot speak to the fact of an all-male priesthood (which God is supposed to have given to His church and to have been adequate in past ages) precisely having been one of the factors making for the secondary position of women in society.
If men alone could represent God, then somehow they were the lords of women.
If women could not represent God, that reflected upon women.
A kairos approach whitewashes the past.
The Christian church, it implies, has not, through its sexism, been a cause of sexism in the world.
(The fact that this might have been the case seems to be beyond the imagination of many even of liberal disposition in the church.)
The church has nothing for which to apologize.
Men are let off scot-free.
They are now to admit women to orders, orders which they themselves have rightly filled over the centuries.
Meanwhile a woman who adopts a kairos approach is to see herself as one whom God has now deigned to choose, and privileged at that.
But if only now is it God's intention that they also be admitted to orders, women must necessarily see themselves as some kind of secondary citizens.
At a time when my country had a woman in the highest office of state, women were still not admitted to the lowest order in the church, that of deacon.
The ‘golden thread’ approach
This approach has considerable theological ancestry, particularly Lutheran.
It is a way of bringing some kind of order to the many diverse things which the scriptures could be said to be about.
Luther imposed a coherence upon Christianity through concluding that justification by faith was the theme which unlocked the scriptures.
He then proceeded to read them in terms of this motif.
In the twentieth century we find the Lutheran theologian and new testament scholar Rudolf Bultmann reading the scriptures in terms of a very similar theme.
Taking an existentialist approach, he says that it is God who delivers us into freedom, which is not something which we can accomplish for ourselves.
Much liberation theology has implicitly worked with what I here call a ‘golden thread’ approach.
The theme which interests such theologians is that of liberation: this is both read out of the scriptures and then the scriptures are read in terms of this theme.
It is in the fact that a golden thread methodology may be a two-stage operation that its potential value lies in relation to the issue of women.
Thus one may (first stage) read the meaning of scripture out of it, and then (second stage) apply what one holds to be the golden thread to another situation, not considered in the scriptures.
Or (another possibility), one may judge one theme in scripture to be an organizing focus (first stage), and then (second stage) bring that criterion to scripture, judging other themes to be of lesser importance or frankly wanting.
I shall consider each of these possibilities.
In the first case one asks (stage one) what it is that the scriptures (or Christianity) are essentially about?
One responds that Christianity is about the dignity and integrity of persons as children of God, and consequently their liberation from oppression.
One then asks (stage two) what this implies for how women should be treated in the church in our day?
The great advantage of this approach is that it gets away from picking out odd texts from the bible to ‘prove’ one thing or another and asks after the underlying message.
Moreover, it allows us to adjudicate on a matter with which the bible does not concern itself (as it may be said not to concern itself with the question of the liberation of women).
It can moreover, as in the second case, be used in order to produce coherence within the biblical material itself.
Thus it may be said (stage one) that fundamental to the biblical outlook is that in Christ there is neither Jew nor Greek, nor bond nor free, no more male and female.
Other biblical passages (stage two) may then be held to be less than adequate in terms of this criterion.
It is of interest to consider the issue of women in comparison with other issues in relation to which such a methodology has been applied.
Luther himself knew well what methodologically he was doing and what was necessary: that he needed to order and adjudicate.
For as he said — in inimitable words —‘the scriptures have a wax nose.’
Thus, working in terms of what I have called a ‘golden thread’ approach (the golden thread being justification by faith) he names the Epistle to James (which appears to speak of justification by works) an ‘epistle of straw’.
An example in relation to which the opponents of the ordination of women might be expected to agree that they were making use of such a methodology is the case of slavery.
The new testament implies that the use of slaves, provided it is humane, does not contravene the will of God.
But in time Christian people came to ask after the fundamental values of Christianity; such that slavery then became an impossibility.
Liberation theology does not, in the same sense, require a two-stage operation.
For the call to liberate the poor, it may well be said, is to be read directly out of scripture.
An argument that the equality of women is a necessary implication of Christianity must clearly employ a two-stage operation.
But this is not necessarily a bad thing.
For people are forced, as I suggested, to employ a more sophisticated hermeneutic than simply selecting odd biblical verses.
It should be noted that what I have called a two-stage golden thread approach implies that human beings have some kind of control over what they will say is right.
In this it begins to approach to what I shall call an ‘ethical a priori’ position.
I should like to consider momentarily the application of such an approach to the various (conflicting) new testament verses which have to do with the status of women.
I certainly used to use a golden thread methodology, together with other kinds of considerations, when arguing for the ordination of women.
It seemed to me axiomatic.
But this is not surprising, since I basically held an a priori ethical position.
Thus it seemed to me clear that the Galatians passage (that there is neither Jew nor Greek, nor bond nor free, there is no more male and female) 20 was of the essence of Christianity.
Other passages were to be judged mistaken in terms of this criterion.
How could one, should one wish, argue that it is the Galatians passage which is fundamental?
(The fact that I found it offensive to have to make any such argument for human equality shows that I was working with an ethical a priori approach, but I believe that a case can be made.)
In this passage, one may well argue, Paul broke  through to the ultimate implications of the Christian message.
It is a passage in which he is concerned with the nature of life in Christ (for it is a baptismal statement).
Indeed it may well be intended as a statement as to what should be the case in the eschaton.
By contrast, the Corinthians passage in which Paul speaks of male headship, and in which it is said that women should be silent (a verse which is probably an interpolation and does not owe to Paul), he is concerned with a practical situation which has arisen, a situation in which the church, still insecure in a pagan world, was likely to cause scandal if it departed too far from social convention — and his concern is that it should not unnecessarily put itself in jeopardy.
One forgives him.
One might further say that Paul would surely want to be judged in terms of the highest that he knew.
Furthermore one may argue that the subordination of women in the church reflected the cultural conditioning of people in the first century.
By contrast, the principle of human equality is a fundamental implication of the gospel.
(Yet again it must be said — an argument which does not directly arise out of a golden thread approach but which is pertinent here — the two passages in the new testament which speak of women's subordination both rely on the Genesis account of creation and fall, an account no longer valid in a post-Darwinian age.)
The golden thread approach, coupled with considerations such as that post-Darwin certain past arguments no longer hold water, together with an element of an a priori ethical stance, seems to me to provide the best concerted argument for the ordination of women.
Yet there seems to be a dearth of people arguing consistently using a golden thread methodology.
That this is the case is significant.
Christians seem to believe themselves to be under a pressure to find texts in the bible which directly support their case.
Those arguing for the ordination of women clutch at verses, or at historical evidence from the past, which seem to support ‘their’ side.
The fact that this is so indicates well that scripture is considered to be sacred literature.
(Something that arises out of the fact that Christianity is a historical religion in which there is a belief in revelation, so that the literature which tells of this revelation is a literature apart.)
Christians must have difficulty in using the bible to speak to contemporary issues so long as this belief persists.
The joy of a golden thread approach is that it provides a way of moving between the past and the very different circumstances of the present.
It allows a translation process to be undertaken, while the underlying theme (that for example of human liberation) remains constant.
The problem with such an approach is of course that if one's starting-point is ‘what are the scriptures fundamentally about?’(and not ‘what is a priori right?’— which would be an ‘a priori ethical’ position) it is perfectly possible for others to contend that they consider some quite other theme to be ‘fundamental’to the scriptures.
Thus opponents of the ordination of women might plausibly say (as Barth would seem to) that fundamental to the scripture is male headship.
A conservative could adduce, in support of this contention, the fact that in scripture God is overwhelmingly conceptualized by using male metaphors; that God came in Christ, a male human person; and that he chose men alone to head the church (if one thinks that the calling of the twelve bears a relation to the constitution of the church).
At the end of the day it is a case of choosing what one's faith will be about — a point which Christians are reluctant to acknowledge.
Once one has conceded that, then one has entered the arena of an ‘a priori ethical’ position.
Among Christian feminist theologians who may be said to have employed in part a ‘golden thread’ approach, although not specifically in relation to the question of ordaining women, is Rosemary Ruether.
Ruether is a liberation theologian; indeed she has worked consistently from a liberation perspective in relation to such issues as third world poverty, anti-semitism and militarism.
It is from this perspective that she approaches the women's issue.
Ruether speaks of ‘claiming the prophetic-liberating tradition of Biblical faith as a norm through which to criticize the Bible’— a golden thread approach.
As she herself comments, the theme of liberation is not marginal to the scriptures.
Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza has criticized Ruether here, asking how one should distinguish script from scripture.
But I find Ruether to be fully justified: one must, as a theologian, make some judgement as to what the scriptures are about, and Ruether is explicit as to how she reads.
But, proceeding further, I find Ruether's work to be less than satisfactory because muddled methodologically.
Ruether, who is by training a historian, and politically of left-wing convictions, quickly comes simply to embark on a description of certain threads which she believes to have run through history.
Thus we have the impression of what we may call a ‘sacred history’, threaded through history: the history of the liberation of people.
Indeed at times it appears that she thinks that this liberation progresses from age to age (though in correspondence she tells me that she thinks that the conclusion to history may well be that we annihilate ourselves).
If this is how her  work is to be read, then we are of course back with all the problems of the kairos approach: why has history been what it has been and given what history has been what may be said of God's intention in relation to women?
There is however one vital difference between Ruether and the kairos approach as I described it.
Ruether does not think in terms of a God who is transcendent above history and acts as an agent in history; and this we might say lets her off the hook as far as the theodicy question is concerned.
But in that this is the case, has not another problem appeared?
Has she in fact any concept of God at all, or simply a ‘transcendent life principle’? 27 What is that other than simply a human conception?
It seems to me questionable that Ruether is herself theistic.
Ruether in fact seems reluctant to pursue what I have called a two-stage approach.
And that she does not do this is not accidental.
For, given her Marxist-Hegelian approach (as I should want to call it), all reality tends to be collapsed into history.
It becomes difficult then to adduce abstract principles which should have a life of their own, quite apart from whether they have been exemplified within history, which may be used to judge history.
Equally (as I have suggested) it is difficult for her to have a God who is something other than a force (perhaps a human idea) present within history.
In the event one is hard pressed to see how hers is a theology, as opposed to simply a political agenda for the liberation of people.
(In fact, if one reads her work carefully, one notices that she never speaks of God, but rather of people's concept of God, which may lead them on in their striving for justice.)
An ‘ethical a priori’ position
In order to give a sense of an ‘ethical a priori’ position, I will at this point in the book say something of my own odyssey.
Such a recitation may lead to the conclusion that one who consistently holds to this position (as has been my experience) lands outside the church.
By an ‘ethical a priori’ position I mean to indicate that certain principles are held to be an a priori and not subject to qualification.
One considers oneself able to be a Christian while holding to these principles because one believes that these very principles are fundamental to Christianity, or at least not incommensurate with it.
The theological justification behind such an approach (not that I had necessarily thought this out at the time when I was a member of the church) must surely be that God's will must be held to be one with  what is good, and therefore what Christianity proclaims cannot differ from human ethical goods.
Consider then my own odyssey in relation to the Christian church.
From aged twelve to fourteen I was on Sundays marched, crocodile-wise, from my girls' boarding school to the local Anglican church.
Some time during those years I remember thinking it offensive that all the people ‘up front’ in black were male.
This was the mid-fifties.
Going to another church (of the Presbyterian Church of England) my love of God came to be the central factor in my life, and aged almost sixteen I told my headmistress with quiet confidence that I wished to be ordained.
As an undergraduate, still thinking of ordination, I visited a woman minister, and returned discouraged, having grasped that women were normally relegated to minor churches.
Upon receiving a degree which would allow me to undertake research, I turned down a place which I had been offered to study theology, and went to Oxford.
During my years in Oxford, working as I was largely in the field of recent Anglican ecclesiastical history, I was increasingly drawn to Anglicanism.
I have memories of asking permission to take communion.
The rule was that as a member in good standing of another church (and I was a member of the Presbyterian Church of England) one might do so on a temporary basis; but that if one found oneself doing so for any extended length of time, one should ask oneself whether one should not be confirmed.
I had asked myself, and the answer was no, not as long as that church refused to ordain women!
This was in the late sixties.
Writing a doctorate on the British response to the church conflict in Nazi Germany, I was well aware that Dietrich Bonhoeffer had refused to grant that the established national Protestant Church was in fact a Christian church so long as it refused to ordain people who were racially Jewish.
I believed I should consider the Anglican Church not fully Christian in that it discriminated against women; though I wanted to worship there.
I wrote as much in a letter to my bishop in Scotland in 1974 or 1975, at which time I was asking that he ordain me.
I in fact came to be confirmed by mistake!
I finally asked that same bishop, who was a personal friend, for baptism.
I was not sure that I had been baptized (having shrunk back from the outstretched hand with water in my late teens, believing baptism a piece of medieval nonsense), while wanting to be a member of the church.
I now wanted desperately to belong to the Christian church in general(which to me, from my Free Church background, was what baptism implied) while not able to belong specifically to the Anglican Church (which was what confirmation implied) so long as that church discriminated  against women.
For the bishop, however, who knew his church history, it would not have made sense (as he subsequently told me) to baptize an adult without also confirming her, for the two ceremonies had originally been one.
Some months later it dawned on me that he had put his hands on my head and what this implied!
Finding myself through a fait accompli an insider, I took it to be ‘God's will’.
Save for this fluke I could not have been in the position in which I now found myself.
For three years from 1977 I worked all hours, sacrificing my career and my free time, for the cause of the ordination of women in the British Anglican churches.
I had by this time spent some years in the States, including a year living in an Anglican theological college, and had watched my friends become ordained.
I was in an ambiguous position.
The ordination of women was something for which I was supposed to argue.
Yet as far as I was concerned it was an a priori matter that the church should not discriminate.
To be forced to argue that one is a full human being of equal dignity (for that is what it felt like) is quite extraordinarily undermining.
One moment which I recall vividly illuminates the problematic position in which I had placed myself.
Having in Scotland lost the vote for the ordination of women to the priesthood, it seemed profitable to argue that women should be ordained to the  diaconate (that is to say be made deacons, not simply deaconesses).
We had an expert team, among us people with a first-rate knowledge of Greek and early church history.
It was my task to put the material together.
It seemed necessary to argue (that it was relevant both proponents and opponents seemed agreed) that Phoebe of Romans 16 might indeed be accounted a ‘deacon’ and not simply a ‘deaconess’.
I remember my feelings.
What was I doing, in the late twentieth century, arguing that what happened in the first century was of relevance to whether or not I could be a deacon.
I had never had to argue that as a woman I should have an education, become a theologian, own a house, or anything else.
What did that do to me as a person, to my sense of myself in the Christian church?
In 1980, coming back from a hospital in the States where I had been told that I ought to have an operation (interestingly on my throat — it was as though all the tension caused by what I could not say was caught up there), I saw that I had to be free of this.
Back in Britain writing my last newsletter to the Group in Scotland I had loved and brought together, I said that I thought we had to be much bolder, taking an a priori stance on the fact that there could be no discrimination against women.
But the problem with taking such an a priori stance is that it  clashes with the nature of Christianity.
For Christianity is a historical religion.
Thus, in consideration of such an issue as to whether women can be ordained, relevant factors for people come to be (as I have said) questions such as what was the case in the early church, what would Jesus have done, how is God envisaged in the religion of the ancient Hebrews?
Were we not concerned with a historical religion we could settle such matters as to who might be the ministers in the religion (if indeed there were to be any) on a priori ethical grounds.
It is because of this historical dimension to the religion that those arguing (for example) for the ordination of women apparently find it so difficult to say, in the way in which it has been possible to maintain in the sphere of politics, that we hold these truths to be self-evident, that all human beings are created equal and must not be discriminated against.
There is always this reference to history, and the reference is to a sexist history.
Questions of human dignity and equality are however not matters which one should have to argue (which was what I was forced to do when I was in the church).
To entertain the idea that they are matters which are open to discussion is in fact deeply offensive.
It is owing to the fact that Christianity is a historical religion, having a necessary reference to a past period of human history, that such a discussion needs to proceed.
THE DENIAL OF DISCONTINUITY
In recent years there have been feminist theologians who, far from believing there to be a gap to be bridged between past and present, have emphasized rather the continuity to be found in the situation of women.
Thus there has grown up an interest in feminist ‘herstory’; etymologically impossible, the word emphasizes that his-story has been just that — the history of men.
But the work which I want to consider here is not simply historical, it is also theological in intent.
We are to read the stories of women as though they were our stories, empathizing with them in their suffering and standing with them in their courage in the face of patriarchy.
I shall discuss the work of Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza and of Phyllis Trible.
What I shall want to argue is that their position is caught up in a circular argument: the only reason one could have for wanting to stand in this kind of relationship to biblical women is that one is Christian, but these writers never tackle the prior question as to whether feminism is in fact compatible with Christianity, such that one should want to stand in relationship to biblical women.
I shall in considering the work of Schüssler Fiorenza look in particular at the essay ‘Toward a Critical Theological Self-Understanding of Biblical Scholarship’, in her collected essays Bread Not Stone , as this represents a somewhat later and more refined perspective than her earlier book In Memory of Her , though I shall also draw on that work.
It is Schüssler Fiorenza who has been foremost among those who have argued that we should promote a solidarity of sisterhood with the women of the earliest Christian community.
She writes:
We participate in the same struggle as our biblical foresisters against the oppression of patriarchy and for survival and freedom from it.
We share the same liberating visions and commitments as our biblical foremothers.
We are not called to ‘empathize’ or to ‘identify’with their struggles and hopes but to continue our struggle in solidarity with them.
Their memory and remembrance — rediscovered and kept alive in historical reconstruction and actualized in ritual celebration — encourage us in historical solidarity with them to commit ourselves to the continuing struggle against patriarchy in society and church.
It should be noted that what we are said to share with them is their vision: there is one continuing struggle against patriarchy.
Biblical interpretation is to be done ‘for biblical communities today….
It…can sustain, encourage and challenge….’
A constant theme in Schüssler Fiorenza's work is that we draw strength for our struggle from our knowledge of the past.
In In Memory of Her she once and again quotes Judy Chicago: ‘Our heritage is our power.’
Schüssler Fiorenza has shown in an impressive way in In Memory of Her that women's contribution to the life of the church was not so marginal as has often been assumed.
She enables women today to see that women have been historical agents in the past, and to envisage the past from the perspective of women.
As a piece of reconstruction of history (or herstory) there can be no reason to find fault with her work.
But it is clear that Schüssler Fiorenza aims to be very much more than a historian.
It is also her intention to speak theologically.
It is here that it seems to me that there are basic problems which are not thought through, and moreover that moves are made which are deceptive, in that they give the impression that a solution has been found where in fact the main issue has not been tackled.
In what follows I shall try to elucidate what I believe the problems to be.
In the first place, such a stance tends to minimize the gap between past and present, even though Schüssler Fiorenza may say that she  wishes to ‘preserve the historical distance between the present and the past’.
(I think that Bread Not Stone is more hesitant here than In Memory of Her : she speaks of there being one vision, whereas in In Memory of Her she appears simply to suggest that in our suffering and our courage we are one with first-century women.)
But even if one considers those women in the modern western world who are less fortunate, they still have, for example, an entirely different legal status than had a first-century woman.
The difference in life-style between myself (and herself) as white, middle-class women living in the western hemisphere today and that of first-century women is such as to make all comparison meaningless.
To be asked to see myself as one in solidarity with first-century women strains my credulity.
It is then not immediately apparent why ‘our heritage is our power’: we are in a radically different situation, with different problems and different options.
I may indeed want to stand by women living in less fortunate circumstances than I today.
(I cannot help the dead.)
It is, I think, no chance that I have chosen over the years to support women rather than men political prisoners in Chile.
But it is not their wish that I put myself into their shoes, rather than living free and wishing that for them also.
I find then this ‘universal solidarity of sisterhood’— as though women across the ages had a like situation — to be far-fetched.
But in fact the call for solidarity comes from an unacknowledged motivation.
Schüssler Fiorenza wishes to look to the women of the earliest church because she is a Christian.
If one is Christian, one must, in some way, make reference to Christ.
For a feminist, the most obvious way in which to do this (for Christ is a male figure) is to make reference to the earliest community of disciples, particularly the community of women.
It appears to be a clever move to make.
It is however to evade the issue as to whether Christianity and feminism are compatible.
The whole raison d'etre of that early Christian community was that it believed certain things of Christ — at the very least, that it was he whom God had raised from the dead.
Indeed one's own reason for looking to this community was presumably that, as a Christian, one needed oneself to make some reference to Christ.
Like it or not then, one is forced to confront the questions which Schüssler Fiorenza, through her strategy, seeks to avoid.
Is it possible for feminists to be Christians, when Christ is a male figure?
(Indeed, is Christianity true: could it possibly be that one was raised from the dead?)
It is of significance that one finds mention of Christ to be singularly absent from Schüssler Fiorenza's work.
She at one  point quotes another, James Barr, who says: ‘The true believer is a believer in God and in Christ…
‘. But she herself neither acknowledges this, nor explores what problems a religion of which this is true holds for women.
Meanwhile she has given the impression that, by looking to the earliest community of women and men, she has found a way for women to be Christian.
If it is simply that ‘our heritage is our power’, and women gain strength today by looking to their sisters in the past, if what interests her is the vision of an equality between women and men, Schüssler Fiorenza might well be better advised to look to other communities in the ancient Near East.
There is considerable evidence that greater equality prevailed between women and men in the cult of some ancient polytheistic communities.
It is of interest for example that Ruether, as she has increasingly wanted to find models for women in the past, has been forced to look outside the ancient Hebrew and Christian tradition.
Indeed one may ask whether there is any possible community in the past which, through its vision of equality between women and men, could inspire one?
It may be more fruitful to create a utopian, and as yet unrealized, vision to hold before our eyes.
One might at least look to the best examples there may be today.
Schüssler Fiorenza herself agrees that all early Christians shared an androcentric mind-set.
Why then look to them?
She comments that a postbiblical (sic)feminist stance ‘too quickly concedes that women have no authentic history within biblical religion’.
But why (if it were not for the fact that one is a Christian) should one be wanting to stay with the experience of women within the biblical tradition?
Schüssler Fiorenza however wants to suggest (as at times Trible does also) that we have in any case to live within — and thus also we need to try to redeem — the trajectory of biblical religion.
‘Western women’, she writes, ‘are not able to discard completely and forget our personal, cultural or religious Christian history.
We will either transform it into a new liberating future or continue to be subject to its tyranny whether we recognize its power or not.’
This is a very different kind of argument, a pragmatic one.
But is it the case that western women, living today in the United States, let alone in secular modern Europe, live in societies so dominated by the Christian myth, so ready to point to the place of women within the biblical tradition, that the best that women can do is to try to give a better reading of that past?
To suggest that a re-reading is the only option open to us is a counsel of despair.
We are not so trapped.
The younger  generation (at least in Britain) is profoundly ignorant of their biblical past.
The society has enshrined in law a status for women far different from that of biblical women.
Surely one does not spend one's life as a biblical scholar reinterpreting the tradition because that is all that can be done in view of the fact that, like it or not, we live within this trajectory?
We may today distance ourselves from, indeed reject, this tradition should we so wish.
Carol Christ well writes in disagreement with Schüssler Fiorenza: ‘To acknowledge a kind of intellectual and conceptual debt to Western biblical traditions is not the same as to acknowledge loyalty to those traditions.’
I would want to argue that if our goal is a religious situation in which women and men are accounted equals, we shall need to promote not continuity but rather discontinuity with the past.
Unless one is Christian, there is no particular reason to find the past normative.
It may be far more powerful to live free from the past, weighed down as little as possible by how women have been perceived, or have perceived themselves, in that past.
For myself, I wish to say to men that as long as they associate me with an idea of ‘woman’ drawn from the past, or suppose that a model for gender relations is to be found in that past, they have failed to see me for the person who I am, or to envisage what equality might mean.
Such a stance provides a challenge.
So long as one's own eyes are fixed on the past, it is difficult to make the point that the past should not be prescriptive for the future.
To encourage a solidarity of women across all ages is moreover profoundly separatist.
One's basic identity is found in relation to a community of women.
It is clear why, if one wishes to remain within the Christian context, one should want to side with women (and women-identified men) against the ‘male’ establishment.
But (unless one be Christian) why not hold as one's vision a community of both women and men who, having essentially left the past behind, live in the present?
Above all I fail to see how one could worship God or expand one's religious sensibilities by looking to this past.
Schüssler Fiorenza believes that a people that has no history loses its sense of itself.
It may well be true that Black people are inspired by the memory of their courage under slavery.
That they are prepared to take on board such a past, one must hold in awe.
But — quite apart from the issue of whether a woman like myself can in any meaningful way identify herself with women in the remote past — one must ask how could this be useful theologically?
There is a question here which I  believe makes such a move as Schüssler Fiorenza wishes to make highly problematical.
She writes: ‘The process of inspiration must be seen as the inspiration of those people, especially of poor women, struggling for human dignity and liberation from oppressive powers, because they believe in the biblical God of creation and salvation despite all experiences to the contrary.’
Though I might, in working for a different future, find the struggle of women politically inspiring, I am unlikely to find a community in which women were not counted equal a medium through which I can gain a glimpse of God.
Does Schüssler Fiorenza mean that one is inspired by these women, although the religion in which they were involved is sexist (in which case one is inspired to act against the biblical God)?
Or that one is to continue to believe in the biblical God despite all experiences to the contrary, that is to say believe that God is bound up with a religion and a community in which women are counted inferior (in which case one is attempting to believe in an evil God)?
She herself thinks, of biblical texts, that if one cannot accept the ‘religious, political, and personal ethos’ of a text ‘one cannot accept its authority as revealed and as Holy Scripture’.
I would suggest that no more can one make use of the early Christian community or its religion as a medium which is transparent of God.
Like Schüssler Fiorenza, Phyllis Trible seeks to close the gap between past and present.
By re-reading texts in a more favourable light, she would allow feminist women the better to be able to appropriate the scriptures.
Looking to the past, she seeks to illuminate the present, believing there to be no unbridgeable gap between the two.
It is not only those texts which women might be able to estimate positively which she exegetes.
In her book Texts of Terror she considers the stories of four women of the Hebrew scriptures who are subjected to terror; rape, murder and dismemberment at the hands of men.
She writes: ‘Ancient tales of terror speak all too frighteningly of the present.’
She describes the circumstances in which she chose to focus on these tales: ‘hearing a black woman describe herself as a daughter of Hagar outside the covenant;…reading news reports of the dismembered body of a woman found in a trash can’.
Evidently the present is in some respects not unlike the past.
Of the biblical stories she remarks: ‘To account for these stories as relics of a distant, primitive, and inferior past is invalid.’
Her hope is that ‘by enabling insight, they may inspire repentance’.
She ‘interprets stories of outrage on behalf of their female victims in order to recover a neglected history, to remember a past that the  present embodies, and to pray that these terrors shall not come to pass again'.
Concluding her exegesis of the story of Jephthah's murder of his daughter in the keeping of a foolish vow, an event which was remembered ritually by women in ancient Israel, she writes:
Like the daughters of Israel, we remember and mourn the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite.
In her death we are all diminished; by our memory she is forever hallowed….
She becomes an unmistakable symbol for all the courageous daughters of faithless fathers.
Her story…evokes the imagination, calling forth a reader's response….
Let us in the spirit of the daughters of Israel remember and mourn the daughter of Jephthah.
Unlike Schüssler Fiorenza who seeks to move behind an androcentric text to the community which gave rise to it, Trible remains with the text itself.
She employs a method called ‘rhetorical criticism’, a form of literary criticism, in which the text is criticized using clues given in the text itself.
The principle which guides her exegesis is that one should ‘use scripture in interpreting scripture’.
Although conceding, in a footnote, that one may use extrabiblical material to ‘illuminate scripture’, her basic stance is to grant to the text the status of a self-contained entity.
This is well captured by the opening line of her book God and the Rhetoric of Sexuality : ‘The Bible is a pilgrim wandering through history to merge past and present.’
The text has a certain givenness; it may be interpreted anew in each age.
Trible re-reads from a feminist perspective.
She believes that the scriptures contain what she calls ‘counter-cultural’ motifs and themselves critique patriarchy.
Thus, in an early essay, she writes: ‘I affirm that the intentionality of biblical faith…is neither to create nor to perpetuate patriarchy but rather to function as salvation for both women and men.’
Many feminists, she says, read the bible to reject: ‘My suggestion is that we re-read to understand and to appropriate.’
Trible's work could well be criticized in its own terms.
It is questionable that texts can always be read as favourably as she seeks to do.
I shall make mention of her reading of the story of Ruth, suggesting however that that story does not escape patriarchal parameters.
Her interpretation of the Genesis creation story in particular has been the cause of considerable interest.
She argues that the creation of woman is the climax of the story, that the phrase ‘helper’ connotes equality, and that man ‘discovered a partner in woman rather than a creature to dominate’.
Others qualified to judge have however found this re-reading too optimistic.
Again, the same question may be asked as that which I have asked in relation to Schüssler Fiorenza's work: given that in every age women have been mistreated at the hands of men, how much do present-day women really have in common with biblical women?
The story of Ruth illuminates for me the unbridgeable difference, rather than the similarity, between her situation and mine.
It is however a rather different criticism which I wish to bring to Trible's work, one which runs in parallel with my critique of Schüssler Fiorenza's work.
Why, unless one is a Christian, should one be wanting to undertake such a re-reading?
Indeed, in Trible's case, unless one is a conservative Christian who believes the text to be the word of God?
If one is a fundamentalist Christian who believes the text to be inspired, then one sees why the text is alone to be interpreted in terms of the text.
But if one is not fundamentalist (and not simply working as a literary critic) then there are questions which need to be brought to the text.
What authority could, for example, the text of the creation story possibly have post-Darwin?
Trible's reading of such a text is certainly very different from that of, say, Barth.
But, if only by default, through simply reading the text in terms of the text and not bringing outside considerations to bear, she, as does Barth, shores up its authority.
Trible is in fact very ambivalent as to what is her position.
In her major book God and the Rhetoric of Sexuality she writes: ‘The Bible as literature is the Bible as scripture, regardless of one's attitude toward its authority.’
(One may think this no more to be the case than Schüssler Fiorenza's proposition that we cannot but live within the trajectory of biblical religion.)
Particularly in her more recent work however, she seems to want to give herself out simply as a literary critic.
Unlike Schüssler Fiorenza, Trible never explicitly names herself a Christian feminist.
But if Trible's position is that she is a literary critic, pursuing rhetorical criticism without commitment to the text, then it must be said that the impression she gives is often very different.
This is true not least of her more recent work.
In Texts of Terror she comments that ‘wrestling with the silence, absence, and opposition of God’ is the context of her work.
Indeed, she comments of the story of Jacob at Jabbok, that the ‘man’ with whom he wrestles is deity; and, of Jacob, on his ‘refusing to let the man go unless he blesses him’.
She writes: ‘As a paradigm for encountering terror, this  story offers sustenance for the present journey….
We struggle mightily, only to be wounded.
But yet we hold on, seeking a blessing.’
But — other than if one is a Christian theologian of a rather fundamentalist variety who believes this text to be the inspired word of God — why should one be struggling with it?
If I read Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice and notice the anti-semitism which surrounds the character of Shylock, I may be bothered by it, even condemn Shakespeare for his anti-semitism.
But I do not try to re-read the text to make it more acceptable; I dissociate myself from Shakespeare's outlook.
Trible's whole approach suggests that we should be granting authority to these texts, texts which convey the most fearful misogyny.
Of two women whom she mentions in her acknowledgements in Texts of Terror she remarks: ‘They themselves rendered to God, even the God of terror.’
But why be wrestling with this God and seeking a blessing from him — other than if one believes that the text is of God?
Why not dismiss it?
Indeed, the theodicy question as to how one could ever use such texts as a medium through which to worship God may be thought to be even more insoluble than is Schüssler Fiorenza's finding inspiration in the early Christian community.
Of course it would be possible for Trible to maintain that she is re-reading the text because it is an important western text and she wants to understand more accurately what its authors meant.
But that this is her intent is clearly not the import of her words.
It is of interest that Schüssler Fiorenza, who looks to the continuity of the tradition, is a Roman Catholic.
Trible, to whom the integrity of the text is crucial, comes from a Southern Baptist background.
Of course a theologian may move far from her background and Trible may well want to claim that she has done so.
What must be said however is this.
If one's position is that one is a literary critic, there can be no reason to wrestle with the text that one may appropriate it.
If one is a conservative Christian who grants the text authority, one sees why, as a feminist, one should need to wrestle with it.
But, in wrestling with it, it should be noted that one is not addressing the more fundamental question as to whether in fact feminism is compatible with Christianity.
Meanwhile the effect of taking such a stance towards the text is to bolster its authority, or at least to fail to question it.
Indeed Trible's work has precisely been useful to women of conservative disposition who, accepting the text's authority, need to interpret it as best they may.
It must be said then of the attempt to re-read the history or literature of the past, that the only motivation for doing so can be that one is a Christian.
Other than if one is Christian, there can be no reason for one, in relation to one's religious life, to want to give more positive accounts of the past.
Furthermore that while the history or literature of the past is re-read — and the impression given that the position of women is better than one might have expected — the more fundamental questions which need to be asked are not tackled.
Can there ever be an equal place for women in Christianity?
Is Christianity true in any case, or is what the early church believed about Jesus simply not possible?
What of the fact that our knowledge of evolution makes the Genesis text invalid?
Readings such as that of Schüssler Fiorenza and Trible may make it easier for Christian women who are feminists to associate themselves with the Christian tradition.
But the issue as to whether feminism and Christianity are compatible is not entered upon, let alone shown to be the case.
A POST-CHRISTIAN POSITION
One may believe of God that God is equally available to people in all times and places.
Such is my position.
That is to say I deny that there could be a particular revelation of God in any one age, which thenceforth becomes normative for all others.
It should be noted that this is equally as is a Christian position, a religious position.
I am simply denying that God (whatever we may mean by God) could be of such a kind that God could intervene in human history, or be revealed through particular events in history, or through a particular person, in a way in which God is not potentially present to us in and through all acts and persons.
It will be clear that my not being a Christian has nothing to do with any feminist stance which I may espouse.
I am not a Christian because I do not credit, as I earlier put it, that nature and history could be other than closed causal nexuses or believe that there can be events which are in some way qualitatively different from other events.
Again I cannot believe of Jesus Christ that he is related to God in a way which is qualitatively different from that of all other human beings.
To be religious in such a way is to understand theology to have the same relation to the past as do all other human disciplines.
It is Christianity which is here the exception.
In no other human discipline, not in philosophy, nor science, nor music, is it believed that  there has been a particular revelation of God in history, so that that point in history is then necessarily taken up into the discipline.
Other disciplines are not historical in the sense in which I have named Christianity a ‘historical’ religion.
Take the case of Beethoven (but equally of a scientist working today).
Beethoven is unthinkable without the tradition of western music, indeed one might say without the very specific background of late eighteenth-century music in Vienna.
His music, though unique to him, is clearly a creation of the late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century tradition.
In this sense it is rooted in history.
But Beethoven could take what he would from the past, and invent what he would.
There was no point in past music with which he had to reconcile what he wanted to say, or to which he had necessarily to make reference.
Again a scientist stands at the point which has at present been reached within a long tradition of enquiry.
But she is essentially faced with thinking out what she believes truth to be.
She may work within a paradigm, and not be uninfluenced by how her mind was formed as she grew up within the discipline of science.
But if that paradigm seems untrue, to her or to the scientific community in which she works, it can be jettisoned in favour of a new construction of reality.
Not so in the case of Christianity.
Christianity, as we have seen, necessarily has an anchor in history.
For it is believed that God has been revealed in a peculiar way to a certain people, and in particular made known through the person of Jesus Christ.
Christianity is then a historical religion in a way in which religion need not necessarily be historical.
And in a way in which other disciplines are not.
This is not to say that, as a religious person who is not a Christian, one has no relation to the past.
Indeed it may well be that it would be impossible to stand in no relation to the past, or to the framework in which one's mind and one's awareness as a religious person were formed.
But one need not believe that God revealed God's self at a particular point in history, so that one need necessarily make reference to that point in history in one's religion.
It is in such a sense that I am post-Christian.
Post-Christian because Christianity (and not Islam) is the historical context within which my religious sensibilities were formed.
But definitely post-Christian because I do not believe that there could be this uniqueness: that God could be related in a particular way to a particular age or to one particular person Jesus Christ.
What should the post-Christian then hold of the religion that there has been down the ages?
How is she or he to make sense of the fact  that the Christian tradition has reigned for two thousand years?
The answer is clear.
There is no reason but to think (if one is a religious person) that people were in tune with God in other ages, as indeed one believes oneself also to be.
They were not deceived.
What one must say however is that people interpreted their awareness of God in terms of the age in which they lived.
That is to say they constructed a picture of the world, a picture which one oneself no longer believes to be viable.
This picture could be expressed in the following way as a religious myth.
God created the world, humans fell, in time He sent His Son Jesus Christ, who lived, died and rose again, and who will come at the end of time.
Such a picture of reality, through which people have interpreted their awareness of God, has also been expressed in more abstract terms.
Thus God is said to be trinity in unity, the second person of the trinity becoming incarnate in Christ.
To reject the picture is not to suggest that people did not have a very real experience of God.
To believe that people have been sensible of God in other ages is not however to accept what I may call the ‘vehicle’ of the Christian myth which has carried their religious sensibilities.
As it will have become clear, I do not believe that this vehicle is tenable.
Many Christians of a liberal disposition have come to this conclusion of some aspects of the myth.
Thus as we have seen Darwin pulled a plank out from under the creation stories.
Again the virgin birth, in view of what we now know of human reproduction, has become highly suspect for people.
In the face of the untenability of various parts of the Christian story of former ages, many Christians have made the move of saying that, however, these things are ‘symbolically true’.
Of course one cannot say this of the whole story; were one to say that one would no longer be a Christian.
One would think (as I think) that this story has served as a vehicle through which people expressed their love of God, but not that it is true.
Christians I have suggested, if they are rightly to be named Christians, must in some sense believe that God was in a unique way related to Christ, so that he becomes particular for them, and they are (as I am not) in their religion related to history.
It is here however that the feminist questions arise.
Why should one want to say of a myth that it is ‘symbolically true’ if it is a sexist myth?
What possible meaning could it have for one's life?
Why symbolize one's deepest beliefs through a myth which jars with all that one believes to be moral in the realm of relations between human beings?
It is such questions which one must ask of Christians, particularly Christians who would be feminist, who explain that the creation story (or any other part of the Christian story which may be said to be sexist) is to them a ‘true myth’.
The Genesis story, for example, does not symbolically convey a perfect creation in which human beings were equal, but one which carries (as feminists must believe) a false moral message.
The further question arises as to whether the myth is not false to what we know to be the case concerning the origin of humankind.
As we have already said, a creation myth which was symbolically true would have to convey that neither woman nor man was present before the other; moreover, not that they were created out of dust but that they were integrally related to the rest of the animal creation.
If one believes it to be true that Christ is the Son of God one sees why one should be Christian.
But if the Christian story is a myth why not, as a feminist, dispense with it?
It is sometimes said that all religion is mythological in form, and operates through concrete stories and symbols; that religion must necessarily have what I have called a vehicle and that there can be no pure awareness of God.
This may very well be true: let us grant for the moment that it is.
But this — it will be clear — is quite beside the point.
If one realizes that one is dealing with myths and symbols, then one might as well create myths and symbols which are true to what one would symbolize.
Many feminists who wish to be religious are indeed doing just that.
If a symbol does not symbolize what one thinks good or true, there can be no reason to retain it.
Nor do I believe that it can be said that in no way can we disentangle ourselves from the religious myth which we have inherited.
Many people are precisely dispensing with Christianity because they can no longer believe in it.
The ‘vehicle’ of Christianity which has carried people's love of God is no longer viable to them.
Nor is it the case that we in fact need a vehicle, a mythological story to carry our awareness of God, of the kind which has been fabricated in the west.
We may need some conceptualization, some image, some words, if we are to speak of God; but scarcely a picture of the universe and a history of humankind such as we have inherited in the Christian creeds.
I do not think then that we can ‘blame’ earlier generations for believing Christianity to be true.
‘Blame’ is not the right word.
They thought in terms of a picture of the universe and of the origin of humankind (one which we now know to have been in large part mistaken), and they interpreted their awareness of God in conjunction with this picture.
Again, I do not think that individuals are to be  blamed for this: whole societies were caught up in this sexist interpretation of reality.
(One may however ask after the nature of men in so far as it has been men rather than women who have created these pictures of the world and of the ‘place’ of woman within it such that they should have needed to construct such a misogynist picture.)
But whether people should not be called to account for continuing to hold such a picture today is another question.
One would have thought that a deep incompatibility should have become apparent to them between what they believed about the equality of human beings and the misogynist, or at least highly patriarchal, nature of this myth.
(It is because Christian feminists see such an incongruity that they want to adapt or reinterpret the myth.)
Not least, as I have suggested, the question arises as to how God can be good if God can have revealed himself through such a history and if such a myth is true.
Indeed there may be reason to think that such a dichotomy cannot for ever persist.
As long as people find the Christian story good there is reason to believe in it, or to believe it with the exception of some of the more minor matters such as virgin birth or the creation stories which they have had to decide are untrue (or only symbolically true).
But once doubt comes to be cast on the goodness of this story, then human beings will raise questions also as to its truth.
It is this situation with which many women are faced.
They realize, as feminists, the extent to which this Christian story has hurt women, indeed how far the fact that God has been seen as ‘male’ in the west has served to undermine a sense of women as also made in the image of God.
Questions will then inevitably be raised as to whether the Christian myth is true in any case.
I would suggest that many women are coming to doubt that it is.
In so far as our religion is our vision of the world, if that vision comes no longer to seem ethical, then it will be discarded.
One's religion, at the end of the day, one might suppose, has to conform to one's ethical beliefs.
The question of the truth of the Christian picture of the world has increasingly come to be raised during the last two hundred years.
In our age this has become an urgent question for many people and many others have left Christianity behind them.
The further question which feminism raises — to an extent to which, I would contend, this has not been raised before — is that of whether it is moral.
It is possible to say that Christian beliefs are ‘symbolically true’.
But if one does not believe them to be symbolically ‘true’ but false to one's belief in human equality, there is no point in having made this  sideways move.
It is precisely at the level of symbolism that, feminists are saying, the Christian story has harmed women.
Thus many a feminist no longer has any use for Christianity.
But this does not necessarily mean that she can no longer be a religious person.
Indeed one might well argue that unless this generation is able to distinguish between what has been the religious vehicle which has carried people's love of God, and the love of God itself which needs to be interpreted in new ways, there may be scant hope for the future of religion in the west.
Christology
THE LIMITS OF CHRISTIANITY
The nub of the question as to whether feminism is compatible with Christianity is that of whether a Christology can be found of which it may be said that at least it is not incompatible with feminism.
By Christology is meant the portrayal of Jesus as the Christ.
I have suggested that a meaningful way to set the limits as to what may rightly be called a Christian position, is that Christians are those who proclaim Jesus to have been unique.
Such a definition does not only include those Christians who construe their belief in orthodox terms; who proclaim of Christ (following the definition of the Council of Chalcedon) that he was fully God and fully human, these two natures existing in one person.
It includes also those who wish to speak of uniqueness in some other way.
For example I shall later consider Bultmann, who has no classical two-nature Christology, but who says of Jesus, as of no other, that this was the man whom God raised from the dead; so that for him this man's resurrection becomes the pivot of history.
I do not intend to have a restrictive but rather an expansive definition.
To say of persons however who simply believe of Jesus that he had a very fine moral teaching, but who wish to say nothing of Jesus himself, that they are Christian surely does not make sense theologically — whatever they may say of themselves.
Such a position should rightly be called humanist.
Christians have always proclaimed not simply Jesus' teaching, but something about Jesus.
There can rightly be no Christianity without a Christology.
The question of the compatibility of feminism and Christianity then is that of whether there can be a way of speaking of Christ's uniqueness which is not incompatible with feminism.
(Let us take also a minimalist definition of feminism, as meaning the proclaimed equality of women and men.)
The problem of course with Christology  for feminists is that Jesus was a male human being and that thus as a symbol, as the Christ, or as the Second Person of the trinity, it would seem that ‘God’ becomes in some way ‘male’.
It should be noted at the outset what is the nature of the problem with which we are concerned.
It is not a question of whether feminists have something against ‘men’.
Whether or not that is the case, the problem here is not that Jesus was a man, but that this man has been considered unique, symbolic of God, God Himself- or whatever else may be the case within Christianity.
The Godhead, or at least Christology, then appears to be biased against women.
Feminists have been very aware of the power of symbolism and ideology.
It is no small matter then to suggest that western religious thought, which has been so fundamental to western culture, has been ideologically loaded against women.
Before we proceed to consider the question as to whether there can be a Christology which is not incompatible with feminism, I should like to point to the significance of this question for Christians.
It is not simply that it is a vital matter for some small group of people (as some may think them to be) called ‘Christian feminists’ who would reconcile their feminism with their Christian faith.
For Christianity has always proclaimed Christ to be an inclusive concept.
In him, it is said, there is no East nor West, he is the new Adam, the first-born of all humanity; there is in Christ no Jew nor Greek, no more male and female.
The question which feminists are raising then strikes at the very core of Christology.
For it is being questioned whether a symbol which would appear to be necessarily male can be said to be inclusive of all humanity.
Does it not give male human beings privilege within the religion?
As far as women who would be Christian are concerned, how may they see in the Godhead an image of themselves?
The contention that Christology is not inclusive represents the undoing of what, classically, has been claimed of Christ.
Why has this question now come upon the scene?
What has changed in human relations between men and women, or how is it that women sense themselves differently, such that this matter has become urgent?
It would be difficult to give a definitive answer, but we may have some clue.
In other ages, the female seemed in some sense to be ‘included’ in the male, in a way in which this is no longer the case.
This made Christology seem natural.
Men were normally held to represent women also.
Humanity could then as a whole be thought to be summed up in Christ.
Mistaken biological beliefs, such that the male alone was thought to be a full human being, underlay  western culture, making this seem the more plausible.
Today men are not in the same way held to represent women: there are two sexes and women represent themselves.
It may then be that today situations where men alone are priests, or equally the fact that Christ is a male symbol and God is conceptualized using male metaphors, may make God appear to be ‘male’ in a way in which this was not earlier the case.
If we see a procession of only men we ask ‘where are the women?’.
As we have said, in an age when men alone filled the professions, it appeared only natural that those who led the church were likewise male.
When this is no longer so, the fact of a male priesthood makes God appear to be in some way peculiarly male, such that He needs a male priesthood to represent Him.
The belief that men alone represent humanity, whereas a woman is an individual who only represents herself, never absolute, does not wash any longer.
A symbol which is a male symbol appears in our culture to represent maleness, in a way in which earlier this may not necessarily have been the case.
Hence the urgency of the question as to whether Christ is an inclusive symbol, and the feeling of many women that it is not.
In this chapter I turn first to patristic Christology.
I do this because it was in the period of the church fathers that what was to become orthodox Christology was worked out.
But I also believe patristic Christology to be more hopeful than that of any other period in our quest to find a Christology which is inclusive of women.
I shall suggest however that the philosophical framework which allowed the fathers to have a Christology which could be in some way inclusive of women has disappeared; and moreover that even patristic Christology does not solve the problem.
I turn then to recent feminist Christological positions.
I conclude that none of them succeed in overcoming the biased nature of Christology and moreover that such attempts cannot, through the very nature of Christology, succeed.
Next I proceed to what may be called conservative Christologies, Christologies in which the maleness of Christ is said to be of the very essence of Christology.
Obviously such Christologies are not acceptable to feminists.
Both conservatives and feminists however, as I shall then consider, may take refuge in the suggestion that whereas Christ is a male figure, Mary (or the Holy Spirit) is an equivalent ‘female’ representation.
I shall suggest that these attempts to find what I call compensatory factors not only fail to be counterbalances, but also represent the undoing of Christology.
I shall then, having concluded that feminism and Christology are not  compatible, turn to the feminist critique of Christology (on the part both of those women who would be Christian and those who are not) and discuss the crucial nature of symbolism.
I wish finally in this introduction to say something of the nature of the question which feminism is raising here for Christianity.
It will be clear from what I have already said that I myself do not have a Christology and am not a Christian.
I do not believe that the uniqueness which Christians attribute to Christ is possible.
That is to say neither do I believe, in the terms of classical Christology, that Jesus of Nazareth could have had, as well as his human nature, a divine nature; nor do I believe that he could have been raised from the dead, so acquiring uniqueness through God's act of raising him.
I put this earlier by saying that I do not believe that the causal nexus of nature or that of history could be broken.
(I may believe Jesus' teaching to have been exemplary, or that he was a man singularly in tune with God; but this, as I would argue, does not make me a Christian.)
The question for me then is whether Christianity is true; and I do not believe that it is.
The question which feminism poses for Christianity is however other.
It is that of whether Christianity is ethical.
That is to say, is it not the case that a religion in which the Godhead is represented as male, or central to which is a male human being, necessarily acts as an ideology which is biased against half of humanity?
Is it not the case that such a religion is by its very nature harmful to the cause of human equality?
That is a serious charge against Christianity; and one which has not been raised in quite the same way by other moral issues (such as slavery) which have in the past confronted Christians.
PATRISTIC CHRISTOLOGY
Were it to be that Christian orthodoxy were that a man, Jesus of Nazareth, was God (or we may say ‘a god’), then there would be no hope that Christianity and feminism could be reconciled.
We should simply have a male God.
The religion would consist in the deification of a human person.
(We might indeed say of such a theology that it was a Jesuology, rather than a Christology; and Christianity has, at its worst, we may think, come to resemble this.)
It is in the fact that this is not however orthodoxy that our hope lies.
Patristic Christology is subtle, for the fathers were trying rightly to express a complex issue.
They were in the first place monotheists.
They did not therefore want to suggest of Christ that he was another God, which would create a polytheistic situation.
Indeed their background as Greek intellectuals would have made it nonsensical to them to have said of a particular item in our world (a particular human being) that he was ‘God’.
They did not intend to equate the man Jesus of Nazareth with God.
To have made such an equation would have been to create an idol: an item in the creation (not this time a golden calf but a person) would have been deified.
(Obviously in this case it would follow that women are not ‘like God’ in the way in which men are ‘like God’, and Christology could not be compatible with feminism.)
The problem for the fathers was how to express that God could be said to have uniquely identified God's self with Jesus of Nazareth, without making Jesus into God.
Hence the development of a two-nature Christology: that Jesus was fully God and fully human, these two natures being predicates of one ‘person’ or entity.
The patristic scholar Richard Norris, a student in particular of the Antiochenes (that school which emphasized the distinction between the two natures) and who himself, in the sentences I quote, inclines towards an ‘Antiochene’ position, puts this point well.
He writes:
Classical statements about the Incarnation begin with the assumption that God is anything but a particular human being….
To say ‘the Word was made flesh’, then, refers not to a simple identity of God and Jesus but to a relationship in which God lovingly identifies himself in and with a real human person, 80 that that person can truly be called the Word, the self-communication and self-objectification of God in human terms….
The church fathers, with their doctrine of two distinct but unified natures in Christ, tried to say [this].
They were entirely clear in their minds that one must not ‘confuse’ God with a human being.
The question to be asked then is, given that women are unlike Jesus of Nazareth in the form of their humanity, may it not be said that a woman baptized into Christ is not differently related than is a man to Jesus as the Christ?
For this is what matters in Christology; we are speaking of Jesus as the Christ .
At the outset we may note the following about the practice and theology of the early church.
Christians were baptized into ‘Christ’, not into ‘Jesus’, that is to say into a relationship to Jesus as God, not into the human Jesus.
And Jesus as God, as the second person of the trinity, presumably has no sex.
Indeed both women and men were so baptized and entered the  people of God which was the church — in differentiation from the Jewish background in which only men were circumcised and fully a part of the religious people of Israel.
Secondly, it must be said that, from the very start, Christians strained ordinary human language in order to speak of the significance of Christ; the term Christ was an inclusive term, such that one could speak of persons as being ‘in Christ’.
They did not simply speak of the human Jesus of Nazareth and of the relation of persons to him as a human.
As Christian doctrine developed, and it was said that God in Christ took on humanity, in both Greek and Latin the inclusive term for humanity was used, not that specifically for a male human being.
(English is confusing here, for the same term ‘man’ has — until recently — been used both to encompass all humans, and specifically to speak of men.)
In an article written in support of the ordination of women to the priesthood in the Episcopal Church in the United States, Richard Norris, whose scholarship I have just mentioned, argues that the tenets of patristic Christology are such that it cannot be said that a baptized woman is differently related than is a man to Jesus as the Christ.
Indeed that to say that she was, would be fundamentally to undermine patristic Christology.
The most definitive statement to which attention may be drawn in this regard is the much-quoted reply of Gregory Nazianzen to Apollinarius: ‘What is not assumed, is not redeemed’— or in Greek, ‘not taken on, not healed’.
The context was Apollinarius' denial that Jesus' was a humanity like ours.
Gregory argues that if God did not take on a humanity like ours, then we are not redeemed; for it was through sharing our humanity that Christ redeemed it.
Now if it could be said that God in Christ took on specifically ‘male humanity’, then women would be outside the scheme of salvation — and that has never been suggested.
If it is to be held that both women and men find salvation in Christ, then it must be simply ‘humanity’ which is of significance as having been taken on.
Norris in fact claims that in the patristic period nothing was made of Christ's maleness, as also not for example of his Jewishness, as being of Christological significance.
Were his maleness (or Jewishness) to be brought into play, Christ would not be the saviour of all.
Such a Christology is in no way specifically a ‘feminist Christology’.
It simply does not allow that differences of sex, as also not of race, are of significance Christologically.
The implications of this for the eucharist would seem to be that a woman, equally as a man, can represent Christ.
(Of course not all  traditions believe that Christ is represented by the celebrant.)
For it has always been said of the eucharist that precisely it is not a play about the last supper — in which case the celebrant had best be male and semitic in appearance.
Rather the eucharist (as also the passover) is a re-presentation, yet anew each time, of an action which took place in the past.
Indeed one might contend that, were a woman to celebrate, it would, through her very physical dissimilarity to Jesus of Nazareth, be the more apparent what was intended.
(Indeed it could be that the fullness of humanity summed up in Christ would be well represented by a woman and a man concelebrating.)
But in any case it follows that the necessary prerequisite for ordination is the presence of a baptized human being (not a monkey — in that God in Christ took on humanity).
Furthermore, it could be said that if, in baptism into Christ, there is no more ‘male and female’, it is an aberration to introduce such a distinction again in ordination.
At the time that I was contending for the ordination of women to the priesthood of the Anglican Church, I made use of another argument, drawing out the implications of patristic thought.
I have never seen this particular argument put forward in quite this form; and I believe it to be the best argument for the ordination of women that there is.
The argument arises from the fact that patristics was developed within what was philosophically a Platonist tradition.
It was therefore assumed in the culture that there were ‘universals’ and that it was the universal, rather than particular instances of that universal, which could be said most truly to exist.
To understand what is meant by a ‘universal’, and the implications of this way of thinking for Christology, consider the following example.
Let there be shirts on a washing line.
Some are blue and some pink, some have pockets and some not, but they are all examples of what it means to be a shirt: they all exemplify ‘shirtness’— the universal.
That is not to say that they do not have particularities, for a particular instance of a shirt has to be of a certain colour, and have pockets or not, or it would not be a shirt.
Now what is in fact being said in a Christology created within such a cultural framework, is that God in Christ took on ‘humanity’— the universal.
Of course to be a human one has to be male or female, Jew or Gentile: a being which did not have sex and race would not be human.
It is not then that this particular instance of a male, semitic human being ‘is God’— one would in this case have to say ‘a god’.
But rather that in the incarnation God in Christ took on humanity (the universal); which is not to imply that he did not  have particularities, which indeed one has to have to be human.
The latter is a very different kind of statement from the former.
God in Christ, through taking on a particular instance of humanity, shares with all human beings the universal, humanity, and it is that which is of significance, even though he may have different particularities from some other individuals.
What attracted me to this way of speaking is that it would seem to allow for a celebration of the diversity of human beings, this held together with an emphasis on the commonness of their humanity.
Indeed one could say that, in that Jesus had particularities, such a way of thinking would allow one to celebrate the particularity of each human being.
While at the same time we might say of all of us that God in Christ took on a humanity which, with him, we share.
The whole tenor of such a Christology would be other than what has often been the case in western theology, whereby Christ has been conceived as male (and white!) so that women (and earlier Blacks) have seemed to be somehow less like Christ.
In a world in which women are understood to be the equals of men, and in which we must promote the equality of people of different races, such a Christology as that which I was proposing would seem to be fruitful.
It should be noted moreover that such a Christology is not predicated upon saying that the difference between the sexes is of minimal importance, or simply to be compared with differences of race, with the implication that women can be said to be like Christ and so for example be ordained.
It allows for a variety of views on how alike, or unalike, human beings are in their particularities, in particular what is the significance of the difference of sex between men and women.
What has happened however is that we have lost the philosophical framework which made the development of patristic Christology possible.
Today people conceive as ‘real’ that which, within a dominantly Platonist framework of thought, would have been held to be a particular instance of what could be said most truly to exist.
That is to say they think in terms of particular human beings (and the term human beings tends to be understood to be a collectivity of the sum total of human beings).
So the question then becomes for them how this particular human being is God, rather than their thinking in terms of a humanity in which he too participated.
Furthermore, many people tend to collapse the distinction between the two natures.
When these things are the case then the man Jesus, with his  particularities, tends simply to be equated in their mind with ‘God’.
Indeed we may say that there has always been such a tendency, in the patristic period likewise, to collapse the distinction between the two natures.
In consequence some human beings appear to be more like Jesus (who is simply equated with God) than are others, in that they share his maleness.
The problem has been yet further exacerbated in the modern age as compared with the patristic period by what one must see as the demise of the doctrine of the trinity and its replacement by a tritheism.
A trinitarian position is that God is one (it is monotheistic), and that that one God exists in three ways, as Father, as Son and as Spirit.
The divinity of the second person of the trinity is then understood with reference to the other two persons of the trinity.
In so far as it is the case that, in the classical doctrine of the trinity, it is said that the three persons are alike in all save their mutual relations, when we are speaking of Christ as God, as the second person of the trinity, it cannot be said of Christ that he is ‘male’.
For sexuality is not a property of God.
If however Christ, in and of Himself, in isolation from the other two persons of the trinity, is considered to be ‘God’, then there will be a greater tendency to predicate maleness of Christ as divine.
That the classical doctrine of the trinity has in this manner been departed from may be thought to be of no small consequence.
The extent to which there has been such a departure is well shown by the fact that, when the World Council of Churches was originally formed in 1948, the basis of that Council (to which churches which wanted to join must subscribe) read: ‘The World Council of Churches is a fellowship of churches which accept our Lord Jesus Christ as God and Saviour.’
(It has subsequently been amended, adding a trinitarian formula.)
In such a case the impression is given that Jesus is, as it were on his own, and with no reference needing to be made to the other persons of the trinity, God.
The emphases of modern Christology may then be much more problematical for human equality than was the original doctrine.
But it would seem to be impossible for us to return to patristic sensibilities, for the framework of thought which made that Christology possible is no longer with us.
Moreover, it must be said that even the patristic position in no way solves the problem that the symbolism of Christ is somehow male.
Even though it may be said that what is taken on in the incarnation is a humanity in which we all share, it is still the case that the form in which this universal nature is said to have been taken on is that of a male human being.
FEMINIST CHRISTOLOGIES
I shall now turn to the attempts by feminists of recent years to find a Christology which is at least not incompatible with their feminism.
I shall suggest however that, through the very nature of Christology, there can be no Christology which is compatible with feminism.
There may be said to be three different types of Christology: ‘high’ Christologies, ‘low’Christologies, and ‘message’Christologies.
A ‘high’ Christology is one which emphasizes Christ's divinity, a ‘low’Christology his humanity, and a ‘message’type Christology one which looks to his words rather than to the nature of his person.
Feminists have advocated Christologies of all three types.
The problem in reconciling Christology with feminism is the very fact that, by definition, Christology speaks of Jesus as the Christ.
However ‘high’ a Christology one may have, the divine nature of Christ is still bonded to the human nature of a human who was male.
However ‘low’ a Christology, this human person, who is a man, is not simply human but his human nature is bonded to a divine nature.
One might say that the feminist problem is that one cannot simply speak of the one nature without the other.
Inescapably, if one is to have a Christology, one must bring the two natures together, and herein lies the problem.
A ‘message’ Christology cannot simply consist in a message, a message which exists independently of the person who preached it.
If it is to be a Christology, it must also concern Christ's person — whereupon all the problems which Christology entails are again present.
High Christologies
The advantage of a ‘high’ Christology would seem to be that there is less concentration on the maleness of Jesus, because less concentration on Jesus.
If one thinks in terms of the ‘cosmic Christ’, or the second person of the trinity, one conceives of Christ as God rather than as a human.
Moreover, in speaking, as one would tend to in a high Christology, of humanity as being summed up in Christ, or in saying that through the second person of the trinity humanity is taken into the Godhead, differences between humans may also be minimized.
The problem is that this divine Christ is, in the second of his two natures, the human person Jesus, who is male.
This tends to make Christ as God appear male.
A Christian feminist who has propounded what is clearly a ‘high’ Christology (though it may also be a ‘low’one, for she wants to speak clearly of the humanity of Jesus) is Patricia Wilson-Kastner, in her book Faith, Feminism and the Christ .
Wilson-Kastner is an Episcopal priest and patristic scholar.
Her theology is in effect a cosmology: through the Logos all was created; on the cross Christ gathers up our brokenness; his resurrection is proleptic (a making present through a prefiguration of what lies in the future) of the fact that alienation will in the end be overcome.
Feminism likewise, she argues, is concerned for the overcoming of dualism and alienation.
Hence we should ‘[understand]the significance of Christ as embodying values and ideals which also are sought for and valued by feminists’.
Trinitarianism too fits well with a feminist ethical position.
‘[Just as]feminism identifies interrelatedness and mutuality-equal, respectful, and nurturing relationships — as the basis of the world as it really is and as it ought to be, we can find no better understanding and image of the divine than that of the perfect and open relationships of love.
Wilson-Kastner finds her ‘high’ Christology and her feminism to embody the same ideals.
Wilson-Kastner's emphasis is on what persons hold in common in their humanity.
‘The unity of humanity is essential if humanity is to  fulfil its vocation in creation.
Any feminism which does not also begin with an assumption of one human race, composed of female and male, black, white, yellow, short, tall and so forth, each equally human and not bound by preconceived roles, is not compatible with the Christian faith.’
With this of course one may agree.
I too have suggested that Christology should embrace a multiplicity.
But for her the difference of sex is essentially of no more import than are differences of race.
‘The division of persons into male and female is significant, but it is one category among many.’
That women are of the opposite sex to Christ should then, she believes, be of no great moment.
The fact that she is basically thinking in terms of the resurrected, cosmic Christ again tends to minimize any distinction which there might be between a woman and Christ in regard to sex.
Thus the question which confronts Christian feminists — how should they deal with the fact that the basic symbol of their religion is that of a male Christ — does not really impress her.
Nor does she have a sense for the impact which the fact that Christ has been seen as male and as part of the Godhead has had on the relations of women and men in western culture.
It is as though, for her, Christ is beyond sex.
The question with which we are concerned is not tackled.
Furthermore, I think there is a problem for Christians today in  thinking in terms of this non-gendered cosmic Christ which forms the key to her Christology (and I am sure I should have thought this at the time when I counted myself a Christian).
Wilson-Kastner apparently makes no distinction between, on the one hand, a factual account of what is the case, and, on the other, a mythological symbolism.
She moves (for example) between speaking of the crucifixion of Christ (fact) to the cosmic nature of Christ — which can hardly be said to be ‘true’ in the sense of an empirically known fact.
She will frequently tell us that the fathers of the church, or the bible, state such things to be the case, as though that were the end of the matter.
I do not doubt that people in an earlier age may well have thought in terms of the kind of cosmic world picture in terms of which she herself thinks.
(It is difficult to tell how far theologians in the patristic period, when they spoke of the cosmic Christ or the doctrine of the trinity, believed themselves to be stretching language to its ultimate and speaking metaphorically.
One like Gregory of Nyssa, an architect of the doctrine of the trinity, was deeply conscious that God was beyond all human description.)
To simply state that the fathers or biblical authors believed something does not address the question as to whether they were right, or whether our picture of the world has not so much changed as to make theirs fantastic.
In an age in which we have a keen sense for the difference between fact and symbol, Wilson-Kastner makes no distinction.
For example, she takes the Nicaean expression of belief as literally true, speaking not simply of the Logos but of Jesus (sic) becoming incarnate.
What can that mean?
Wilson-Kastner believes that Christianity proclaims (as indeed it may well) that alienation is overcome in Christ.
Again, we may ask, is this a faith statement, or a statement of what is the case?
Further, she argues from the fact that one wills alienation to be overcome, that indeed it is overcome.
‘There must be some reality that can heal the fragmentation of the world.’
Must there be?
One could argue that brokenness and alienation are fundamental to the world.
Though she has much to say of brokenness, my problem with her book is precisely that, through her swift movement to a triumphant conclusion, symbolized by the resurrection and the unity of humanity, she does not allow there genuinely to be brokenness.
I would then at any stage have found it difficult to believe in the cosmic Christ in whom, for her, lies the key to the solution to the world's affliction and the alienation of women.
Evidently moves which for one person seem plausible are simply not moves which  others can make.
The debate is interesting, for it becomes evident that women who count themselves feminists may otherwise have a very different sense of reality.
Low Christologies
The advantage of a low Christology would seem to be that Jesus is considered to be just another human, one among us, our brother.
Such a Christology stresses Christ's humanity rather than his divinity.
The fact of Jesus’ maleness then would seem to be of no more import than is his or her sexuality in the case of any other human being.
It is not, in a low Christology, that we have a divine Christ who is male.
The problem however is that were it simply to be said of Jesus that he was a human like any other who lived in history we should not have a Christology.
A Christian position must necessarily hold of this human being Jesus that he existed (or exists) in relation to God as has no other.
Either it must be said, in traditional terms, that, together with his human nature, he also had, in one person, a divine nature; or in some other way he must be held to be unique.
But then we have present a male human being who, in some sense, is considered unique.
The problem with a low Christology becomes apparent through considering a liturgical situation.
We have already said, that of a liturgy in which no mention was made of Christ, we might hold that it was meaningful, even theistic, but that it could not rightly be called Christian.
In a Christian liturgy mention of Christ must necessarily be made, as is the case of no other human being.
Indeed, through the fact that he is spoken of as though there present, something different is being said of Christ than of anyone else.
No Christology can be so low that it overcomes the feminist difficulty by saying of Jesus that he was no different from every other human who has lived.
A Christian position must necessarily have a Christology .
The question is then posed as to whether one can reconcile that Christology with feminism.
Indeed one might argue that talk of Jesus as our ‘brother’, emphasizing his humanity, makes Jesus more intrusively male than if one were casting him in the role of the cosmic Christ.
The difficulty a low Christology poses for feminists was brought home to me some years ago in attending a eucharistic liturgy, which I believe had been written by Carter Heyward, whose work I shall shortly mention.
Only women were present and the service was  orientated towards women.
In place of a sermon there was a time of quiet in which women present spoke to the theme of ‘creation’, some from the perspective of giving birth.
How jarring it seemed then that, at the consecration, reference had necessarily to be made to the man Jesus of Nazareth: he had to take centre stage.
Not simply was he mentioned, as men may well have been in the prayers of intercession, but he was actively made present as lord of the situation.
In such a liturgy it becomes apparent, in a way in which in a traditional liturgy, with a man celebrating, it does not, because there is not the same incongruity, that women are, at the very core of their religion, dependent on the male world.
Contrast the situation which pertains when a group of men celebrate the eucharist together, as has often been the case for example in a monastic setting.
The central action revolves around persons of the same sex and figures of speech having the same gender reference as they themselves.
Mention is made of a male Christ, God is conceived in male terms, and biblical readings doubtless largely concern the doings of men.
Incidentally women may be mentioned, in prayers or as subsidiary figures in readings.
How much more is the lack of symmetry between men and women apparent when one considers the fact that a congregation of nuns must invite an outsider, an outsider who, in many countries in the present Anglican and in the Roman Catholic context, has to be a man, to celebrate for them.
If he does not arrive the action cannot proceed.
Within the Christian context women must necessarily refer to, and exercise a dependence upon, the world of men, of a kind which men would not conceive of having in relation to the world of women.
Heyward, of whom I have just made mention, writes of Jesus as follows: ‘Jesus matters only if he was fully,and only,human.’
And further: he was ‘a human person who knew and loved God’.
If this is all she thinks, she surely cannot be considered Christian.
I too, as one who is not a Christian, might well say of him that he knew and loved God.
Why then should she look in particular to Jesus?
She writes: ‘We cannot simply shift Jesus from center-stage and replace him with humanity or God by wishing it were so.’
Why she should think this, apart from consideration of her own biographical context, is unclear.
She, evidently, is Christocentric, while another (as I have always been) is theocentric.
But I too would want to say that (as someone has expressed it) we see God through a Christ-shaped window: I have no doubt that, as a western person, my understanding of God has, in part at least, been shaped by the person who was  Jesus of Nazareth.
But again this does not make me a Christian.
Heyward however shifts ground: ‘I am hooked on Jesus.
I could no more pretend that the Jesus-figure,indeed the Jesus of the kerygma , is unimportant to me than I could deny the significance of my parents and my past in the shaping of my future.’
The term kerygma , proclamation, is normally held to refer, in such a phrase as ‘the Jesus of the kerygma’, to the proclamation concerning Jesus; that is to say the proclamation of him as the resurrected one, as Lord and Saviour.
To say this is very different from the assertion that he was simply human — and that is all.
Jesus, in such a statement, is held to be unique, if only through the fact that this is the human of whom it must be said that God raised him.
Heyward has a Christology (one close to the primitive Christology of the second chapter of Acts for example).
If Jesus is our brother, he is a brother of a very special sort.
But then the problem returns.
A ‘message’ Christology
The advantage of a ‘message’ Christology would seem to be that, with the shift of concentration from the person of Christ to his message, we circumvent the problems which present themselves when the symbol of a male person is understood to be central to Christianity.
Many feminists who are Christians are surely attracted to Christianity through the compelling nature of the person who was Jesus of Nazareth and the power of his message, which resonates with their own beliefs and values.
A problem however presents itself similar to that which we have discussed when considering a ‘low’ Christology.
To be concerned simply for Jesus' message, a message which anyone could have preached and which is now acknowledged quite independently of the person who preached it, is not to hold a Christian position.
It is to hold a humanist position, to be one who, like Gandhi, finds Jesus' message striking.
Compare such a position with the position that there is a kerygma to be preached about Jesus.
An example of one who held this latter position is the existentialist theologian of the last generation Rudolf Bultmann.
Bultmann, as I mentioned, never speaks in terms of a two-nature Christology of the type which arose in the Greek world.
But Christ does for him have a uniqueness; and thus I count his position a Christian one.
For Bultmann, the resurrection is not an event in our world (for resurrections he would hold, as I, do not occur in our world), but something of far greater magnitude, an  eschatological event which represents the breaking in of another world order.
It takes place in another dimension from our normal history, in God's history.
Now the resurrection (an event of another order) is however the resurrection of the man who died (a normal event in our world).
Thus Jesus is unique, for it is to be said of him as of none other that this is the man whom God raised, and his resurrection forms the turning-point of history.
There is then, in Bultmann's theology, a necessary reference to the Christ event.
(There are concomitant problems for the feminist.)
Here an interesting comparison can be made with the position of Rosemary Ruether.
Ruether's interest (as that also of Bultmann) is in Jesus' message, a message in her case held to concern the coming of the kingdom, the vindication of the poor and the creation of a just social order.
The centre of her theology is the Christian vision.
Women — who have been among the poorest of the poor — are primordially those who will be liberated.
But how may this be said to be a Christology?
If all she wants to speak of is a message and a vision then there is no reason to call this position Christian.
Humanists too may have a vision, perhaps one which draws from Jesus Christ.
Marxists have a vision, and Ruether is very much in tune with left-wing thought.
There can be no incompatibility between being a feminist and taking on board the Christian vision.
But to speak in terms of a vision involves no necessary reference to history, or to any particular person; one could make the vision one's own without knowing with whom it originated.
If one simply wishes to speak of a social vision, one may without further ado drop any reference to the Christian ‘myth’, a myth which is so problematical for women.
One need make no reference to a male human person who is proclaimed Lord.
But to be Christian is not simply to preach Jesus' message.
It is also to proclaim a message about Jesus — and therein for a feminist lie all the problems.
If one holds, of Christ, that he was, in whatever way, unique, then one is clearly a Christian.
There arises the problem of reconciling a religion which has a unique Christ (who in his human nature is male) with feminism.
But if Jesus of Nazareth is not thought to be unique, and the Christian story is just a myth, why, one must ask, should one who is a feminist choose to take up this particular myth when it is so male, and has central to it a male person who is held to be unique?
Bultmann's is clearly a Christian position (and the problems arise for feminists).
Ruether's, if she is not saying in any sense of Christ that he is unique, surely cannot be said to be so.
In which  case why not jettison this religion which has been so harmful to women? l6
CONSERVATIVE CHRISTOLOGIES
I call ‘conservative’, for the purposes of the discussion in this chapter, Christologies which hold the maleness of Christ to be essential to his nature, and the fact that Christ was male to be central to Christianity.
Conservatives do not essentially believe that the maleness of Christ in any way harms women.
Women also have their place in God's creation.
Indeed conservatives who are Catholics understand the feminine, as also the masculine, to be woven into a cosmic picture.
The maleness of Christ may be said to form the linchpin of this picture.
Such an understanding of reality on the part of a Catholic conservative was well expressed by the Anglican bishop Graham Leonard, in his speech against the ordination of women to the General Synod of the Church of England in 1978.
I believe that the Scriptures speak of God as Father, that Christ was incarnate as a male, that he chose men to be his apostles…not because of social conditioning, but because in the order of creation headship and authority is symbolically and fundamentally associated with maleness.
For the same reason the highest vocation of any created being was given to a woman, Mary, as representative of mankind in our response to God because symbolically and fundamentally, the response of sacrificial giving is associated with femaleness.
I do not believe it is merely the result of social conditioning that in the Scriptures, in the Jewish and Christian tradition, mankind and the Church is presented as feminine to God, to whom our response must be one of obedience in contrast to those religions in which the divine is regarded as contained within creation and is to be manipulated or cajoled in order to provide what man needs.
For a woman to represent the Headship of Christ and the Divine Initiative would,unless her feminine gifts were obscured or minimized , evoke a different approach to God from those who worship….
As the American Protestant layman Thomas Howard has said ‘Jews and Christians worship the God who has gone to vast and prolonged pains to disclose himself to U8 as he not she, as King and not Queen, and for Christians as Father not Mother, and who sent his Son not his daughter in his final unveiling of himself for our eyes.
These are terrible mysteries and we have no warrant to tinker with them.’
It is thus believed by Catholic conservatives to be not by chance that the incarnation took place in a male human person.
The Vatican declaration that women cannot be ordained to the priesthood states:
[The incarnation]cannot be disassociated from the economy of salvation; it is, indeed, in harmony with the entirety of God's plan….
For the salvation offered by God to men and women…took on, from the Old Testament Prophets onwards, the privileged form of a nuptial mystery: for God the Chosen People is seen as his ardently loved spouse…
Christ is the Bridegroom; the Church is his bride, whom he loves because he has gained her by his blood.
Again, the Anglican V. A. Demant, arguing against the ordination of women, writes of the Christian religion: ‘It is a Logos religion.
And in so far as we can use gender imagery for these things the Logos is a masculine principle….
The Logos is the active, manifesting, creative-destructive, redemptive power of the godhead.’
Again, Hans Urs von Balthasar, at a later date the author of a statement officially sponsored by the Vatican in support of its declaration, describes Jesus' self-giving on the cross, re-enacted in the mass, in explicitly sexual terms.
In its origin [Christianity]presents to man and woman a glorious picture of sexual integrity: the Son of God who has become man and flesh, knowing from inside his Father's work and perfecting it in the total self-giving of himself, not only of his spiritual but precisely also of his physical powers, giving not only to one individual but to all.
What else is his Eucharist but, at a higher level, an endless act of fruitful out-pouring of his whole flesh, such as a man can only achieve for a moment with a limited organ of his body?
For Balthasar, Mary plays the ‘female’ part.
She is ‘the favoured place where God can, and wills to, be brought into the world’ .2l
It is within such a framework of thought that it is contended that a priest must necessarily be male.
(It should be noted however that not every argument for the necessity of a male priesthood necessarily entails a complete picture of God's dispensation as embodying male and female principles.
It may simply be said that it is just a ‘fact’ that Jesus was male, and that therefore priests should be.)
The Vatican declaration puts forward, as one argument among others, a Christological argument against the ordination of women.
The context which it presumes is the Catholic teaching (found for example in  Catholic is that of Christopher Kiesling.
Kiesling argues that what constitutes the priest as the image of Christ is the character of orders, that is to say that the person is a priest.
(A character, in Catholic Aristotelian theology, is a similitude or image impressed by another.)
He comments: ‘It is not a person's maleness which constitutes that person the representative image of Christ, but a person's having the sacerdotal character, the instrumental priestly power to perform those actions signifying the giving of divine gifts, a power deriving through ordination from Christ,the donor of God's grace.’
Thomas Aquinas indeed thinks that a woman cannot receive the character of ordination.
But why?
Because, as he believes, the state of woman is that of subjection:quia mulier statum subjectionis habet .
Kiesling concludes: ‘It does not appear that femaleness, femininity, womanhood as such is the barrier to woman's receiving holy orders, but femaleness in a state of subjection .’
Likewise Kari Børresen notes that (in this respect unlike Bonaventura)‘Thomas does not say expressly that a priest ought to belong to the male sex because Christ, whom he represents, became incarnate in this sex.’
Thomas’ belief that woman's state is one of subjection derives, as we have seen, from the false biological presuppositions which he took from Aristotle.
An indication as to what his position would logically have had to be, had he not held these false presuppositions, is evident from his discussion of the validity of baptism when administered by a woman.
An initial objection which he poses is, interestingly, that it is not fitting that a woman should represent a father.
He answers this objection however with the reply that, whereas in human generation a woman can only be the passive principle, in spiritual generation neither man nor woman function by virtue of their own powers, but only as instruments of the power of Christ.
The baptism is valid.
However, the framers of the declaration have not quite been answered; for Thomas clearly thinks that God chooses certain things and persons to become sacramental signs because they provide the more suitable signification.
Kiesling writes: ‘We must take seriously…all the implications in the psychological and sociological realms of male priests to represent Christ.’
And Børresen concedes (of Thomas): ‘His thought definitely is, that there should be conformity between the two kinds of instruments of Christ: His human nature and the priest.’
The Dominican Jerry Miller however has argued that the Vatican Declaration has ‘misapplied [Thomas']teaching on the issue of sign-value to support its argument from natural resemblance’.
With Kiesling he argues that it is that femininity signifies  inferiority to Thomas, and not femininity as such, which makes a woman unsuitable.
A further line of argument which may be pursued against the declaration is that, according to Catholic theology, the power of orders lies in the soul, which is the same for both sexes, and not the body.
Arguing against those who said that women could not be ordained, the Anglican theologian of the last generation Leonard Hodgson comments that to say ‘that a woman is incapable of receiving the priestly or episcopal character involves saying that her sexual differentiation carries with it a deficiency in spiritual receptivity and power’.
Intriguingly, in his third proposition in favour of the argument that women can be priested, Thomas himself comments that orders lie in the soul, which is the same for both sexes, a point to which curiously (as George Tavard has pointed out) he makes no reply.
Thomas seems however to contradict himself in this matter, presupposing elsewhere that orders relate to the body, as when he writes: ‘Since in matters pertaining to the soul woman does not differ from man as to the thing,…it follows that she can receive the gift of prophecy and the like, but not the sacrament of Orders.’
The Vatican declaration furthermore expressly rules out the objection that, in the eucharist, it is the risen Christ who is represented; and that as such he has no sex.
Referring to the biblical saying that in the resurrection men and women do not marry, the declaration comments that this does not mean that the distinction between man and woman is suppressed in the glorified state.
(Such a position must, one would think, constitute the strongest provocation for feminists to conclude that maleness is, in Christianity, intrinsic to the Godhead no less!)
Conservative Protestant Christians may pursue what is a rather different Christology which issues in opposition to the ordination of women.
Headship and authority are, it is said, properly vested in the male: thus Christ is head of the church, and hence also women should not exercise the authority involved in being in charge of a congregation.
Such a line of argument is based primarily upon scripture, and does not necessarily involve a notion of there being male and female principles in the universe.
In the case of some evangelical writers (though not Barth) it may also be said that male dominance is fundamental to creation and found in all known human societies.
The evangelical Gordon Wenham pursues this line.
An interpretation of scripture is presupposed in which all verses must comport with one another.
The scriptures are then read, from Genesis to Paul, as supporting male headship.
In response to this line of thought it may well be pointed out that the subordination of woman to man is depicted in scripture as having resulted from the fall.
Subordination is, in the Genesis text, the punishment meted out to woman.
It is of interest that it would seem to be the case that the Galatians verse, that in Christ ‘there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no ‘male and female’, makes direct reference to Genesis.
(The parallelism of the three statements is interrupted by the different form of the third, and the particular words used for male and female, which are not those which one would expect, are the same as those which the Septuagint — the Greek translation of the Hebrew scriptures with which Paul would have been familiar — uses in the Genesis verse.) 34 If this is the case, then Paul is in effect saying that the subordination, which owes to the fall, is overcome in Christ, the second Adam.
It is surely the redeemed order of creation, in which there is no subordination, rather than the fallen order, which should be symbolized in the ministry of the Christian church.
If however a writer believes the creation of woman from man prior to the fall to imply subordination, then there is no answer possible.
COUNTERBALANCES TO CHRISTOLOGY
Both conservative Christians and, more surprisingly, Christian feminists suggest that there are what might be called counterbalances to Christology in the form of female figures or feminine motifs present in Christian theology.
I say surprisingly in the case of Christian feminists because it is so clear to me that women, or the feminine, can never hold an equivalent place to male figures or motifs within what is a deeply masculine religion.
What is to be understood as happening is perhaps that, given that someone wants to be Christian, she as a feminist will look for what female representation there may be in the religion, whether or not this is fully satisfactory.
Personally, when I counted myself a Christian, I had no interest in finding female figures or ‘feminine’ motifs within the religion.
I just wanted a religion in which gender was not of significance.
Once I grasped the centrality of symbolism to the religion and grasped its effect, it was time for me to leave.
I have never been a Christian feminist, with typical Christian feminist concerns and sensibilities.
The compensatory factors which are suggested are various.
It is said that if the Logos is to be conceived to be in some sense male, then equally the Spirit is to be held to be female.
A second, though less  common suggestion, is that the undivided unity of the Godhead is symbolically female, whereas the three individuated persons, the energies of the Godhead in their differentiation, are symbolically male.
Thirdly, it is contended that whereas Christ is male, an equivalent figure is to be found in Mary who is female.
The suggestion that though God is to be conceived as male, humanity is to be understood as female in relation to God, I shall leave until the next chapter.
But it too is a compensatory move which is sometimes made.
I believe it to be true of all such moves that they are dubiously orthodox.
Moreover I do not think that it can be said that they succeed in righting the imbalance in the symbolism of Christianity.
The suggestion that the second person of the trinity, the Logos, is ‘male’, but the Spirit should be seen as ‘female’ would appear to be common among more conservative Christians, Catholic, Anglican and Orthodox, and has been taken up by Christian feminists.
In the course of arguing against the ordination of women, the Orthodox theologian Thomas Hopko writes: ‘As the Son and the Holy Spirit are not the same and are not interchangeable in their unique forms of their common divinity, so the male and female are not the same and not interchangeable in the unique forms of their common humanity.’
One may think such a suggestion to be far from orthodox.
Patristic doctrine (which it might be expected that one who is Orthodox should revere), when expounded for example by the Cappadocians (the authors in large part of the doctrine of the trinity) is that the persons of the trinity are alike in all respects save in their mutual relations.
Thus it would be difficult to say that the second person of the trinity is somehow male and the third female.
Further, Hopko finds there to be ‘a direct analogical, symbolic…relationship’ between, on the one hand, Adam and Christ, and, on the other, Eve and the Spirit.
Of Genesis 2 he writes: ‘Women are created and called to be men's ‘helpers’ in their service of self-emptying love.
(Gn 2:18).
They are to be ‘submissive’ to men's love and service, and as such to enable and empower it — as the Holy Spirit, ‘incarnate by grace’in saved humanity, enables and empowers Christ himself to ‘fulfil his divine ministry among his creatures.’
Responding to such an equation of the spirit with femaleness, Norris points out that Gregory of Nyssa (one of the Cappadocians) does indeed speak of Christ as casting out demons by the power of the Spirit, but that there is nothing in his language to imply a subordination of the Spirit to Christ!
The suggestion that the Godhead in its undivided unity be considered  ‘feminine’, while the three persons ‘masculine’, is explained by Demant.
He writes: ‘If we are pressed to see in the doctrine of the Trinity some clue to the sense that gender…must have something corresponding to it in the God-head, one would find in the unconditioned Unity of God something like the feminine in creation, while the differentiated Persons, on the other hand, have each a masculine denomination.’
But, he adds: ‘This attribution of femininity to the undivided unity, and of masculinity to the threefold divine energy, is not found explicit in the Church's teaching traditions.’
It is an interesting reflection of how gender, both masculinity and femininity, has been construed in the west.
One should comment however that God in God's unity, if we are speaking of monotheism, has in fact been conceived as male and not female!
I turn finally to the suggestion that the compensatory figure to Christ who is male, is Mary who is female.
Many a feminist seems to have become fixated upon Mary in recent years.
That this should be the case is perhaps a good indication of the need that Christian women feel to find themselves represented symbolically in their religion.
I find myself incredulous.
There is nothing whatever upon which Mariology could be built!
It is a castle in the sky, a male construction of an earlier age, for which there exists no possible basis.
We know today (as the ancient world did not) that a new human being comes from chromosomes from both the male and the female.
If moreover there were to be a case of parthenogenesis, the resulting foetus would be female, for there would be no ‘Y’ chromosome present!
Nor is there textual evidence which carries any conviction.
The passage in Matthew (in which talk of Mary's virginity occurs) is late, unreliable, and contains some of the most fanciful and non-historical writing in the new testament.
Paul evidently knew nothing of so remarkable an event, for he never mentions it.
How the myth came to be seems clear enough.
The Greek version of Isaiah 7 uses a word which refers specifically to a virgin, whereas the underlying Hebrew simply denotes a young girl.
It is this Greek version of the Hebrew scriptures with which the author of Matthew — who intends to say that the prophecy has been fulfilled — would have been familiar.
One must add that there is nothing particularly remarkable about the fact that such a myth should have grown up; it would almost be surprising if it had not.
It was frequently said of great men in the ancient world, for example of Plato, that they had had a god for a father and a human mother.
Indeed Origen, the early Christian apologist, replies to attacks on the notion of the virgin birth by  referring to other stories of virgin births circulating in his world.
Quite apart from the impossibility of virgin births, it must be said that symbolically the figure of Mary is surely of little avail.
The Christian religion has always resisted the idea that Mary is part of the Godhead; she is in no way equivalent to the male Christ.
Biblical religion is not about Mary, who is wholly peripheral, but about Christ.
Furthermore, Mary is scarcely a woman whom women today might be expected to find to be a symbol who represents them.
She fulfils a typically female role: she is the one who receives from a God conceived as male.
That is to say she conforms to the masculinist construction of femininity.
The chief, indeed only, reason for her appearance on the scene is that she gave birth to a (male) child!
Indeed her title of the patristic period,theotokos , the God-bearer, conceives of her simply in relation to him to whom she gave birth.
What an extraordinary position has been reached in some Christian theology, such that it is thought, at least at a subconscious level, that somehow Christ and Mary are a pair, Christ male and representative of men, and Mary female and representative of women, was brought home to me by the following incident.
Some years ago when I was on the edge of Christianity, I spoke to a large gathering about the problematic nature of the Godhead for women.
The Latin American liberation theologian Jon Sobrino responded that there was no problem: men should emulate Christ he said, and women Mary.
It had never occurred to me.
However widespread such an attitude may have been in popular piety (and perhaps it has been widespread), and though it may be thinkable to a Latin American theologian today, it is hardly orthodox.
The early Christians clearly did not think that Mary provided a role model for women and Christ for men!
Christians modelled themselves on Christ.
One has the sense that, in such a theology, there are two glorified persons in heaven retaining their sexuality, Christ and Mary.
(The two-nature Christology of Chalcedon has disappeared: Christ is a male deity.)
Nor is Mary equivalent to Christ.
The suggestion is in fact a good symbolization of the inferior position of women.
Quite apart from the fact that they would appear to be unorthodox and a distortion at its best of Christian theology, I believe it must be said of all these suggestions that, if what is intended is that they should give an equal place to women or to the ‘feminine’ within the Christian religion, they fail.
What is said of the Spirit by Hopko is that the Spirit exists in the service of the male Christ.
Again it may not be thought to be particularly helpful that God in God's undifferentiated  nature (or indeed the Spirit in its rather vague nature) are to be understood as ‘female’, while ‘divine energies’(sic), that which is clearly differentiated and self-determining, is to be seen as ‘male’.
Mary is in no way the equivalent of Christ in the Christian religion.
The religion is centred on him.
Indeed she only has a place in the religion in relation to him.
For men to have a male deity, and women a lesser female ‘deity’, would create a polytheistic religion.
Finally, of all schemes which assign gender to different persons of the Godhead, which suggest that God in God's undifferentiated unity is female and as differentiated is male, or which see God as ‘male’ and humanity as ‘female’in relation to God, it must be said that they necessarily fuel gender differentiation.
Certain attributes are said to be ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine’, ‘complementing’(it is often said) the other.
When symbol systems to which a certain ultimacy is attributed, as is the case of symbols for the nature of God, or the relation of God to humanity, are conceived in terms of male and female, certain understandings of gender are legitimized and reinforced.
This is ultimately unhelpful to women.
CHRIST AND FEMINISM
We have concluded therefore that the maleness of Christ is not to be evaded.
Even if we take patristic Christology, in which it is said that God in Christ took on humanity in which we all participate, it is still the case that that human nature was the human nature of a male human being.
ID any symbolization of Christ the symbol will be male not female (or neuter).
This necessary maleness is equally the case if one moves from the Greek to the original Jewish framework.
The Messiah had to be a male figure.
The repercussions of this maleness of the concept of Christ may be thought to be incalculable.
The onus, one would have thought, lies on those who would show that it is not the case that the fact that God, whether in the form of the Father or of Christ, has been seen as ‘male’, is an underlying factor in western culture, distorting human relations.
All the evidence would seem to point to the fact that this is the case.
It is conservatives and feminist radicals who grasp the importance of symbolism.
Both see that the fact that God, and Christ, have been seen as ‘male’ is crucial to the religion.
It establishes a particular place both for men and for women, for the ‘male’ and for the ‘female’, within the religion.
But feminists who are alerted to the importance  of symbolism believe Christianity accordingly to be judged.
One may think that as the ethical equality of human beings comes to be recognized in our society, the masculine nature of their religion will become an ever more pressing question for Christians.
Christian feminists often fail to recognize the crucial nature of symbolism.
In so far as they do, they are troubled: they try to find a way for women to be represented in a religion where the Godhead is conceived in male terms, and a way indeed to be able to associate themselves with a male God or Christ.
Conservatives (and Christian feminists also to some extent) seek alternative ways in which the female can be symbolized in the religion, ways which it must be thought are less than satisfactory, and which become increasingly unsatisfactory as that for which women stand in our society changes.
It should be pointed out once again that those feminists who say that, on account of the male symbolism, Christianity is impossible for them, are not thereby necessarily ‘anti-men’.
It is a retort which is sometimes given, but quite beside the point.
For we are not here, in speaking Christologically, conceiving of Jesus as simply one human being among others who have lived in the past.
Christology gives a male human being a status which is given to no woman.
A Christian service revolves around Christ.
Indeed it may be (as in my case) because one deeply cares that there should be good and equal relations between men and women that one is adamant that no one human being can be given the kind of status which Christians give to Christ.
Such a religion as Christianity is a symbolic distortion of the relationships which I would have.
Above all in religion, one would think, when religion is so potent for how human beings conceive the world, it is important that there be no such bias.
I am therefore not Christian not least for the sake of the kind of human relationships which I want to see flourish.
It will be useful in conclusion to look at some incidents which illuminate the way in which symbolism operates in the religion.
It is sometimes said that the difference of sex is of no more significance than the difference of race.
Thus it is thought that the fact that some human beings are of the opposite sex to Christ is not of importance.
I would argue that this is not the case.
Symbolically at least(and in Christology we are dealing partially with the realm of symbolism) the difference of sex is a divide.
This indeed is the origin of the word: the ‘se’ root of ‘sex’means to cut or divide — as also in section, secateurs, segment — and sex is the great cutting of humanity.
It may be that biologically we are on a continuum, and on rare occasions a  child is born whose sex is uncertain.
But symbolically (and in large part biologically) there are two sexes.
Again, that this is the case is not contradicted by the fact that, in many spheres, I may have much more in common with first world men than with third world women.
Consider then the following.
A book, edited by Hans-Ruedi Weber (until recently of the World Council of Churches),On a Friday Noon , shows illustrations of Christ crucified, drawn from all cultures and times in history.
The variety is fascinating.
There are yellow Christs and brown Christs, Christs who are serene and Christs in agony, Christs who are stylized and Christ in the image of the people who depicted him.
But one thing these pictures — which reflect a spectrum of human art and imagination — have in common: they are all images of a man.
If there were to be an image of a woman in that book, that one picture would stand out as the exception.
However Christ is understood, as people take him up into their culture, or make of him what they will, they know him to be male.
A woman is the ‘opposite’ to Christ in a way in which someone of another race is not.
Consider then again the following, an example which shows well how far feminists who are Christians feel the lack of a male figure with which to associate.
In the Anglican cathedral of St John the Divine in New York there was placed a female figure on a cross.
It was designated ‘The Christa’.
(It is significant that it could not be called ‘Christ’ but had to be given another name; moreover that it had to be explained what this was, whereas a man on the cross would have required no explanation.)
The fact that such a statue could be produced, and was apparently meaningful to women, shows something of women's yearning in their religion in a culture which is now deeply conscious of feminist issues.
There followed an uproar.
As could have been the case of no male figure, the Christa for many people represented a distortion of Christianity.
This incident highlights the tension.
Yet what can be done?
For it is indeed a distortion of the historical religion, in a way in which no figure of a man can be (consider the book showing images of Christ), to depict a female Christ.
Consider again the following.
Many years ago, at a race relations meeting held in the church hall of a Black church in the American South, I saw a striking picture of the head and shoulders of a Black man on the cross, simply called ‘Black Christ’.
I realized, in a way in which it had never struck me before, what a need there was for Black people (naturally) to see themselves as in the image of their God, and  their God as in their image.
This the more particularly when the surrounding society has discriminated against them.
When I became in a conscious way feminist I pondered long what it meant that a woman could not in such a way depict Christ as being in her image.
Yet the need is there, as evidenced by the Christa.
It will be appropriate to end this discussion by recognizing the fact that it is fundamentally on account of Christ's maleness that still today, throughout the greater part of Christendom (and in countries where women now play a leading part in public life), women may still not be ordained.
In my own case it was not that I was considered pastorally unsuitable, or academically unable, which led to my being refused ordination.
I could not even be considered.
Let us compare this with situations in which the issue of race has been involved.
There was last century a question as to whether Blacks could be ordained, but they have been.
Today, were a Black to be refused ordination on account of his race, there would be an outcry.
One may imagine that bishops would rush to ordain him to make the point.
Again, when Jews were refused ordination in the national protestant church in Germany during the Third Reich, the church split, for there were those who said that on principle (whatever might be the case in the state) this could not be in the church.
But men have not, on the whole, one may note, considered it necessary to break ranks in order to ordain women.
They have agreed that there was something to be discussed.
So apparently have the majority of women.
That this is so shows how deep is the division of sex to human beings.
But one may also say, from the fact that this has needed to be discussed — and from the fact that, as I say, throughout the greater part of Christendom women have not been ordained — it would be difficult to argue that the fact that this religion has had at its centre a male figure has been of little significance.
Concretion
THE CONCRETION OF RELIGION
Religion lives through its concretion.
By concretion I mean the parables, the stories and the history, the images, symbols and metaphors by which it is carried.
Of course it would be possible to have a religion which was largely abstract, which consisted of philosophical formulations and moral maxims.
But Christianity is not like that.
It lives through a wealth of images.
For a start Christianity, and Judaism before it, arose amid the history and literature of a people.
Within Christianity, people have sought out symbols through which they could formulate their faith, such as the doctrine of the trinity.
It is through this concretion that the religion is conveyed from one generation to another.
Biblical figures have become paradigmatic.
The parables of Jesus have entered the culture.
It is the particular way in which its doctrines have been expressed through concrete imagery which has shaped those doctrines.
Above all the understanding of God is an imaginative construct, for we have no access to what God may be in God's self.
Clearly the shaping of Christianity has been largely masculine.
God is conveyed using male metaphors.
Christ is central to the religion.
As we shall see, his parables largely concern male characters.
Prophets and priests, disciples and church leaders are male.
Of course women too are present.
But the way in which they are present may be less than helpful.
If they are placed in secondary roles, or it is assumed that women's identity is to be found in mothering, then the fact of their presence reinforces a certain understanding of the feminine.
The concretion conveys a subtle message to us at a subconscious level.
The parable of the prodigal son conveys at a conscious level a message about the need for forgiveness and acceptance.
But at another level we come to learn that God is to be compared to a good  father (not a mother) who divides his property between two sons (not daughters).
The concretion is potent.
It forms the religious imagination.
One may respond (in relation to the parable of the prodigal son) that one knows that today women may pass property to their daughters.
But it is still the case that through the reading of it in church a certain image of what it means to be male or female is conveyed.
Again it may be said that though prophets and priests in the bible are male, there is no reason why women should not be ordained or exercise leadership today.
But the past situation makes women appear an aberration.
Of recent years, not least through the coming into their own of women this century, the question has arisen for Christians as to how far the concretion is itself inspired.
Is the imagery God-given, or is it the product of the human imagination and so subject to alteration in another age?
When in effect, through changing the symbols or language used, should we have another religion?
C. S. Lewis speaks for the conservatives here:
Suppose the reformer stops saying that a good woman may be like God and begins saying that God is like a good woman.
Suppose he says that we might just as well pray to ‘Our Mother which art in Heaven’….
Suppose he suggests that the Incarnation might just as well have taken a female as a male form, and the Second Person of the Trinity be as well called the Daughter as the Son….
But Christians think that God Himself has taught us how to speak of Him.
To say that it does not matter is to say either that all the masculine imagery is not inspired, is merely human in origin, or else that, though inspired, it is quite arbitrary and unessential.
And this is surely intolerable….
A child who had been taught to pray to a Mother in Heaven would have a religious life radically different from that of a Christian child.
For Lewis the concretion is given.
And concretion is not incidental to what is conveyed.
This would also be the position of conservatives such as Leonard (whom we have considered) 2 who believe masculinity and femininity to be built into God's ordering of reality.
Likewise Austin Farrer believes that a translation process cannot be undertaken without the substance of the matter being lost.
He pokes fun at the modern person who says:
‘As for the terms in which St Paul expressed it — well, there you are he used any sort of figure that came to hand: he picked up a rhetorical  metaphor from a cynic preaching in the market….
He would have been amazed to learn that subsequent generations would make such stuff the foundation of dogmas.
We should strip off the fashions of speech; but keep the substance, of course.’
…But what is the substance?
It has an uncanny trick of evaporating once its accidents of expression are all removed….
Now the thought of Christ Himself was expressed in certain dominant images….
These tremendous images…are not the whole of Christ's teaching, but they set forth the supernatural mystery which is the heart of the teaching….
It is because the spiritual instruction is related to the great images, that it becomes revealed truth….
We have to listen to the Spirit speaking divine things: and the way to appreciate his speech is to quicken our own minds with the life of the inspired images….
Theology is the analysis and criticism of the revealed images….
Theology tests and determines the sense of the images, it does not create it.
The images, of themselves, signify and reveal.
For Farrer too the images are given.
What may a liberal say to this?
How may the message be disentangled from the original imagery through which it was conveyed, or is this to distort and change its meaning Farrer has been criticized by Ian Barbour who writes: ‘By his appeal to authority, Farrer makes ‘authorized images’ immune to criticism….
By detaching religious images from the human experience in which they occur, he minimizes the influence of psychological forces and cultural images (from literature, mythology, art, etc.)
…. I submit that the images themselves are not directly God-given but arise from man's analogical imagination.’
Of course one may (as a liberal) agree with this.
Human beings chose the imagery through which they would capture their understanding of God.
Jesus looked to material close to hand for the subject matter of his parables.
Yet this does not really speak to the conservatives' point.
For that which is conveyed is clearly shaped by the concretion.
A feminist will agree with Lewis that a child who prayed to a mother in heaven would have a fundamentally different conception of God!
She might well say that she would have a different sense of herself as well had she grown up counting herself as made in God's image.
Criticism of those who see concretion to be fundamental to religion may be quite beside the point.
The Lutheran scholar Robert Jenson chastises Christian feminists for being so foolish as to think that the term ‘Father’ is being used univocally (having the same connotations) when used of human fathers and of God; as though to imply  that there is sexuality in God.
But feminists may be well aware that, in calling God Father, it is not intended to say that God literally has sexuality, while yet wanting to maintain that this is problematic.
When Jenson continues that the reason why the biblical God is called ‘Father’ is that the attempt is being made to get away from sexuality, with which women are more naturally to be associated, we may think that he has given the game away!
For it is precisely the fact that men have tended to be associated with that which is above, spiritual and ‘like God’, whereas women have been associated with that which is below, of the earth, sexual, and ‘unlike God’ which lies at the heart of the problem!
To continue to use exclusively male language for God (or female language for humanity in relation to God) reinforces these perceptions.
The biblical material is not innocent.
The problem is that Christianity cannot shed its concretion.
For Christianity is a historical religion.
It is rooted in a particular past, a past that was patriarchal.
It would be difficult to think of God as anything other than‘Father’ and ‘Son’when the biblical metaphors for God are male, and Jesus was a male human being.
Of course supplementary imagery may be found, but the core imagery remains male.
The Hebrew scriptures are bound up with the history of a particular society, and that society was patriarchal.
The church arose in a social setting in which women were not equals.
Jesus' teaching is conveyed through the particular examples which he used.
In Christian worship, or through the reading of the bible, this language and imagery is transported from the past into the present.
Moreover this language and imagery is brought from the past into the present not just as any language and imagery, but as having a certain givenness.
The bible is considered to be inspired literature which is in some way normative for the religion.
Change to the concretion may be thought to be extraordinarily difficult, for the imagery is built into the literature and thought structure which form the basis of the religion.
In some cases it is, if one is to retain the historical character of the religion, impossible: for example the fact cannot be altered of Jesus having been a male human being.
One thinks of the feminist cartoon of the three wise men arriving at Bethlehem, one saying to the others, with down-turned mouth: ‘Its a girl!’
That would disrupt the whole story.
The impact which the bible and the imagery of the Christian religion has had on our society is not to be overestimated.
It has been fundamental to western consciousness.
This is still the case today, although its hold may be lessening and our societies becoming radically secular.
Children who read western literature absorb the impact  pact which religion has had on that literature.
In Britain children still hear biblical stories in schools; much of American society is steeped in the bible.
For many people in our society the bible is a book like no other book.
People who never normally go to church find themselves called upon to express their emotions through religious symbols and imagery at moments of transition and crisis in their lives: at baptisms, weddings and funerals.
The church is full of concrete symbolism: the priest may have to be male, the words of the prayer book or liturgy are used, the hymns of former generations sung.
At Christmas, the most celebrated festival of the year, a particular story is depicted on Christmas cards or in nativity plays.
It has one woman character, and she is there qua mother.
Men are shown in different roles, as innkeepers, shepherds, wise men and fathers.
The story celebrates the birth of a boy, who is to be the redeemer of humankind.
Christian feminists too are of course deeply conscious of these things.
The concretion of the Christian religion drives them to its edge; indeed makes them wonder whether there is a place for them within it.
They attempt a process of translation.
But the biblical material may simply not be amenable to what they would say.
They may look to parts of the tradition which are less inimical to them, for example stories that tell of the lives of women.
But the women whom they find may well not match their feminist consciousness.
It struck me as incongruous when I heard of a parish church, in a commuter town south of London, which was to enact a nativity play.
What had those educated women in that church, many of them with responsible jobs in London, in common with that story?
As we have said, in concluding the last chapter, women need to find images with which, and persons with whom, they can in their religion form some association, or perceive a reflection of themselves.
Men generally fail to realize that there are women in the pews in pain — and others have left.
Women are disrupted in their worship by the masculinity of the religion to the point that it ceases to be for them a vehicle through which they can love God.
The question thus with which we are confronted is that of whether this religion can contain the new consciousness of women.
I shall in this chapter first look at the biblical material.
The bible forms the basis of the Christian religion and is the source of its concretion.
That the bible is deeply patriarchal may be taken as read.
What I shall endeavour to show is the extent and depth of this bias towards the male.
I shall then, secondly, move to the language of  Christian theology, the imaging of God.
I shall consider the success of attempts of recent years to mitigate its masculine nature.
Thirdly, I shall look at the understanding of the ‘feminine’ which has been built into the tradition.
I shall then fourthly look at the various ways in which Christian feminists try to relate to and to appropriate the biblical material.
Finally, I shall consider the conclusion to which some women have come, that feminism is incompatible with a religion of which the core symbolism is male.
I shall look at the endeavour of women both within and outside Christianity to create a different concretion.
BIBLICAL RELIGION
That the bible reflects a patriarchal world is clear.
The majority of biblical figures, whether  patriarchs , prophets, priests, disciples or church leaders, are male.
The scriptures largely concern the interaction of men with one another and with their God.
The central figure of the tradition for Christians, Jesus Christ, is of course male.
A handful of women who play a part on the stage form the exception.
Likewise parables and ethical sayings are largely directed to the world of men.
But it is not simply that women are notable by their absence.
When they are present they are present for the most part performing female roles as defined by that society.
The problems are thus multi-faceted.
In general terms these things are evident: one need not demonstrate them.
What I wish rather to do is to show the extent to which it is the case that the bible is patriarchal in its presuppositions.
I shall therefore do two things.
Firstly, I shall consider Jesus Christ.
For it is often supposed that his attitude towards women stands in stark contrast to that of the surrounding society.
Here at least, it is thought, feminist women may find some solace.
Jesus' attitudes and teaching are moreover central to the biblical witness: they tend to be the reference point to which Christians turn.
Moreover, his parables and ethical sayings are among the most well-known passages in the bible.
Secondly, I shall discuss textual analysis of the bible which has been carried out by feminists in recent years.
Such readings of the text lead one to the conclusion that patriarchal presuppositions are woven into the writing in such a way that they cannot be extricated.
The fact that a negative view of women is conveyed at a level which must be largely subconscious  makes these texts all the more dangerous.
Biblical stories, and the narration of history in the bible, may be profoundly damaging to human relations.
To turn first to the words and attitudes of Jesus.
We should of course be aware that we do not know what Jesus himself said: we do not have his words verbatim.
Nor do we know precisely what he did.
‘Jesus’ as we have him may have been filtered through the patriarchal world which remembered him and wrote about him (if the biblical authors were male).
Nevertheless, this is not of importance in relation to our present consideration.
For it is Jesus as he was remembered and his words as we have them which have played the part which they have in western culture.
What I wish to discuss then is the contention of some in recent years that ‘Jesus was a feminist’.
This has been suggested by male authors who wish to support the cause of women, and by many a Christian feminist.
For such a contention there would seem to be not a shred of evidence.
Even if one takes a minimalist definition of feminism, the equality of women and men, is this the case.
Indeed, one might well say how could such equality have occurred to Jesus, given the society in which he lived.
Still less can it be said that Jesus had a feminist interpretation of social realities.
That Jesus reached out to women as individuals in their need (as he did also to men) is certainly so.
But there is no evidence that he mounted a critique of the position in which women were placed in his society.
It must in the first place be said that there was probably nothing particularly exceptional about Jesus' behaviour and attitudes towards women.
True he was not, so far as we know, misogynist: there is evidence to the contrary.
But it must not be thought that he was in this alone in his society: there were others also who were not.
Judaism (as Jewish scholars have pointed out) was much more diverse than Christians, keen to suggest that Jesus stood out from his surroundings, have sometimes allowed.
It is important moreover that one not give overtones to stories surrounding Jesus which they may in no way have carried.
Thus for example it is sometimes held to be of significance that the first appearance of the resurrected Christ is said to have been to a woman.
Judith Ochshorn, a specialist in Near Eastern culture, points out that there is a long history of women as mourners and attendants on the dead: thus ‘in its cultural context, the presence of women at the cross or at the tomb of Jesus was not exceptional’.
Again the context of Jesus' statement against divorce may not, as has sometimes been suggested, be that of a prohibition  of a double standard for men and women.
He was simply advocating one of the two strands of thought already present in the legal thought and practice of Judaism.
Inasmuch as the parables provide us with some indication of how Jesus saw the world, it must be said that women would appear.
to have been marginal to his perception.
Nicola Slee provides some interesting statistics.
Taking alone the synoptic gospels, for they are likely to be closer to the words of Jesus, the facts are as follows.
There are in the parables in Mark's gospel 18 main characters, all of whom are men; in Matthew's 85, 12 of whom are women, but this includes 10 bridesmaids; in Luke's 108, of whom 9 are women.
Moreover, and perhaps even more significantly, among the men there is a rich spectrum of life represented: they are farmers, builders, merchants, kings, judges, stewards, doctors, bridegrooms, servants, sons, fathers, priests, publicans, rich men, poor men, thieves, fools, scoundrels.
By contrast the roles in which women are portrayed are wholly conventional.
The women can be listed exhaustively as ten bridesmaids, a woman searching for a lost coin, a widow seeking justice, and a handful of unspecified wives, mothers and daughters mentioned in general terms.
The facts speak for themselves.
There is no positive evidence that Jesus saw anything wrong with the sexism of his day.
He did not, so far as we know, see the necessity for structural change to remedy the oppression that women were under.
One may make a comparison here with his attitude towards the poor; for one could evidently make out a case that, in relation to the poor, he preached the need for revolution.
He suggests that a woman may be allowed to sit at his feet, rather than preoccupy herself with cooking.
But there is no suggestion that the service of others, in which discipleship was to consist, should involve taking some of the burden of housework from women.
His parables never challenge male privilege.
The father in the parable of the prodigal son divides his property between sons.
The ‘owner of the house’, the person who builds a house, and the one who has authority over servants, are all presumed male.
In John 3 Jesus is reputed to have said that ‘the bride exists only for the bridegroom’.
Mention is made, in Matthew 18:25, of a man selling his wife and children into slavery to pay off his debt.
What more need one say?
It has been pointed out by Ochshorn that Jesus' message is evidently addressed basically to men.
The life which Jesus advocated must have necessarily had an appeal to men rather than to women, for it would in many cases have put women in an impossible position.
Ochshorn comments:
It seems likely that in ways we can never measure, the preachings about the superiority of the life of the spirit may have been profoundly discouraging and alienating to mothers of very young children, who knew about the realities of their own lives and realized that these preachings were profoundly insensitive to those realities….
It is not that Jesus viewed women with ambivalence, but his emphasis on the superior value of the spiritual may have placed women more than men in an ambivalent relationship to the divine.
Jesus urges that land and possessions should be abandoned.
But only men had these.
He forbids divorce, but implicitly accepts that it is a man who initiates divorce, ‘the man who divorces his wife…
‘. When a man says he will follow him ‘but let me first say farewell to those at my home’, Jesus reprimands him, and when a woman cries out ‘Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts that you sucked’, he replies ‘Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God’.
In both these cases he rejects the ties of family.
Nor, significantly, in the realm of religion does Jesus appear to have done anything to counter the inferior position in which women were placed.
We have records of frequent clashes with the Pharisees over the sabbath and other traditional observances.
Not once is Jesus recorded as challenging the oppression of women.
He heals a woman with a flow of blood, but haemorrhaging is a disease and is referred to as such: ‘Be healed of your disease.’
He nowhere confronts the whole issue of menstruation and childbirth, which marked woman as either ritually unclean or sinful.
He never for example suggests that women should be allowed into the inner courts of the temple, or take upon themselves the obligations of prayer laid on men.
And we must certainly say that he never saw the issues of language and imagery which feminists today believe to be crucial: he evidently refers without second thought to God as ‘Father’.
In saying these things one is, of course, not ‘blaming’ Jesus — any more than one is blaming, as individuals, any of his contemporaries for not comprehending the ethical necessity of human equality.
We may think that ‘blame’ would be a mistaken judgement on the peculiar blindness in that society to the situation of women.
But when one realizes what that situation was, the blindness becomes horrific.
That Jesus was personally kind to women there is no reason to doubt.
That he freed people to be themselves and to be present for  others is the undeniable witness of the texts.
But that he had a feminist analysis of society is something for which there is no evidence.
To contend under these circumstances that Jesus was a feminist, or that he spoke out for women, must imply a very low estimate of what being a feminist (or speaking out for women) might mean.
It becomes important to say these things in view of the fact that Christian people tend to look to Jesus' teaching and actions as exemplary of what human relationships should be.
He was in no way concerned with those issues which must concern us.
Ochshorn writes: ‘Jesus was neither a feminist nor a misogynist.
His central message simply lay elsewhere.’
I turn then, secondly, to the readings which feminist scholars are giving of biblical texts.
The techniques used are those learnt in literary analysis, particularly literary analysis as influenced by French (post-modern) thought.
I take here as my example Nelly Furman's intriguing essay ‘His Story versus Her Story: Male Genealogy and Female Strategy in the Jacob Cycle’.
Other effective examples of such work are Esther Fuch's two essays in the same volume,Feminist Perspectives on Biblical Scholarship,in which Furman's essay appears.
Fuchs, in an analysis of women as mothers in the Hebrew scriptures, shows how women are considered entirely in relation to the male world.
In her other essay she considers the theme of female deceptiveness in those scriptures, arguing that it is the text itself which is deceptive through its failing to name the real problem: namely that the power relations which pertained between men and women forced women to seek to obtain their ends through underhand means, while at the same time the deviousness of women is used to justify their inferior position.
I turn however to Furman's essay.
A text, says Furman, quoting the French semiotician Roland Barthes, is a reading of a text: a reader, like a musician faced with a score, appropriates it in a way that is meaningful.
She proposes a feminist reading.
She will gain entrance to the text through a consideration of how articles of clothing function for women and for men.
For men, as she shows, articles of clothing signify a specific bond between them.
Thus when Joseph escapes the embrace of Potiphar's wife (Gen. 39:9–10), who would seduce him, leaving his coat in her hands, the coat stands for his loyalty to another man.
Likewise Jacob, his father, had given him a long robe with sleeves, for he ‘loved Joseph more than any other of his children’(Gen. 37:3).
‘In both cases, a piece of attire represents an  emotional link, a trust between men.’
Again when Pharaoh makes Joseph vizier of Egypt he gives him special clothes, as does Joseph his brothers to mark his reconciliation with them.
Garments, for men, express feelings.
When overcome with grief, men rend their clothes.
(Gen. 37:29, 34; 44:13).
Clothing sets up a hierarchical order founded on a father's liking for a child.
Items of clothing are thus ‘textual signifiers’; ‘they implement the new hierarchical order of elective dominance’.
When however we turn to women, items of clothing have a very different signification, a signification corresponding to women's lack of power in the society.
Thus Tamar, the widow of Judah's son, substitutes for her widow's dress a prostitute's veil.
Whereupon Judah asks for her favours, for which she takes his signet, cord and staff as a pledge for payment — so that, when pregnant, she is able to prove that he is the father of the child and so legitimize her twins and perpetuate the line of her husband.
Potiphar's wife, likewise, had made an article of clothing serve her own purpose, in that case to convince her husband that Joseph had tried to seduce her.
Again, Rebekah secures Isaac's blessing for Jacob by dressing him in Esau's clothing.
Furman comments:
When Rebekah, Potiphar's wife, or Tamar uses a piece of attire for their own personal ends, they do not create a gratuitous disturbance in the order of things.
Although in a world under divine guidance their actions can be said to actualize the Lord's will, these actions can also be seen as the expression of women's resentment and rebellion.
When Rebekah suggests that Jacob take his brother's place, or when Potiphar's wife tries to seduce Joseph, or Tamar calls attention to Judah's progeny, their interference breaks up the exclusive father-son dialogue and forces recognition of their presence….
Women use pieces of attire…to reinscribe themselves in the patriarchal system….
As used by men, garments form a communicative channel from which women are excluded; but when used by women, garments function as communicative devices between the sexes.
For the men, garments are symbolic markers of filial love and recognition, whereas for the women they serve as a means of self-inscription in a system that neglects them….
Whereas for the men garments have a determined, precise meaning, that is to say, a truth value, for the women clothes are nothing but signifiers open to a variety of meanings; they are items whose function and referential meaning can easily be changed….
[Garments]are the place of juncture for a multiplicity of meanings, the locus for the expression of divergent desires.
One may furthermore point out that the anonymous biblical narrator sides with Potiphar and Joseph.
‘In siding with Joseph, the narrator embraces the ideological structure which Joseph serves, namely, the male desire for an exclusive bond between men…
The position of the biblical narrator is no more ‘neutral’ than that of the feminist reader.’
Such textual analysis, undertaken with a feminist pair of eyes, is uncovering the depth at which sexism must be seen to be present in the text.
It shows to be wholly naive claims that the problem of the patriarchal nature of the biblical literature could be solved by for example substituting certain female words for male words, or concentrating on those stories which concern women.
The text is the product of a sexist, indeed misogynist, culture: the presuppositions of a patriarchal world are written into it.
Moreover, such texts are the more dangerous in that they affect us at a subconscious level.
The fact that the narrator evaluates the story from a patriarchal perspective only compounds the issue.
There is, one must conclude, little that can be done.
Yet these texts are read as sacred texts.
THE IMAGING OF GOD
Central to the concretion of the Christian religion has been the way in which God has been conceived.
I shall here consider the imagery and the symbols which have been used for God.
In particular I shall look at the attempts of recent years to unearth other, female (or feminine) imagery, present in the scriptures and in the Christian tradition.
I shall argue that the suggestions which have been made carry with them grave problems.
Moreover that they do not do the work which it is intended that they shall do.
The source of Christian shaping of the concept of God is the biblical language and metaphors.
In the Hebrew scriptures, God is of course overwhelmingly conceived using male figures of speech.
It may be noted that, in this, the Israelites were unlike surrounding cultures which, polytheistic rather than monotheistic, conceptualized the divine through the use of both female and male imagery.
This prevalent masculinity does not change in the Christian scriptures.
The naming of God as Father is added to the previous designations of King, Lord and Judge: all of them, it should be noted, denoting in that society high-ranking males.
God is called ‘Father’ 170 times by Jesus in the gospels, and in his prayers never invoked by any other  name.
By contrast God is never once throughout the bible addressed as ‘Mother’.
With the development of Christian theology, God comes to be symbolized as trinity.
It may well be that this development makes matters worse.
It could well be argued that inasmuch as there is a relationship between the second person of the trinity and the male human being Jesus, God becomes relatively more anthropomorphized, so appearing more masculine.
Don Cupitt indeed suggests that the fact that Jesus, a human being, came to be seen as God, made for a situation whereby God the ‘Father’ also was conceived more anthropomorphically than was the case within the Jewish background.
In Christian art it becomes acceptable to portray God ‘the Father’ as a male figure, whereas within Judaism this would have been unthinkable.
In Christian theology, God comes to be conceived as ‘Father’ and ‘Son’.
The fact that Jesus referred to God as ‘Father’ made this move seem axiomatic.
In this context it is of interest that the Jewish scholar Rita Gross argues that there is no intrinsic reason why, within Judaism, God should not be named ‘She’.
She writes: ‘The familiar…‘the Holy One, blessed be He’ is also…‘the Holy One, blessed be She’and always has been .
Only the poverty of our religious imagination and the repressiveness of our social forms prevented that realization.’
This may be more difficult within Christian theology.
I turn then to the interest in Christian circles of late in trying to mitigate the exclusively male, or masculine, way in which God is understood in the bible and in Christian symbolism.
It is suggested that the God of the bible, called by masculine names, has however characteristics which are more ‘feminine’ as feminine has traditionally been conceived, and that there is imagery to be found which is female.
Trible points to the use of the metaphor of a womb to convey God's compassion.
In Isaiah God is compared to a woman in travail.
Jesus says that he would comfort Jerusalem as a mother hen takes chicks under its wings.
The German Protestant theologian Jürgen Moltmann speaks of God as a ‘motherly father’.
He suggests that trinitarianism implies ‘a radical transformation of the Father image’.
For ‘a father who both begets and bears his son is not merely a father in the male sense.
He is a motherly father too.’
The Council of Toledo (675), he tells us, spoke of the Son as being born out of the Father's womb.
There is interest also in showing Christ in the past to have been conceived to have more feminine, indeed female, characteristics.
In particular there has been appreciation of the medieval tradition in this respect.
Thus Anselm of Canterbury, referring to Galatians 7:19, speaks of St Paul as his ‘sweet nurse, sweet mother’; and continues, with reference to Luke 13:34: ‘And you Jesus, are you not also a mother?
Are you not the mother who, like a hen, gathers her children under her wings?…
Then both of you are mothers.
Even if you are fathers, you are also mothers…
Fathers by your authority, mothers by your kindness.
Fathers by your teaching, mothers by your mercy.’
In passages which have become well known, the medieval woman mystic Julian of Norwich speaks of God as both Father and Mother and of the trinity as exemplifying fatherhood and motherhood.
Of Christ she writes: ‘By the skill and wisdom of the Second Person we are sustained, restored, and saved with regard to our sensual nature, for he is our Mother, Brother, and Saviour.’
Again she says:
For the merciful ample flood of his precious blood and water suffices to make us sweet and clean; the Saviour's blessed wounds are open, and rejoice to heal us; the dear, gracious hands of our Mother are ever about us, and eager to help.
In all this work he functions as a kindly nurse who has no other business than to care for the well-being of her charge.
An interesting gloss on the medieval understanding of Christ as a nurturing mother is provided by Caroline Bynum, who tells us that in the medical theory of the time breast milk was believed to be processed blood.
Eleanor McLaughlin has argued effectively that, in comparison in particular with modern Protestantism, the medieval tradition allowed for a more androgynous understanding of God and, since the human was seen as ‘female’ before God, also of the human being.
This suggestion that the masculine God should be understood in a more female or feminine way is however not without problems.
The effect of such imagery is to enrich or enlarge our concept of the male, or of what may truly be said to be ‘masculine’.
God (who is basically seen as male) is portrayed as nurturing and caring, Christ as feeding and protecting.
It may well be said that the patriarchal understanding of what it means to be male is abandoned.
But such a move does nothing for women, or for the concept of the feminine per se:it expands our understanding of what is to be considered authentically male.
In order to change the understanding of women, or enlarge the  conception as to what is to be considered authentically female, we should have to apply what have been thought to be characteristically male attributes to a female symbol.
For example the female should be seen to embrace headship or authority.
Indeed one might well say that, through this augmentation of what is to be considered male, the male now absorbs all in himself.
While remaining male, the male symbol has taken over female tasks and properties as well.
What place then is left for the female?
As one of my students remarked: ‘If men now have wombs, women are superfluous.’
Furthermore one may remark on the fact that that which is considered ‘feminine’, which the male also now takes on, corresponds simply to what have traditionally been women's tasks (nurturing and caring).
Through suggesting that God should be seen in these ways, for example that those biblical verses which give feminine attributes to God should be drawn upon, one does nothing to change the conception of what are authentic roles for women.
The idea that femininity is in the first place to be associated with motherhood is simply writ large.
Thus for example in the quotation which I gave from Anselm, it is to be noted that God is to be seen as a Father in authority and teaching, as a Mother in kindness and mercy.
This is hardly a feminist revolution.
The whole approach then, though it may in helpful ways mitigate an authoritarian image of the male, does not change our understanding of women.
I have already commented on the suggestion, made by both conservative Christians and Christian feminists, that the Spirit should be seen as specifically female.
Certainly the word for spirit is female in Hebrew, and there is a long tradition of the divine wisdom being conceived to be feminine.
It may be that Christianity has lost something here which was present in the tradition.
If we are speaking however within a Christian context of the Holy Spirit, such a suggestion may be far from helpful.
The Spirit becomes in effect a weak counterpart to the male Logos: I say weak because clearly the Spirit is not differentiated in the sense in which the Logos is associated with a male human being.
What is to be understood as female is something vague; indeed the Spirit is often designated as neuter.
The two ‘male’ persons of the trinity by contrast are anthropomorphically conceived entities, ‘persons’to whom people direct their prayers.
Moreover the Spirit has ever played second fiddle to the male Christ within trinitarian theology.
Talk of the Spirit as female may moreover once again tend to fuel a certain understanding of what is to be considered feminine.
The process theologian John Cobb can write as follows of  the Spirit: ‘It is the receptive, empathetic, suffering, redemptive, preservative aspect of God, whereas Logos is order, novelty, call, demand, agent, transformer and principle of restlessness.’
This may be thought scarcely auspicious.
That the God of Judaism and of Christianity is in conception profoundly male is clear.
It may be more honest to face this for what it is.
The various attempts to find more female aspects to the tradition can retrieve very little.
Moreover, as we have seen, the attempt to elicit more feminine aspects to a God (or Christ) otherwise conceived of as masculine is really beside the point as far as women are concerned.
The Spirit fails to be a counterpart to the two ‘male’ persons of the trinity, and is scarcely female.
The extent to which God in all three persons of the trinity has simply been seen as male is well captured by the liturgy of The Alternative Service Book used in Anglican services of confirmation in Britain.
The candidate replies ‘I believe and trust in him’ three times to the successive questions ‘Do you believe and trust in God the Father/his Son/his Holy Spirit…?’.
When one speaks of the biblical God, one automatically says ‘He’: that God is profoundly male.
It strikes a very foreign note to call the God of this tradition by anything other than male names.
Of course it may help feminists when, in a Christian invocation to worship, God is referred to as for example ‘Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier’.
But when, in the next moment, the bible is read, we shall again hear talk of ‘Father’ and ‘Son’.
As long as one remains within a biblical and Christian tradition, the problem may be thought to be without solution.