

Incomers and Settlers
APPROACHING SOME of the more forbidding coasts of Scotland in a modern vessel, one must surely marvel at the temerity of those prehistoric voyagers who crossed the sea in flimsy boats and refused to be deterred by lowering cliffs or storm-lashed, perilous rocks.
Some may have regretted the excursion and eventually turned back for home.
But once ashore, others seem to have had little difficulty in establishing new homes.
Many of the first traces of human habitation in what we now call Scotland have been identified from bones and stone implements found in caves along the approaches to the eastern firths of Forth and Tay.
These and remnants of temporary nomadic camps date from between 8000 and 6000 BC.
In the west, hunter-gatherers from Ireland have left plentiful flint knives and arrowheads, deer antlers and whalebones, around the shores of Luce Bay in Galloway.
Others found their way into the western reaches of Argyll, also using shore caves as a base from which they went out seasonally fishing, hunting and gathering fruit, nuts and birds' eggs.
A whole warren of such caves was rediscovered in the cliffs during the nineteenth century expansion of Oban.
This peripatetic life gave way to the more settled communities of Neolithic farmers, and by the time of the Bronze Age their hut circles had become substantial enough for the foundations, post-holes and fragments of stone wall to survive into our own time.
In the Tayside uplands alone there are  around 200 recognizable agricultural settlements from 1500 BC onwards.
Both hunters and farmers fished in the rivers, lochs or sea from skin-boats and log-boats, and further incomers braved the waters between Ireland and Britain in similar small craft.
Much low-lying land which today is fertile was in the past an exasperating jigsaw of bog, burn and loch, difficult to negotiate, let alone exploit.
Mountainsides and glens with their rocks only sparsely coated with acidic, unproductive soil offered different problems.
Incomers had to combine harsh subsistence farming with hunting in forest and stream.
The marshy lands around Stirling and Bannockburn must have been inhospitable to these early settlers, but were to prove of incalculable worth to fourteenth-century patriots determined to assert their independence from southern predators.
As successive batches of immigrants strove to carve out their own territories and perhaps take over existing farm and hunting lands by force, the already established settlers built impressive hill-forts to watch over their possessions and shelter people and livestock in time of emergency.
But their earliest important memorials gave priority to honouring the dead and to their religious practices.
The most ancient burial chambers consisted of huge stone slabs forming a chamber with entrances through which further corpses might be introduced.
These passage-graves were covered with cairns of stone, frequently mixed with shells in coastal districts.
There were also gallery-graves, sometimes called Clyde cairns because of their prevalence around the Clyde estuary, and very much resembling Irish burial chambers in their rectangular construction and internal division into separate compartments.
Simpler interments took place in smaller round cairns, common in the Western Isles.
Later the practice of cremation led to tidier storage of ashy remains in cinerary urns, though still ritually accompanied by pottery beakers and food bowls, animals and birds, and even helpings of fish to succour the departed on their way.
Examples of all types are plentiful in different regions: the  long cairn of Balnagowan in Aberdeenshire, fragmented into heaps of stones lined up over some 230 feet; the well-preserved Clyde cairn of Brackley in Kintyre, excavated in 1952 to reveal both inhumation and cremation procedures, with food vessels and jet necklace beads; and the protracted cemetery of Nether Largie tombs below Kilmartin village in Argyll.
On a slope high above Wigtown Bay in Dumfries and Galloway, nearly always fretted by a breeze or whistling more stridently in the wind, is an especially fine duo of 5,000-year-old tombs called Cairnholy.
A circular type known as Clava tombs can be found at the northern end of the Great Glen, many without an entrance, which would seem to signify that each was used only once and then sealed.
The most beautifully situated group of these is at Balnuaren of Clava, off a byroad below Culloden.
Under sheltering trees stand three cairns and stone circles, worn yet awesomely dignified after more than 5,000 years.
They are believed to have been family shrines rather than communal burial places.
Quite apart from the sturdiness of their burial mounds, the settlers made sure of leaving solid, lasting tributes to their deities and their belief in certain seasonal rhythms.
Standing stones on their own, in groups, or in circular henge patterns often seem an integral part of the rocky landscape, growing out of the earth itself or lying at ease upon it; but the work of human hands can be detected in the cup-and-ring decorations on some, the geometrical arrangement of others.
The three standing stones of Lundin Links in Fife now watch over play on a golf course, though without providing any additional hazard.
Like many such groups, they have acquired a patina of legend: during the nineteenth century there were those who referred to them as Druid stones, others who thought they were of Roman origin, and yet others who asserted they must be the gravestones of Danish invaders vanquished by Banquo and Macbeth.
Inevitably there is also speculation, as with Stonehenge and with the Ring of Brodgar on Orkney, about a possible astronomical significance.
In Caithness there are many upright monoliths from the Bronze Age, some standing alone, others in patterns suffused with some ancient significance.
Most bewildering of all are the parallel ranks of 200 small slabs on the ‘Hill o’ Many Stanes' at Mid Clyth.
At Raigmore, near Inverness, a stone circle almost 60 feet in diameter was raised around 1600 BC over a much earlier Stone Age settlement.
A later use of stone can be found in everyday rather than religious or funerary building.
The souterrains so plentiful in Angus settlements were tunnel-like underground chambers lined with slabs and probably roofed with timber, supporting further slabs.
Archaeologists who first came across them assumed that since these ‘earth houses’ were so small, their inhabitants must have been midgets.
Later research showed that they were in fact storehouses and workshops, attached to hut-dwelling communities during the first and second centuries AD: quernstones were found in such a cellar at Barns of Airlie, and a chamber in a Carlungie souterrain seems to have been used for both stone and metal working.
In cases where the souterrain was too large for storage of one village's produce, it may have been used by the chief of an area as a sort of tithe barn for goods paid to him as tax.
During the first century AD a number of homesteads on islands and in coastal regions were fortified, possibly against Roman slave traders.
These brochs (a word derived from the Old Norse borg — a citadel — later transmuted into borough ) nearly all followed one basic pattern: that of a large circular dwelling with drystone walls up to 15 feet thick, and some of them as much as 50 feet high.
Chambers were built into the walls, and remnants of ledges suggest support for wooden floors.
Some incorporated timber-framed lean-to houses, and the central open space could accommodate livestock.
Among better preserved examples is the almost complete broch on the island of Mousa, in Shetland.
One at Edinshall in Lothian is part of a whole complex of settlement and hill-fort, the broch itself suggesting a military role with a guardroom to either side of the entrance.
This hillside defence system was probably set  up by the Votadini, a tribe whose continual harassment by the neighbouring Selgovae led it to seek alliance with Rome at a very early stage.
Such hill-forts of successive races or groups living uneasily side by side continued to dominate the landscape during recurrent tribal and racial struggles for power.
A healthy number still survive in spite of the activities of farmers, planners and roadbuilders in search of cheap metal.
In Lothian, for example, there are Castlelaw Hill near Glencorse, and the superb example of Chesters Hill a mile from Drem; Barry Hill in Perthshire and the two forts of Brown Caterthun and White Caterthun in Angus; and the grass-covered expanse of Knock Farril above Strathpeffer.
The main oppidum or tribal centre of the Votadini was excavated in the early years of this century on Traprain Law, a steep volcanic upthrust from the East Lothian plain.
The presence of a rich hoard of Roman silver and Roman pottery of the Flavian period shows the strength of the tribe's alliance with and compliance with the dictates of Rome.
The Romans left fewer substantial marks on what they called Caledonia than they did on southern Britain, largely because so many of their attempts to establish regional centres collapsed when they were recalled to deal with unrest in southern Britain, or even back to Continental Europe and to Rome itself.
Resources had to be overstretched to maintain even a foothold north of the Tay, in wild mountainous regions inhabited by ‘half-naked savages with reddish hair and large limbs’, as Tacitus put it.
The first major campaigns into the unknown were led in AD 79 by Gnaeus Julius Agricola, whose son-in-law, Tacitus, wrote a hagiographical account of the proceedings which is infuriatingly vague about the actual geography.
The culmination of the invasion was a mighty battle against an alliance of Caledonian tribes under Calgacus at a place the historian called Mons Graupius.
He implies that it was close to the sea in the far north: but what, to Romans venturing into uncharted territory, was the far north?
Some scholars have suggested a  site near Inverness; others the junction of the rivers Tay and Isla.
Recent theories favour identification of the mountain with Bennachie, close to a Roman marching camp revealed in the late 1970s by aerial photography at Durno, 15 miles northeast of Aberdeen.
Tacitus records that just before his death the defeated Calgacus denounced the Romans as ‘Pillagers of the world…to robbery, butchery and rapine they give the lying name of ‘government’; they create desolation and call it peace.’
His descendants were to have good reason for echoing such sentiments in relation to the behaviour of Henry VIII's troops in Scotland.
After Agricola's recall to Rome, the will to hold on to large parts of the north seems to have ebbed.
Tacitus lamented that Britain had been ‘completely conquered and immediately thrown away’.
Excavations have shown that the extensive legionary fortress near Inchtuthil, north of Perth, had to be evacuated as early as AD 87 before construction had been completed.
Buildings were hastily demolished, and ironwork likely to be of use to the natives was buried in a deep pit.
Although the Romans maintained a number of marching camps across the Lowlands such as those at Pennymuir, Roxburgh, and Glenlochar in  Kirkcudbrightshire , signal stations on heights such as the Eildon Hills, and sentinel forts substantially reinforced at one time and another, these were subjected to repeated tribal attacks and occasionally a combined assault.
Two major constructions were the forts at Dalswinton north of Dumfries and Newstead near Melrose, close beside the major Roman thoroughfare of Dere Street across the Border.
Newstead, known to the Romans as Trimontium, has in the present century yielded up wonderful finds including shoes, sandals, jewellery and the iron helmet of a cavalryman.
But no Romanized townships sprang up; there were no farmstead villas of the type found in southern Britain; and the sheer cost in fortification, roadworks and supplies required to maintain a presence in such bleak and unrewarding country finally defeated even the most assiduous empire-builders.
as if to seal off the barbarians and leave them to their own  devices, Hadrian's Wall was built from Solway to Tyne between AD 122 and 127.
This, too, was so frequently overrun that by AD 143 it was decided to attempt another defence further north, across the narrower neck of land between Forth and Clyde.
This Antonine Wall, named after Antoninus Pius, was mainly a turf rampart on stone foundations behind a ditch, with barracks and forts at two-mile intervals.
It proved of little value, and had to be abandoned within twenty years.
Examples of centurial stones or distance slabs with which different legionary detachments marked sections they had constructed are to be seen in the National Museum of Antiquities in Edinburgh and the Hunterian Museum in Glasgow.
It is interesting to note a shortening of the working distances at the Clyde end of the rampart: the menace from attackers over the Kilpatrick Hills was such that working parties had to keep protectively closer together.
Not merely the Antonine Wall but Hadrian's Wall fell to hostile tribes.
In AD 208 the Emperor Severus took personal charge of a fleet into the Firth of Forth and from it led an expedition across Fife, over the Tay valley, and on into the ever inhospitable north to put an end to these depredations.
The enemy cunningly avoided direct confrontation and concentrated on guerrilla warfare.
Severus managed to get as far as the Montrose region and perhaps briefly beyond that: tantalizingly, in 1869 labourers on the Duke of Sutherland's railway extension to Helmsdale and ultimately to Thurso in distant Caithness unearthed a collection of Roman bronze coins in a region never held and supposedly never reached by imperial forces.
In any case, after Severus's death at York in Ad 211 the momentum was lost, and again the legions withdrew, after making a number of treaties which were not observed for long.
Towards the end of the third century a new name appeared in Roman records, though the people to whom it was applied had established themselves in the country much earlier.
The significant factor was that a number of racial groups incorporating pre-Celtic and Celtic influences from France and  Ireland were now showing signs of working together and establishing not merely tribal oppida but a virtual kingdom to pit against their rivals, Roman or otherwise.
Because of their habit of painting and tattooing themselves, these people were dubbed Picti (‘painted men’).
They were notoriously warlike, subduing or assimilating lesser tribes and raiding sketchy Roman settlements to loot silver and make it into ornaments to add to their warpaint.
Their federation was probably governed by a number of minor rulers, but these gradually came to offer tribute to a paramount king.
This kingdom spread itself over Scotland north of the Forth and Clyde and for a time seems to have included Orkney.
As the Roman hold on Britain slackened, Picts joined with other Gaelic-speaking incomers from Ireland known as Scotti a word meaning simply pirates.
Although for a time they were merely raiders, these Celtic cousins had ambitions to acquire land and permanent residence, and were as ready to fight the Picts as to co-operate with them.
Originating from the northern part of County Antrim in Ireland, anciently known as Dalriada, they set about establishing another Dalriada in Argyll and the nearer islands, including Iona.
In the sixth century AD they fortified what was to become one of the most symbolic sites in national rather than regional history.
Dunadd fort clings to an isolated rocky hillock near Kilmartin, starkly visible from the road between Lochgilphead and Oban, above what must once have been a naturally protective boggy valley.
There are remains of four levels of wall, the lowest of which would have had wooden gates to protect its main entrance.
But ruined walls are, at best, just ruined walls.
What Dunadd has most provocatively to offer is a hollowed out bowl in one slab of rock, accompanied by carvings of a boar, the outline of a footprint, and several lines of ogam inscription.
The ogam script, using clusters of strokes at angles above, below and across a base line to shape its 20 basic characters, was commonest in its pure form in Ireland.
On the Isle of Man it was mixed with runic characters, and with Latin in  Wales.
Slight variations found in the Isles are usually known as Pictish ogams.
At Dunadd the carvers made use of fissures in the rock itself as their base line.
No reliable interpretation of these scripts has yet been established, but in the Dunadd fort the wording must surely, along with the bowl and footprint, be related to coronation rituals of the Dalriadic kings rather than to the Picts.
Distinctions of tribes and languages become very blurred when we try to catch their echoes from far across the centuries.
Very roughly it would seem that the predominant tongues in what came to be called Scotland were, from 600 BC to 300 BC, Early Celtic; from then until AD800, Pictish Celtic; from An 800 to 1200, Gaelic Celtic; and thereafter, English.
From the sixth century AD onwards the country fell, with frequent incursions from varying directions, into five main spheres of influence.
In the north and east were the Picts, their realm divided into seven main provinces or sub-kingdoms.
In Argyll the Dalriadic Scots were building up their strength.
The region of Strathclyde, spreading south from the Clyde to encompass Cumberland and Westmorland, was in the hands of Britons speaking Cumbric, a Welsh form of Gaelic which gave Cumbria its name.
In the south-west corner, Galloway was a land of Gaelic-speaking Picts.
A constant threat from the east was the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Bernicia, reaching from the Tyne to the Forth and amalgamating in the early seventh century with Deira to form Northumbria.
In An 685 King Ecgfrith decided to expand his realm still further by a large-scale attack on the Pictish lands.
At Nechtansmere, near Forfar in Angus, he and his troops were trapped in a narrow pass, Ecgfrith himself was killed, and thereafter Northumbria abandoned any attempts at invasion.
It was not, however, until the battle of Carham in 1016 on Northumbrian territory that the Scots made their own effective inroads and claimed Lothian for themselves.
By then its established language had become a form of English referred to by Gaelic speakers as ‘Inglis’, then ‘Scots’.
The dialect which inspired much Scottish literature came to be known, sometimes  admiringly and sometimes mockingly, as ‘Lallans’(Lowlands).
Yet it is the ‘capital of the Highlands’, Inverness, whose inhabitants boast of speaking the purest English in the British Isles; and in the Black Isle fishing village of Avoch (pronounced ‘Ouch’) a unique local patois is variously ascribed to an influx of Cornishmen long ago or to seamen from Spanish Armada wrecks.
Although languages or local inflections may have been disguised or distorted, the traveller can often catch a resonance of the most influential peoples in a region through its place names.
It is now generally accepted that words prefixed by pett or pit (similar to the Welsh and Cornish peth for ‘thing’ or ‘piece’) are of Pictish origin, as in places such as Pitlochry (‘stony share’) and Pittenweem (‘share of the cave’).
The greatest incidence of such names is in the region between the Forth and Inverness, known to be the main Pictish area.
Cumbric produced a prefix as familiar in Strathclyde as in Wales:caer,meaning a fort or, more generally, a dwelling place.
Caerlanrig signifies a settlement in a glade; the embattled frontier city of Carlisle, fought over so often by Scots and English, is a blend of caer with the Roman name for the old tribal centre of Luguvalium (Luguvalos's town), which the natives adapted as luet.
Three of the commonest Gaelic elements are baile, achadh and cill.
Baile,signifying a farmstead, is still in common use as the description for small crofting communities.
The most familiar corruption of it appears in Balgowan (‘the smith's steading’), Balmalcolm (‘Malcolm's steading' — personal ownership was frequently declared), and Balnab (probably ‘the abbot's place’ because of its proximity to the early Christian settlement at Whithorn).
Achadh,a field, generally takes the form of Auch, Auchen or Auchin:Auchtermuchty (‘pigbreeding field’); Auchenbegg (‘small field’); and Auchintoul (‘field of the barn’).
Cill is more common in its Kil form, meaning a church, often attached to the name of a saint or bishop, as in Kilpatrick or Kilmartin.
Later such formations had to share honours with those designated Kirk,of Norse  origin, as in Kirkpatrick (dedicated to the same saint as Kilpatrick) and Kirkcudbright, the church of St Cuthbert.
Norse and Gaelic combine in Kirkintilloch, derived from tulach,meaning a low hill or ridge.
Other place-name ingredients which the traveller and map-reader will frequently encounter are:
Aber
a river mouth
Ban
white
Dhu
black
Eccle
a church
Eilean
an island
Haugh
alluvial land beside a river
Holm
a small island
Inch
an island
Inver
a river mouth
Kin
a head or headland
Mor
great
Ross
a forest
Strath
a wide valley
During the eighth and early ninth centuries the Vikings pillaged the coasts, sacking the monasteries of Lindisfarne and Iona.
They had already acquired bases in Orkney and Shetland, and began settling there and along the north and west of Scotland.
Places associated with them are identifiable in the adaptation of stathr or bolstadr,a farm, into the suffix ‘ster’, as in Camster and Shebster in Caithness, and ‘bister’ as in Fladdabister in Shetland.
Wick, on its own or as a suffix, comes from vik, a bay or sheltered inlet.
In spite of the pagan savagery of the Vikings, Celtic Christianity kept a hold on the country.
St Ninian and St Columba had converted Picts and Dalriadic Scots during the fifth and sixth centuries.
It was still, however, dynastic and political considerations rather than religion which began drawing Picts and Scots into a closer relationship.
For some time after the battle of Nechtansmere the Picts had remained the more powerful of the two.
Then, because of their geographical position, they were seriously weakened by the Viking onslaught down the east coast.
Leadership also presented problems because of complicated rules of inheritance.
The Pictish succession was not by primogeniture but by tanistry, a system in which the senior and fittest member of the same blood was appointed heir, frequently from the matrilineal side.
This had the advantage of assuring leadership by a strong adult rather than the possibility of a child inheriting — a hazard which was so frequently to affect the later Stuart dynasty.
On the other hand it raised the danger of an ambitious cousin, too impatient to wait for the present ruler's death, committing regicide; and there were many instances of this.
In 844 Kenneth MacAlpin, a Dalriadic Scot on his father's side but with a mother of Pictish royal blood, became king of both the Picts and the Scots.
Distinctions were soon lost, and after a spell of being known as Alba the country became once and for all Scotland, though some of its boundaries were still in a state of flux.
What has most puzzled students of the period is the complete disappearance of the Picts as a distinct entity within a very short time.
Their administrators ceased to hold any sway.
Their language has survived only in fragments of place names, and many of those are arguable.
No written records exist.
What they did incontestably leave were remarkable examples of those hard-wearing memorials which we have already observed from prehistoric times: stones.
Pictish symbol stones are not merely raw chunks of rock standing upright or propped across burial mounds.
The carvings on many of them are skilled, sophisticated and often breathtaking in their beauty of line.
Many carry intricate designs incorporating discs, crescents, arches and horseshoes; others are alive with grotesque or naturalistic beasts and human figures.
A number have ogam inscriptions.
The placing of such stones often suggests they may have served as boundary markers between tribes, and the linking of different symbols could signify intermarriage between families.
At some stage Christian symbols, especially in the form of crosses adorned  with elaborate convolutions, began to find their way into the carvings, with a striking similarity to designs known in the Anglo-Saxon monasteries of Northumbria.
The Maiden Stone near Chapel of Garioch, about 5 miles north-west of Inverurie, carries interlaced panels with the figure of a man standing between two contorted fish, and designs on the back include the characteristic ‘Z-rod’ and mirror and comb symbols.
There is a fine cross-slab by the roadside at Aberlemno in Angus, and an ornate one in the actual churchyard of the village.
A stone by another roadside, on the isle of Skye, served for years as a door jamb in the Tote shoemaker's house until rescued in about 1880.
Although there are major collections in the National Museums of Scotland in Queen Street, Edinburgh, and the museums at Meigle, near Coupar Angus, and St Andrew's cathedral, one of the most attractive settings in which to study such stones is the row of cottages below the church at St Vigeans, just outside Arbroath.
The examples here were originally memorial slabs from a church existing on the site before the Norman and medieval buildings.
Used as part of the walls in the later fabric, a number are badly mutilated as a result.
Some display robed and seated clerics.
One must have served as a recumbent tombstone, since it has a slot at one end to hold a vertical cross.
The most tantalizing is known as the Drosten Stone because of the remains of a Roman inscription:
It seems most likely that three personal names are commemorated here — Drosten, Uoret and Forcus — but one would dearly love to know the significance, on the back, of a hooded archer holding what appears to be a crossbow.
At Rosemarkie in the Black Isle, north-east of Inverness, a remarkable number of stones were found within a few hundred yards of the present Groam House museum, indicating past  importance as a tribal and then a religious centre.
In the early twelfth century this was in fact the cathedral town of the Ross diocese, superseded in the following century by Fortrose.
The museum houses an informative display of stones, with some of the engraved patterns picked out in colour by the American artist Marianna Lines, who has tried to achieve authentic hues by using natural pigment dyes.
The gem of the collection is the 7-foot high pink sandstone Rosemarkie cross-slab, a riot of abstract patterns, interlace, and animal heads, with a cross sunk into panels near the top.
Of all symbolic stones, one has laid an overpowering weight upon Scottish history and Scottish sentiment.
Its legend goes back to the book of Genesis.
While Jacob was dreaming of Jacob's Ladder at Beth-El, his head was pillowed on a rock which upon waking he set up as a holy monument.
This was taken by him and his sons as a sacred treasure when they went into Egypt.
During the Exodus it was left behind, and became an equally revered treasure of the Pharaohs, one of whom gave it as part of his daughter's dowry when she married a Celtic prince.
There is even a fanciful tale that the young couple, Prince Gaythelus and Princess Scota, gave their name to the Gaels and Scots as they progressed through Europe to an eventual home in Ireland, taking the Stone of Destiny with them.
For some considerable time the stone provided a ceremonial seat for the inauguration of High Kings of Ireland until one of them, Fergus MacErc, became ruler of the new kingdom of Dalriada in Argyll, and took the stone with him to the fortress of Dunadd.
Here it played the same role.
Scottish kings were crowned on the sacred stone, and at their death were buried on the holy island of Iona.
Later the stone was transferred to the new stronghold of Dunstaffnage on a crag above the mouth of Loch Etive.
Then came the population and administrative drift from west to east.
A number of factors were involved in this.
Norse raids down the west coast had already made it necessary to move sacred relics from St Columba's isle of Iona to relative  safety at Dunkeld in Perthshire, which became the ecclesiastical centre of the Scottish realm, though kings continued to be buried on Iona, as did several Viking chieftains.
Agriculture and stock-rearing fared better in the drier and more fertile east than in the western mixture of peat lands and thinly coated, often precipitous rocks.
Trade with Europe, which alternated with aggressive incursions from Europe, was easier to handle through the eastern firths.
It was inevitable that the seat of government should be moved to the region where the growing population was most prosperous and royal control easiest to exercise.
When Kenneth MacAlpin decreed that his capital should be moved to Scone he also ensured that the Stone of Destiny went with him.
From now on the coronations of Scottish kings took place on the Moot Hill in the grounds of Scone Palace, on the outskirts of modern Perth.
The original abbey there was destroyed by John Knox's followers during the Reformation, and the present neo-Gothic mansion is an early nineteenth-century reconstruction of earlier palaces.
Worst of all for Scottish pride, what has come to be called the Stone of Scone is no longer in its honoured place.
A prophecy concerning the stone declared that wherever it was held, a Scot would be king.
This could be interpreted in different ways, as later patriots were to find to their cost.
In 1296 it was seized by King Edward I of England in the apparent belief that mere possession of the stone validated his claim to be King of Scots.
Not until James VI of Scotland became James I of England at a ceremony in Westminster Abbey could it be said that a truly Scottish monarch had once more been ritually crowned upon the Stone of Destiny.
Fife, Tayside and Central
THE BOUNDARY changes of 1974 gave the name of Tayside to what had been the counties of Perthshire, Kinross-shire and Angus (which itself had once been known as Forfarshire), while Clackmannanshire and Stirlingshire became rather drably Central.
Such an unimaginative word blurs the historical resonances which the mere name of Stirling surely evokes; while the ancient royal burgh of Forfar, whose castle was a residence of several early Scottish kings, is quite an appreciable distance from the side of the Tay.
Much of the region is truly Lowland.
Along the northern bank of the firth lies the fertile Carse of Gowrie, the word carse meaning much the same as haugh — a stretch of alluvial levels beside a river.
Following the northward curve of the coast is a rich corn-growing belt which from early times profited from ample supplies of seaweed as fertilizer.
Sea and river ports simplified trade with Continental markets.
In one of them, Dundee, advantage was most shrewdly taken of the fruit growing capabilities of local soil and climate when the Keillers set up their jam and marmalade manufactory in 1797.
Between the Sidlaw Hills and the Braes of Angus, the red loam of Strathmore has provided healthy cropping and stock-rearing since the twelfth century in spite of disruptive wars and civil strife.
South of the firth are gentle hills such as the Lomonds, attractively breaking the otherwise unremarkable skyline and not harsh enough to impede farming up their shallow slopes.
Many of the small, trim villages owe their neatness to the desire of eighteenth-century landowners to add picturesque touches to their estates, moving employees tidily into settlements which would enhance the lordly view, or establishing small industrial and ‘tradesman’ villages.
One feature which recurrently catches the traveller's attention in such communities is the local doocot, or dovecot.
There is a greater concentration of these in Fife than in any other region of Scotland.
Some were built by lairds for their own estates, or by burghs for the benefit of their citizens, to provide fresh meat during winter when, before the introduction of turnips as winter fodder, cattle had to be slaughtered and salted down in wooden tubs.
There is one in the shape of a beehive beside the terraces of Aberdour castle, with some 600 nesting-boxes formed of stone slabs.
Another, again like a beehive but with a flattened top and pillbox entry on it, belonged to the priory and collegiate church at the medieval fishing port of Crail.
Fish provided a harvest from earliest times.
In the seaward wedge of Fife known as the East Neuk —neuk being an old Scots word meaning a corner — there was busy medieval trade with the Continent, still remembered in the crow-stepped gables of many Flemish-style houses, and a wide-ranging herring fishery.
Crail's activities declined long ago and now there are only a few shellfish boats, but its seventeenth-century Customs House is still an attractive feature of the harbour.
Anstruther, which until the outbreak of World War II was the major East Coast herring fishing base, now houses the Scottish Fisheries Museum in period buildings near the water's edge.
The main centre of today's dwindling East Neuk fleet is at Pittenweem.
St Andrews still has an attractive, if not overworked, little harbour below the gaunt shapes of ruined castle and cathedral.
On the northern bank of the Tay, Dundee grew as a result of the whaling industry, which among other things supplied plentiful fuel for the town's oil lamps.
Importing jute from India, its merchants found that this could be mixed with whale oil to provide hard-wearing coarse fabric.
In due course Dundee's shipyards were to build Shackleton's  Terra Nova and another exploration vessel which, after years moored in the Thames, is now back home on display — Scott's Discovery.
The coastline, even when assaulted by North Sea storms, is less rugged and inhospitable than that of the west.
Inland, the whole landscape is essentially a domesticated one until on its northern and western fringes the Highlands begin to lift their stern shoulders; yet it was in these desirable lowlands that many of the most violent deeds in Scottish history were planned or carried out.
The move of Kenneth MacAlpin's capital to Scone must have meant a great deal more physical comfort for kings and their retainers after the rocks and raw rain of Argyll, but the heads wearing the crown were offered little chance of lying easy.
It is difficult to sum up the succession of kings and sub kings who schemed and killed their way to brief spells of power — eight of them in one century — or to keep in steady perspective the shifting boundaries and aspirations of petty earldoms and self-proclaimed kingdoms.
Only two strands appear consistent throughout; and both of them meant lasting complications.
Firstly, it was accepted by all Scots that the coronation of their king was valid only if carried out upon the Stone of Destiny, and in spite of the Christian ceremony accompanying it the right to place the crown on the new monarch's head belonged irrevocably to the Earl of Fife, premier layman of the realm.
Secondly, it was accepted by all English rulers that, whatever her own misapprehensions on this score, Scotland was basically an English colony.
We know how Edward I of England chose to misinterpret the meaning of the Stone of Destiny.
But even before Edward's time, seeds of dissension had been sown.
In 945 Malcolm I had signed a treaty with Edmund of England agreeing that in respect of lands held by himself in Strathclyde, which included Cumberland, he owed fealty to Edmund.
This and a similar arrangement by Kenneth II for lands in Lothian came to be regarded by the English as an admission that Scottish rulers were not equals but vassals in relation not merely to a few  specific regions but to the whole of Scotland — which had never been contemplated by the Scottish signatories.
Whatever nominal agreements might be contrived, only to be misread, there were repeated raids by one side upon the other in contravention of treaty terms.
Internecine feuds between Scottish aspirants to the throne did little to strengthen the national cause.
Kenneth II, mysteriously murdered, was followed by Kenneth III, but he in turn was killed by Kenneth II's son Malcolm.
As Malcolm II, the assassin wrested northern Northumbria from the English, but then was himself murdered in Glamis castle by some of his disaffected nobles.
The room where the deed was done is still shown to visitors.
His rightful heir, according to the tradition of tanistry, should have been Kenneth III's grandson, but Malcolm had already disposed of him and other possible candidates while laying plans for his own grandson Duncan to succeed.
This leads us directly to one of the most wantonly falsified stories in Scottish history.
Five or six miles north-east of Scone stands the hill of Dunsinane.
As well as an old fort on its summit, the climber will be presented with a view of Birnam Wood about twelve miles away.
Echoes of Shakespearian declamation hang inevitably in the air.
The fort, however, is unlikely to have belonged to the much denounced Macbeth: the ramparts are those of a prehistoric tribal fortification.
Furthermore, Macbeth did not murder Duncan in his palace of Cawdor in Nairn, since the castle there was not built until the fourteenth century; and Duncan was not the pitiable old greybeard portrayed in the play but a ruthless and ambitious man regarded by many as a usurper.
Macbeth,mormaor or high steward of Moray, had a stronger lineal claim to the throne than Duncan but, so far from being a self-seeking assassin, was acting on behalf of his stepson Lulach, Lady Macbeth's son by her first marriage and, through her, direct descendant of the legitimate royal line.
Lulach was unfortunately simple-minded — probably the only reason he had been allowed to survive, when two other claimants contesting Duncan's pretensions happened to be murdered just before  and after the investiture.
Having killed Duncan, not in any ghost-ridden Shakespearean castle but on a battlefield near Elgin, Macbeth reigned conscientiously in Lulach's stead for seventeen years.
Then Duncan's son Malcolm, who had been sheltering in England all this time, joined forces with the Earl of Northumbria and, with Edward the Confessor's approval, invaded Scotland in 1057.
Macbeth was brought to battle and death at Lumphanan in Aberdeenshire: a long way from Birnam Wood or Dunsinane.
Malcolm was briefly opposed by forces still loyal to ‘Lulach the Fool’, but they and their lord were also soon disposed o The bodies of Macbeth and his stepson were taken for burial to Iona, already the graveyard of many kings.
Surviving vicious family feuds and a number of humiliations at the hands of the English, Malcolm III established a line which was to last for over two centuries.
It is generally referred to as the House of Canmore, though Canmore was originally only a nickname — Malcolm ‘the Great Head’— not bestowed in any complimentary sense by those who suffered under his notorious rages and lust for war.
In spite of his own savage appetites, Malcolm took as his second wife a remarkably pious woman.
English by birth, Margaret fled to Scotland in 1068 with her brother Edgar Atheling, claimant to the English throne after the death of Harold at the battle of Hastings.
When she became queen she encouraged English refugees from William the Conqueror's tyranny to settle in her husband's country, though in due course he was forced to reach an agreement with the Norman invader.
In 1072 William led a large army up to Stirling, forded the river there, and rode on to join up with his fleet entering the Tay.
He and Malcolm met at Abernethy, a place of importance from prehistoric times through its days of glory as a major Pictish centre.
A ruined Iron Age hill-fort still overlooks the little Perthshire town, and close to its tall eleventh-century round tower is a Pictish stone etched with mysterious designs.
In this tower Malcolm Canmore is reported to have done homage to William.
The Scots claim that Malcolm offered  homage only in respect of his holdings in Cumbria and the largely anglicized Lothian; William and his successors chose to interpret the acknowledgement as embracing all Scotland.
Certainly there can be no denying the fact that at Abernethy the King of Scotland gave his son Duncan as hostage to the King of England.
In a way this was, or ought to have been, supererogatory.
The devout and cultured Margaret had been brought up in Anglo-Norman ways and persuaded her husband to speak English rather than Gaelic.
He is said to have shown his adoration for her by kissing her holy manuscripts and having them richly bound for her.
Where conflicts between the Roman and Celtic branches of Christianity continued to erupt, she favoured the Roman rite.
She settled Benedictine monks from Canterbury in a priory at Dunfermline.
The third son of her marriage to Malcolm to become king, David I, shared her religious views and elevated Dunfermline to the status of an abbey, with rich endowments.
The massive pillars of its nave are very reminiscent of the Norman splendours of Durham cathedral.
In 1916 remains of St Margaret's earlier foundation were rediscovered under the nave, and the lines of its walls are now marked out on the floor.
Royal patronage continued throughout the centuries, and the abbey guest-house became a royal residence for monarchs seeking temporary respite from cares of state.
Even after the iconoclasm of the Reformation, when much of the abbey church survived only because of its adaptation as parish church, James VI fell under its spell, granted it to his queen, Anne of Denmark, and set about refashioning it into a sumptuous palace.
The window of the room in which his son, Charles I, was born can still be seen; and after Charles's execution, Charles II stayed here following his coronation at Scone on New Year's Day 1651.
Among other foundations, Queen Margaret (whose efforts on behalf of the Church were duly recognized in her canonization) set up her own private chapel on the Castle Rock in Edinburgh, now the oldest surviving building in the city.
She  helped monks to resettle Iona in the west, and in the east contributed lavishly towards the religious houses of St Andrews on their breezy promontory above the North Sea.
This settlement had grown in importance since the day when, according to legend, the bones of Scotland's patron saint, the apostle St Andrew, were brought here by the Greek monk St Regulus or St Rule under the aegis of Nechtan, late seventh-century king of the Picts.
A church set on the rocky bluff by the Celtic sect of the Culdees (‘Companions of God’) later submitted to Roman usage and to the transformation of its survivors into Austin canons.
A patchy stone outline on Kirkhill is all that remains of St Mary-on-the-Rock, close to the massive wall surrounding the later church of St Rule, itself to be overshadowed in 1160 by the cathedral of Our Lady and St Andrew.
The internal length of this ‘new cathedral’, 357 feet, made it one of the longest churches in Britain and certainly the greatest in Scotland.
Battered by enemies, most fiercely after the Reformation, it is now a gaunt ruin with seabirds swooping in and out of the gaping socket of its east window.
Relics have been housed in the neighbouring priory ruins, including a huge stone chest decorated in high relief with scenes from the biblical tale of David and known as St Andrew's Sarcophagus, although there is no reason to suppose that it ever served as a coffin.
The town also became the home of Scotland's first university, founded in 1410 and formally recognized by the Pope at Avignon three years later.
Its first building, the College of St Salvator, was not completed until 1450.
Above the arch of its clock tower is an eroded stone said to be miraculously imprinted with the features of Patrick Hamilton as he was burnt at the stake before it in 1528.
A member of the university who had taught Lutheran doctrines, Hamilton became the first martyr of the Scottish Reformation.
His initials are set in the cobbles in front of the tower.
In South Street is St Mary's College, founded in 1537 on the site of the ‘Old Pedagogy’.
Its quadrangle is graced by two historic trees: one a huge holm oak planted in 1728, the other  a thorn tree said to have been planted by Mary, Queen of Scots.
Poor students at the university were long known as ‘mealie students’ because they took a sack of meal and salt lumps with them and had to make it last all term.
In spite of his wife's gentleness and her liking for Anglo-Norman culture, Malcolm Canmore continued to terrorize northern England, especially after the death of William I. He met his end at Alnwick when facing the troops of William Rufus.
Three days after the news had been brought to Margaret in Edinburgh she died, and her body was taken to the church she had endowed at Dunfermline.
Malcolm's brother Donald Bane declared his right to the throne, and in violent tirades against English influence in the country rallied forces to drive out most of Margaret's entourage.
Her son Edmund hastily swore loyalty to him, and was rewarded with the lordship of Lothian.
Duncan, the son presented to the English king as hostage some twenty years earlier, now appealed for William II's help in return for a promise of fealty.
With an Anglo-French army he invaded Scotland and deposed Donald, but allowed him to live.
Then Duncan sent his allies away, proudly declaring that he would allow no English or Norman troops to continue military service in his homeland.
As a reward for this patriotism he was murdered as soon as they had left, probably with the connivance of his half-brother Edmund.
Donald Bane returned, lent his support to a misguided Northumbrian rebellion against William Rufus, and in the ensuing turmoil was deposed again, this time by his nephew Edgar, second son of Malcolm and Margaret.
Edgar put out the ageing Donald's eyes and consigned him to prison.
Edmund was allowed to enter a monastery, where after his death he was buried in chains at his own request.
Edgar and two brothers who succeeded him, Alexander and David, achieved something quite unusual: all three died peacefully.
During his reign Edgar made one decision which was to have great significance later.
Abandoning the family  residence of Dunfermline, he established his own home near his mother's chapel on the Castle Rock of Edinburgh.
His successor, Alexander I, was known as ‘the Fierce’, and there were legends of his suppressing an uprising by rebels from Moray so brutally that nobody survived to explain the reasons for their disaffection.
Yet at the same time, perhaps on his own fierce insistence, he was spoken of as ‘a lettered and godly man’.
This pious strain was much more apparent in the third brother, David I. Although he contributed lavishly to the Dunfermline foundation, David continued to favour the Edinburgh residence.
He also continued his mother's religious benefactions, and was largely responsible for the splendour of the great Border abbeys at Melrose, Kelso, Jedburgh and Dryburgh.
Again like his mother, he favoured Anglo-Norman laws and institutions.
Marrying the widowed sister of Henry I, he was created Earl of Huntingdon, and before becoming king spent a great deal of time in the land and company of his brother-in-law.
It was probably as a result of this that the Anglo-Norman chronicler William of Malmesbury was impelled to describe his manners as being ‘thus polished from the rust of Scottish barbarity’.
Upon his accession he set about the introduction of the Norman feudal system by dividing his realm up into feus or fiefs, and gave monopolistic trade charters to many towns on whose loyalty he henceforth hoped to rely.
He established the concept of the King's Peace, whereby the king was not merely a war leader but a representative of God on earth, with the duty of ensuring safe conduct and good behaviour throughout his realm.
In return his subjects owed him the duty of honouring that peace.
Breaches of the peace were punished with large fines or imprisonment.
David also imported Anglo-Norman acquaintances on whom he bestowed land and privileges.
Among these were a number of scions of William the Conqueror's knights whose descendants were to wield great influence in Scotland's tumultuous history: Bernard de Bailleul (later Balliol); Robert de Brus (Bruce or ‘the Bruce’); and Walter FitzAlan, who  became hereditary Steward of Scotland, a title leading ultimately to the name and royal family of Stewart.
During the conflict between the factions of Stephen and Matilda, David invaded England in the hope of seizing Northumberland and even Durham for himself.
The defence against him was supervised by the Archbishop of York, and three holy banners of St Peter of York, St John of Beverley and St Wilfrid of Ripon were flown from a standard in a cart, giving the subsequent engagement near Northallerton the name of ‘Battle of the Standard’.
The Scots were defeated, but a year later King Stephen could achieve a peace treaty only by ceding the earldom of Northumberland to David's son Henry.
In 1153 David died, to be succeeded by his grandson Malcolm ‘the Maiden’, so called because of his youth and celibacy: he was only 23 when he died in 1165, unmarried.
Malcolm was followed by his red-haired brother William ‘the Lion’(from the beast on his standard as much as from his personal courage), instigator of the first of so many attempts over the centuries to form a binding union with France against the English.
With French help he invaded England as an ally of Henry II's rebellious son Henry, but while besieging Alnwick in Northumberland was ‘surprised in a mist’ and captured.
Mortifyingly he had ‘to swear vassalage’ to Henry II for the whole of Scotland.
Fortunately within a short time Richard I was compelled to sell back these rights in order to finance his Crusades, and the Scottish king reverted to being a vassal of the English king only in respect of English lands which he possessed.
There was now a spell of peace until William died in 1214 and was buried at the abbey of Arbroath.
He himself had founded this in honour of St Thomas of Canterbury, at whose tomb Henry II was doing penance just at the time of William's capture at Alnwick.
When Edward I succeeded to the throne of England in 1272, the king of Scotland was Alexander III.
He did homage to Edward explicitly for the land held by him of the English king, but is reputed to have added ‘saving my kingdom of Scotland’.
This was denied by all succeeding rapacious English  kings, on the basis of a blatant forgery concocted by Edward or his minions.
In 1285 Alexander died in a riding accident.
His children had predeceased him, and the only lawful successor was his granddaughter Margaret, ‘the Maid of Norway’.
She was recognized by a grand national assembly at Scone as heiress to the throne.
In view of her absence in Norway at the time, and the need for regents during her minority, six guardians of the kingdom were appointed.
Edward I, with his eye on a complete subjugation of Scotland on the lines of his conquest of Wales, pressed for the marriage of the child to his son Edward, later installed as the first Prince of Wales.
A marriage treaty was signed, including in its provisions an agreement that the independence of Scotland should be recognized.
The Maid of Norway died (it is said from seasickness) on her way from her homeland in 1290, bad weather having forced her ship to seek shelter on Orkney.
The young Margaret's claims and the authority of her guardians had never been too highly regarded by the powerful Bruces, lords of Annandale and Carrick.
Now that she was dead they boldly advanced their own claim to the throne.
They were not the only ones.
Black John Comyn, lord of Badenoch, asserted his right as direct descendant of Duncan I. Five others were remote descendants of Malcolm IV.
But the only really close dynastic rival to Robert Bruce was John Balliol, like himself a great-grandson of William the Lion's younger brother.
Supporters of Bruce were prepared to testify that Alexander III had appointed Bruce of Annandale as his successor; but Balliol's backers and some less committed nobles and clerics, fearful of civil war, invited Edward I of England to come and arbitrate.
He was delighted to do so, with the implication of being regarded as overall ruler of the kingdom.
He decided in favour of Balliol, but made it clear that this was only the appointment of a figurehead: he himself was the true monarch.
On St Andrew's Day 1292 Balliol was crowned at Scone according to the ancient ritual.
Edward, who had probably shrewdly observed that this  pretentious lordling, though haughty in manner, was a vacillating and easily manipulated nonentity, did not trouble even to be civil to his puppet or to Scottish laws and traditions.
He encouraged Scots to appeal direct to himself against their own king's judgements.
Planning a campaign against Philip of France, he demanded men and money from Scotland.
A committee of clerics and nobles meeting at Scone in 1295 persuaded the so-called King John that enough was enough, and that instead of pandering to the King of England he should seek an alliance with the King of France.
This was the first formal treaty in the continuing saga which later generations were to refer to wistfully as ‘the Auld Alliance’.
John Balliol, though opposed by nature to any activities whatsoever which might threaten war, summoned up the courage to tell Edward that promises of fealty extracted under threats of violence were not valid.
Edward immediately seized all Balliol's English estates.
Balliol retaliated by banishing all English property owners and any others he or his advisers suspected of being pro-English.
Among these were the Bruces, whose lands he handed to their old rivals, the Comyns.
The Bruce claimant to the throne had just died, but his son and grandson were determined to assert family rights, even if it meant offering their services to Edward I for as long as it might take to drive the Comyns from the seized lands in Annandale.
After that the Bruces could renew their struggle for the throne.
In 1296 Edward invaded Scotland to subdue the ineffectual Balliol, massacring the inhabitants of Berwick and marching on to defeat the Scots at Dunbar.
At Brechin, the ancient red sandstone cathedral town in Angus with its tall watch-tower, Balliol hastened to surrender himself and his crown.
AU heraldic insignia were shamingly torn from his coat, signifying that he was unfitted to be a knight.
Mocked as Toom Tabard, the ‘empty coat’, he was taken as prisoner to England along with other loot: the Black Rood of St Margaret, and the coronation Stone of Destiny from Scone.
The stone was placed within a specially designed chair in Westminster Abbey to make it  symbolically clear that all coronations of English kings henceforth should be regarded as simultaneous coronations of the kings of Scotland.
Before leaving a cowed Scotland, Edward rode about demanding oaths of submission from all the magnates in the land.
The discredited Balliol was eventually released from his comfortable English captivity after an appeal from the Pope, and passed the rest of his days on his ancestral estate at Bailleul in France.
He died in 1315, but during his lifetime was still regarded as rightful king by many of his one-time subjects.
Among these was a tall firebrand of a patriot in his middle twenties.
William Wallace of Elderslie, son of a Renfrewshire landowner, was one of the lesser gentry who had not put his name to the document of submissions, known as the Ragman's Roll because of the ribbons dangling from its seals.
Having impetuously killed the English sheriff at Lanark — perhaps, according to a fifteenth-century minstrel, in revenge for the killing of his own wife by the English — and been proclaimed an outlaw, he fled into Ettrick forest to assemble a force of rebels against the domination of English governors and garrisons.
The Bruces, whose currying of favour with Edward had resulted in the restoration of their estates, stirred up minor troubles but seemed glad to yield for the time being to their benefactors and express disapproval of Wallace's wild conduct.
Many other Scottish nobles preferred subservience to English gentlemen of their own rank rather than alliance with upstarts and peasants of their own race.
Another young patriot, Andrew of Moray, however, assembled further dissidents and joined forces with Wallace after a mutually enthusiastic meeting at Perth.
Neither sought superiority for himself.
Between them they claimed to act for the wrongly deposed King John Balliol (another reason for the Bruces' disfavour) and between them, in the absence of Edward on one of his French campaigns, systematically mopped up English defences across central and south-east Scotland.
On one occasion Wallace rode daringly down upon Scone and put to flight an English justiciar who  was busily pronouncing outlawry upon anyone who refused to swear loyalty to Edward.
In September 1297 Wallace and Moray faced their sternest test.
During John Balliol's imprisonment Edward had appointed John de Warenne, Earl of Surrey, as Guardian of Scotland.
He seems to have been a somewhat slipshod caretaker, complacently assuming that ill-coordinated groups of rebels could pose no significant threat to seasoned English troops.
Neither he nor his associates really took alarm when Scottish forces began to assemble on Abbey Craig, a hill beside the Forth near Stirling.
To this day the strategic importance of Stirling is obvious to anyone approaching from the south.
On a rocky eminence commanding what was for centuries the lowest point at which the Forth could be bridged, the castle — on the site of a Roman fort — and its steeply pitched town stand between what was once a marshy plain and the shadowy beginnings of the Highlands beyond, with the Ochils and Trossachs already edging in.
Possession of Stirling meant control of a crucial gateway between north and south.
Wallace's men, rushing into position from the siege of Dundee, formed up into schiltrons — tightly packed, bristling clusters of spears and a number of homemade weapons within a shield carapace — to face the skilled archers, cavalry and well-equipped foot soldiers of the English army.
There was some argument on the English side as to the best way of crossing the river and finishing the whole business as swiftly as possible.
De Warenne was recommended to use a ford some distance below the narrow bridge, but opted instead for a quicker, decisive attack over the bridge.
Mounted knights struggled across two abreast, and plunged immediately into a marsh.
As those behind came piling into the snarl-up, the Scottish schiltrons launched themselves downhill and cut the stumbling knights to pieces.
The bridge was soon blocked with the dead and dying, so that survivors could not retreat and reinforcements could not be sent in to help.
When English  resolution faltered and they turned to flee, the Scots pursued them down the Lowlands and across the Border, laying waste to Northumberland and Cumberland.
Andrew of Moray died of wounds received during the battle, but Wallace went on to be proclaimed Guardian of Scotland, and was given the accolade of knighthood by dignitaries still claiming, like himself, to represent the absent Balliol.
This displeased not only Edward of England but also Robert the Bruce, who could offer no support to any faction standing between him and the crown.
After a brief spell of backing the rebel cause, wavering between patriotism and expediency, Bruce once more allied himself with the English.
Edward returned from France determined to put an end to the rebellion.
He had trouble feeding his 40,000-strong army as they reached the north, largely because of Wallace's scorched earth policy, and was considering a temporary period of recuperation in Edinburgh when two treacherous Scottish lords betrayed Wallace's whereabouts.
Edward was able to take his enemy by surprise near Falkirk.
Although hopelessly outnumbered, the schiltron hedgehogs held the English cavalry at bay until the remorseless fire of archers thinned their ranks and they were defeated.
Fleeing from the carnage, Wallace resigned his Guardianship and made his way to France, seeking aid there and from Norway, and ultimately from the Pope.
Refused by all, he doggedly returned to Scotland and carried on guerilla warfare until, captured by further treachery, he was handed over to the English by the sheriff of Dumbarton.
After a mockery of a trial in London, at which he proudly denied that he was a traitor, ‘since I never swore fealty to the English king’, he was hanged, drawn and quartered.
His heart was tossed into a fire, his head stuck on a pike on London Bridge, and the four quarters of his body displayed at Newcastle, Berwick, Perth and Aberdeen.
On Abbey Craig, overlooking Stirling's fifteenth-century Old Bridge, now stands a tall monument designed by a local mason and completed in 1869.
A statue of Sir William Wallace flourishes a sword from the outside of the tower.
Within, vaulted chambers include a Hall of Heroes from the nation's past, and the Wallace Sword Room in which is housed his actual sword.
For some reason which has never been explained, in September 1936 four men broke in and stole the sword.
It was missing for three years, until recovered unharmed from Bothwell Brig in Lanarkshire.
There is another tower at Ayr, with a statue by a local self-taught sculptor, which in fact predates the Stirling monument by some forty years.
On the probable site of Wallace's birthplace at Elderslie a modern memorial bears inscriptions in Gaelic (Bas agus Buaiad —Death and Victory), English, and Latin, a translation of which reads I tell you the truth.
Freedom is what is best.
Son, never live a life like a slave.
Important as the victory at Stirling Bridge had been for Scottish pride, there was, after a period of despondency and subjugation, to be an even more significant battlefield above the Bannock Burn two miles south of the town.
In an attempt to establish a national administration in the absence of John Balliol, Scottish nobles and clerics had in 1299 appointed a triumvirate of Guardians: Bishop William Lamberton of St Andrews; John, the Red Comyn of Badenoch; and a member of the Comyns' long-standing rival family, young Robert Bruce of Carrick.
Their approaches to Pope Boniface VIII and the resulting admonitions from the Pope condemning English invasions of the Papal fief of Scotland had incensed Edward and driven him to some of his more savage oppressions.
Bruce, forever wavering, had muted his criticisms and been allowed by Edward to continue as joint Guardian after Wallace's execution; but old ambitions began to stir once more.
If Scotland was ever again to have a free, strong ruler, there had to be consistent support from the nobles.
The most powerful of these magnates were the Bruces themselves and the Comyns.
Whatever personal designs Robert the Bruce might have on the throne, he was unlikely to achieve them without some mutual agreement.
He and John, the Red  Comyn, had come to blows before.
On a February day in 1306 Bruce arranged what was apparently meant to be a conciliatory meeting-at the Greyfriars' monastery church in Dumfries.
Exactly what happened in that building will never be known.
It seems that the two men had yet another quarrel, though there is no way of knowing who started it.
Bruce was a short, stocky man with red hair and a burning ambition.
Comyn had a reputation, even in that violent day and age, for his uncontrollable temper.
From whichever side the provocation came, it is certain that Bruce stabbed his rival before the altar.
He himself admitted so when he emerged, telling his followers that he thought he had killed Comyn, whereupon one of them rushed in ‘to mak siccar’(make sure): the Kirkpatricks of Dumfries have ever since carried the emblem of a bloody hand with dagger and the motto ‘I mak siccar’ on their coat of arms.
The sacrilege of committing a murder on holy ground would obviously lose any Papal support Bruce might have hoped for, and alienate other European monarchs.
As soon as the news reached Edward in England he was only too happy to appeal to the Pope for the murderer's excommunication.
This the Pope did; but Bruce was granted absolution by the Bishop of Glasgow, who joined his cause.
The only possible course now was to gamble everything on becoming king.
Bruce and his four brothers threw the English out of Dumfries castle and set off to capture other fortresses.
Before Edward could retaliate, Bruce headed for Scone.
The Stone of Destiny was in alien hands, but in other respects the coronation ceremony on 25 March 1306 was carried out according to tradition.
Bishop Wishart of Glasgow was in attendance; Bishop Lamberton of St Andrews conducted the ceremony.
One essential person was missing, however.
The Earl of Fife, who had the hereditary right to place the crown on the king's head, was in captivity in England.
His sister Isabel, although the wife of the Red Comyn's kinsman, the Earl of Buchan, asserted her family right by appropriating her husband's horses and riding to Scone.
She arrived too late for the actual ceremony, so  another took place two days later, on Palm Sunday, when she placed a gold circlet on the head of King Robert I.
Although old and ill by now, Edward was still determined not to let Scotland slip from his grasp.
His armies poured north over the Border, slaughtering men, women and children indiscriminately.
Many Scots magnates, related to or on good terms with the Comyns, took the English part.
Bruce's forces were defeated first in Methven wood by the English, and then beside Loch Tay by Comyn's uncle, the Lord of Lorn The king's sister and the Countess of Buchan who had crowned him were dragged out of sanctuary where they had been sent for safety, and exhibited in cages hanging from castle walls at Roxburgh and Berwick.
Robert himself disappeared, and it seemed that Scottish attempts at independence had yet again been humbled.
Many romantic tales are told of the king's subsequent wanderings.
He spent some months hiding in the Western Isles and perhaps in Ireland.
The cave in which, close to despair, he is said to have won fresh heart after seeing a spider succeed in securing a thread of its web after several failed attempts, is claimed by several localities.
Rathlin island is one.
Another ‘Bruce's Cave’ is signposted for tourists above the Kirtle Water near Kirkpatrick Fleming in Dumfriesshire, near the old family terrain of Annandale.
Early in 1307 Bruce returned to the mainland near his estate and possible birthplace at Turnberry.
So weakened by his privations that at first he had to be carried in a litter, he soon forced himself to re-establish his authority by donning armour and leading crucial assaults himself.
Edward I, heading yet again for Scotland, died in July of that year, leaving the continuing conflict to his feeble son Edward II.
From early surprise victories in the wild hills around Loch Trool, Bruce and his reinvigorated followers went on with growing confidence during the next seven years to capture one castle after another from the English.
At Perth in January 1313 Bruce himself was second to scale the castle wall after wading neck-high through icy cold water.
By the spring of the following year only two  major strongholds remained in English hands, but one of them was crucial: Stirling.
Edward Bruce, Robert's brother, was laying siege to the castle, but there was a stalemate.
In the end it was agreed under a chivalric code that if no English forces came to relieve the beleaguered garrison by Midsummer Day 1314, the governor would honourably surrender it to the Scots.
Such an outcome would have been so great a blow to Edward II's prestige that he decided to throw all his resources into reaching the garrison and destroying the besiegers.
Levies of heavy cavalry, archers and foot soldiers were summoned from the English shires and from Wales and Ireland.
Some 17,000 in all assembled at Wark in Northumberland, and on their way into Scotland were joined by contingents supporting the Comyns or for other reasons opposed to the rule of Bruce.
King Robert himself came to his brother's aid, though with few more than 5,500 trained fighters.
These were organized into four divisions of foot soldiers and about 500 light cavalry.
A supply depot was established at Cambuskenneth, within a protective loop of the river.
At Cambuskenneth Abbey twelve years later the Scots Parliament was to swear allegiance to King Robert's chosen successor, and a later king, James III, was to be buried here after his murder in 1488.
Today its Gothic bell-tower, much restored in the nineteenth century, is the only substantial survivor.
The battlefield itself survives, thanks to the National Trust for Scotland and a National Committee formed to fight another kind of battle — against the threat of a housing development obliterating the site.
The rise of the hill is dominated by a statue of Robert the Bruce on horseback, and within a swirl of concrete rotunda is the Borestone, at which the first blow of the battle was struck and by which Bruce set up his standard.
Making a preparatory tour of his advanced troops on a pony, he was spotted by an English patrol.
Sir Henry de Bohun levelled his lance and charged at the unarmoured king; but Bruce rose in his stirrups, and with his battleaxe cleft right through the English knight's helmet and skull.
This was not, however, the scene of the major confrontation.
Bruce had disposed his men along the Bannock Burn and its succession of bogs, and had dug camouflaged pits between the treacherous marshy patches.
He also sowed clusters of caltraps, spikes projecting upwards to bring down the cavalry.
But rather than wait for the English to be lured on to these snares, he decided to launch the first attack himself.
Advancing on a narrow front, the bristling schiltrons threw their opponents into confusion on such unfamiliar, unstable ground.
English reinforcements approaching along the edge of the Carse were intercepted by the Earl of Moray and driven off in disorder, leaving heavy casualties.
Resisting all temptations to pursue, Bruce and his men regrouped and rested, in a strong position and in good heart.
King Edward was still sure that the sheer weight of his mounted knights must prevail.
He decided to move his forces across the Bannock Burn by fords closer to Stirling, so that he could personally relieve the castle next day.
It proved an exhausting process, and even when accomplished there were fears that the Scots might attack during the night.
Bruce had in fact been contemplating a withdrawal to the hills rather than risk a head-on clash with forces which so visibly outnumbered his own.
But when a Scottish defector from Edwards army arrived with reports of the miserable morale of the English and exhorted him with the words ‘Now's the time and now's the hour’, he again decided to take the initiative.
During the night the Earl of Atholl, jealous of Bruce and foreseeing a probable English victory, descended on Gambuskenneth and killed the depot commander and his men.
But it was too late to hinder the Scots.
On the morning of Midsummer Day, after a blessing accompanied by a holy relic of St Columba carried in the Monymusk Reliquary, Bruce threw all his forces down upon Edward's.
The tightly packed schiltrons might have been in some danger if the enemy's Welsh archers had been used at once; but Edward or his advisers thought they could settle things swiftly by an all-out cavalry charge.
In fact the broken ground made it impossible  for the English knights to manoeuvre easily.
Bruce's far lighter cavalry cut them off in a flanking movement.
Men and horses were jammed into one awkward mas.s, into which the Scottish spearmen slowly and murderously thrust their way.
As the English were forced back, their archers belatedly came into action, but showered more arrows into the backs of their own troops than into Bruce's.
The end came when Edward's royal standard was seen to be leaving the field.
Edward himself sought refuge in Stirling castle, but was refused entry by the governor on the understandable grounds that he would certainly be captured.
He fled via Linlithgow to Dunbar and ignominiously took a rowing-boat back to the English border at Berwick.
Behind him he left, according to a contemporary chronicler, the Bannock Burn so dammed by the dead ‘that men might pass dry over it upon drowned horses and men’.
England had lost 2 earls, more than 60 barons and bannerets, 265 knights, and at least 10,000 foot soldiers.
Scotland had re-established itself as an independent nation.
This was not, however, accepted either by the English or by the Pope, to whom Edward repeatedly appealed for help.
On 6 April 1320 the clergy, barons and community of Scotland made their own appeal, asserting Scotland's right to freedom from alien domination.
In the Declaration of Arbroath they made their principles splendidly clear: For as long as one hundred of us shall remain alive we shall never in any wise submit to the rule of the English, for it is not for glory alone we fight, for riches, or for honours, but for freedom, which no good man loses but with his life.
Arbroath abbey was to provide the setting for another nationalistic upsurge in our own century.
On Christmas morning 1950 the Stone of Scone was removed from Westminster Abbey by a group of young Scots led by a law student, Ian Hamilton.
When police investigations began to point towards the culprits, they addressed a petition to King  George VI appealing for the stone's formal return to Scotland, and fastened this to the door of St Giles's cathedral in Edinburgh.
Then, on 11 April 1951, they drove the stone to Arbroath and laid it on the altar of the ruined abbey, draped in the saltire flag of St Andrew.
No proceedings were taken against them; but nor was any attention paid to their appeal, and the stone was hurried back to Westminster.
Another important declaration was made in 1328, when the Treaty of Northampton temporarily ended Scottish invasions of northern England in the time of Edward III.
Its chief clause read: Scotland shall remain to Robert, King of Scots, and his heirs, free and undivided from England, without any subjection, servitude, claim or demand whatsoever.
For a time there had been grave apprehensions on that question of inheritance.
Late in life, King Robert had still fathered no male heir.
Marjory, his daughter by his first wife, was persuaded to agree that if the king died without a son the crown should pass to his brother Edward; but to be on the safe side a marriage was arranged between Marjory and Walter, the hereditary High Steward, who in spite of his youth had distinguished himself at Bannockburn and become one of Bruce's most trusted lieutenants.
If all else failed they at any rate ought to produce children.
This proved a wise precaution.
Edward Bruce, crowned High King of Ireland under dubious circumstances, died at the battle of Dundalk in Ireland in 1318.
Marjory had been killed in a fall from a horse two years earlier; but a boy child, Robert, was born from her dead body.
Her widower, Sir Walter, rose in power and influence.
By the time of the Declaration of Arbroath he had attained sufficient eminence to be included as a principal signatory along with five earls.
Then in 1324 something unexpected happened.
After twenty-two years of married life King Robert's second wife, Elizabeth de Burgh, gave birth to a son.
At the age of 5 this child, David, was married to Joan, 7-year-old sister of Edward III.
Robert himself, afflicted by leprosy, spent the last two years of his life in Cardross castle beside the Clyde, dying before he could learn that the Pope had lifted his excommunication and acknowledged him and his successors as rulers of Scotland.
His embalmed body was carried to Dunfermline for burial, but at his own request his heart had been removed by a trusted comrade-in-arms, Sir James Douglas, to be taken on Crusade.
After Douglas's death in battle with the Moors in Spain, the embalmed heart was brought back to Scotland for a final resting-place in Melrose abbey.
David II was crowned at Scone in 1331, though effective administration of the land during his minority was entrusted to Robert Stewart, son of Walter the Steward.
In spite of David's childhood marriage to the sister of the English king, Edward did not hesitate to help a Balliol descendant make a bid for the Scottish throne, driving David and Joan into exile in France after the battle of Halidon Hill near Berwick.
An attempted return led David to disastrous defeat at Neville's Cross, after which he was a prisoner in English hands for eleven years until bought back for what could truly be called a king's ransom.
There was a further period of tussles for power until the ageing grandson of Bruce and son of Walter and Marjory at last reached the throne in his own right as Robert II, and gave to the royal house the name which would remain as Stewart until Mary, Queen of Scots, altered its spelling to Stuart.
Although his son Robert III was lame, sickly, and also elderly at the time of his succession, a royal dynasty had now been established.
A settled administrative capital did not yet exist.
Until well into the sixteenth century the royal court and its functionaries were peripatetic.
The only place with an inalterable role was Scone.
Nearby Perth was a favourite venue for general councils.
Five days after his coronation in 1424, James I called his first parliament there, and later his third one.
He personally favoured Perth as a national capital, but it was unhappily to become the scene of his assassination.
Scotland's first truly constitutional monarch, James, made  many enemies among the nobility.
Given too free a hand during years when he, like David II earlier, had fallen into English captivity, they resented the disciplines which their returning king was determined to impose on them in the cause of national unification.
He executed, imprisoned or dispossessed many of his own relatives to ensure the containment of their territorial ambitions and safeguard against any attempted seizure of the throne.
Sir Robert Graham, angered by a spell of imprisonment from which he had escaped into the Highlands, set up a conspiracy with two Stewarts, one of them James's uncle and the other his own domestic chamberlain.
Pretending that they desired only to rid the country of a tyrant, on 21 February 1437 they burst into the Blackfriars monastery in Perth in spite of the attempt by Catherine Douglas, one of the queen's attendants, to bar the door by using her arm as a bolt, earning herself the name of Kate-Bar-the-Door.
Unarmed and half dressed, the king was slaughtered in a frenzy of dagger thrusts.
In due course the conspirators were taken to Edinburgh, subjected to protracted torture, and finally beheaded.
All that remains on the site of the monastic gatehouse in modern Perth is the stone house associated with Walter Scott's novel The Fair Maid of Perth.
Although vengeance had been wreaked on the assassins in Edinburgh, that was still by no means the main administrative centre.
Kings and their councils sat in judgement in different towns, and were accommodated in different palaces.
Stirling remained a favourite with several monarchs: James II was born there, James III preferred it to other residences, James IV added to it, and James V transformed the interior into a Renaissance palace after his marriage to Mary of Guise.
Their daughter Mary was born at Linlithgow, of which her father was also fond and to which he fled after defeat by the English at Solway Moss, before going on to Falkland in the wooded heartland of Fife.
It was on his deathbed in this French-style palace, an exquisite architectural tribute to the shared tastes of the Auld Alliance, that James heard of his daughter's birth and  predicted of his realm ‘It cam’ wi' a lass, and it'll gang wi' a lass.’
Mary's own child, James VI, though born in Edinburgh, was baptized in Stirling castle while the father, Darnley, sulked in a house in the town.
The infant James himself was, breaking with all tradition, given a hurried coronation in Stirling's medieval Church of the Holy Rude after his mother's forced abdication.
He continued to live in Stirling with guardians and tutors, on his way to becoming the best educated of all Scottish monarchs.
Not until kings grew weary of perambulating in bad weather over rough countryside from one provincial centre to another were judges appointed to branch out from the royal court on circuits known as eyres, listening to pleas and sorting out local problems.
The need for centralization of the royal court and parliament led at last to the choice and subsequent development of Edinburgh as Scotland's capital city.
SELECTED SITES OF INTEREST
Antiquities
ABERLEMNO Sculptured Pictish stones beside the B9134 between Brechin and Forfar, and cross-slab in churchyard.
ARDESTIE Souterrain signposted north-west of Mains of Ardestie from the A92 Dundee to Arbroath road.
Huge boulders and slabs enclose a long chamber with a central drainage gully.
Nearby at Carlungie is another souterrain discovered during ploughing in 1949,120 feet long and 6 feet deep.
ANTONINE WALL Substantial remains of fort at Rough Castle, 6 miles west of Falkirk; military bath-house at Bearsden outside Glasgow; and stretches of wall at Watling Lodge, the Kinneil estate in Bo'ness, and cutting across New Kilpatrick cemetery and golf course.
ARDOCH Signposted north of Braco village.
One of the best preserved Roman fortified camps in Britain, set on the edge of  the Highland Fault, with subsidiary camps nearby testifying to the importance of the situation for the occupying forces.
FOULIS WESTER Standing stones, cairn, and stone circles on Ardoch moor, north of the A85 east of Crie
MEIGLE Collection of cross-slabs, vertical and recumbent carved tombstones (one hog-backed and decorated with roof-tiles) and fragments, on the B954 south of the village square.
(For a general study of the foregoing, a see also Chapter 1.)
Historic Buildings.
AUCHTERARDER Glenruthven Weaving Mill and Heritage Centre have fabric displays and the only working steam textile engine in Scotland.
BRECHIN Round tower of Irish type from eleventh or twelfth century, originally free-standing but now linked to restored cathedral by an aisle.
Within the cathedral is a collection of early and medieval carved stones, some belonging to a previous monastery.
DOUNE Off the A84 8 miles north-west of Stirling, castle built by the Regent Albany in late fourteenth or early fifteenth century, later the home of the ‘Bonnie Earl o'Moray’.
The present Earl of Moray displays a collection of vintage and other automobiles in his Doune Motor Museum.
DUNKELD Cathedral attractively set beside the Tay.
Main character established between twelfth and fifteenth centuries, with the choir later restored for use as parish church.
Dunkeld Bridge is one of Telford's finest achievements, overlooking path to Birnam Oak, reputedly the last remaining tree of the Birnam Wood which Macbeth was sure would not come to Dunsinane.
GLAMIS Off the A94 5 miles south-west of Forfar, a largely seventeenth-century castle with earlier remains including Duncan's Hall, associated with Macbeth.
Childhood home of  Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, and birthplace of her younger daughter Princess Margaret.
HUNTINGTOWER Once known as Ruthven castle, created from two tower houses linked together, with fine painted ceilings.
The setting for the ‘Raid of Ruthven’(see Chapter 4).
ST ANDREWS Castle clinging to rocky headland much eroded.
Served not merely as a defence but as palace for bishops and archbishops of St Andrews.
Mine and countermine driven through foundations during siege of 1547 still accessible.
STIRLING Castle and Visitor Centre.
The King's Knot, lavish early seventeenth-century landscaped gardens below castle.
Mar's Work, remains of a Renaissance mansion built for the Earl of Mar, Regent of Scotland, with a heraldic panel above the gateway incorporating his coat of arms and those of James
Museums
ANSTRUTHER North Carr Light Vessel moored at East Pier.
Also Scottish Fisheries Museum.
ARBROATH Abbey.
Also Signal Tower Museum, with a history of the hazardous building of Robert Stevenson's Bell (or Inchcape) Rock lighthouse 12 miles out to sea.
The tower provided shore accommodation for keepers and kept in communication with the lighthouse by means of flagstaff signals and carrier pigeons.
CERES Fife Folk Museum in old weigh-house and adjoining buildings in the centre of the burgh.
CULROSS Largely administered by the National Trust for Scotland, a town still essentially sixteenth- and seventeenth-century in building and layout, with cobbled streets for the poor, ‘planestane’ strips for the gentry, a dignified Town House, preserved ‘Little Houses’, and a shipping merchant's white-harled, pantiled mansion which he chose to designate a ‘palace’.
DUNDEE Maritime survivors include the frigate Unicorn,the oldest British-built ship still afloat; Scott's Discovery,and mementoes of whaling industry and local lifeboats in castle at Broughty Ferry.
McManus Galleries have extensive local history displays, including valuable material from Roman fort at Carpow.
DUNFERMLINE Abbey with many royal burials.
Also Andrew Carnegie Museum in tiny weaver's cottage, birthplace of the tycoon who endowed his home town with a magnificent public park and other amenities.
FALKIRK Local history museum with material on the Antonine Wall.
GLAMIS Angus Folk Museum, in six estate cottages in the village near Glamis castle, with displays of agricultural tools and methods, local spinning and weaving (regular demonstrations of handloom production), development of domestic lighting, laundry, and a completely equipped country schoolroom.
INVERKEITHING Museum of local history in fourteenth century friary, with particular emphasis on the story of Rosyth dockyard.
PERTH Balhousie castle beside the North Inch houses HQ and museum of the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment), covering its history from 1740 to the present (see also Chapter 8).
ST ANDREWS Preservation Trust museum in seventeenth-century fishermen's cottages in North Street has re-creations of old grocer's and chemist's shop interiors.
Edinburgh and Lothian
THE COUNTY now known simply as Lothian is an amalgamation of what used to be East Lothian, Midlothian, and West Lothian, with a few bits chipped off the edges here and there: for example, the little settlement of Stow with its packhorse bridge over the Gala Water was once in East Lothian but has now been lured into the Borders region.
Like a gentler shadow of the Cheviot borderline separating much of England and Scotland, the ranges of the Lammermuir, Moorfoot and Pentland Hills link into a parallel barrier closer to the Firth of Forth.
Between it and the water lies a plain augmented by rivers and burns, interspersed with spectacular upsurges of rock left behind by volcanic upheaval and the crushing grip of glaciers.
These volcanic plugs, from North Berwick Law on the Forth estuary and the Bass Rock in the firth itself to Castle Rock in Edinburgh, provided early tribes with natural defensive sites.
An Iron Age fortification on North Berwick Law is still visible despite the damage done to it by a quarry which provided stone for many of the town buildings.
Traprain Law was a tribal centre until well into the Roman age, and has yielded up over a hundred pieces of fine Roman silverware.
On the peak of Edinburgh's rock, with a tail of ground sloping sharply away down the Royal Mile, the Picts had a stronghold around AD 450.
Even mightier in the background is the extinct volcano of Arthur's Seat.
Farming began to flourish in the Lothian plains once the bogs had been cleared and fords or bridges provided over  the network of rivers and streams.
Under the feudal system, landowners owing service to the king imposed their own service demands on their tenants, usually involving a cash rent in return for the lease of farmlands.
In their turn, the stronger and financially sounder tenant farmers, or lairds, would extract money and labour from those a step lower down the scale.
A few sturdily independent types might save up enough cash to buy their own patch outright and farm it independently, becoming known as ‘bonnet lairds’.
The use of resources was a piecemeal affair.
Open fields without hedges or other divisions were awkwardly split up in a system known as ‘run-rig’ between joint small tenants living in a small village or ‘fermetoun’, each annually allocated strips or ‘rigs’of from a quarter to half an acre, with a rough- and ready attempt to balance the better and poorer land between the respective individuals.
The ground was cropped until it was exhausted and had to be left for a few years to recuperate.
On his travels through the region early in the eighteenth century, Daniel Defoe noted the disparity between its natural fertility and the inadequacy of its farming methods.
His opinion was confirmed by John Cockburn of Ormiston: ‘Excuses for putting off is the highest pleasure in our Indolent Country.’
Cockburn himself was one of those whose reappraisal led to East Lothian becoming a notable region for agricultural reformers, ploughing their profits back into the improvement of the earth.
There was a more carefully calculated rotation of crops.
New breeds of livestock were introduced.
Among the attractive little villages and market-places snuggling under the foothills, Ormiston became the centre of Cockburn's model estates during the first experimental enclosures.
As a Scottish member of the Parliament in London for more than thirty years after its inception in 1707, he had the opportunity to make direct contrasts between what he saw of improved English farming methods and those still prevailing in his own country.
At home he decided to go in for wholesale enclosures, encouraged his tenants to take long leases by reducing their rents, and instructed them in modern scientific methods.
Ormiston  village was redeveloped with the aid of the inhabitants themselves, for whom he provided timber from his estates, stipulating only that no houses should be built ‘but what are two storeys high’.
He also introduced a bleachfield to supplement the local cloth trade, and built up a local mining and coal-selling business.
Not all sub-tenants found themselves incorporated into such an idealistic new system.
Many in the Lowlands were simply discarded, and in their place the landlords engaged labourers or ‘hinds’ on a yearly basis.
Taken on around Whitsuntide, such men were provided with a cottage for the period of the hire, and in return were expected to supply from their own meagre resources a ‘bondager’— a woman who would perform field-work or any other menial farm duty required of her.
This would usually be the wife, sister or daughter of the hind.
During much of the nineteenth century almost half of the Lothian agricultural force consisted of women, though some of these were seasonal workers imported from Ireland and the Highlands.
Short-term employees lived cramped together in shabby, draughty one-room huts or ‘bothies’.
Although hinds and their bondagers occupied more substantial cottages, their own tenancy was comparatively brief, so there was little incentive for either them or their employer to undertake any improvements to the accommodation.
The hind was supposed to be able to cope with all tasks on the farm; but an ambitious worker might endeavour to become an indispensable expert.
A ploughman with a knack for handling horses could establish himself as a virtual NCO above the lower ranks on the land.
For a long time there were few specialized tradesmen: most farm workers made their own tools and carried out their own running repairs, until the spread of cheaply manufactured iron began to displace wood, and more sophisticated craftsmanship was called for.
In line with Cockburn's experiments, other villages in the region began to develop industries for local craftsmen, such as Andrew Fletcher's attempted factory at Saltoun.
A bale-weighing tron or steelyard preserved at Stenton recalls the  importance of the woollen trade.
The historic site of Athelstaneford was developed as an estate village by Sir David Kinloch, leasing out smallholdings on which his tenants could build their own harled (rough-cast) and pantiled cottages; and here, too, many of them wove cloth.
The church which Kinloch also provided has in its churchyard a flagstaff from which permanently flies the saltire or St Andrew's cross, floodlit at night, recalling the vision of a white cross against blue sky which supposedly inspired combined Pictish and Scottish forces to victory against the invading King Athelstan and later became the national flag.
Around Preston and East Linton there were by the middle of the nineteenth century seven watermills: in the whole of East Lothian the total in 1854 was recorded as 73.
Preston Mill at East Linton is admirably preserved in working order.
On nearby Phantassie Farm, birthplace of the engineer John Rennie, a wind-powered threshing machine was introduced in 1799.
The farm still has its beehive doocot with 600 nesting boxes, between three and four hundred years old.
There are other substantial ones at Athelstaneford and the village of Dirleton with its attractive houses around wide greens, preserving the medieval shape of the community if not its original buildings, other than the imposing baronial castle.
Before the belated awareness of the plain's potential fertility, the growing importance of the region owed at least as much to trade and communications.
Edinburgh's growth as an administrative centre went hand in hand with this.
Tracks and, later, roads converged on the city from every strategic direction.
Like Stirling, it commanded a vital dividing line.
More closely linked than Stirling with the sea, it could do business with other maritime centres in England (during times of truce) or Continental Europe.
Leith developed as both a trading and fishing port.
Quays were extended at the beginning of the nineteenth century by John Rennie, coal docks and graving docks followed, while fishing harbours and piers continued to prosper from one century to another.
Today the intermingled  old streets and waterfront are almost suffocated by grain warehouses.
When granting the abbey of Holyrood a foundation charter, David I had given its canons the right to build and profit from a burgh of their own, in what has since become the Canongate.
Above this, climbing towards the castle, was the burgh of Edinburgh, to which Robert the Bruce granted a royal charter including, among other privileges, jurisdiction over the port of Leith.
Nevertheless it took many centuries for Edinburgh to become unequivocally the royal and national capital.
It was the Stewart dynasty which most markedly set its seal on the place; and which ultimately abandoned it when James VI achieved his goal of becoming King of England and thereafter neglected his Scottish capital.
The Stewarts suffered a sequence of disasters which would almost suggest that some evil magician had set a curse upon the entire house.
Several inherited the throne in childhood, even in early infancy —‘Woe to the kingdom whose king is a child’— and were oppressed or imprisoned by their regents and guardians, kidnapped by the English, or bandied to and fro between powerful nobles.
They created further complications by the rarity of their legitimate male heirs surviving into manhood, though they littered the landscape with a surfeit of illegitimate children.
Yet each in his own way sincerely struggled to impose order on a country where Lowlander and Highlander rarely met in friendship, and could rarely communicate in the same tongue; where there was the continual threat of another English excuse for invasion, often abetted by self-seeking elements within the kingdom itself; and where arrogant noblemen prolonged family feuds disruptive not merely to the families conceded but to the governance of the kingdom itself.
James I, son of Robert III, was born at Dunfermline in 1394.
Sent by his father to France at the age of 12, he was captured at sea by the English and kept in their custody for eighteen years.
His uncle, the Duke of Albany, was content to act as Regent after Robert III's death without making too  strenuous an effort to liberate the rightful king.
He issued proclamations and charters in his own name, and promoted his relatives to high office.
Serious negotiations for James's return began only after the deaths of Albany and of Henry V of England, and after he had married the Duke of Somerset's daughter, Joan Beaufort, for whom he wrote the moving love poem King's Quair.
Almost 30 when he was finally crowned at Scone, and with his naturally introspective, melancholy temperament soured by long, enforced idleness, he drove himself to become a man of action and set about destroying those who had grown rich and powerful in his absence, especially the Albany faction.
The second Duke's eldest son, Sir Walter Stewart, who had been Keeper of Dumbarton castle, was imprisoned on the bleak Bass Rock, and others were summarily tried and executed for treason and conspiracy.
The result was James's own assassination at Perth, just when he was planning to make it his capital and the new home of St Andrew's University.
His son, with a face blemished by a large red birthmark which led to his being known as James of the Fiery Face, was only 6 at the time of the assassination.
Crowned in Holyrood abbey rather than Scone because of the rebellious atmosphere around Perth and the southern Highlands, James II was left nominally in the care of his mother.
The Three Estates of parliamentary lords, prelates and burgesses, however, had given effective control to the Guardian, the fifth Earl of Douglas.
The widowed queen was granted Stirling castle as a residence, but when she tried to take her son there the Keeper of Edinburgh Castle held on to him until she contrived to smuggle him out.
Intrigues between various factions striving to make the king their puppet continued throughout his minority.
The queen mother remarried but her new husband, Sir James Stewart, the Black Knight of Lorne, was soon seized by her enemies and ‘put in a pit and bollit’(presumably boiled in a pit or pot) until she agreed to relinquish her son to one scheming clique.
Carried back to Edinburgh, James witnessed the fate of two Douglas brothers who, scorning to collaborate  with the intriguers, had been treacherously invited to a feast known to posterity as the ‘Black Dinner’ and there beheaded before his eyes.
Yet other Douglas robber barons continued to indulge in their own intrigues against king and country, in the ‘almost aimless treachery’, as Andrew Lang describes it, which ‘endured for centuries from the reign of David II to that of James VI’.
When he reached the age of 19 and married Mary of Gueldres in Holyrood abbey, James could no longer be denied the full authority of kingship.
It is hardly surprising that, after what he had witnessed, he should set about some slaughter of his own.
Past persecutors were convicted of treason and hanged; the scheming eighth Earl of Douglas was summoned to Stirling and, when he had refused to give up his association with his own particular clique of conspirators, was stabbed to death by James himself.
The king then decided to move his court to Perth, so long favoured by his father.
It was unfortunate that, just when he had quelled a great deal of internal disorder and was aiming at a profitable alliance with the Lancastrians during the Wars of the Roses, he chose as a grand gesture to drive out the English garrison still holding Roxburgh castle, only to be killed when one of his own bombards exploded.
His son and heir was 8 years old.
Again there was a break with tradition for strategic reasons.
Rather than make the risky journey to Scone, James III was crowned in Kelso abbey near Roxburgh.
His mother and a council of nobles were appointed to act as Regents, but in a short time the queen had fallen out with her colleagues, not least because she was an avowed supporter of the house of York, while several of them stood for Lancaster.
Even those uncommitted to either side in the English dispute made clear their disapproval of any procedure ‘that gave the keeping of the kingdom to a woman’.
When James III assumed full kingship, there were several elements pitted against him.
After murdering some of his art-loving favourites in 1482, one group imprisoned him in reasonable comfort in Edinburgh castle and formed a provisional government.
His own brother, with an  eye on the throne, allied himself with Richard, Duke of Gloucester (later Richard III), and accompanied a Yorkist army headed for Edinburgh; but, in the face of a compromise suggested by the provisional government, changed his mind.
Gloucester thereupon went off to capture Berwick-upon-Tweed and, after thirteen changes of ownership over the centuries, made it once and for all English.
James was released from captivity but not from his nobles' displeasure, incited largely by the scheming Red Douglas family.
His eldest son James, who had been living in Stirling castle, was persuaded to join the malcontents.
They mustered an army at Linlithgow and marched on Edinburgh.
The king escaped to Perth to rally his own forces, and the two sides met at Sauchieburn, near the immortal field of Bannockburn.
James had armed himself with the sword of Robert the Bruce, but it stood him in poor stead.
Persuaded by advisers to leave the battlefield, he fell from his horse and was carried, injured, into a nearby mill.
A man claiming to be a priest was admitted to his presence, drew a sword, and killed him.
During his reign, despite constant intrigue and the treacherous attempts of the Douglases and others to do shabby deals with England, living standards had notably improved.
Parliaments met regularly, trade blossomed.
Over fifty small burghs were granted privileges for buying and selling specific goods, making and selling cloth, or acquiring a monopoly in other crafts.
These were known as burghs of barony and regality.
Of higher standing were the royal burghs, which alone were entitled to handle foreign trade, now expanding with exports of wool, hides and salted fish.
James III was buried in Cambuskenneth abbey.
His son, aged 17, became James IV at a coronation ceremony at Scone on 24 June 1488.
It was this Stewart who really stimulated the growth and pride of Edinburgh.
A great dandy, he loved fine clothes, opulent surroundings and good company.
Well educated in Latin, French, German, Flemish, Spanish and Italian as well as in the Gaelic which enabled him to talk to the most suspicious  and recalcitrant Highlanders, he gathered about him scholars and artists to add distinction to what soon became not merely the constitutional but also the cultural capital of the north.
Proud of his own appearance and punctilious in all his social and religious observances, he was praised by the Spanish ambassador of the time as being
as handsome in complexion and shape as a man may be…
He never cuts his hair or his beard.
It becomes him well…
He says all his prayers.
Before transacting any business he hears two masses.
After mass he has a cantata sung, during which he sometimes dispatches very urgent business.
The poet William Dunbar, born in East Lothian and educated at St Andrews, celebrated James's marriage to Margaret Tudor of England — a liaison which led in the fullness of time to the Stewart succession to the throne of England — with a poem,The Thistle and the Rose , and summed up his entourage thus:
Kirkmen, courtmen and craftsmen fyne
Astrologis, artists and oratouris
Musicianis, menstralis and mirrie singaris
Glasing wrichtis, goldsmyths and lapidaris
Printouris, payntouris and potingaris.
James granted two Edinburgh businessmen a patent to set up a printing press and produce books at reasonable prices: a comfortable monopoly, since at the same time he proscribed the import into Scotland of any books printed abroad.
His infant son's personal companion, Sir David Lindsay, was made Lyon King of Arms and carried out major diplomatic missions, but is best remembered today for his wry attacks on the corrupt and greedy nobles in Ane Satyre of the Thrie Estates.
Around 1500 James set about building a suitable royal palace beside David I's Holyrood abbey and under the mighty presence of Arthur's Seat.
Holyroodhouse incorporates the Chapel Royal, where some Scottish monarchs were married  and some were buried in the-royal vault.
Here James's own marriage of convenience to Margaret Tudor took place in 1503, after he had sired a number of children on various mistresses.
Unashamed nepotism ensured that one of the boys became Archbishop of St Andrews while still a minor.
Some eight years after that wedding James was less happily responsible for another major work in the city: the Flodden Wall, of which only a battlemented tower now remains in the Vennel between Lauriston Place and the Grassmarket.
Despite the designedly conciliatory Anglo-Scottish marriage, James had not remained long at peace with his wife's brother.
Unlike his predecessors, he seems to have got his nobles more or less under control, and had pacified the Highlands; but, like those predecessors, he found that England was rarely in a mood to be pacified.
His own conduct does seem provocative.
In the time of Henry VII he had stripped the whole of Fife of oak and fir trees in order to build a huge man-of-war, the Great St Michael,and had given hospitality to the impostor Perkin Warbeck as son of Edward IV and therefore rightful king of England.
He strengthened old castles and built new ones.
When Henry VIII acceded to the throne, James let himself be drawn into a dubious alliance with the French king Louis XII, and after Henry had invaded France wrote him a brash letter demanding a cessation of hostilities.
When it was clear that Henry was outraged and in a mood for immediate retaliatory action, James decided on what in current jargon would be called a pre-emptive strike.
He set out with an army across the Border.
Dragging with them seventeen unwieldy brass cannon from Edinburgh castle, they took Norham castle on the south bank of the Tweed, and pressed on a few miles to Flodden in Northumberland.
The battle there lasted less than two hours.
The Scots were routed.
James, his son and most of his knights were slain.
At Scottish military funerals ever since the eighteenth century, when the poem inspiring it was written, the bagpipe lament of The Flowers o' the Forest is played in memory of that dreadful day.
A tall stone cross on the site bears the following dedication: To the Brave of Both Nations.
The inhabitants of Edinburgh, fearing imminent invasion, hastened to build the Flodden Wall as a defence.
Again a child was crowned.
As James V was not yet 18 months old, his mother was appointed Guardian, threatening a re-run of old melodramas.
The sensual Margaret Tudor very quickly stirred up trouble by taking a second husband, the sixth Earl of Angus — a Red Douglas, who proved to be a greedy bully and unsuitable either as a husband or a stepfather.
On the grounds that James IV's will had nominated her for the regency only if she remained a widow, the Scottish Estates sent for the Duke of Albany, descendant of that Stewart who had plagued James III.
He had married well in France, and tendencies now swung again towards the Auld Alliance, much fed by the lingering grief of Flodden.
Conflicting interests drove Albany out in due course.
The queen mother, impatient for a more vigorous husband, divorced Angus, who was now conspiring with Henry VIII, and married another Stewart.
Angus disappeared for a while, but returned to reclaim all his old honours and become one of a new group of guardians.
The young James found himself a virtual prisoner of the Red Douglases in Edinburgh castle.
In May 1528, while Angus was away, James disguised himself as a groom and made a dash for Stirling.
With supporters opposed to the Douglas braggarts he set off towards Tantallon castle, where Angus had precipitately fled on learning that the king was loose and in vengeful mood.
Built to last by William Douglas, at a time when the family was in high favour because of its support of Robert the Bruce, the massive red sandstone ruins of Tantallon on its seagirt rock above the mouth of the Forth look virtually unassailable even today.
In its prime the solid curtain-walled castle could not have been taken by storm up the sheer cliffs rising from the sea on three sides; and a deep ditch hewn from the rock on the landward side made any surprise attack on the gatehouse or drum towers improbable.
Even though James V had brought artillery with him to pound the walls, it made little impression, and in the end the besiegers ran out of gunpowder.
Starving the defenders out seemed to be the only course, and that would take a long time.
Negotiations led to Angus being allowed to surrender unharmed on condition that he went into exile in England, while the Red Douglas possessions were declared forfeit.
Systematically demolishing his enemies, imprisoning some and descending on Border troublemakers for summary hangings, James combined military decisiveness with a great love of the arts and, as both his admirers and detractors admitted, of regal pomp.
Henry VIII of England, busy destroying monasteries and confiscating their wealth, suggested in friendly fashion that his nephew should do the same in Scotland.
But James remained true to the Roman faith, and to provide funds for his extravagant tastes sought a rich wife from Catholic Europe.
His first choice was Madeleine, daughter of King Francis I of France.
Their wedding took place in Paris on New Year's Day 1537 with all the pomp James could have wished for, accompanied by the substantial dowry which he also fancied; but six weeks after reaching Scotland his fragile wife died, unable to survive the rigours of the Scottish winter.
He wasted little time in finding a replacement, choosing the widowed Mary of Guise.
While waiting for her to produce a legitimate heir, he managed to father a number of illegitimate children on his six mistresses.
Franco-Scottish ties were stronger than they had ever been.
When Mary arrived in Scotland complete with the second dowry, James set about transforming a number of his favourite residences.
French masons were brought in to work on the glorified hunting lodge of Falkland in Fife until it came to resemble a French Renaissance palace in miniature, with the courtyard's south range richly decorated with Scots thistles, French fleurs-de-lis and pictorial medallions.
A part of the grounds is still called the Fleurs, and the Royal Tennis court is one of the type, originating in France, known as jeu quarre.
The ambience was the same at Stirling, where a Renaissance palace was inserted within the curtain walls, graced by delicate  stone columns rising above the starker battlements.
Mary herself praised the work done at Linlithgow; and for her comfort and his own, James began augmenting Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh.
What was once the abbey's guest-house had been increasing in size and grandeur as successive monarchs used it for their Edinburgh residence.
While Edinburgh itself was growing in importance as a centre of government, the temporary residence was refashioned into a palace.
James IV had added new ranges of rooms.
His son planned a whole new courtyard and other buildings, but before his death had got little further than a north-west tower, later to be incorporated in further developments by Charles II's architect, Sir William Bruce.
Between palace and castle runs the processional route of the Royal Mile, for long the arena for the city's most important activities, climbing as it does up a narrow ridge cramped between steep slopes carved out by ancient glaciers to either side.
In 1724 Daniel Defoe described it as ‘perhaps the largest, longest and finest street for buildings and number of inhabitants, not in Britain only, but in the world’.
The character of the whole place is best assessed by walking down from the castle rather than climbing east to west.
Urban development does not, unfortunately, keep itself within strict chronological order, so that a geographically direct descent of the Royal Mile skips disconcertingly in and out of a far from direct historical sequence.
One of the first things to catch the visitor's eye when starting down from the castle esplanade is a cannonball lodged in the wall of a house, believed to have been fired from the castle at Holyroodhouse in 1745 when anti-Jacobite forces on the Castle Rock were at odds with Prince Charles Edward at the lower end of the town.
A glance to the left gives glimpses of the spacious Georgian squares and terraces of the eighteenth century, when the North Loch and surrounding swamps were drained to allow construction of the New Town.
Names in its neat gridiron of streets reflect the Hanoverian ascendancy of the time: George Street, Queen Street, Princes Street, Hanover  Street and Charlotte Square.
Contrasted with that prospect of classical elegance is the tangle which the visitor sees ahead down the older thoroughfare: the spire of St Giles's cathedral, entrances to courtyards in which lived men as diverse as the philosopher David Hume and the Jekyll-and-Hyde rogue Deacon Brodie, and high tenement blocks wedged against one another as if to prevent them toppling backwards into a chasm.
Lack of space in which to build laterally resulted in this characteristic Edinburgh townscape of early tower blocks, often with additional lower floors invisible from the street, clinging to the cliffs and reached through narrow wynds, vennels and closes overshadowed by the dark flanks of buildings stained by the smoke of those ‘Auld Reekie’ years.
The smoke of fires was not the only reeking element in the atmosphere.
When Boswell lodged Dr Johnson in James's Court off the Lawnmarket his guest promptly remarked on the ‘evening effluvia’ which Boswell admitted ‘could not be masked’.
The markets themselves must have contributed greatly to this.
From medieval times the street itself had accommodated market traders, their chief area being the Lawnmarket — once called the Landmarket — to which people from neighbouring farmlands brought in food and goods.
A heart-shaped stone inlay in the road marks the site of the old Tolbooth where market tolls were collected, causing even more constriction in the narrow, lurching street.
It also served as a prison, and features as such in Walter Scott's novel The Heart of Midlothian.
St Giles's cathedral nearby is more properly known as the High Kirk, having been formally designated a cathedral for only a brief period during the reign of Charles I. It was here that Charles attempted to impose a High Anglican liturgy, virtually a Mass, upon a Presbyterian society which responded with brawls in the church and outside, still remembered as the Jenny Geddes Riots after a vegetable seller from the market who was reported to have thrown her stool at the Dean's head.
John Knox's House in High Street recalls the opposition of the fiercest of all Scottish Reformers to the Catholic beliefs (sometimes thinly veiled, sometimes undisguised) of the house  of Stewart.
It may or may not have been his home for any length of time, but it is certainly the only survivor of that contemporary period of timbered houses with thatched roofs which frequently caught fire and were eventually forbidden.
The stone houses and tenements which replaced them, however, often continued to sport timber galleries above the street.
Below Knox's supposed home once stood the Netherbow Port, a gateway in the town wall, outside which began the abbey's separate burgh of Canongate.
Canongate had its own Tolbooth, which has survived because it was set into the building line instead of blocking the thoroughfare.
It now thrusts a clock out high above that thoroughfare.
Among some fine town houses are Moray House, built after James VI had abandoned his capital for the greater adulation of London but when a Scottish parliament still endeavoured to preserve its autonomy in Edinburgh; and relics of ancient inns more accessible to coaching traffic than those in the congested upper reaches.
And finally, at the foot of the Royal Mile, one confronts Holyroodhouse, resplendent behind its gates and opulent courtyard.
While James was still in the middle of grandiose schemes for embellishing his more cherished properties, murmurs of trouble with England began to rumble once more.
Henry VIII agreed to an amicable meeting at York to discuss differences between the two countries, many of them fomented by Douglas troublemakers exiled in England.
James's advisers, especially churchmen who feared that one of Henry's main motives was to coax their king towards Protestantism and an anti-French alliance, warned against any venture on to English soil.
When James failed to arrive at York, Henry was furious and vengefully launched attacks on the Borders.
In return James decided on a full-scale invasion of England, and marched from Edinburgh with 10,000 men, adding some reluctant levies on his way.
At the battle of Solway Moss the superior numbers of the Scots were too disorganized to withstand the English troops.
Many deserted before the battle even started, and a number of nobles surrendered as soon as they could decently do so.
James himself, ill with some ailment which has never been reliably diagnosed, and perhaps debilitated by a variety of medicines in which he dabbled, fled despondently to his palace at Linlithgow to see his pregnant wife.
From there he moved on to Edinburgh, and finally shut himself away in his much embellished palace of Falkland to die.
His ill-starred daughter, of whose birth on 8 December 1542 James heard on his deathbed, was kept at Linlithgow for seven months, by which time it had been agreed that she should in the fullness of time marry Edward, heir to Henry VIII of England.
Henry relied on the Douglas family and hostages taken at Solway Moss to support this arrangement on their return to their homeland.
The infant queen was crowned at Stirling, and her mother was appointed Regent.
Mary of Guise, as leader of Papal and pro-French elements among the nobility, was dubious about English proposals for a proxy marriage before the queen was 10, and a subsequent upbringing in England.
In due course the whole idea was rejected.
Henry at once launched destructive raids into Scotland in what became wryly known as the ‘Rough Wooing’.
His troops under the Earl of Hertford devastated the great Border abbeys, ravaged defenceless villages, set fire to the Canongate in Edinburgh, and inflicted heavy damage on Holyroodhouse.
In Argyll and the Inner Hebrides some pro-English Scots were equally ruthless against their own countrymen.
The invasion was briefly halted at Ancrum Moor near Jedburgh, where a heavy defeat was inflicted on the English by an army under the command of the sixth Earl of Angus, hitherto one of Henry's supporters but now a bitter opponent because of the desecration of his family's graves at Melrose abbey.
At the same time help was sought from France, which sent troops to the east coast.
At Henry's death his son Edward was 9 years of age.
Hertford, now Duke of Somerset, proclaimed himself Lord Protector of England, and resumed the carnage in Scotland.
He led an army of some 18,000 to meet the Scots at Pinkie, six miles east of Edinburgh.
The invaders were backed up by warships which from the mouth of the river Esk poured a crippling cannonade into the Scottish ranks.
More than 10,000 were killed.
Somerset wreaked further damage on Holyroodhouse and established English garrisons in Leith and other key positions.
One of the strongest of these was Haddington, the county town of East Lothian.
The town's appearance today is that of a compact, prosperous market centre still clinging to its medieval street plan and to memories of the Franciscan priory once known as the ‘Lamp of Lothian’, a designation transferred in our own century to the church of St Mary.
This church suffered cruelly when French and Scottish besiegers bombarding the English garrison destroyed the roof and vaults.
The French reinforcements had arrived in answer to a plea from Mary of Guise, who had accompanied her daughter to safety in an island priory on the Lake of Monteith, about fifteen miles west of Stirling.
In return for this co-operation the French asked that the child queen should be affianced not to Edward VI but to the Dauphin of France, and that she should be brought up there.
A treaty was signed outside Haddington, and within a few weeks Mary, Queen of Scots, was on her way from Dumbarton to Paris.
Another son of Haddington was, it has been claimed, the fervent Protestant evangelist John Knox.
After the dislodgement by French forces of agitators who had hanged the Catholic Archbishop of St Andrews from the walls of St Andrews castle and then sustained a protracted siege, Knox served a term in the French galleys until released by the intervention of Edward VI of England, to whom he became a royal chaplain.
He preached fierily in England until the advent of ‘Bloody Mary’ Tudor caused him to flee to Switzerland and study with Calvin.
Frequently reviled by the Catholic party under the queen mother, neither Knox nor his followers could view with any optimism the continuing presence in their country of French troops.
The English, with no hope now of  consummating the Rough Wooing, finally withdrew; but the French were proving almost equally unwelcome, provoking fears among committed Protestant reformers that Scotland was to be swallowed up by yet another powerful nation, and this one Papist.
During young Mary's absence in France, her mother acted as Regent of Scotland.
The queen mother's religious views and those of the French advisers she gathered around her did little to allay the reformers' fears; nor would they have been happy to know that on Mary's marriage in 1558 to the Dauphin, who the following year became King Francis II, she secretly signed an agreement that if she should die childless her kingdom of Scotland and her claim to the throne of England should become her husband's.
In a drift away from the Auld Alliance, leading magnates appealed to the newly crowned Queen Elizabeth of England to help rid them of the French.
Already disturbed by Catholic accusations that she herself was illegitimate and that Mary was rightful successor to the English throne, Elizabeth hastened to oblige.
Combined English and Scottish forces drove the French out of Leith.
Mary of Guise took refuge in Edinburgh castle, and conveniently died in June 1560.
By the Treaty of Edinburgh both French and English agreed to withdraw and to recognize the independence of Scotland, while in return Mary would recognize Elizabeth as rightful Queen of England.
Once the foreign troops had gone, the Scottish Parliament denounced Popery, forbade the celebration of Mass, and introduced a Protestant confession of faith.
John Knox returned to a tumultuous welcome, having been flatteringly described as a reformer who not merely ‘lopped the branches of the papistry’ but struck ‘at the root, to destroy the whole’.
In August 1561 Mary, widowed after a short marriage and a short reign, and seeing little future in a country under the influence of her powerful mother-in-law, returned to her own kingdom, landing in the mist at Leith and making her way to Holyroodhouse.
Thus there came into being a national jurisdiction which  had forsworn Catholicism, ruled over by a queen who refused to abandon her Catholic faith.
For a while she behaved wisely or cunningly — by allowing her ministers to give formal recognition to the ways of the reformed church on condition that she herself was allowed to worship in the old way in the privacy of her own chapel at Holyrood.
Her other inconsistencies presaged more awkward problems.
She had refused to sign the treaty recognizing Elizabeth as legitimate Queen of England, still considering her far from legitimate; yet, once returned to Scotland, she compromised far enough to say that she would accept Elizabeth's tenure during her lifetime on the understanding that her own eventual right to the succession was acknowledged.
The English monarch repudiated any such understanding.
The fact that Mary and her late husband had after their coronation in Rheims formally assumed the titles of King and Queen of England and Ireland had not provoked any great trust in Elizabeth's always suspicious mind.
The stage was set for years of mutual mistrust and recrimination.
Whatever their differences, the two queens had one quality in common: Mary, like Elizabeth, sensed that the best way to win her subjects' affection and loyalty was for her to be seen moving among them.
It helped that she was in herself such an impressive figure.
Like Elizabeth too she had red hair, but unlike her cousin she was some six feet tall, towering majestically over most men, with a narrow face, high brow and broodingly sensual eyes —‘a miracle of nature’, according to an Italian visitor to her court.
She loved to dress in vivid colours, garnished with necklaces, bracelets, rings and other glittering jewellery which was the envy of every other monarch in Europe.
She travelled regularly, taking in scattered places such as Inverness, Inverary, Dunoon, Aberdeen and the Border towns which needed encouragement after English depredations.
Every spring she was to be found visiting Fife.
In Argyll and Ayrshire she enjoyed herself hunting and playing golf.
But Edinburgh was her capital city; and in Edinburgh most of the significant dramas of her life happened, or at least came to a head.
John Knox, at the time of the queen's return established as minister of St Giles, denounced her religious compromises from the pulpit and in a series of interviews endeavoured to persuade her to give up her idolatrous views, regretfully concluding that she was ‘indurate against God and his truth’.
Certainly she was indurate against Knox's sermonizing, and their clash of ideologies was one of the factors leading to passionate outbursts against Mary whenever one of her enemies wished to force her into an awkward situation.
Knox had trained at St Andrews as a priest, but under the influence of the Reformation advocate George Wishart became devoted to Lutheran ideals.
When Wishart was burned at the stake on the orders of Scotland's primate, Cardinal Beaton, Knox had joined protesters and rejoiced at Beaton's eventual hanging at St Andrews.
Sheltering abroad, in 1558 he wrote The First Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Woman — the ‘regiment’ actually meaning a regimen or government by women, which he condemned as ‘a thing most contrarious’to God's ‘revealed will and approved ordinance’.
His tirades were reinforced, according to a contemporary, by a commanding physical presence and manner.
Rather below the normal height, his cheeks ruddy and somewhat full, the eyes keen and animated, large lips, his thick black beard flecked with grey falling down a hand and a half long, he bore an air of authority, and in anger his frown became imperious.
The question of remarriage and the provision of an heir to the unstable throne was inevitably rearing its head.
Any possibility of a suggested match between Mary and the heir to Philip II of Spain was ringingly denounced by Knox.
The wild offer by Elizabeth of England of her discarded favourite, the Earl of Leicester, met with justifiable incredulity.
The whole matter was not so much solved as channelled in another direction by the sudden love match between Mary and her first cousin Henry, Lord Darnley, whom she described as the ‘properest and best proportioned long man’ she had ever seen.
He was  a suitable husband in one way: through the second marriage of his grandmother, Margaret Tudor, he stood next in line to Mary in the succession to the English throne.
In other ways he proved far from ideal.
Effeminate, spoilt and faithless, he was a bitter disappointment to her, and was so thoroughly despised by the rest of the Court that when she became pregnant there were rumours about the child having possibly been fathered by one of her favourites.
Giving birth in Edinburgh on 19 June 1566, Mary was at pains to declare loudly to Darnley before a number of witnesses: ‘God has given you and me a son, begotten by none but you.’
Apart from that she was now showing little but contempt for him.
Only a few months earlier he had, as she was soon to discover, been involved in a plot to murder her secretary and musician David Rizzio, believing or half-believing that the two of them were lovers.
Led by the brutish Patrick, Lord Ruthven, a gang burst in upon Mary, her ladies and Rizzio at supper in one of her private inner rooms in Holyrood.
Rizzio was dragged into a neighbouring closet — now a feature of every visitor's tour through the palace — and stabbed about fifty times.
Darnley's own dagger was found still in the body.
Fearing for her own safety, the queen slipped out of the palace at night and, in spite of being unsure of Darnley's own part in the murder, rode with him to Dunbar castle on the coast of East Lothian.
She returned to Edinburgh a week later, having acquired a dependable escort under the leadership of the Earl of Bothwell.
John Knox made capital out of the murder by praying to God to ‘destroy that whore in her whoredom’.
Darnley himself was the next to die.
Mary's nobles detested her insolent consort almost as much as she did and, either from genuine loyalty to her or in devious application of their own power politics, conspired to remove him.
The leader of this band was that dashing Earl of Bothwell who had shown signs of becoming Mary's latest favourite, and who was soon to show even higher ambitions.
On the face of it the queen herself was innocent of any involvement.
Yet the favours and  appointments she showered on him must surely have given Bothwell reason to assume that he could interpret her secret wishes.
Mary's own conduct towards her dissolute husband was also open to a number of interpretations.
Darnley had not attended his son's christening at Stirling.
Soon after the ceremony he went to Glasgow, where he fell ill with what would seem to have been smallpox, and from vanity kept a taffeta mask over his face.
During a visit to him there, Mary is supposed to have written a letter to Bothwell which, discovered later in a silver casket with some poems in French and a written agreement to marry Bothwell, pointed clearly to her complicity in a plot to murder her husband.
Arguments over the authenticity or otherwise of these ‘Casket Letters’ have continued over the centuries.
Nevertheless it was as an outwardly devoted wife that she took charge of Darnley's transfer from Glasgow to Edinburgh, where she lodged him not in Holyrood, in case he infected the infant prince, but in a house belonging to the Canon of Holyrood.
This building, Kirk o' Field, stood well apart from other properties by the south wall of the city.
Mary spent a number of days and nights close to the sick man's bedside.
On the evening of a masked ball in the palace she came visiting with Bothwell and other lords, and while she chatted to her husband they — with or without her knowledge went down to the cellar to prepare the gunpowder stored there.
In the small hours of the morning, after they had all gone, there was an explosion which shook the whole town.
Darnley and his attendant were dead.
But they had not been destroyed by the explosion: bewilderingly, their bodies were found in the garden some distance from the house, and they had obviously been strangled.
As with the Casket Letters, conflicting theories concerning the event have proliferated ever since.
Public outrage at the enormity linked the names of Mary and Bothwell.
A hasty burlesque of a trial exculpated Bothwell, but instead of keeping tactfully out of sight for a while he abducted the queen on the pretence of seeking to protect her.
She found herself again in Dunbar castle where, according to stories later defensively circulated by Mary herself, Bothwell raped her and she had to agree to marry him.
A rushed divorce from his wife was arranged, and he and Mary returned under a strong guard to Edinburgh, where on 15 May 1567 they were married in Holyrood palace by Protestant rites.
As a wedding present the queen created Bothwell Duke of Orkney and Lord of Shetland.
Even nobles who had at one time covertly recommended such a union were alarmed by the unseemly haste, and realized that in any case the tide of national opinion was against the match.
Diplomatically changing sides, they joined with forces planning rebellion.
Bothwell carried Mary off again, this time to Borthwick castle, a dark tower house in Midlothian south of Edinburgh which is still inhabited today.
Pursued there and besieged, they fled by night to raise a loyal army, but found it pitiful in numbers.
Superior forces led by the Earl of Morton met them at Carberry Hill near the earlier battlefield of Pinkie.
The two armies waited while messengers conveyed to Mary the offer of her rebel nobles to support her once more if she would discard her husband's murderer.
Since she knew by now that some of them had abetted Bothwell in that very matter, she angrily repulsed them.
In the end Bothwell himself saw that there was no hope.
He rode off towards Dunbar and set sail for his dukedom of Orkney and then for Norway, where he was arrested and confined in due course in the castle of Dragsholm in Denmark.
Until well-into our own century his embalmed body was displayed in a glass-topped coffin in Faarevejle church on the Danish island of Fyn.
Mary's submission to her lords brought none of the forgiveness which they had implied.
She was kept prisoner in Edinburgh and then in a castle on an islet in Loch Leven near Kinross.
Forced to abdicate and agree to the appointment of the Earl of Moray, one of her father's illegitimate sons, as Regent on behalf of her son, she languished in the bleak tower which now looks so romantic with its nineteenth-century addition of trees.
Beside the laird's hall on the third floor a  window embrasure was converted into a small private oratory for her use.
After a year she used all her wiles to coax a young man into helping her escape, and crossed the Forth at Queensferry.
Along a route taking in the castles of Niddry, Cadzow and Craignethan she rallied sympathizers who still regarded her as rightful queen.
The always quarrelsome and largely Catholic Border lords made moves to join her.
High hopes of a triumphal return lasted just over ten days.
She was defeated at Langside, south of Glasgow, and fled to Dumfries and at last to the banks of the Solway.
Her last night on Scottish soil was spent at Dundrennan abbey.
On 16 May 1568 she crossed the firth to land in England at the ‘lytle prety fyscher town’ of Workington and appeal, fatefully, for help from her cousin Elizabeth.
For five years after her departure, Edinburgh castle was loyally held in the queen's name under the command of her secretary, William Maitland of Lethington, and the distinguished soldier Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange, in spite of Kirkcaldy's having led the forces opposed to her at Langside.
A plaque on a courtyard wall pays tribute to his defence of the castle, which collapsed only when cannon on loan from Elizabeth devastated the main east front, which later had to be entirely rebuilt.
Custody of the refugee monarch in England became a matter of immediate local pride.
She was lodged in Carlisle castle by the Deputy Warden of the West Marches of England, whose authority was immediately challenged by the Earl of Northumberland, premier Catholic nobleman of the region.
Northumberland failed to take her into his personal custody, but their exchanges of letters during her incarceration in Carlisle were to contribute largely to the disastrous Rising of the North in 1569.
This Northern Rebellion soured any possibility of Mary ever being trusted by her cousin Elizabeth, and spelt little but trouble for the always uneasy Border.
SELECTED SITES OF INTEREST
Antiquities
CAIRNPAPPLE HILL Near Torpichen off the Linlithgow to Bathgate road.
An extensive ritual and burial site with henge and cairns from 3OOO-14OOBC.
A chamber open to visitors displays an Early Bronze Age beaker burial, and magnificent views take in the mountains of Arran, the Trossachs, the Bass Rock in the Firth of Forth, and the Border hills.
CHESTERS HILL-FORT North of Haddington, signposted a mile south of Drem.
A substantial, well-preserved Iron Age settlement with two encircling ramparts and supplementary earthworks.
Traces of stone circles interrupting the main defences suggest later, less defensive occupation from the second century AD onwards.
RATHO Cup-and-ring rock markings on Tormain Hill, off the B7030 near Ratho, beyond south-west suburbs of Edinburgh.
On a ridge with fine prospects over Edinburgh, the Pentlands and the Firth of Forth are outcrops and boulders with the stylized incisions of circles, cup shapes and concentric grooves which appear at ritual sites in many countries from Ireland to India, and in especially large numbers in Scotland.
TRAPRAIN LAW 2 miles south-east of East Linton.
A 500-foot high volcanic plug which was a tribal centre for over 1,000 years, with series of defensive outworks being added by successive occupants.
It probably grew to the status of a town with special civic privileges during the Roman occupation, and seems to have survived well into the Saxon period.
(For a general study of the foregoing see also Chapter 1.)
Historic Buildings
DIRLETON CASTLE Rises from a rocky crag above the village of Dirleton, west of North Berwick on the A198.
Appearance today largely due to sixteenth-century work of the Ruthvens.
In the grounds, a beehive doocot and seventeenth-century bowling green.
EDINBURGH Castle Includes Scottish United Services Museum of weapons, uniforms and other regimental relics.
HAILES CASTLE Off narrow unclassified road near East Linton.
Overshadowed by Traprain Law, the castle in a tranquil riverside setting was a Bothwell property to which the earl brought Mary, Queen of Scots, during their flight from Borthwick in 1567.
It had been seized by the English during the ‘Rough Wooing’, and was largely demolished by Cromwell in 1650.
LENNOXLOVE A country mansion in parkland just outside Haddington.
It was originally a tower house called Lethington, property of the Maitland family who produced many influential royal advisers including Mary's ‘Secretary Lethington’ and her son's Chancellor; and the Earl of Lauderdale who became dictatorial Secretary of State for Scotland under Charles II.
In Charles's time the house was bought by ‘La Belle Stewart’, Duchess of Lennox — the model for Britannia on British coinage — who, after her husband's death, insisted the house should be renamed Lennoxlove as a sign of her devotion.
LINLITHGOW The palace overlooking a beautiful loch was the birthplace of Mary, Queen of Scots.
Much of interior destroyed by fire during garrisoning by troops after 1745 rising.
In 1914 King George V held a court here in the Lyon Chamber.
Parish church close by has a modern open spire in the style of the medieval crown steeple which was removed in the early nineteenth century.
DUNBAR Near ruined castle, lifeboat house displays collection of models of early lifeboats and rescue apparatus.
EAST FORTUNE Museum of Flight on airfield from which airships once set off.
Display of early aircraft and space rockets.
EDINBURGH Holyrood Park Visitor Centre Exhibition of prehistory, history and conservation of the park's plant and animal life.
NEWTONGRANGE Scottish Mining Museum provides a ‘coal trail’ linking the Lady Victoria Colliery to the beam engine, brickworks and colliery remains at Prestongrange, past traces of a medieval coal heugh and later developments of the Lothian coalfield.
Displays of working steam engines.
SOUTH QUEENSFERRY Museum in Council Chambers has a local history display, including particularly interesting material on the building of the Forth railway bridge.
Georgian House, Charlotte Square Characteristic Adam building in the New Town, furnished in appropriate style.
Gladstone's Land, Lawnmarket Seventeenth-century block with period furnishings.
Takes its name from Thomas Gledstane, a wealthy merchant.
Canongate Tolbooth Sixteenth-century tolbooth with gun-loops in its tower.
Regular exhibitions, including permanent display of tartans and clan insignia.
Huntly House, Canongate Museum of local history in sixteenth-century town mansion.
Lady Stair's House, Lawnmarket Seventeenth-century town house in a secluded close with collections of material relating to Robert Burns, Sir Walter Scott and Robert Louis Stevenson.
Museum of Childhood, High Street History of children's dress, toys and environment through the ages.
The Borders
THE MODERN region called simply Borders encompasses the older shires of Berwick, Peebles, Selkirk and Roxburgh; but in this case the ‘new’ name reverts to an older over-all description of a swathe of land between England and Scotland whose boundaries were repeatedly overrun and violently con-tested throughout the centuries.
Even after the Union of the Crowns there remained a long period during which old traditions and suspicions simmered uneasily, and old local enmities flared up at the slightest provocation.
Although the landscapes on both sides of the Border are very similar, from the lowlands north and east of Carlisle through fells rising to the Cheviot range and falling again to the coastal plain, it is still noticeable that permanent settlements of any size are fewer along the Scottish side.
Scottish kings were rarely powerful enough, or could muster an army large and united enough to keep permanent guard along the frontier against major English invasions.
They had their work cut out in simply trying to provide defences against the incursions of cattle raiders from the North Tyne valley, over Bewcastle Waste, or through that tract of the western fringe so unsure of its ownership that it was known as the Debatable Land; and their own people were themselves frequently as unruly as their enemies.
Even the heavily fortified town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, on the Scottish bank of the river, was wrested from them by the English over and over again, and finally lost.
Under both governances it somehow managed, in friendly or  hostile fashion, to draw supplies of meat, poultry and other foodstuffs from the fertile riverside plain known as the Merse (or Marsh), which with its moderate rainfall was from early times one of the most productive agricultural regions in the country.
Northumbrian villages, though protected to some extent by castles and garrisons such as those at Carlisle, Naworth, Harbottle and Norham, tended to be built in a sort of miniature bailey around a large square green which could be gated when cattle were brought in for the night.
Scottish villages were so frequently attacked and burned, and were so lacking in adequate fortified protection, that farmers and small gentry could survive only by building stone tower houses with barmkins, or walled enclosures.
After the defeat at Flodden every Scottish Borderer with land above the value of 100 was ordered to build such towers and enclosures to safeguard tenants, workers and livestock.
Any flimsy homesteads of clay and brushwood outside the defensive walls (or even inside if those walls were breached) were liable to be set on fire regularly, but their hardened inhabitants could usually manage a replacement within a few days ‘provided we have five or six poles and boughs to cover them’.
Little was permanent, and comforts were minimal.
A traveller in the early seventeenth century wrote of a thatched house in Langholm that the wall had ‘one course of stones, another of sods of earth, a door of wicker rods, and the spider webs hung over our heads as thick as might be in our bed’.
Celia Fiennes, riding through the same region towards the end of that century, found the Border dwellings ‘worse than booths at a fair’, and so smelly that she preferred to lunch with her horses in the stable.
Records of clothing and the other necessities and niceties of life are scanty.
The historian D.L.W. Tough comments that the main pointers are in what is omitted rather than what is mentioned: barely a reference to shirts or nightshirts, and the possibility that even adult Borderers had their underclothes sewn on and removed as seldom as those of slum children in later industrial cities.
‘There is certainly little to suggest’, he  adds, ‘that personal cleanliness was thought a necessity, or was even a rare virtue.’
Between the warring factions on both sides of the Border lay many stretches of infertile wilderness known as wastes.
Rocky outcrops (‘edges' or ‘rigs’) on the fells were the only landmarks to guide the knowledgeable around the boggy patches of moss or flow.
For inveterate cattle-lifters it all added up to a convenient no-man's-land across which to launch thieving raids.
Only gradually were these treacherous areas brought into profitable use from peat digging to farming or, especially in our own time, for afforestation.
In the north of the Border shires, along the flanks of low hills such as the Eildons, medieval monastic establishments built up their extensive sheep runs, denuding the cover of the hills and destabilizing the soil.
In the fertile valleys they acquired large agricultural granges, some to be farmed by their own lay brothers, others let out to tenants who formed clusters of farm ‘townships’.
Here as in other regions the system of ploughed riggs, or ridges, and strip cultivation in fields shared by different families was common for many centuries.
Marks of these furrows can be detected on many a gentle slope, especially when slanting sunlight casts regular shadows.
The main crops were oats and barley.
The mill was usually under monastic supervision, and the miller was allowed to take a proportion from each sack as his fee.
Those who wished to brew beer for their own household could use the abbey brewery — again upon a proportional payment.
In the less fertile, wilder southern fringes it was on the whole more rewarding to raise stock whose meat could be salted down and whose hides could be tanned and made into clothing, shoes and cooking or storage pots.
In the case of secular centres, most burghs had strips of land leading back from the market-place for burghers' houses, vegetable plots and space for livestock.
Outside the town wall there would be common land for grazing, and strips of arable land.
The burgesses of the ‘husband town’ allocated such divisions on behalf of the Crown, the arable land being measured  to assess its user's liability for military service: a ‘husbandland’was the area of ploughland sufficient to provide a man with a living that could afford him a horse and harness when called on in a Border emergency.
At appointed intervals the burgesses formally rode the boundaries to make sure that no encroachments or neglect had occurred.
These surveys became a major symbolic ceremonial, and are recalled in the colourful annual Common Ridings of Jedburgh, Langholm, Hawick and other towns.
One of the most moving is the Common Riding at Selkirk, whose Flodden memorial with its inscription O, Flodden Field recalls the single local survivor who staggered back from the battle with an English standard, now lodged in the town museum.
Each June a young lad chosen by popular vote to carry the town standard concludes the pageant by ‘casting the colours’ in the market-place.
Not one of the Hawick contingent returned from Flodden, but each year a flag is carried through the town by the ‘Comet’, this time a young married man.
It is the replica of one seized from a gang of English raiders from Hexham the year after the battle.
In 1988, offered the honour of taking part in the Lord Mayor of London's Show and carrying the Burgh Standard, the town of Langholm proudly declined on the grounds that the cherished flag was never displayed other than on Common Riding Day and never left the town, and that ‘It would be demeaning for the Principals to take part in a ‘fancy dress’ parade'.
Emergencies demanding the swift rallying of armed men arose not just in times of national conflict, but when large or small bands of rustlers swooped on livestock and rode off with them, as those Hexham raiders had intended.
The movement of cattle, legal and illegal, had a much greater influence on Border life, particularly in its less amenable wilds and wastes, than did agricultural developments.
Prehistoric and Roman tracks were duly appropriated by drovers from the Highlands, bringing their cattle down for sale in the Lowlands and, when the two nations were at peace, in England.
Some routes were planned, climbing from valleys  to moorland pastures and shielings for summer grazing.
Many more came into being simply by use rather than by calculation.
Paths were worn between one friendly community and another, between markets and recognized assembly points.
They could also, of course, be used by less friendly rustlers descending unawares on those communities: one hill track between St Mary's Loch and a ford across the Tweed was ruefully dubbed ‘Thief's Road’; but most such raiders preferred to shun known tracks and ride straight across wild countryside on their sturdy little Border horses, known as hobblers or  hobbies .
When a drover's or farmer's beasts went missing, they were liable to find their way into rogues' hiding-places such as the deep cleft of the Devil's Beef Tub near the source of the River Tweed above Moffat, where encircling hills seemed, according to Sir Walter Scott, to be ‘laying their heads together to shut out the daylight from the dark hollow space between them’.
Between the unruly vales of Teviotdale, Eskdale and Liddesdale, animals could be hidden in the wilds of the Tarras Moss into which only the bravest of pursuers would dare follow.
The story of the Borders is largely one of cattle-rustling on a scale which would have amazed even the American Wild West, of internecine feuds as violent as those of Sicily, and of cliques of racketeers who brought into the language the term ‘blackmail’, meaning ‘black meal’ or ‘black rent’— in other words, protection money.
As early as 1249, when England and Scotland were nominally at peace and recognized each other as separate kingdoms, a commission of English and Scottish knights framed a code of Laws and Customs of the Marches for use in local and national disputes and transgressions, though it was to be honoured more in the breach than in the observance.
Edward I, considering himself sovereign lord of both countries, appointed his own Warden not so much to keep the peace along a border whose very existence he denied, but for the whole Keeping of Scotland.
Only when Scottish independence was once more recognized did there come about the establishment of separate Wardens for each of the three main regions either side of  the Border: West March, Middle March and East March.
Appointments to these posts were in the gift of the monarch on either side, but the power of local lords made the choice a foregone conclusion in most instances if the said lords wished to serve, which was not always the case.
For long periods there were Homes in the East March, the Kerrs of either Ferniehirst or Cessford (related but mutually hostile) in the Middle March, and the Maxwells in the West, save for periods when their feuding rivals the Johnstones took possession.
On the English side, reluctance to accept office was a frequent occurrence.
The Border was a long way from the intrigues of the Court in London, a good thing at times but a disadvantage if one were planning a profitable intrigue of one's own.
In due course the usages of the frontier included regular meetings of Wardens from either side, seeking to control unrulier elements in their own jurisdiction and obtain redress for robberies or killings inflicted from the facing March.
They convened Days of Truce at which to reach mutual agreement on ‘clearing’ bills against the accused (that is, finding them not guilty), or ‘fyling’them (‘fouling' or finding them guilty).
Although these were supposed to be held monthly, devious excuses were manifold when one side or the other wished to dodge an awkward issue.
And although safe conduct was officially guaranteed to either faction during the time it would take to reach the site, parley and then ride home, many truces failed to hold.
One regular meeting place was at the Redeswire or Reidswire, close to the present Border crossing of Carter Bar.
On 7 July 1575 Sir John Forster, the Warden of the English Middle March, took offence at an insult offered him by his opposite number, supporters of the two men began to jeer at each other, and a skirmish ensued in which several men were killed and Sir John and his son-in-law Lord Francis Russell were carried off as prisoners.
Since the rulers of neither country were inclined to full-scale war at this time, diplomatic moves were made to sort the matter out, and the captives were hastily returned.
Ten years later Lord Francis Russell was less fortunate.
Another meeting place in the Cheviots was at Windy Gyle, a bleak height difficult to reach even today unless one is a committed long-distance walker along the Pennine Way.
Two prehistoric cairns stand above what was described in the sixteenth century as
a great waste ground of four miles broad and more…and the side thereof that lieth towards England is the common pasture of the uttermost inhabited towns of England, and the side thereof towards Scotland is so wet a moss or marshy ground that it will neither bear corn nor serve for the pasture of any cattle, also their way scarcely any man pass over it.
One of the stone mounds is now known as Lord Russell's Cairn.
Close to it at a March meeting in 1585 accusations of a theft of some Scottish spurs and counter-accusations of ‘a pretended matter beforehand’ began to fly to and fro, until without warning someone on the Scottish side shot and killed Russell.
Sir Thomas Kerr of Ferniehirst and Sir John Forster told conflicting stories in the subsequent enquiry.
Ferniehirst was removed from office on English insistence, and gradually calm was restored.
A flagrant breach of truce in 1596 made history, and led to the creation of one of the most famous of the Border Ballads collected by Sir Walter Scott and others: the tale of Kinmont Willie.
William Armstrong of Kinmont, a celebrated reiver or raider, was among the Scottish representatives at a meeting at Kershopefoot in Liddesdale, where the English frontier runs down the middle of the Kershope burn to its junction with the Liddel Water, and then south down the Liddel.
Today it is a delightful corner, a tranquil meeting of the waters below a modern bridge with a road sign for England and Cumbria at one end.
That spring day almost four centuries ago began quietly and formally enough, but ended in uproar.
As Armstrong was riding homewards along the river bank at the end of the session, a group of English horsemen set off in pursuit, captured him, and bore him off to imprisonment in Carlisle castle.
This defiance of the Border code so enraged the Keeper of Liddesdale, Sir Walter Scott of Buccleuch, that after diplomatic protests had failed he gathered men about him, rode to Carlisle, daringly broke into the castle, and rescued Kinmont Willie.
Later it was suggested that he had received help from dissident Englishmen who preferred Border ruffians of like mind to their own unpopular Warden; but nobody could deny the rescuer the sobriquet bestowed on him in the ballad —‘The Bold Buccleuch’.
The feat was all the more admirable in that the notorious Armstrongs had been among the major headaches in the region under his own jurisdiction, and Willie was among the worst.
One of the rare similarities between Highland and Lowland customs was the resemblance between the northern clans' loyalty to a chieftain who in return owed his family and retainers an equal commitment, and the mutually supportive ‘surnames’ of Border groups — usually known on the Northumbrian side of the Border, especially in Tynedale, as ‘graynes’.
Leading Scottish families included the Armstrongs, Elliots, Grahams and Scotts, though there were holders of those names also in the English borderlands.
Since many associates who were not blood relations often assumed the surname but between them could muster only a limited number of Christian names, confusion was avoided by the bestowal of what we might call a nickname, or what has been more justly described as a ‘toname’.
Thus one John Armstrong could be distinguished from another as John of the Park or Jock of the Side, the Laird's Jock (son of the chieftain), Jock Stowlugs, and so on.
The worst fate that could befall any relative or follower was to be declared a ‘broken man’: that is, either by punitive official proceedings or by some family banishment, to be removed from the protection of the surname and so become an outlaw, fair prey for any enemy, English or Scottish.
A tombstone in the tiny graveyard of Caerlanrig in Teviotdale, down a tree-lined country lane which seems quite incongruously cosy in the shadow of windswept fells, commemorates  the fate of an Armstrong who relied too much on the power of his name and his supporters.
Johnnie Armstrong of Gilnockie had defied an agreement between the Wardens of the Marches that no building should be erected by either side within the confines of the Debatable Land when he set up a tower above the Esk.
This is usually identified with Hollows Tower, still to be seen in a fine state of repair beside the A7 near Canonbie, though it was in a poor state after Lord Dacre had ridden in from England to burn it.
In reprisal the Armstrongs set off in force and burned Netherby in Cumberland.
Their incursions into England were not mere hit-and-run raids: the Armstrong reiving, riding clan could put hundreds (they boastfully claimed thousands) of horsemen into the field for private raids as devastating as any military campaign.
These reivers would round up cattle and horses and drive them back to their own lands.
If sufficient forces could be raised at short notice, the robbed would pursue the robbers on ‘hot trod’, with the right to reclaim their goods by force and deal with the wrongdoers out of hand.
If there was a delay, a ‘cold trod’ gave them the same privileges provided the retaliation was completed within six days.
Local inhabitants on either side of the Border were legally obliged to offer assistance to the pursuers; but it was a brave man who opposed the Armstrongs, knowing that brutal vengeance would be exacted sooner or later, however much the law might theoretically be on his side.
Johnnie Armstrong's power over the region became so great, and the ill doings of his ‘riding family’ and associates so flagrant, that protests from England and the growing wrath of young James V in Edinburgh brought about a fatal confrontation.
The king himself led an army into Liddesdale, rounded up the better-known thieves and ‘tuik of thame to the number of xxxii personis of the greitest of them’, including Armstrongs and Elliots.
There was then apparently an offer of pardon to others who submitted willingly to the royal authority without delay.
Johnnie Armstrong, distinguished from others of that surname by the to-name of Black Jock, dressed himself up in all his finery and rode with fifty of his best men to meet the  king in Teviotdale, obviously hoping to impress him as a near equal.
The normal attire of reivers in action included a shirt covered by a sleeveless quilted leather coat or ‘jack’, usually stiffened with strips of metal or horn, leather breeches and sturdy leather boots.
On their heads they wore a steel bonnet, either a ‘salade’ like a rimless upturned bowl, a peaked version known as a burgonet, or a morion with curved brim and raised centrepiece like a cockscomb.
Some of their leaders, however, indulged in richer displays: in moments of leisure or on a Day of Truce a chieftain might sport a satin doublet or gold-buttoned jerkin, satin hose, and velvet breeches and cloak.
Certainly when Johnnie Armstrong arrived for his meeting with the king he was arrayed in the most ostentatious items from his wardrobe.
Instead of being impressed, James was mightily displeased.
‘What wants yon knave that a king should have?’ he demanded.
When Black Jock protested loyalty to the Crown and his native land, and offered to carry out any raid James might choose in England, he and his followers were summarily hanged from the nearest trees.
The reiver's last proud defiance has passed into Border history: ‘It is folly to seek grace at a graceless face’.
Although intermarriage between Scots and English Borderers was officially forbidden during many periods, and could be punishable by death, it frequently took place.
Some alliances between, say, a Fenwick of Tynedale and a Croser of Teviotdale might ensure a lull in raiding and cattle thieving for a while, though there was usually an excuse for it to be resumed at fairly short notice.
Some families, across the Border or on their own side of it, pursued deadly feuds which could be settled only by the extermination of an entire family or, grudgingly and with much pressure from the Wardens, a compensatory payment in money or goods.
The Tynedale Fenwicks and the Liddesdale Elliots were involved for a long time in a savage, unyielding feud; and the Armstrongs, among their many clashes, quarrelled simultaneously with the Scottish Turnbulls and Johnstones and with the English Bells, while the Bells were also feuding with the English Grahams.
The intensity of these  hatreds was such as to ensure that at the christening of a male child his right hand was kept clear of the water so that it would be free for unhallowed retribution upon family enemies.
Of all the turbulent valleys and fells, the most violent and troublesome territory continued to be Liddesdale.
The raids and executions of James V provided only temporary respite from reiving and feuding.
This ‘cockpit of the Border’, too volatile and time-consuming to be included in any of the three main Scottish Marches, had been allocated a Keeper of its own.
Although there were profits and national prestige to be made out of all the Wardens' privileges and untold opportunities for corruption, it was often difficult to find anyone to shoulder this particular responsibility.
Some Wardens could supervise matters from the reasonable comfort of homes such as Ferniehirst outside Jedburgh; but Hermitage castle, the ‘Strength of Liddesdale’ in the middle of inhospitable fells and mosses, was one of the most chill and sinister strongholds in all Scotland.
Hermitage has existed since the thirteenth century, standing within older earthworks.
Fact and legend mingle inextricably within its grim walls.
An early occupant is said to have been the villainous Lord Soulis, who in the ballad of the Cout of Keilder forces the head of his noble visitor under a pool in the Hermitage Water to drown him.
He met his own fate when the wizard Thomas of Ercildoune instructed Soulis's enemies how to capture him and boil him to death in a cauldron on the Nine Stane Rig, a Bronze Age stone circle which can be reached by a scramble up the hillside above the modern B6399 between Newcastleton and Hawick.
Whether or not there was ever such an owner, there is no doubt about the family which held the castle longest.
Sir William Douglas captured it from one of Edward Balliol's English supporters, though he himself was later to join the English cause.
Furious at the decision of young King David II to appoint Sir Alexander Ramsay rather than himself as sheriff of Teviotdale, Douglas captured Ramsay and threw him into the Hermitage dungeon.
He then went off, leaving his rival to starve to death.
After his defection, David presented the castle to another William, later the first Earl of Douglas.
Taking no chances, this Douglas killed his predecessor in Ettrick Forest.
After a couple of decades in English hands, Hermitage came back once more to the Douglases.
They set about reinforcing and extending their property to give it much the appearance it has today, apart from some modern restoration.
Their grip was relinquished only when, playing their usual game of underhand negotiations with the English, they aroused the suspicions of James IV, who installed Patrick Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell, in their place.
The Hepburns proved hardly more reliable, but did keep a hold on the castle and — so far as anyone could keep a hold on such a region — the lordship of Liddesdale.
James V had failed to subdue the Armstrongs and their kind.
His daughter was fated to face the same problem.
After the scandalous murder of her secretary and the rumours surrounding her dismal husband, Queen Mary was anxious to re-establish her qualifications for wise, firm rule.
Combining the public relations exercise of showing herself to her people with the need to exhibit her legal powers, she set off on court circuits or justice eyres which inevitably had to include the crime-ridden Borders.
One such court was scheduled for Jedburgh in October 1566.
Here the queen was, according to local records, accommodated in a turreted tower house known since as Mary Queen of Scots House, though a few researchers have concluded that it could not have been built until many years after her stay in the burgh.
However that may be, it is a sturdy example of a defensive town house of the period, and serves today as a repository for souvenirs of the queen (some of dubious authenticity), including a replica of her death mask, the Communion plate she used on the morning of her execution, and her royal seal.
At this time there were few suggestions of any relationship between Mary and James Hepburn, the then Earl of Bothwell, other than that of queen and devoted lieutenant.
Yet when news reached Jedburgh that Bothwell was lying seriously  wounded in his Liddesdale stronghold of Hermitage, Mary set off to ride the 50 miles there and back in a day.
The earl had gone on ahead in order to round up malefactors and provide the court with some impressive numbers for trial.
He and his men succeeded in wheeling a satisfactory batch of Elliots into custody in Hermitage.
Then, in a further foray, Bothwell encountered Little Jock Elliot of the Park, one of the most savage of that reiving family, and shot him off his horse.
He approached the fallen man, either to arrest him or make sure he was dead, whereupon Elliot came to life and stabbed Bothwell three times.
Some chroniclers say that Elliot then died; others that he escaped and continued to be a thorn in the flesh of the authorities.
Bothwell's men had to carry their leader back to Hermitage, where he was greeted by the mortifying news that the prisoners had overpowered their guards and taken charge of the castle.
In order to gain admittance and nurse his wounds, Bothwell had to strike a deal which involved letting all the Elliots go free.
There are two versions of subsequent events.
Writers who disapproved of Mary claimed that her impatience to be at her lover's side
could not temper itself, but needs she must bewray her outrageous lust, and in an inconvenient time of the year, despising all discommodities of the way and weather, and all danger of thieves, she betook herself headlong to her journey with such a company as no man of any honest degree would have adventured his life and his goods among them.
Others record that she patiently concluded the business then before the court, and went off with a reliable escort to hold a council with Bothwell about the taming of Liddesdale and empower him to hold courts in Hermitage itself.
Whichever may be the true explanation, it is certainly known that on her way across the wilderness north of Hermitage the queen was thrown by her horse into a peat bog, marked on modern maps as the Queen's Mire.
Here she lost her watch.
When she returned to Jedburgh that evening she was in great pain from what is likely to have been a haemorrhage, of which she had suffered several since her son's birth.
At one juncture it was thought she had died, but gradually she recovered.
Local gossips noted that her husband, Darnley, did not appear in Jedburgh until the crisis was over; and then, incensed by the attendant nobles' cool reception, he stayed only one night and possibly did not even visit Mary.
Bothwell had already been fetched here on a horse litter from Hermitage.
In 1817 the lost watch was unearthed by a mole, and a stirrup and horseshoe were found in the Queen's Mire, though there is no firm evidence of their having come from Mary's horse.
In 1987, the four-hundredth anniversary of her execution, events throughout the country included a ride by Jedburgh men and women in costume retracing the royal route to and from Hermitage.
In that same year the watch was stolen from the museum.
Although Mary herself was never to return to the town above the Jed Water or to venture again into the valley of the Liddel Water, her tragic history was soon to involve others in the turmoil of Liddesdale.
When she arrived in England in 1568 she claimed to be seeking the protection of her cousin Elizabeth, but at the same time began scheming for support in her claims to both thrones, having earlier told a priest that she ‘trusted to find many friends when time did serve, especially among those of the old religion’.
Of those readiest to succumb to her personal charm and regal pretensions, the most influential was Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland.
He and fellow Catholic lords began to murmur of an uprising against Elizabeth; and there were even plans for Mary to marry the Duke of Norfolk, in the hope of producing an acceptable successor to the throne of England.
Elizabeth soon discovered what was afoot and frightened the mooted consort into a hasty retreat to his Norfolk estates, though she misinterpreted his sudden flight as a prelude to the rising of the north.
When he reappeared apologetically in London to plead for clemency he was sent to the Tower, while in the north itself the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland blundered into ill-planned revolt.
The Northern Rebellion began with a march upon Durham cathedral, where Protestant furnishings were torn down and mass was celebrated.
It did not take long for forces from the south to march upon the rebels and throw them into abject retreat.
As their pursuers closed in near Hexham and Naworth, when ‘the beacons burned all night, and every hill was full of horse and foot crying and shouting as though they were mad’, the two leaders fled across the Border into Liddesdale.
Westmorland and a few followers were lucky: after joining with the reivers in attacks on the English Marches, they ultimately fled to the Netherlands and lived there as pensioners of Catholic Spain.
Northumberland was less fortunate.
Having been offered shelter by one of the Armstrongs, Hector of Hardlaw, whom he had helped some years previously, he was treacherously handed over to the Earl of Moray, Regent of Scotland since Mary's enforced abdication.
Himself an illegitimate son of Mary's father, James V, and a collaborator in the murder of Darnley, Moray held on to his captive for a time in that Loch Leven castle where the queen had also been imprisoned.
His successor, the Regent Morton, was anxious to keep the peace with England at least until he had consolidated his own position, and ingratiatingly delivered Northumberland up to the East March Warden at Berwick in June 1572 in return for a large cash payment.
The rebel lord was beheaded two months later at York.
Meanwhile his Countess had been rescued from a Liddesdale cottage ‘not to be compared to any dog kennel in England’ by the chivalrous Kerr of Ferniehirst, in spite of past feuds with her husband's family.
He and Buccleuch then went to Hector of Hardlaw's house and burned it to the ground.
‘Taking Hector's cloak’ became a Border catch-phrase for the betrayal of a friend.
The Border was aflame once more.
Matters had not been helped by the murder of the Earl of Moray at Linlithgow by  a member of the rival Hamilton family, who aimed his musket from an upper window behind a line of washing.
After some shifts and confusions,’ a new Regent was appointed, the Earl of Morton, one of the ubiquitous Douglas family.
Taking advantage of the ebb and flow of state politics and power, Border reivers swept in force over the Border in the company of English refugees who were now their grateful allies.
In retaliation, English troops inflicted a scorched-earth policy on the Border valleys and towns, burning Hawick, battering Ferniehirst castle and Jedburgh, and boasting that they would leave ‘never a house nor tower unburnt’.
In the aftermath the Border needed time to breathe and recuperate, and while religious civil war threatened Scotland as a whole, the far from religious reivers bided their time.
Whenever the preoccupations of monarchs on either side of the frontier distracted attention from local outrages, the riding families rode again, incapable of forswearing the pleasures of rustling, pillage, murder and blackmail.
When James VI came to manhood and attempted to assert himself over both the Borderers and the disruptive Highland clans, he tended for a while to concentrate on the Highlands rather than the Lowlands.
Troublesome as the Armstrongs, Elliots and the rest might be within his own kingdom, they were quite useful as a thorny, lacerating palisade against their English neighbours.
In any case he had dangerous worries on his own doorstep.
Shuffled from one power group to another during the regencies of his childhood, he was not safe even when he became a fully fledged king.
Falling under the spell of an older, flamboyantly dressed and well-educated kinsman, Esme Stuart, who had come over from France, he was suspected of dangerously Papist leanings and of some unnatural sexual habits.
Such suspicions were reinforced when he made this pampered favourite Duke of Lennox and granted him the revenues of Arbroath abbey.
In August 1582 Protestant lords under the' Earl of Gowrie kidnapped James while he was hunting near Perth, and took him to Gowrie's castle of Ruthven outside the town.
Their excuse was that they feared the influence of those Catholic  lords who, pretending to be the king's loyal advisers, were in fact anxious to restore his mother to the throne.
Mary herself, in captivity in England but forever smuggling out letters and appeals, dealt slyly in shrouded half-promises and suggestions, but made one thing quite clear: she still regarded herself as rightful Queen of Scots and, even towards the end, offered no more than a grudging suggestion of James being ‘associated’ with her in ruling the country.
The Gowrie faction guarded James for almost a year, issuing decrees in his name while claiming that he was their willing guest.
In July 1583 he escaped to St Andrews, and set about destroying his tormentors or pardoning some in return for abject submission.
Yet Gowrie's son was, in 1600, apparently prepared to risk abducting the king yet again, luring him to the House of Gowrie in Perth with a fanciful story about a mysterious pot of gold.
The ‘Gowrie Conspiracy’ was to leave a lot of puzzling questions which have never been satisfactorily answered.
The king had his attendants with him, and in a very short time they overpowered and killed Gowrie and his brother, whose bodies were hanged, drawn and quartered, the quarters being displayed at Edinburgh, Perth, Dundee and Stirling.
There have been suggestions that James owed Gowrie a great deal of money, and contrived the incident to rid himself of the debt; or that he had homosexual designs on the young man, and had murderously silenced him when rejected.
Ruthven lands were forfeited.
An Act of Parliament abolished the very surname and ordained that the property outside Perth should henceforth be called Huntingtower.
Although its great hall and courtyard buildings have crumbled, its linked tower houses make an impressive sight from the A85 towards Crieff, and the interior still contains fine tempera painted ceilings, plasterwork and moulded fireplaces.
When the clumsy plotting of the Queen of Scots against Elizabeth finally exasperated the English beyond endurance, Mary was beheaded at Fotheringhay.
Her son, who had scarcely known her but felt that his own throne was conceivably under threat so long as she lived, made no great show of grief when  the news was brought to him.
James had for some time been accepting an annual pension from Elizabeth in return for promises of assistance against foreign invaders — meaning, at this period, Spain — and on the tacit understanding that he would in no way connive at his mother's return to Scotland.
Now he renewed pressure to have his own right of succession to the English throne acknowledged.
Elizabeth played one of her characteristically tantalizing games, and kept him waiting until the very moment of her death.
Although contemporary witnesses leave no doubt that James was a practising homosexual, he knew his dynastic duties, and at the age of 23 set off to bring home a bride.
Calculating that neither Elizabeth nor the Scottish parliament would favour a Catholic marriage, he settled on a Protestant princess of Denmark.
Whatever his proclivities, he carried out the wooing in gallant style.
When gales prevented Anne from sailing to Scotland, James went himself to fetch her, and they were married in Oslo.
She was 15 at the time of the wedding, and was to present him with seven children, among them the future Charles I. She also presented him with an embarrassing situation by deciding after a while to become a Roman Catholic.
During the king's absence on his romantic mission, a bitterly familiar name was involved in strange moves against his person.
The Earl of Bothwell, nephew of the earl who had done James's mother so much harm, was what today would be called a tearaway: he revelled in leading Border raids, once broke into the Edinburgh Tolbooth to free one of his men from custody, and was widely believed to hold the office of chief warlock to various covens of witches.
At North Berwick he was reported to have assembled a band of 200 witches to raise a magic storm which would drown the king and his new queen on their voyage to Scotland.
The site of this unsuccessful venture in the black arts is marked today by the few stony fragments of St Andrew's twelfth-century church above the harbour.
James was terrified of witchcraft and became a ruthless persecutor of anyone suspected of it.
When he heard of the incident he imprisoned Bothwell in Edinburgh castle, but continued to  fear the earl's powers.
He had reasons other than supernatural ones: Bothwell soon escaped into the Borders to cause further disturbances, twice forced his way into Holyroodhouse to plead with and simultaneously threaten the king, and once cornered him in Falkland palace.
He was both courageous and physically attractive, but deranged, and it was a great relief even to his associates when he left Scotland to die a pauper in Naples.
When Elizabeth of England died early on the morning of 24 March 1603 it had already become obvious to her entourage that James VI of Scotland was her only possible successor.
Many who had earlier worked against Scottish interests had for some time been making covert approaches and promises through envoys between the two Courts.
It is said that on her deathbed Elizabeth, unable to speak, signified assent to the succession by a movement of her head or hand.
In any event, the decision was made.
Sir Robert Carey, Warden of the English Middle March, had been in London visiting the queen, but had prudently arranged for relays of horses to be ready for him between the capital and Edinburgh, so that he could ingratiate himself with the King of Scots by being the first to arrive with the news that he was now King of England also.
The moment Carey was confident that Elizabeth had breathed her last he was in the saddle, racing for the Border.
It took him two and a half days to reach Edinburgh.
James had gone to bed by the time he arrived, but the travel-stained messenger was admitted and graciously allowed to convey the news.
The favours for which Carey had hoped were somewhat disappointing.
Courtiers in London, angry at his arrogant seizure of responsibility for notifying the new king, blocked various royal appointments.
Fortunately he was allowed to become Master of the Household to the young Prince Charles, treated his royal charge with intelligence and genuine affection, and on Charles's accession was created Earl of Monmouth.
The Union of the Crowns did not mean that England and Scotland had ceased to be separate countries.
Full national union would be another century in coming.
But now that King  James VI of Scotland was also King James I of England he was determined to rule both kingdoms so as to allow no further violence between them.
As far as he was concerned, there was no longer a borderline.
Reiving and feuding must stop.
He saw little hope of achieving this by gradual measures or appeals to newly established unity.
Wasting neither time nor mercy he set about dispersing the riding families.
They had undoubtedly been asking for trouble.
Within a few days of Elizabeth's death the reivers had taken what they imagined would be the opportunity for easy plunder, and swarmed over the Border in what their victims and the Wardens referred to as ‘Ill Week’.
James appointed new guardians with wider powers on each side of the Border, and troops were moved north.
A couple of thousand men were allowed to leave the country and serve as mercenaries in the struggle of the Netherlands against Spain.
Those remaining were placed under strict rules and penalties.
No one must own any horse other than a work horse; arms were forbidden; informers were planted in every community to report on breaches of regulations or even suspicions about a man's trade or lack of it; and in all cases of doubt, summary hanging was in order.
The riding families were broken up: many, like the Grahams, were transported to the Low Countries and Ireland, leaving their lands and stock to be appropriated by grateful Marcher lords.
Those who fought back were declared outlaws and hunted down.
Peace was at last enforced on the Border.
Yet in the blood of the quelled freebooters and their descendants there would always be a pulse of rebelliousness, a longing to ride again as their ancestors had done.
After a couple of decades of comparative calm, the names of Armstrong and Elliot began to reappear in familiar practices.
There was no possibility of large-scale raiding into England now; but in spite of sharing a crown, the two countries were still separate and old cross-Border temptations still beckoned.
Small groups went in for spasmodic cattle thieving with familiar equipment and familiar methods, including blackmail.
In an Act of 1662 in the reign of Charles II  there is reference to ‘a great number of lewd disorderly and lawless persons, being thieves and robbers, who are commonly called Moss-troopers’.
Rewards were offered, including some to moss-troopers themselves provided they betrayed their companions.
It took a long time for the plague to be controlled and for strongholds of the riding families to be overthrown.
In our own time the Armstrongs' Hollows Tower has been romantically restored; but Mangerton, home of the most powerful of the Liddesdale branch of the family, is no more than an overgrown knot of stones on a knoll beside an equally melancholy, abandoned railway line.
One substantial surviving tower house, about five miles north-east of Sir Walter Scott's grave in Dryburgh abbey, is that of Smailholm:
That mountain'd tower,
Which charm'd my fancy's wakening hour.
In 1773 Scott was sent as a sickly child to stay with his grandparents at Sandyknowe farm, below the rocky plinth from which rises a fortalice with sturdy walls and gun-loops.
It captured his imagination, as he later showed in Marmion;and that imagination was further fed by books in the farmhouse window seat and by the Border tales his aunt and grandmother told him.
The Pringle lairds who built and occupied the tower had frequently been beset by reivers from Tynedale and Redesdale, who on one occasion took away with them 600 cattle, 100 horses and 100 prisoners.
In despair John Pringle accepted a blackmail deal which, however irksome, seems to have been honoured and left him unmolested afterwards.
Later the family ran into financial difficulties and sold the property to Sir William Scott of Harden, whose direct descendant was the young Walter Scott.
Throughout his life the author loved and drew inspiration from the whole region, from Smailholm to ‘Scott's View’ above the river Tweed and the house he built for himself at Abbotsford.
Smailholm tower today provides a worthy setting for a  collection of tapestries and spell-binding costume figures evoking characters and scenes from Scott's Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border;and there is a compelling tableau of Queen Mary and her ladies, the ‘Four Maries’.
Researches into Border ballads were to lead to the composition of Scott's immensely popular Lay of the Last Minstrel .
He had started his career in the law, but while attending court at Jedburgh in 1792 he met and became friends with Robert Shortreed, Sheriff-Substitute of Roxburghshire, and was invited on expeditions into Liddesdale to listen to old tales and verses.
Within the gate of what is now the Bank of Scotland's premises in Jedburgh is preserved a ‘Loupin'-on Stane’ from which they used to mount their horses before setting off.
Liddesdale was still a sullen, untamed region populated by people as prickly and hostile as they had always been.
It was only Shortreed's family connections with the Elliots which guaranteed a friendly reception.
One of these relatives, a Dr Elliot, had already collected many ballads.
When he saw Scott's interest in the history of the valley he arranged for men to clear out the rubbish which had accumulated in Hermitage castle so that the visitors could inspect the dungeon.
The ‘Border Warhorn’ which was to hang in Abbotsford was found in use as a grease vessel for a local labourer's scythe.
Scott and his friend returned year after year in search of poetic treasure, and Scott is recorded as having been the first man ever to tackle the rough tracks into Liddesdale in a carriage.
Roads were few and uncomfortable in the Borders.
In 1832 a fellow poet, James Hogg, the ‘Ettrick Shepherd’, wrote of Selkirkshire:
Not a vestige of a road formed before the last century.
The county was overrun with underwood that made it impervious to the traveller.
The first settlement of any size in Liddesdale was the purpose-built village of Newcastleton, established in 1793 by the third Duke of Buccleuch as the basis of a weaving community.
In the following century it was linked with Edinburgh and Carlisle, and with the larger textile centres of Hawick and  Galashiels, by the ‘Waverley Route’ railway.
This disappeared during the Beeching era, and most of the employment in the neighbourhood is now in the expanding forests, including the vast spread of Kielder spanning the Border into Northumberland.
Wool has been an important product of the region since the earliest days of home spinning and weaving produced a coarse grey cloth known as ‘hodden’.
When monks from France and Flanders were settled in the Border abbeys in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries they introduced new skills, and also devoted themselves to the expansion of sheep rearing to provide the necessary basic material.
Profitable exports were handled through the port of Berwick-upon-Tweed until, in the middle of the fifteenth century, the kings themselves saw the advantages of taking over pastures for their own flocks, storing the wool at Selkirk and then shipping it out via Leith.
Experiments over the centuries resulted in the predominance of the Cheviot breed with a fleece eminently suitable for finer grades of cloth.
Water for fulling — cleansing and thickening the cloth — and in due course for driving the industrial mills which were to replace the looms of individual home-based workers was also an important factor.
The bridge over the river Tweed at Peebles was once an important part of the Kailzie Drove Road, a main route for cattle driven from the Highlands for sale in English markets and with side paths for transporting local woollen goods to similar markets.
Stretches of this can still be found descending on Peebles from the north and, south of the town, across a ford on the Haystoun burn and over Kailzie hill, heading onwards over the Ettrick Water towards the Border.
The name of ‘tweed’ now associated with a rough-surfaced, hard-wearing cloth arose from a misunderstanding between Scot and Sassenach.
Correctly called twill, it was heard by London dealers in Scottish pronunciation as ‘tweel’.
On one occasion, it is said, this was written down mistakenly as ‘tweed’.
When enthusiastic repeat orders for such an admirable product began to roll in, shrewd manufacturers along the river Tweed  saw the advantage of association with the river name and set about exploiting it.
There was a great expansion in the nineteenth century with the coming of power-driven mills, and a corresponding growth in their parent townships.
Selkirk, Peebles, Kelso and Jedburgh all flourished.
It was Jedburgh weavers who first combined two colours of yarn to produce the now familiar look of ‘tweed’.
At Walkerburn, a few miles along the river from Peebles, a mill shop and wool museum display all the processes of shearing, cleaning, spinning, carding, dyeing and weaving.
Ironically the adjoining mills, which for more than a century provided employment for almost the entire village and sup-plemented the picture now provided by the museum, were abruptly shut down in 1988: bought up by a large firm, the premises were paid an afternoon visit by a director who announced imminent closure and drove off.
It is true that demand for coarser gauges of knitwear has fallen off and that the export market has been infiltrated by products from countries with lower wage rates.
Yet, although commercial competition is tougher, there are still weaving and spinning mills in Selkirk, one of which won the Queen's Award for Export Achievement.
The large enterprise of Jedburgh Kiltmakers stands beside the A68 north of Jedburgh, and large-scale mills and knitwear houses still provide most of the employment in Hawick on the Teviot.
Hawick's sheep auction mart is the oldest in the country, while Kelso is still the centre for the huge annual Kelso Ram Sales.
Another important stream was that of the Gala Water.
The name may have derived from the old British,gala or gwala , describing a full or swiftly flowing stream, though some etymologists think it may be the Cymric gal , meaning ‘scattered’.
Shiels or shields are cottages, direct from the Anglo-Saxon, so the town of Galashiels may be regarded as cottages by a stream, or as scattered cottages.
A modern statue of a shepherd carrying a ram on his shoulders symbolizes the place's dependence on the wool trade.
In the thirteenth century wool was exported from here to Flanders.
In return, Flemish weavers eventually  came to settle in the neighbourhood and teach local workers their ‘mysteries’.
By the middle of the eighteenth century the main product was a coarse cloth known as Galloway Grey.
Although there had been fulling mills along the river for several centuries, the first industrial age mill was not built until 1790.
As others followed, the Gala Water was dammed and its course altered to create three mill lades.
Production expanded so rapidly that home supplies of wool were insufficient, and imports from Australia and South America increased.
All raw materials had to be washed before processing, and especially in the case of imports there was a need to get rid of dirt, seeds and insects.
Great quantities of effluent pouring into the river added to the stench of local skin and tannery works to produce appalling smells and what one official report referred to as ‘gross pollution’.
The seeds, however, had one interesting effect: well over 300 separate plant species arrived in the wool, and when flushed away into the Gala Water began to grow profusely along its banks.
Before chemical dyes were discovered in the mid-nineteenth century, the colouring of cloth had been achieved by boiling plants in dye kettles.
Such hues included:
Red Rock lichen
Blaeberry (bilberry)
Nettles
Yellow bedstraw
Tormentil (also used for tanning)
Applewood
Bright red
Yellow
Buckthorn
Bright yellow Teasel
Sundew
Rhubarb
Orange
Ragwort
Peat soot
Magenta
Dandelion
The discovery of chemical substitutes led to the founding of a dyestuffs industry and helped the mills develop into extended factory production, gradually mechanizing processes which had hitherto been done by outworkers in their own homes.
Cloth manufacture and the knitting of garments became separate industries, though close working partnerships remained essential.
The Guinness Book of Records confirms the fastest example of co-operative production on 30 January 1974 when wool was sheared, dyed in Selkirk, carded and spun in Galashiels, and knitted and finished in Hawick, with a sheep-to-wearer time of 4 hours 35 minutes.
Tartan, the style most commonly associated with Scotland, had never been produced in the Borders before 1826.
Then Sir Walter Scott ordered a pair of trousers in black and white shepherd check, adopted the pattern as the family tartan, and started a fashion.
Prince Albert, Queen Victoria's consort, helped this trend by designing his own Balmoral tartan and having it made up at Walkerburn.
At the Great Exhibition of 1851 in the Crystal Palace, eleven Galashiels firms exhibited woollen worsteds over a hanging space of 2,000 feet.
A local family, Hoppringle, later changed its name to Pringle, still a familiar one on sportswear.
They came into possession of the ‘forest stead’ of Gala at one of the most troubled times in the Borders.
Other all too familiar names come into the story.
In 1563 one Hoppringle had been set upon and murdered in his house by a joint force of Armstrongs and Elliots, which gave rise to a long Border feud.
Those days are remembered in a fine statue in Galashiels of a mounted reiver with typical steel bonnet and lance.
The town's brief motto, ‘Soor Plums’, is a memento of an English invasion when a few stragglers misguidedly stopped to help themselves to some wild plums.
Set upon by the locals, they were killed and tossed into a trench still known as Englishmen's Syke.
The incident must also have inspired the melancholy bagpipe tune, ‘Soor Plums of Galashiels’.
Only the most starry-eyed optimist could have supposed that the Union of the Crowns and then, at last, the Act of  Union in 1707 making the two countries one would somehow bring immediate peace in a region with such memories.
The amalgamation of kingdoms was itself carried out with the greatest animosity on both sides.
England had thrown out the Stuart monarch, James II, and brought in his daughter Mary and her husband William of Orange, followed by the heirless Queen Anne.
A Protestant Hanoverian succession looked inevitable.
The Scottish Parliament was split on this as on so many other matters.
Catholic elements still regarded the exiled James II as rightful James VII of Scotland, and would continue to extend this loyalty to his son and grandson.
The Protestant element favoured complete union with England, in spite of warnings that this would mean subjugation — by peaceful means rather than the warlike ones of the past, but subjugation nonetheless.
To force the Scottish Estates to acknowledge the Hanoverian right of succession, the English authorities banned the sale of Scottish cattle and other products in England as part of a programme of arm-twisting economic sanctions, and threatened to treat all Scots as aliens unless they toed the line.
Commissioners were appointed on either side to work out an agreed formula which would cover differences in legal systems, taxation discrepancies, the coinages — which were still quite distinct — and above all the religious rights of Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Cameronians and others who had reason to be wary of the Church of England.
The Scots aimed at a federal system which would allow them some autonomy.
There were outbreaks of violence in the Borders and down the Royal Mile in Edinburgh.
But England held the whip hand: it was a matter of amalgamate or be crippled by economic measures.
On 16 January 1707 the Treaty of Union received its royal assent.
Within a few months many assurances were broken; there were wistful, unfulfilled hopes of James Edward Stuart landing and asserting himself as King James VII; and in the House of Lords an attempt by Scottish members to repeal the Act was defeated by only a small majority.
But it was all too late.
‘Now there's ane end of ane old song,’ James Ogilvy, Earl  of Seafield, had said as he signed the engrossed exemplification of the Act of Union.
The music was by no means ended: there were many discords still to come.
SELECTED SITES OF INTEREST
Antiquities
EDINSHALL BROCH On a side of Cockburn Law near Abbey St Bathans, Duns, reached along farm path from the B6355.
An early oval fort of pre-Roman times with a later broch in one corner, perhaps added by the Votadini even though they were supposed to be collaborators with the Roman occupiers.
Later came a walled but obviously peaceable settlement.
EILDON HILLS On the northernmost of the three peaks, reached from Melrose by the B6359 or from Eildon village on the A6091, are remains of a fortified British town which was probably the oppidum of the Selgovae, to which the Romans added a circular enclosure.
Visible for miles around, this was obviously an important signal station, serving the supply depots and fort of the Newstead settlement at the foot of the hill.
GLENRATH SETTLEMENT Manor Water road off the A72 between Peebles and Lyne leads to a Celtic settlement and field system of lynchets and dykes, with cairns made of stones dug from the earth during cultivation, and fragments of circular houses.
WODEN LAW About 8 miles south-east of Jedburgh, reached from the A68 via eastbound by-road below Carter Bar.
From the summit there is a view of the Roman supply route, Dere Street.
The fort started with a single stone wall, to which were added ramparts and another wall.
There are also Roman siegeworks which may have been used for exercises by troops from nearby temporary camps still visible around Pennymuir.
(For a, general study of the foregoing see also Chapter 1.)
Historic Buildings
ABBOTSFORD Off the A7 just over 2 miles south-east of Galashiels.
Romantic ‘Scottish baronial’ mansion built by Sir Walter Scott between 1817 and 1822.
The author's study is preserved as he left it, along with his collections of books, armour and historical records.
FERNIEHIRST Off the A68 a mile south of Jedburgh.
Sixteenth-century Border castle with fairy-tale turrets (now for holiday let as luxury apartments!), home of the Kerr family restored in recent years by their descendant and current chieftain, the Marquis of Lothian.
The stables have been converted into an information centre with displays of Border reiving history and battles in which the family has been involved over the centuries.
GREENKNOWE (The word means ‘green hill.)
Beside the A6089 about 9 miles north-west of Kelso, a sixteenth-century turreted tower house complete with its original iron yett, or gate, behind a sturdy timber door.
JEDBURGH Most extensive remains of all the ravaged Border abbeys, with glass-less but beautiful rose window known as St Catherine's Wheel.
A Visitor Centre provides graphic background details to the history of the abbey and town.
NEIDPATH On the western outskirts of Peebles, a medieval castle set high on a wooded bank above the Tweed.
In essence a massive L-shaped tower with walls 12 feet thick, a well and a pit dungeon, it was adapted in the seventeenth century for more comfortable and less defensive living.
The gateway carries the goat's head and coronet crest of the Hay family, Earls of Tweeddale.
THIRLESTANE Castle off the A68 just outside Lauder.
It has been in the hands of the Maitland family for more than 400 years since its creation by John Maitland, Chancellor of Scotland, and later enlargement by the Duke of Lauderdale.
The state rooms were redecorated by plasterers from Holyrood.
Splendid display of toys in the family nurseries.
TRAQUAIR Tower house converted into a lavish mansion, off the B709 2 miles from Innerleithen.
Claiming to be the oldest inhabited house in Scotland, it was a favourite hunting centre for royal visitors.
Among its treasures are the cradle used by Mary, Queen of Scots, for her son James; a quilt woven by her and her ‘Four Maries’; a secret staircase used by recusant priests and Jacobite refugees; and a collection of Jacobite glass including one with a portrait of Prince Charles Edward.
When Bonnie Prince Charlie left after a brief visit during his march on England in 1745, the Earl of Traquair vowed that the resplendent Bear Gates (the ‘Steekit Yetts’) should not be opened again until the Stuarts were restored to the throne.
They remain shut to this day.
Ale is still produced in the eighteenth-century brewhouse, and sold on the premises.
Museums
COLDSTREAM Military and local museum in the original headquarters of the Coldstream Guards, founded here in 1659 from what had originally been Monck's Regiment, formed under Oliver Cromwell's auspices.
EYEMOUTH Museum opened in 1981 to commemorate the great east coast fishing disaster in which 129 local fishermen were lost.
Displays include Eyemouth tapestry, history of Berwickshire fanning and fishing, and the wheelhouse of a modern fishing boat.
GALASHIELS Anderson's textile museum with daily guided tours and the largest range of worsted textiles in the world.
HAWICK Museum in Wilton Lodge Park, on western outskirts of the town, has extensive displays of Border history and in particular of the textile industry.
HEXHAM (Northumberland) Although in England, this must be recommended for its imaginative displays in the Middle  March Centre of Border reiving history, with chillingly convincing soundtrack backgrounds to colourful life-size tableaux.
JEDBURGH On hilltop above the town, Castle Gaol, a nineteenth-century model prison in the shape of a turreted castle, has been converted into a museum of prison life and local social history.
PEEBLES The Tweeddale Museum is housed in the Chambers Institution, a gift to the town from the brothers William and Robert Chambers, founders of the famous dictionary and encyclopaedia publishing company.
Noted for its fine geological collection.
Frequently changing exhibitions of local history.
SELKIRK Halliwell's House off the main square, actually an entire terrace of eighteenth-century dwellings, has become a museum of local and national history, with a special display of the town's long-standing ironmongery trade, and sad souvenirs of the battle of Flodden.
In the nearby Municipal Buildings is a courtroom with the bench and chair used by Sir Walter Scott during his 30 years as Sheriff of Selkirk.