

CHAPTER 1: THE PROBLEM
INTRODUCTION
The international legal system has been described as a series of bilateral consensual relationships within which rights, commitments and obligations are formulated, and values are allocated between parties inter se .
In the words of International Law Commission Special Rapporteur, Professor Roberto Ago:
The correlation between a legal obligation on the one hand and a subjective right on the other admits of no exception; as distinct from what is said to be the situation in municipal law, there are certainly no obligations incumbent on a subject which are not matched by an international subjective right of another subject or subjects, or even…of the totality of the other subjects of the law of nations.
These serial bilateral relationships are created both by treaties and the operation of rules of customary international law.
A multilateral treaty relationship may be broken down into a series of bilateral relationships.
‘It is as if each contracting party were bound by as many bilateral treaties as there are other contracting parties.’
A dispute as to the interpretation or application of an international convention may arise between many of its parties but a claim of breach will normally be specific to particular parties.
Similarly with customary international law, the concept of opposability reduces the issue to one of bilateral application as between the immediate parties.
International dispute resolution operates within bilateral relationships.
‘It is up to each State, to protect its rights’, whether these be a claim for reparations for the commission of an international delict, a claim of cessation of a continuing wrongful act, or a claim to act in self-defence.
The regular means of communication between States through diplomatic exchange and protest accentuates the bilateral character.
In certain dispute resolution processes, for example mediation, conciliation and enquiry, a third party assists the parties in resolving the dispute, but that person's function is to attempt to focus the parties' interest in its resolution, not to widen its parameters beyond their concerns.
The adversarial nature of judicial and arbitral proceedings likewise assumes a bilateral model, which is especially clear in boundary determination.
This bilateralism ‘contributes to an ‘orderly’ outward appearance of the law because it facilitates a precise identification of who has a right or a claim against whom and who may enforce it'.
However it also imposes an artificial constraint upon the management of international affairs.
For a number of reasons bilateralism is no longer appropriate as the paradigm model for the regulation of activities in the international arena.
First, as a matter of fact if not law, the actions and responses of any two States will impact upon the interests of other States, as well as upon other participants in the international and municipal arenas.
Even bilateral treaties impinge upon non-parties: the distribution of values between two parties can rarely be contained within neatly drawn lines.
Any bilateral conflict about different perceptions of an appropriate or just distribution of values may also have a wider impact.
Secondly, scientific and technological advances allowing exploitation and exploration of areas not previously susceptible to such activities, and the corresponding increased capacity to exhaust the world's resources or to monopolise a market, mean that even those States that lack the resources to take advantage themselves are still directly concerned in the activities of others.
Further, the allocation of resources outside the jurisdiction of any State, for example in Antarctica and seabed areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, is a matter of concern for all States and peoples.
Thirdly, the expansion of subject matters of legitimate international concern to include,inter alia , economic development, environmental and conservation interests, the regulation of the allocation of resources, and human rights all weigh against a strictly bilateral framework.
These topics are typically the subject matter of multilateral treaties which define mutually accepted uniform standards.
Their conclusion as instruments of codification or progressive development of international law weighs against a bilateral perspective which signifies a reciprocal exchange of commitments.
Fourthly, the increased use of institutional arenas for debate and confrontation rather than reliance upon closed diplomacy means that States are called upon to make their claims and responses in a public, multiparty forum.
The formulation of restraints upon State activities through the adoption (often by consensus) of Resolutions and Codes of Conduct within international organisations makes it hard for a State to claim non-party status, as it can to a treaty it has not ratified.
Although formally non-binding the impact of such instruments upon the development of international law cannot be ignored.
They operate to create expectations as to future behaviour between members of the international community in a wider setting than treaties.
These changes in the subject matter of international law, in the participants in international activities, and in the arenas within which the participants perform have exposed the inadequacies of the bilateral model for the accommodation of third parties, either as individual members of the international community or collectively as the international community as a whole.
There have been limited attempts to address the problem of third parties, for example by the International Law Commission and the International Court of Justice.
The work of the former on jus cogens , the Draft Code of Offences against Mankind, and the concept of an international State crime and the consequences of the commission thereof all develop the concept of obligations owed to the international legal community, and possible third party responses to violation.
The International Court of Justice has asserted that some obligations are owed to the international community, that is, they are obligations erga omnes , not confined to bilateral rights and obligations.
Taken together these developments ‘reveal a trend towards the incipient personification of the international community’ as an interested third party to bilateral transactions.
In the words of Mosler:
International law cannot be defined solely in terms of bilateral or multilateral relations between subjects which possess legal capacity.
The collection of subjects participating in the international legal order constitutes a community living according to common rules of conduct.
In order to assess the progressive development of international law in this direction it is important to determine what claims may be made by or against third parties, either as a particular third party or as a member of the international community, and the possible outcome of those claims.
This book analyses the current position of third parties in international law through an examination of third party claims.
Although third party claims may be made in all areas of international law, the topic will be examined only in three specified areas.
It is hoped that each of these will shed some light on the position of third parties generally.
The areas chosen are all areas where the bilateral relationship is strongly apparent, and where the impact of bilateral action upon third parties may provoke a third party response: treaty law, international judicial and arbitral procedure, and responsibility for an international wrong, with particular reference to armed conflict.
At first sight these may seem rather disparate areas for the drawing of generalised conclusions.
However, inter-State behaviour ranges from genuinely consensual to extremely coercive, with many variations in between.
These areas of law illustrate the importance of the degree of coercion as between the parties inter se, and between the parties and a third party in determining the appropriateness of third party response.
The third party response may in fact be what distinguishes consensual and coercive relationships between States.
The pacta tertiis rule (which protects non-parties to a treaty from having the treaty imposed upon them) has long been accepted in international law.
However multilateral treaties have been instrumental in the shaping and sharing of community values.
There is therefore inevitably a friction between the rigid pacta tertiis rule and the progressive development of normative standards.
The limitations of the former are evident in the event of violation of such treaty-based community standards where there is a need for collective and unilateral response from both treaty parties and non-parties.
Part One of the book examines the modern application of the pacta tertiis rule.
However a third party may find itself without any available forum in which to present its substantive claims.
International adjudication and arbitration operate within a bilateral model with only limited accommodation of third party interests.
The restrictions of international procedures may inhibit the realisation of third party claims, and hence the development of substantive law.
Part Two therefore examines third party claims in international procedures.
Treaty relationships are consensual, and third parties must decide what claims they wish to make with respect to the relationship from which they are excluded.
Civil proceedings are also consensual when commenced by special agreement to submit to arbitration or the International Court of Justice.
A third party must determine its response to a form of dispute settlement from which it is excluded, but which it apprehends may impact upon itself.
The tribunal must also determine whether to permit a third party to intrude upon a bilateral, consensual relationship.
However where jurisdiction is contested there is no community of interest between the parties, the respondent State may view the applicant's behaviour as coercive, and a third party's intervention may be more readily tolerated.
Finally, an act of aggression is coercive and, unlike the commencement of proceedings which accords with the obligation upon States to settle disputes peacefully, involves the commission of an illegal act to which a third party must respond.
It is in the context of armed conflict that many of the problems of third parties are brought into relief.
Traditionally, the right of States to remain aloof from conflict between other States, and to have that stance recognised as the legal status of neutrality, was the most developed third party right.
However, as other third party responses have been formulated, the compatibility of neutrality with the obligations of the United Nations Charter has been questioned.
This in turn raises the question of unilateral and collective response to internationally illegal acts as developed, for example, through the International Law Commission's work on State responsibility.
As Simma argues:
…the bilateralism inherent in the traditional structures and processes of international law is secured on the one hand, by a prohibition of intervention protecting not only a State's internal but also its external affairs against third party interference and, on the other hand, by the pacta tertiis rule in the law of treaties, according to which an agreement can create neither obligations nor rights for a third State without its consent.
The principle of non-intervention has given way to the need for legal response to international wrong-doing, coupled with responsibility for such acts.
Thus Part Three examines the responses of a third State to an international crime of State, taking as a particular example acts of aggression, and examines how the concept of State responsibility may be used to bring some overall cohesion into the third party problem.
In all three areas the impact upon the third party of the actions of other actors is beyond the control of the former; indeed from its perspective it may be of little import whether the behaviour of other States inter se is consensual or coercive, until the degree of coercion becomes such that as a member of the international community it must recognise and respond to an illegal act.
IDENTIFICATION OF THIRD PARTIES
States as third parties
An examination of the claims that can be made by or against third parties requires the identification of third parties.
This depends upon the context of the claim; there is no single definition that can be used to identify third parties for all purposes.
Third parties are those outside a bilateral relationship, whether formally created, for example by treaty or the commencement of proceedings, or occurring through events such as the outbreak of armed conflict.
The Vienna Convention uses the term ‘third State’ to describe the opposite status to ‘party’.
Another possible term is ‘non-party’.
In the context of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organisations or between International Organisations there was discussion as to whether these are equivalent terms.
Reuter, for example, considered that a non-party is a State outside the terms of a treaty, which cannot claim any of the powers of a party, for example , with respect to treaty procedures for amendment or termination.
A non-party is also, but ‘only inferentially’, not ‘directly bound by the obligations of the instrument’.
However, as Reuter pointed out, it is possible to derive rights and to be bound to perform certain obligations without becoming a party to the treaty, an example being the United Nations with respect to its Charter.
By way of contrast, he viewed ‘third party’ as having a more radical, although technically less precise, meaning.
A third party is ‘foreign to an instrument, its consequences and all the rules deriving therefrom.’
While third party analysis in the context of international organisations gives this distinction some validity, in other areas it is less significant, as it is difficult to assert that a State is completely foreign to the effects of an agreement to which it is not a party.
Unless the context makes clear that a special emphasis is to be given to the term ‘third party’, the two expressions will be treated as equivalents.
In some contexts it is relatively easy to identify parties, and consequently third parties.
Article 2 (h) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties provides that ‘A third State means a State not a party to a treaty.’
It does not matter why a State has failed to become a party to a treaty, or whether it is eligible to become a party and intends at some time to do so.
Determining the parties to a treaty is usually straightforward, although there can be problems of substance and evidence.
The rules relating to inadmissible reservations and objections thereto can confuse the relationship even between States which have ratified a treaty.
These rules belie the assumption that a State is either a party or a third party to an entire treaty.
Instead there can be a series of bilateral relationships within the framework of a multilateral treaty, effectively setting up other third party relationships.
A State may be labelled a ‘third party’ to a unilateral act by another State which has juridical effect, although ‘non-party’would seem a more appropriate term.
Braud gives the example of Egypt's 1957 unilateral declaration in favour of third States with respect to transit through the Suez Canal.
Another example is a unilateral declaration of acceptance of the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice under Article 36 (2) of its Statute.
All States are non-parties to the declaration of any other State, but an accepting State is a party to ‘the system of the Optional Clause in relation to the other declarant States, with all the rights and obligations deriving from Article 36’.
States with no declaration are third parties to the jurisdictional scheme.
In Nuclear Tests unilateral statements of the French authorities were said by the Court to have been made ‘publicly and erga omnes’.
France had therefore bound itself with respect to all States, including Australia and New Zealand, leaving no State as a third party.
The adversarial nature of contentious proceedings before the International Court ensures that the parties are readily identifiable.
Third parties to international adjudication are all States other than the applicant or respondent.
Some States may have interests arising out of a treaty to which they are parties, and which is to be interpreted or applied by the Court.
Such States are parties to the treaty, but not to the proceedings.
Somewhat less obviously, it has been argued that in certain circumstances States can be treated as parties to the Court's exercise of its advisory jurisdiction.
Legal questions rarely exist in the abstract and the opinion of the Court may affect the rights and duties of various international actors.
The Court's Rules of Procedure35 take account of this reality by allowing such States the benefit of procedures designed for contentious cases; recognition of certain States as ‘parties’ in advisory proceedings entails third party status for all others.
The definition of a third State has occupied the International Law Commission in its Draft Articles on State Responsibility.
Special Rapporteur Riphagen expounded what he termed the three parameters of relationship in international law which are set up by an internationally wrongful act.
These require to be defined:
1
what international law requires of a State that has violated international law, that is the obligations of the guilty State;
2
the scope of national enforcement, that is the rights of the injured State;
3
the scope of international enforcement, that is the rights and obligations of third States in respect of an internationally wrongful act.
These parameters require an injured State to be distinguished from a third State for the purposes of defining the accountability of the wrong-doer and the rights of other States.
The Draft Articles provisionally adopted by the International Law Commission incorporate the concept of an ‘injured State’.
In these Articles injured States comprise those in a defined bilateral relationship; those in a defined third party relationship; those who share a formal relationship with the wrong-doer State, although not necessarily factually injured by the breach; and those indirectly injured because their only injury is as a member of the international community.
All members of the international community are included within this last category as having suffered a constructive or derivative injury, leaving no residual category of third States.
But this widening of the concept of an injured State, if accepted, could lead to the ‘disappearing third State’, foreshadowed by the International Court in Barcelona Traction and Nuclear Tests .
The elision of third parties into the overall international community in the Draft Articles occurs for the particular purpose of identifying the consequences of an international wrongful act.
This deconstruction of the concept of an injured State to include third parties to treaties and members of the international community in the event of an international crime reinforces the choice of topics to be examined in this book.
Arangio-Ruiz, who replaced Riphagen as Rapporteur at the 39th session of the International Law Commission, has proposed that the Commission examine separately the consequences of an international delict and an international crime, since certain consequences apply only to the latter.
An international crime has effects erga omnes and entails certain unilateral or collective obligations for other members of the international community: the obligation of non-recognition of the situation created by the act; the obligation not to assist the author of the act; and the obligation to assist the victim State.
Whether or not third States are finally included as indirectly injured States in the terms of Draft Article 5 (3), development of international law in this respect is crucial to an examination of the rights and obligations of third parties.
International organisations as third parties
Since the Vienna Convention applies to treaties between States, its definition limits third parties to States.
However, this is an incomplete representation, although the claims of non-State third parties will not normally be made within international institutional arenas which, with limited exceptions, are reserved to States.
Instead claims by and against third party organisations or individuals may be made in a variety of domestic and regional, formal and informal arenas.
The growth of collective action by States through international organisations has been achieved primarily through treaties which have been used to define the competence of international organisations, and to perform their functions.
Accordingly the Vienna Convention on International Organisations provides that organisations can be third parties to a treaty and defines ‘third States’ and ‘third organisations’.
An international organisation, for example the United Nations, is a third party to its constitutive treaty, and its officials are third party beneficiaries of the privileges and immunities49 accepted by it on their behalf.
Since it would be absurd to regard the organisation as a stranger to such a treaty, this third party relationship must be regarded as an exceptional one.
An international organisation or specialised agency may also be an interested third party to a non-constitutive treaty between States.
For example, the International Committee of the Red Cross has an interest in monitoring the application of the Geneva Conventions and Protocols, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is in a similar situation with respect to the Refugee Conventions.
Similarly, an international organisation may have an interest in a dispute or proceedings between States, or between private parties.
An inter-State dispute over refugee border crossings could impact upon the work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, while the International Committee of the Red Cross could be involved in a dispute about the repatriation of prisoners of war.
An international organisation will be directly interested in proceedings where its constitutive instrument, its actions, or its documents might be scrutinised.
Non-government organisations monitor treaty performance and encourage participation in treaties to which they themselves cannot adhere.
For example, the International Women's Rights Action Watch reports on ‘law and policy change in accordance with the principles of the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women’.
Amnesty International performs a similar function with respect to the treatment of political detainees and the international prohibition of torture.
Some such organisations have made procedural claims in litigation to which they are not a party; the various international and regional adjudicative bodies have adopted different stances in response to these claims.
An international organisation can express its interest through the advisory jurisdiction of the International Court.
Not surprisingly a number of international organisations have requested an advisory opinion on the interpretation of their own constitutive treaty, or of an instrument to which a particular organisation is a party, or which it was instrumental in drafting and having adopted.
In contrast, a non-governmental organisation has no such access to the International Court of Justice.
Individuals as third parties
Individuals cannot enter into treaties, although States may enter into them on their behalf.
States are free to waive, renounce, or dispose of a national's rights or interests by treaty unless restricted by national law.
The theory of State responsibility means that international claims are made by States, with individual interests subsumed to those of the State.
There is debate as to whether States accept obligations for the protection of individuals or whether individuals are the recipients of rights which they can enforce.
Whatever view is preferred, where a State has entered into a treaty on behalf of an individual, or a group of individuals, it is self-evident that those individuals have an interest in its performance or non-performance.
States may undertake duties with respect to individuals and impose duties upon them, as signified by the emergence of international crimes and an international law for the protection of human rights.
The individual defendants at Nuremberg, for example, were third parties to the Treaty of London establishing and granting jurisdiction to the Military Tribunal.
Individuals remain third parties to treaties guaranteeing the protection of human rights, although some such treaties grant individuals procedural rights in international arenas.
Most commonly the relationship between individuals and territorial legal persons is governed by municipal law and procedure.
Examples are plentiful: an individual defending an extradition application in a municipal court is a third party to the extradition treaty between the requesting State and the State of detention; the crew of a fishing vessel arrested for illegal activities within another State's exclusive economic zone are third parties to agreements delimiting fishing zones; individuals claiming refugee status rely upon the terms of the Refugee Treaty.
In municipal arenas the focus becomes the incorporation of norms of international law into municipal law, and the forum's jurisdiction over the individual before it.
This obscures the fact that although States act as their representatives in international arenas, individuals remain as third parties.
Legal and natural persons are denied access to most international fora; exclusionary rules prevent them from being parties, interveners, or even witnesses in what they may see as their own claims.
Yet an individual may not accept that the State has represented his or her interests adequately in a claim of State responsibility.
Indeed the State's interests may not coincide with those of the individual.
For example in Barcelona Traction 67 it is possible that the corporate authorities felt that the company's interests were never placed squarely before the International Court and that the legal issue, whether Belgium could represent the Belgian shareholders, ignored the question of third party interests in the company itself.
The legal concept of incorporation and the creation of separate legal personality must entail the recognition of interests of that entity that might require legal protection on the international plane.
The corporation was allowed no say in an authoritative international arena in its own demise.
Further, the requirement that a State has standing before the International Court may mean that an individual's interests are not raised on their merits before the Court.
If the outcome of Barcelona Traction overlooked the interests of the third party corporation, it also ignored those of the shareholders.
On the other hand, States may have received representations from a number of groups of individuals whose concerns may conflict, and the traditional theory of State responsibility allows the State to synthesise or ignore those arguments and to present the position that best represents its own interests.
The theory of State responsibility may ensure the independence of the State in presenting its claims, but this should not obscure the fact that entities other than States have interests that may be affected by the outcome of the proceedings, and that the present process of international litigation, with few exceptions, pays no regard to them.
THIRD PARTIES IN INTERNATIONAL DISPUTES AND CONFLICTS
While the parties, and hence third parties, to treaties and international proceedings may be readily identified, it may be more complex to identify the parties to a conflict or dispute.
The Permanent Court defined a dispute as ‘a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views or interests between two persons.’
Given the adversarial procedures of the Court it is not surprising that it defined a dispute in bilateral terms.
However, a dispute may not be purely bilateral; indeed the two-party model imposed by the adversarial system will rarely represent the multifaceted dimensions of a dispute.
Third party interests in a dispute will range in intensity and directness, as illustrated by the background to Nicaragua v. the United States.
Nicaragua's claims against the United States arose out of conflict in Central America which impinged upon all other States in the area.
As the Contadora process demonstrated, States within the immediate region and beyond felt themselves affected by the repercussions of the conflict.
From among these States the interests of El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica were more directly and intensely affected than those of other States.
Although only Nicaragua and the United States were parties to the original litigation, the United States claimed that its actions in and against Nicaragua were justified as collective self-defence of the territorial integrity and political independence of those third States, in particular of El Salvador.
Thus El Salvador, Costa Rica and Honduras, whilst third parties to the contentious proceedings before the International Court, were asserted by the United States to be parties to the wider dispute.
The legitimacy of this claim is shown by Nicaragua's subsequent commencement of proceedings against Costa Rica and Honduras in which Honduras alleged that the Nicaraguan claims constituted an ‘artificial and arbitrary’ dividing up of the tension within the area.
It might become necessary to define the parameters of an international dispute so as to identify the parties to it.
This especially arises where third parties make procedural claims in an international forum seised of the dispute.
Boundary disputes have become perhaps the classic setting for the presentation of bilateral claims in which third parties may claim an interest.
Since boundaries do not form neat bilateral patterns, adjacent or opposite States may fear that any bilateral demarcation will trespass upon an area claimed by them.
The parties to the proceedings may claim to be unaware of this wider dimension, and may challenge any third party procedural claims.
Alternatively, an unwilling respondent may claim that the dispute is wider than that presented to the forum, in that third parties are involved, and that the claim should not be considered in their absence.
Certain claims depend upon party or third party labelling.
This was the case in the dispute arising out of the restrictions Egypt imposed in 1951 upon Israeli shipping in the Suez Canal.
On one view, this was a bilateral dispute between Israel and Egypt regarding the right of transit for Israeli shipping through the Canal.
On another, it was part of the wider Middle East conflict involving all Arab States in their war against Israel.
Egypt claimed it was still wider, and that all States which had protested Egypt's actions (the Netherlands, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States and France) were parties to the dispute, although their own shipping was not directly affected.
Egypt argued that protest put those States into dispute with Egypt as to the interpretation of the Armistice Agreement and the Suez Canal Convention.
The United Kingdom responded that Israel (as a party) had brought its dispute with Egypt before the Security Council, and that Egypt and Israel were the only parties.
Egypt's interpretation would increase the participants in all disputes by designating any protesting State a party, whether or not the actions protested against affected it directly.
The strategies behind the claims were procedural: Egypt wanted United Nations Charter, Article 27 (3) to be applied, to prevent those States that had protested from voting on the matter before the Security Council, while the United Kingdom wished to preserve the bilateral nature of the dispute and its own procedural rights.
Another illustration of the importance for procedural rights of determining whether a dispute exists, and of identifying the parties to it, is Namibia.
South Africa claimed that since it was a party to the dispute the Security Council had acted illegally in depriving it of its right of audience under United Nations Charter, Article 32.
The Court side-stepped the issue by noting that Namibia had been listed on the agenda of the Security Council as a ‘situation’ not a ‘dispute’.
This avoided the need to distinguish between parties and non-parties, but deprived those closely associated with the affair of claims to procedural rights.
Recognising South Africa as a party to a dispute about its policies in Namibia would have required identification of the other parties.
The obvious candidates are non-States: the people of Namibia, and the United Nations.
These examples illustrate that in any dispute there can be a number of third parties with different interests of varying degrees of intensity.
El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica were ‘hard-core’ third parties to the proceedings before the Court between Nicaragua and the United States; other regional States were third parties with direct interests in the efforts to bring peace to Central America; outside the region, States had an interest in the fortunes of the Sandinista government; States whose shipping used Nicaragua's ports had an interest in its safety; and all States shared a community interest in the maintenance of international peace and security.
In the Suez dispute, the issue between Israel and Egypt was part of the serial conflict between the Arab States and Israel; States parties to the Armistice Treaty and the Suez Canal Convention shared an interest in their observance; and still wider, all States share a common interest in freedom of navigation through international waterways, the possible creation of an objective regime, and in the maintenance of international peace and security.
RIGHTS, OBLIGATIONS AND INTERESTS
A third party may claim that it has a direct interest in the actions of States or it may accept that its interest is indirect or peripheral.
Its interest may be legal, moral, ideological, economic, religious, regional, political, or a combination of these.
A State has an interest in the protection of certain values it upholds.
A third party may assert that it has more than a mere interest in a certain subject, since it has a legal right81 in the subject matter of the dispute, or a right granted under a treaty between the parties.
On the other hand, the parties may argue that some third party is under a legal obligation to them.
These various levels of legal right, interest, and values may be illustrated by reference to treaties and third parties.
On one level all treaties and other international transactions affect strangers to the transaction, which must respect the allocation of values between the parties.
The impact of a treaty upon a third party can range through various levels of intensity, from an actual duty accepted by a third party to perform certain acts, through to the treaty being ‘incidentally unfavourable’ to it.
The impact may be favourable to a third party, again ranging from the bestowal of a right through to some beneficial side effects.
A treaty may create expectations in other members of the international community that it will be performed, and third parties may arrange their own affairs accordingly.
Third parties have no legal basis for a claim that a treaty merely affects them in some way, or that non-performance or reduced performance has frustrated their own expectations; nor can they interfere with the rights of other States to enter into such treaties.
The problem is to determine the degree of intensity necessary to allow the third party to make some valid claim, or for the parties to bring a claim against it.
In international procedural terms this required level of intensity is, at least theoretically, satisfied when a State considers it has ‘an interest of a legal nature that may be affected by the decision in the case…‘, while in treaty law the emphasis is on rights and obligations.
If States A and B conclude a treaty delimiting an area of adjacent continental shelf between them, their agreement will affect third States (and other interested bodies such as mining companies), which will have to acknowledge the existence of the delimitation, and decide upon their appropriate response.
There is a range of potential responses: the delimitation may be respected and acted upon, for example through application for mining licences to either A or B according to the terms of the agreement; other States might tacitly acquiesce in the delimitation; others might make a formal protest that it conflicts with a legal interest of their own, for example, claims of sovereign rights over part of the same area.
If there are proceedings before the International Court between A and B, a third State, C, may be able to intervene to raise its interest before the Court; or C may have sufficient interest to enable it to claim that there is a dispute between itself and A and/or B and (assuming jurisdiction) initiate its own action.
C might ignore the agreement, take coercive action and promote a conflict between itself and A and B. C cannot be compelled to accept the terms of the treaty between A and B; if C acts contrary to the treaty, A and B cannot make that the basis of a claim against C. Equally, if the treaty between A and B was in C's interest, C could not enforce that interest through legal proceedings unless it was in fact more than an interest, and amounted to a legally protected right.
A third State is affected by a treaty as a matter of fact when the treaty necessitates it acting in some way in response (even if its preferred response is to do nothing).
Suppose State C has been for many years the major supplier of wheat to State A. If States A and B make an agreement that A will buy wheat from B instead of from C, this will affect C which will have to decide upon its response.
C may lobby A, may reduce its own prices, may seek new markets elsewhere, or take other steps.
C cannot challenge the conclusion of the agreement between A and B, unless that agreement constitutes a violation of either a prior agreement between A and itself, or of a multilateral agreement to which both are parties.
A distinction is usually drawn between the legal effects of a treaty that bestows rights and one that purports to impose burdens86 upon third parties.
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties continues this distinction and makes no reference to interests of third parties.
However the distinction between rights and obligations is a crude one that does not reflect accurately the impact of treaties upon third parties.
A third party has an interest in a treaty which presents a threat to the continuance or allocation of a value of the third party.
If the value is a legally recognised interest, the third State may be able to make representations against the parties for its protection.
If the value is not a legally recognised interest, the third party may still make diplomatic claims or take political or economic action.
At a higher level of intensity again the treaty may amount to the attempted bestowal of a right or the imposition of an obligation upon a third party.
The bestowal of a right upon a third party gives rise to expectations on the part of that third party that the parties will act in conformity with the treaty in their relations with itself; without necessarily having made any commitment of its own it will see itself as the beneficiary of the exchange of promises between the parties.
The imposition of obligations means that the parties form similar expectations about the behaviour of the third party that they can enforce if the third party does not comply.
In many cases it is simplistic to make a bald differentiation between an obligation and a right, for each can exist at many different levels.
An obligation or right (as well as an interest) can be legal or moral, express or implied.
Either may arise only after the performance or occurrence of some particular acts.
The words ‘obligation’ and ‘right’provide no analysis of what might actually occur within the relationships between the parties and between the parties and non-parties, or of the chain of action and response that is likely to unwind from the conclusion and subsequent performance of any treaty.
A right can be viewed in terms of a claim, although that expression is itself ambiguous.
To make a claim is to articulate a public statement that one has ‘reasons or grounds that put one in a position to engage in performative and propositional claiming’.
One ground for such a belief is that one has a legal right to some act or omission by another legal or natural person, although to define claims in terms of rights becomes circular:
Nevertheless, certain facts about rights, more easily, if not solely, expressible in the language of claims and claiming, are necessary to a full understanding of what rights are and why they are so vitally important.
In the international arena (as in the municipal arena) needs can be the ground for a claim.
Claims resting upon needs must be distinguished from demands where there is no recognised justification for the claim other than, perhaps, naked power.
The armed robber does not claim your property but demands it.
Many of the claims of the developing world, especially those relating to the establishment of a new international economic order, fall into the category of articulation of needs for economic development.
An emphasis upon rights and obligations focuses upon a pre-existing treaty relationship defining parties and third parties.
Disputes relating to rights and obligations centre upon interpreting the status quo , while third parties' claims may rest upon interests or needs that have emerged or been articulated at some subsequent time.
It has been argued that the present day focus of international law is upon disputes relating to parties' interests in satisfying needs, and values, rather than upon formalistic attention to rights.
The drawing of lines between right and wrong [or duty and obligation]is being overshadowed by the need for cooperative adjustment and common improvement among States competing for limited resources.
A concentration on rights and obligations provides only a narrow perspective that ignores the role of international regulation in development, the equitable allocation of resources, and the need for cooperation and negotiation between States.
The formulation of a claim to register some need presupposes a response, but the identity of the respondent might be problematic.
In a bilateral system comprising a network of reciprocal relationships the entity against which claims are made is evident.
It is more complex where international actors co-exist in a variety of relationships.
Claims may be made by or against individual entities, or the international community as a whole.
The international community is not per se owed a duty of obedience to the claims of some of its members, but it does provide a framework for the articulation of claims and for cohesion in response.
It can organise sanctions to unsatisfactory responses.
The presentation of claims within the organs of the institutionalised international community signifies a shift from bilateral to multilateral claims.
Some of the third party claims examined will be based upon recognised legal rights and obligations, but others are based upon certain needs in which some merit is recognised by members of the international community.
One purpose of making these claims might be to attempt to establish a new legal norm, that is, that a claim at present based upon a need will become one of right.
The international prescriptive process operates through the chain of response and counter-response to the articulation of claims which allows for the prediction of future behaviour.
PART I TREATIES AND THIRD PARTIES
STATES AS THIRD PARTIES TO TREATIES: FORMAL PRESCRIPTIONS
THE CURRENT STATUS OF THE PACTA TERTIIS RULE
States enter into treaty arrangements as an expression of their sovereignty.
Treaties bind consenting parties only, and strangers to any treaty are legally unaffected by it.
This is the classic rule of treaties and third parties: pacta tertiis nec nocent nec prosunt.
As early as 1917 Roxburgh demonstrated that many municipal legal systems had developed devices to avoid the restrictions and inconveniences caused by a rigid adherence to the analogous rule that contracts bind only parties to them, a process that continues.
In international law too, the strict rule was inconvenient and could cause hardship to third parties whose interests were adversely affected by treaties from which they were excluded.
States form an interlocking network of bilateral and multilateral treaty relationships, which reinforces the interdependence that characterises contemporary international relations.
On the one hand, emphasis upon the principles of State sovereignty and equality demands strict adherence to the traditional rule, while on the other, the interdependence of States' interests supports some relaxation of it.
There appear to have been two major influences behind the modification of the classic pacta tertiis rule.
The first is that treaties are a major tool for the development of international law.
Treaties are called upon to perform a wide variety of functions corresponding to distinct transactions in municipal law.
A bilateral treaty (or one with a limited number of parties) creating mutual rights and duties in personam most approximates to a contract; it is here that the identity of treaty partners is most significant.
In contrast, the objective of many multilateral treaties (often approximating more to legislation, or to constitutional instruments) is universality of adherence.
The identity of the other treaty members is not determinative when a State is deciding whether to become committed to a multilateral treaty regime.
It is in the identification of a treaty with contract (traité-contrat) that the third party rule is most easily explicable; its restrictions in any concept of traité-loi are readily apparent.
The second influence has been the expansion of international regulation into areas which were previously not regarded as within international competence.
There has been a retreat from the position that States are the only proper subjects of international law, through the acknowledgment that both international organisations and individuals possess a degree of international personality, a development which would have been severely impeded by a rigid adherence to the classic rule.
This Part will examine the topic of treaties and third parties in an attempt to determine the circumstances in which international law accommodates the interests of third parties, and the reasoning by which this is done.
The formal rules relating to treaties and third parties will first be examined.
Chapter 3 will analyse various claims made by or against third States, and the outcome of those claims.
Third party treaty claims are not limited to States; other participants in the international arena may make similar claims.
Chapter 4 will consider claims made by and against third party organisations, and Chapter 5 claims made by or against individuals.
Chapter 6 will outline some conclusions with respect to the current status of the pacta tertiis rule.
GENERAL LEGAL PRESCRIPTION ON TREATIES AND THIRD PARTIES
Before The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
The pacta tertiis rule is founded upon the Roman law analogy to contract and the principles of independence, consensuality, and sovereign equality of States.
The rule protected States from intervention by other States in their external affairs and maintained the inherent bilateralism of international law.
It was in the interests of the Great Powers that they could not be held bound by a treaty to which they had not formally become a party while, as will be seen, a number of the exceptions to the classic rule enabled them to impose their will upon weaker entities.
The rule was reiterated many times, by the Permanent Court of Justice, by various international arbitrations, by publicists, and in draft treaty articles.
Despite this virtual unanimity of opinion 104 it had long been accepted that there were certain exceptions to the rule.
While these authorities restated the general rule attention was focused upon attempts to formulate and analyse the exceptions, especially where rights were accepted as having been bestowed upon a third party.
Two judicial decisions will be given in illustration.
The Permanent Court of Justice in the Free Zones case gave cautious approval to the view that States could create rights in favour of other States as an exercise of their sovereignty.
The Court found on the facts that it did not need to pronounce upon whether the provisions relating to the Gex Zone created a stipulation in favour of a third party, but warned that the existence of such rights should not be lightly assumed: each such claim must be separately examined to determine ‘whether the States which have stipulated in favour of a third State meant to create for that State an actual right which the latter has accepted as such’.
The crucial factors for the creation of a third party right, as expressed by the majority of the Court, were the intention of the parties as stipulated in the agreement, and subsequent actions, including those of the third party.
Strong opposing views had however been presented in the earlier judgment on the case.
In 1965 the Court of Appeal of Berlin unequivocally upheld the right of treaty parties to create agreements in favour of third parties, provided they so intended.
In the Restitution of Household Effects Belonging to Jews Deported from Hungary109 a Hungarian Jew claimed against Germany for restitution of belongings confiscated by the Germans after the invasion of Hungary.
By Article 30 (4) of the Treaty of Peace with Hungary, Hungary waived all its claims against Germany, both on its own behalf and on behalf of its nationals.
This waiver clause was held to be a genuine stipulation pour autrui.
It was:
a genuine agreement in favour of a third party, going beyond a factual privilege…
The admissibility of the conclusion of such treaties and their legal validity in favour of a non-contracting third State is generally recognised in international legal doctrine.
Whether Germany (the third party) had accepted this waiver was irrelevant.
Admittedly, the background was exceptional; the true beneficiaries of the waiver were the allies, who did not want Germany's economic resources to be diminished through claims from States previously allied to the Third Reich.
Although the right was vested in Germany, the allies had the major interest in enforcing the provision.
The case demonstrates the interlocking nature of rights, interests and obligations.
As the dominant parties to the Peace Treaty the allies could insist upon the inclusion of the waiver clause which Germany was in no position to reject.
A Berlin Court was not likely to have rendered the provision ineffective.
Despite these circumstances, the case strongly affirms that where the parties intend a treaty to confer a benefit upon a non-party it can be applied, regardless of third party consent.
Territorial regimes constituted by a multilateral treaty (often as part of a peace settlement) were also regarded as capable of constituting an exception to the classic rule.
When such ‘dispositive’ or ‘objective’regimes were accepted as being in the general public interest they were said to be binding erga omnes.
For example, the International Commission of Jurists concluded in its report on the status of the Aaland Islands that the Convention of 1856 which had demilitarised the islands remained effective and could be relied upon by a third party, Sweden.
The Commission refused to characterise the demilitarisation as an international servitude, but held that a territorial arrangement made in the general European public interest and intended to be of long duration, would have this objective effect.
Drafting The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
In the preparatory work of the International Law Commission which culminated in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties there was much debate over the inclusion and wording of any exceptions to the pacta tertiis rule.
Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice, the third Special Rapporteur, thought that previous analysis of treaties and third parties had been unsatisfactory in both theory and doctrine, and that the subject had received no systematic treatment.
He attempted ‘to introduce some order’ into the subject and to deal with it systematically.
In his Fifth Report he argued that there were three or four major underlying principles under which all claims for exceptions could be brought.
These were: active consent by the third party to be bound by the treaty; presumed consent through the development of the treaty rule as a principle of customary international law; the automatic entailment of rights and obligations; and an over-riding principle of respect for lawful, valid or legitimate international acts.
Jiminez de Arechaga, a member of the International Law Commission, identified what he considered to be the three crucial questions.
He considered the focus of the controversy to be the juridical effects of a stipulation made in favour of a third party, which he deconstructed into three questions: can a third party claim directly any such benefit or can it only be claimed through the auspices of a State party; may the parties to the agreement amend or abolish the stipulation without the consent of the third party; and need the third party accept the stipulation in order to be vested with the benefit in question? 120
In 1964 Special Rapporteur Sir Humphrey Waldock restated the classic rule and covered the exceptions in just two draft articles.
He followed the traditional approach of considering separately the imposition of burdens upon a third party from the conferring of benefits, and stressed in his commentary the requirement of good faith prior to becoming a party to a treaty.
In Waldock's draft Article 62:
1.
A State is bound by a provision of a treaty to which it is not a party if:(a) the parties…intended that the provision in question should be the means of creating a legal obligation binding upon that particular State or class of States to which it belongs; and (b) that State has expressly or impliedly consented to the provision.
2.
A [third]State is entitled to invoke a right…when (a) the parties…intended that the provision in question should create an actual right upon which that particular State, or a class of States to which it belongs, could rely; and (b) the right has not been rejected, either expressly or impliedly by that State.
3.
The provision…may be amended or revoked…by the parties to the treaty without the consent of the State entitled to the right…, unless —(a) the parties to the treaty had entered into a specific agreement with the latter with regard to the creation of the right; or (b) a contrary intention appears from the terms of the treaty, the circumstances of its conclusion or the statements of the parties.
4.
A State exercising a right by a provision of a treaty to which it is not a party is bound to comply with any conditions laid down in that provision, or elsewhere in the treaty for the exercise of the right.
Like the Permanent Court, Waldock focused on the intention of the parties to the treaty and the consent of the third party to any such right.
The position of the parties is preserved by allowing them to alter or revoke any third party right without the latter's consent, unless there is a specific arrangement to the contrary, or evidence that the parties intended otherwise.
This draft also has a separate provision relating to the imposition of conditions by the parties to a treaty, which a third party must observe if it wishes to take advantage of the relevant right.
As has been seen, one of the pre-Vienna Convention exceptions to the pacta tertiis rule concerned territorial settlements, or treaties conferring status upon some particular territory.
It had to be decided whether the Vienna Convention would include provisions on objective regimes, or whether they would be subsumed under the general prescription.
Fitzmaurice had argued for the binding effect of objective regimes on two principles: implied consent and the erga omnes status of the regime.
Waldock rejected this classification124 and included a separate article on objective regimes.
This article stated that an objective regime existed where it was the intention of the parties to create general obligations and rights in the overall community interest, provided all States with territorial competence over the area subject to the regime were included among the parties, or subsequently consented.
Third parties would be bound by the regime and would also be entitled to invoke its provisions and to exercise any conferred right, provided they had expressly consented to it, or their consent could be implied through acquiescence.
Revocation of an objective regime would only be possible with the consent of all parties which had consented to the regime and ‘have substantial interest in its functioning’.
A criticism of Fitzmaurice's analysis is that it does not answer the crucial question of why such an objective regime should have any effect on third parties.
Waldock's Draft Article 63 was much criticised, at a time when the whole issue had become more politically sensitive with the conclusion of the Antarctic Treaty in 1959.
In the International Law Commission debates and commentaries a number of other issues were controversial.
While there was general agreement as to the impossibility of imposing obligations on a third State by treaty, there were two major schools of thought with respect to rights; some members felt that a treaty could not of its own force create rights for non-parties (and thus would require acceptance by a non-party through a form of collateral agreement), while others (including all four Special Rapporteurs) rejected this view.
They considered that there is ‘nothing in international law to prevent two or more States from effectively creating a right in favour of another State by treaty’.
Waldock remained unconvinced by the argument that it was contrary to the sovereign equality of States, for the third party remained free to reject the right, a view he considered supported by more recent State practice and jurisprudence.
Another source of controversy was what actions would denote implied consent.
There was concern about consent being obtained through coercion, and the effectiveness of such consent.
Another area of debate was the revocability or modification of rights conferred upon third parties; if they could be revoked without the third party's consent then they could not be truly considered rights; if they could not, the treaty parties would have surrendered some of their autonomy.
Further, treaty parties would be reluctant to create rights in favour of third parties if those rights were irrevocable.
The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties: Articles 34–38
Articles 34–38 of the Vienna Convention provide the specialised rules on treaties and third States.
A third State’ means a State not a party to a treaty'.
A treaty may exceptionally purport to bind all non-party States, States belonging to an identifiable category, or even named third States:
It is not a condition that the third State be specified by name provided it is clear from the context or surrounding circumstances what State is intended, or that a group or class of States is intended of which the claiming State is a member.
The intention of the parties is determinative both of whether a third party right has been created and of the identity of any potential third party claimant.
Article 34 restates the basic rule: a treaty creates neither obligations nor rights for a third State without its consent.
In this general preliminary statement of legal effect, rights and obligations are treated together.
There follow separate articles specifying the conditions for the creation of an obligation and a right with respect to a third State, and the different ways of manifesting consent to each.
Article 35 allows an obligation to be imposed upon a third State if the parties so intend, and the third party accepts it in writing.139—The juridical basis for the third party's obligation would appear therefore to be an ancillary (or collateral) agreement in writing.
However since the Convention does not specify that the acceptance be directed towards the treaty parties it might not be possible to regard it as a collateral agreement.
An example might be a State's internal legislation proclaiming its neutral status as constituting acceptance of a treaty agreement between other States.
Under Article 36 a third party can claim a right under a treaty provided the parties intended to create the right and the third party assents thereto.
The intention of the parties is important since a right bestowed upon third parties carries the corollary of the acceptance of an obligation by themselves.
One form of assent is the very act of claiming or exercising the right.
If there is silence, Article 36 presumes assent unless the contrary is indicated.
Jiminez de Arechaga concludes that recognising a third party's assent through its actions shows that the third party is taking advantage of a pre-existing right, and is not concluding a collateral agreement.
The stipulation pour autrui is already effective, but may become inoperative if rejected by the third party.
Article 36 (2) provides that the third party must comply with any conditions, stipulated in the agreement ‘or established in conformity’ with it.
This does not suppress or suspend the right, but may restrain its exercise.
It allows the parties flexibility in that they may impose new conditions, but provides the third party with the safeguard that any new conditions must comply with the original treaty.
Under Article 37, an obligation that has arisen for a third party cannot be revoked or modified without the consent of the parties and the third party unless they have agreed otherwise.
A third party right cannot be revoked or modified by the parties if it is established that the right was not intended to be so revocable or modifiable without the third party's consent.
Article 38 is the only specified exception, for it preserves the position that a rule set forth in a treaty can become binding upon a third party as a rule of customary international law.
Exclusions from the Vienna Convention
The Vienna Convention takes a reductivist and formalist approach to treaty law.
Problems that cannot be solved by simple application of treaty principles are excluded.
Articles 34–38 specify no exceptions to the pacta tertiis rule; such exceptions must either be fitted into the Articles or they must be accepted as prescribing only the general framework of the law.
For example, if objective regimes are to be regarded as creating rights erga omnes they must be incorporated within Articles 34–38, or the principles with respect to them be regarded as sui generis .
It has been suggested that there are three theoretical approaches to regimes binding erga omnes: they can be regarded as a special concept within the law of treaties constituting an exception to the res inter alios principle; they can be justified on a public law basis whereby a group of States assume quasi-legislative competence to create a regulatory regime for a defined territory in the overall community interest; or other processes such as recognition, acquiescence, estoppel, historic title, or the formation of customary international law can produce an erga omnes effect on treaties intended to have that effect.
Another approach has been to apply regime theory as developed by political scientists to areas regulated by international law.150—In all cases, a particular claim would have to be carefully examined to determine the legitimacy of an erga omnes claim, which cannot be presumed.
The Vienna Convention does little to clarify the position of objective regimes at a time when such claims are of considerable political and legal importance.
State succession was also omitted from the Vienna Convention, necessitating the subsequent Vienna Convention on State Succession.
That Convention is not so narrowly drawn and explicitly provides for dispositive treaties and boundary regimes.
In both cases it can be argued that the succession is not to the treaty, but to the territory as defined.
This presents the situation as a matter of territorial competence rather than treaty law.
It can also be viewed as combining elements of treaty law with territorial competence: the acceptance of the territory within the previously agreed boundaries incurs acceptance of any conditions that were negotiated at the time of the boundary settlement.
This again fuses conditions (or obligations) and rights, emphasising the artificiality of their separate treatment.
Yet another omission from the Vienna Convention is the most-favoured nation clause, a clause long accepted as effective to provide benefits for third parties to treaties concluded subsequent to the treaty containing the clause.
The International Law Commission emphasised that the operation of most-favoured nation clauses is not prejudiced by the Vienna Convention, an acknowledgment that the Convention is not comprehensive in its coverage of treaties and third parties.
Other Articles of the Vienna Convention
Article 18 of the Vienna Convention draws a distinction between a third party stranger to a treaty and one which is a non-party, but has minimum obligations.
Article 18 imposes an obligation on a State which has signed but not yet ratified a treaty, or which has ratified a convention prior to its entry into force, not to act so as to defeat the objects and purposes of the convention.
Such a State should act in good faith so as not to frustrate the objects of the treaty.
This obligation gives significance to the public act of signature, and can also be justified by estoppel.
A number of provisions refer to the ‘objects and purposes’ of the treaty, suggesting ‘the existence of a normative element beyond the rules laid down’in the treaty.
Thus Article 18 requires a signatory State to refrain from acts which would defeat the ‘object and purpose’ of the treaty; a reservation must not be ‘incompatible with the object and purpose’of the treaty, and a material breach is ‘the violation of a provision essential to the object or purpose of the treaty’.
These provisions militate against the bilateralism or ‘excessively formal terms of Articles 34–38’.
The Convention also recognises that parties may have varying interests in the operation of a treaty or treaty provision.
Article 60, for example, distinguishes between all States parties to a treaty, and a State party which is ‘specially affected’ by a material breach by another party.
The latter State has greater individual rights in the event of material breach than other parties, who generally can only act collectively.
Article 60 (2)(c) goes further by allowing a party to invoke the breach as a ground for suspension between itself and the defaulting State, if the treaty is such that ‘material breach…by one party radically changes the position of every party’ under the treaty.
This provision allows for a unilateral decision of suspension by a State that does not claim to be specially affected by the breach where it feels the consequences of the breach undermines the entire Convention.
Articles 53 and 64 recognise the community interest in the conclusion and operation of treaties.
The principle of jus cogens gives an objective basis for the assessment of the validity of treaties concluded between other States by providing that treaties conflicting with a norm of jus cogens are void.
However, the concept of jus cogens is not linked with the concept of State responsibility, another exclusion from the Vienna Convention.
Neither the individual State responsibility of a State that concludes a treaty contrary to jus cogens, nor the rights of third States where a treaty violates a peremptory norm of international law are specified.
The substantive jus cogens provisions are not backed up by any general procedural rights.
The procedural provisions in Articles 65–68 distinguish between ‘parties’(presumably to the treaty) and ‘parties to a dispute’.
Under Article 65 the party which invokes a ground for invalidity or termination must notify the other parties of its claim; each other party has the right to raise an objection and to invoke the measures for the peaceful settlement of disputes in Article 33 of the Charter.
However with respect to the ground for invalidity which is most pertinent to the community interest, conflict with a norm of jus cogens, only the ‘parties to a dispute’ can invoke the special procedure in Article 66 (a), although that procedure is compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.
This simultaneously recognises that the community interest in the assertion of a violation of a norm of jus cogens is sufficiently serious to justify an authoritative decision from the International Court, while rejecting the right of all States to apply for such a ruling.
Rosenne concluded that the inclusion of jus cogens, along with the distinction that is drawn between treaties that are void ab initio165 and those that can be subsequently avoided, gives the Convention the flexibility that allows for a reconciliation between its dominant bilateralism and the overall community interest.
Treaties void ab initio are stated to be ‘of no legal effect’ or ‘void’but without any reference to procedures to give effect to the voidness, while for voidable treaties it is specified that the State affected by the defect may raise the defect to invalidate its consent.
In the absence of any third party judicial or administrative procedure the parties can ignore a defect supposedly invalidating a treaty, and continue to regard the treaty as valid; the concept of absolute invalidity has little practical application in treaty law.
The way is left open for the development of some form of third party action in the community interest in the case of invalidity.
The relationship between States directly injured by a violation of international law and other States has been explored further by the International Law Commission in its work on State Responsibility.
Comments on the Vienna Convention
As noted earlier, the Vienna Convention applies only to treaties concluded between States.
The law applicable to the claims by or against other entities must be articulated either by analogy to the Convention, or under general international law.
Since claims by non-State third parties will not normally be presented before an international forum and are not directly governed by the terms of the Vienna Convention, the outcome may well be significantly different from those involving third States.
The provisions of the Vienna Convention on treaties and third parties are sparse; no exceptions to the general rule are spelled out, apart from that with respect to the emergence of customary international law.
The Convention draws no distinction between types of treaty.
There is no recognition of, and therefore no special provisions for, ‘the predominantly contractual’ treaty as opposed to legislative, dispositive, or constitutive treaties.
It gives no explicit recognition to the concept of traité-loi.
Instead the formal rules regulating the effects of treaties on third States have a unity and simplicity which do not rely upon an initial classification of treaties.
This may be unsatisfactory given the many different types and forms of treaty, and the diverse ways in which they impact upon third parties.
However, even if it is accepted that treaties do not perform a single function and should not all be subject to the same rules, there remains the threshold question of how treaties are best conceptualised and categorised.
Very few individual treaties deal with a single subject matter.
O'Connell points out that even boundary treaties may contain other provisions for the performance of reciprocal rights and duties, a factor which prevents their easy categorisation as a dispositive or personal treaty with specific legal consequences.
Many treaties may be equally appropriately classified in a number of ways: having legal consequences flow from such a classification could well lead to incoherence and confusion rather than promoting certainty.
The Convention continues the distinction that has been traditionally drawn between rights and obligations, and assumes that they can be effectively distinguished.
The interlocking of rights and duties within a single treaty may make this impracticable.
Parties and non-parties may not concur in what constitutes a right, and what an obligation.
Conditions may be attached to the bestowal of rights on third parties; onerous conditions could, in the opinion of a third party, transform such a right into an obligation.
In any case the inclusion of conditions tightens the interconnection between rights and obligations.
No linkage is provided in the Convention between the two sets of rights and obligations that are created: those between the parties inter se and those between the parties and any third party.
Treaties, like any other form of agreement, characteristically incorporate both rights and duties as part of an interlocking bargain.
Although there is no doctrine of consideration in international law, treaty rights are likely to have obligations attached, and vice versa.
This is true both of the mutual exchange of rights and obligations by the parties and of provisions intended to bind third parties.
It must be questioned whether there is any basis for the continued separate treatment of rights and obligations.
The Convention is also limited to rights and obligations; it does not purport to regulate the situation where a treaty is incidentally beneficial or detrimental to a third party's interests.175—The different requirements for the manifestation of consent by third States to rights as opposed to obligations could cause difficulties; since a treaty may give rise to both, should the provisions of Article 35 (obligations) or Article 36 (rights) apply?
This could be resolved by requiring that the more certain method (acceptance in writing) apply to such a ‘mixed’ treaty, but this is not specified.
The policy behind Article 35 is to protect a third party from undesired obligations and to make that party's consent the basis of any such obligations.
It is excessively formalistic to demand this acceptance in writing, for States make binding commitments through other modalities, such as unilateral declarations.
Admittedly the Vienna Convention itself applies only to treaties in written form, but Article 3 acknowledges the legal force of unwritten agreements.
The written acceptance of an obligation by a third party creates an additional agreement between the parties to the original agreement and the third party.
In contrast the precise juridical basis for third party rights under the Convention remains uncertain.
What is clear under both Article 35 and 36 is that the third party remains just that: it does not become a party to the entire treaty.
If the written acceptance of an obligation is to be regarded as a collateral agreement (as required by Article 35 and possible under Article 36), it should be subject to the registration requirement of Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
This position is not however supported by State practice.
Article 36 specifies no time within which the third party must make its dissent known, nor is there any indication of the status of that right in the period between its inclusion in a treaty and any dissent to it.
It is not clear when the right actually arises, nor whether its basis is the sovereign will of the treaty parties or the assent of the third party.
If the right arises through third party assent, that time cannot be definitely ascertained where assent is presumed through silence.
This may become relevant if the parties wish to revoke or modify the right, for this cannot be done without the third party's assent, unless it was previously agreed otherwise.
Where a multilateral treaty creates a right potentially for all non-parties, can that right be revoked without their consent?
A possible example is Article 35 (2) of the Statute of the International Court which makes the Court open to non-parties upon conditions laid down by the Security Council.
Is it open for parties to the Statute to decide that other States should either commit themselves to the Statute (by complying with the Security Council conditions) or be denied access to the Court, or must the agreement of all non-party States be obtained?
This right of access to the Court has not been exercised by many third States, but could failure to deposit a non-party declaration with the Registrar of the Court be taken as non-acceptance of the right so that it could no longer be claimed?
Or could a third party claim that it had never indicated dissent and only now wished to exercise the right?
The policy of facilitating access to the Court suggests this to be the preferable approach.
Article 36 states that any conditions attached to the exercise of a right by a third party must be observed.
As already noted, these conditions could be so onerous that they in effect amount to obligations.
It is not stated who is to determine whether the conditions have been observed, or what is to be the consequence of subsequent non-observance.
Arechaga had pointed out that the ability of the parties to confer a right on third parties subject to conditions is a legal strength, for it allows the creation of complex international regimes comparable to statutory regimes in municipal law.
Revocation and amendment of both an obligation and a right are treated in tandem in Article 37.
This is surprising, as termination and amendment of an entire treaty are regarded as distinct, and subject to different rules.
Does Article 37 mean that the normal grounds for termination of a treaty (material breach and rebus sic stantibus) do not apply to obligations and rights created for third States?
Suppose, for example, that there was some fundamental change in the circumstances that had been the basis for the grant of the right to the third party, and that this change radically transformed the extent of the obligations of the parties.
Does Article 37 mean that they could not make a claim to terminate the right on this ground?
Another problem is whether the parties have thereby lost their right to terminate the entire treaty on either of these grounds because of the acceptance of a right or obligation by a third party.
The question is whether Article 37 must be read subject to the general provisions on termination, or whether it displaces them.
In the absence of any words displacing those general provisions the answer must be the former.
The same must be true of the provisions relating to error, fraud and corruption, coercion, and jus cogens.
The third party must be able to claim that its assent is invalid if any of these grounds can be substantiated.
Equally, once it has assented, may a third party withdraw its assent without notice, or is it bound by the restrictions on unilateral termination of treaties?
If there is a collateral agreement the answer must be yes, but if not it should be free to withdraw its assent.
In all the provisions there are exception clauses: an obligation can be revoked or modified only with consent ‘unless it is established they had otherwise agreed’; assent shall be presumed ‘so long as the contrary is not indicated’; a right may not be revoked or modified ‘if it is established that the right was intended not to be revocable’.
In all these cases there is no guidance as to their application, or indication as to the procedures for establishing the necessary facts, or upon whom the burden of proof lies.
Article 18 too leaves areas of uncertainty.
It has been suggested that it is a ‘soft’ provision imposing a moral or exhortatory obligation upon signatory States and is not normative.
Further, the Vienna Convention does not specify how long the obligations under Article 18 continue, although at some point a signatory State that does not ratify a treaty must surely be in the same position as non-signatories.
Article 18 states that this obligation lasts, inter alia, until the State has indicated that it does not intend to ratify the treaty.
One way of indicating this intention would be to take some action contrary to the object and purpose of the treaty, but such signalling action could be deemed a breach of Article 18.
Perhaps a satisfactory solution would be that a signatory State should be under an obligation to publicise a positive decision not to ratify a treaty.
If it changed its policy it would still be able to ratify.
If this were felt to be a circular situation a formal decision not to ratify could be deemed to negate signature.
The State would then be equated to a non-signatory for all purposes, including having a right to accede in accordance with any accession clause.
It has also been suggested that the possible imposition of obligations upon signature may deter States from taking that step.
Article 34 of the Vienna Convention applies to itself so that like other treaties it cannot bind third parties.
Thus the rules contained in Articles 34–38 are only applicable to parties to the Vienna Convention, unless they constitute customary international law.
While Article 34 as a reiteration of the classic rule is almost certainly customary law, it is not so clear that this is true of the more detailed requirements of Articles 35–37.
Article 35 requires a third party to accept an obligation in writing.
Suppose a State not a party to the Vienna Convention accepts orally an obligation under another treaty to which it is not a party.
Under certain circumstances an oral commitment can be binding upon a State, but how would this affect the States parties to the treaty who are also parties to the Vienna Convention?
Can they accept this oral undertaking by a third State or must they, in accordance with the Vienna Convention, demand a written acceptance?
Alternatively, could the third party later retract the acceptance on the grounds that it was not written, and therefore could not have been relied upon by the parties to the Vienna Convention?
In the Pablo Najera arbitration, France had failed to register an agreement between itself and Mexico as required by Article 18 of the League Covenant.
Mexico, a non-member of the League of Nations, claimed that this omission meant that France could not raise this agreement before the Commission.
The Commission ruled that France's failure to perform its obligations under the Covenant could not affect Mexico's obligations under the agreement between itself and France.
As a non-member of the League, Mexico could not rely upon France's obligations with respect to the League.
Similarly, it could be argued that a non-party to the Vienna Convention could not rely upon that Convention's procedural requirements for the manifestation of consent.
However the cases are not identical, for registration is more obviously a procedural act than the means of manifestation of consent.
An unregistered treaty remained valid under Article 18, whereas an obligation does not bind a third party unless it has manifested its consent.
An incorrect method of doing so could be held procedural only, or alternatively it could be held to negate consent.
specific legal prescription
Interlocking arrangements: Treaties of Guarantee
Lord McNair claimed that treaties of guarantee demonstrate the most apparent interlocking of law and policy.
Under such treaties a State, or group of States, puts its authority and weight behind ensuring a certain state of affairs enshrined in the treaty.
States do this in what they perceive to be the general community interest and, perhaps, to encourage the State most directly affected to accept the treaty regime.
As Lord McNair explains, a number of diverse situations may be made subject to guarantee, including a permanent state of neutrality or demilitarisation, the observance of a peace settlement, or the territorial integrity of a certain territory.
A treaty of guarantee incorporates two distinct and separate obligations for the parties: the obligation to respect the terms of the treaty themselves and the undertaking to compel third parties to do likewise.
The similarity with treaties that create an obligation erga omnes are evident, except that in this case a particular State, or group of States, has undertaken to police the obligation.
This fusion of law and policy makes problematic the application of the legal principles relating to treaties and third parties.
The Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel
There are a number of treaties of guarantee where the entity most directly affected was not a party to the treaty.
These were primarily treaties between the Great Powers for the promotion of what they perceived as the benefit of the regional or international community.
In more modern treaties of guarantee such an entity is likely to be a party to the treaty in which case there is no third party issue.
Complex treaty settlements may involve interlocking relationships where third party questions remain.
An example is the settlement which finalised the Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel.
The treaty is a bilateral commitment with reciprocal rights and duties which contains no direct mention of the role of the United States in facilitating its conclusion, other than a general preambular reference to the Camp David framework for peace.
On the day the treaty was signed the Heads of Government of Egypt and Israel sent a joint letter to the President of the United States confirming their understanding that the United States would participate in all stages of the negotiation.
The United States responded by setting out in another letter its obligations to the parties.
In this reply the United States undertook to take certain action at the request of either or both of the parties in the event of an actual or threatened violation of the agreement, and thus guaranteed the continued observance of the Peace Treaty.
There is no indication in the Peace Treaty that the United States has such an obligation, or can claim such a right.
However the letter should be construed as a commitment by the United States to each of the parties that they should be able to rely upon, and be able to demand, compliance.
These assurances were evidently a necessary part of the negotiations to enable conclusion of the agreement.
Although the United States remains a third party to the Peace Agreement it therefore has obligations and rights with respect to its performance.
On the same day, the United States also entered into a Memorandum of Assurance with Israel in which it made a number of more specific undertakings directed towards preserving the security of Israel in the event of a violation of the Peace Treaty.
This Memorandum was a formal, public document, evidently intended by the parties to be binding upon them.
However it related to the performance of another agreement to which the United States was a stranger, while Egypt, party to the main treaty, was a stranger to the Memorandum.
Egypt made strong protests both before and after the conclusion of the Memorandum.
It regarded it as undermining the peace process, as making assumptions about the possibility of breach by Egypt, and as allowing unilateral arbitration of breach by the United States.
Interestingly, Egypt described the Memorandum as changing the United States' role from one of ‘partner’(but not party to the Peace Treaty) to one of ‘arbiter’ which it considered inappropriate.
Egypt concluded that it ‘does not consider itself bound by that Memorandum or whatever commitments to which it was not a party or on which it was not consulted’.
Any steps with respect to the performance of the Peace Treaty taken by the United States under its letter to Egypt and Israel would be binding upon them both, while any action that fell only within the terms of the Memorandum could be objected to by Egypt as a third party.
In the Memorandum the United States also agreed to ‘support the parties’ rights of navigation and access' to waterways in the area.
Since Egypt rejected the whole Memorandum, it also rejected this third party right of support.
Within the terms of Article 36 of the Vienna Convention it could not therefore claim performance of this support if it were to become needed.
The Afghanistan Peace Treaties and Guarantees
The package of agreements by which the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its forces from Afghanistan includes an interesting adaptation of the treaty of guarantee.
Although the conflict was perceived in the West as being an invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, the prime treaty commitment is in the Agreement between Afghanistan and Pakistan on the Principle of Mutual Relations in Particular of Non-Interference and Non-Intervention.
This recognises that Pakistan played a significant role in the conflict through its assistance to Afghanistan resistance forces and in receiving Afghan refugees.
The obligations in this first treaty are guaranteed by the United States and the Soviet Union in a separate treaty.
In this second treaty the two States undertake ‘to respect the commitments contained in the bilateral agreement between Afghanistan and Pakistan’ and ‘urge all States to act likewise’.
These two States have undertaken by treaty to accept the obligations contained in another treaty to which they are third parties, in recognition that any attempt at a lasting settlement is unlikely to succeed without their co-operation.
The Soviet Union has the major overt commitment, to remove its troops from Afghanistan, while the United States' role is to respect this withdrawal and to cease covert assistance to the Afghan resistance.
The package of treaties allows for formal acceptance of a third party obligation, which is not explicitly referred to in the former treaty.
The fourth treaty (to which all four States are parties) strengthens the entire settlement by incorporating all the obligations of the other treaties.
The treaty commitments are interlocked so as to create ‘the component parts of the political settlement.’
Other Treaty Devices
Protocols
The parties to a treaty may utilise specific devices to bind third parties to a treaty regime or to guarantee the provisions of the treaty.
An example is the use of Protocols by the South Pacific Forum States in the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty, and the Driftnet Fishing Convention.
The Nuclear Free Zone Treaty is open only to South Pacific Forum States, but its objectives cannot be fully achieved without some commitments from third parties.
The solution has been the opening of three Protocols for ratification by the nuclear States, whereby they make certain commitments with respect to the zone.
They do not become parties to the treaty but to the Protocol, while the treaty parties are not parties to the Protocol.
Similarly, two Protocols to the Driftnet Fishing Convention have been prepared.
Protocol I is targeted at Distant Water Fishing Nations, Protocol II to Pacific Rim States.
Parties to Protocol I undertake to prohibit their nations and vessels from driftnet fishing in the Convention area while parties to Protocol II accept further obligations in waters within their own jurisdiction.
Parties to the Protocols have the right to be invited to meetings and consultations with the Treaty parties.
One analysis is that a party to the Protocol has agreed to accept some treaty obligations.
An alternative view is that the parties to the Protocol have bestowed a benefit upon the treaty parties, which the latter must expressly or impliedly accept (and presumably have done so in advance by ratifying the treaty).
When the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics signed Protocols 2 and 3 to the Nuclear Free Zone Treaty, it made interpretive statements of its commitments.
These included the proposition that violation of their major commitments by the Treaty parties would free the Soviet Union from its commitments under the Protocol, a statement that gives rise to at least two third party dilemmas.
Under the Vienna Convention the right to terminate or suspend the treaty for material breach by another party is limited to the parties.
The Soviet Union can never be a party to the Treaty, and material breach gives no rights to non-parties.
The problem can also be stated the other way.
If a Protocol party acts in material breach of the Protocol, who has the right of termination or suspension?
The treaty parties (as third parties to the Protocols) would presumably have no such remedy, although they would be the States most immediately and directly affected by any such action.
The other Protocol parties might not be so concerned about the breach and not take any steps in response.
China went one stage further when on signature it ‘reserve[d] its right to reconsider these obligations if other nuclear weapon states or the contracting parties to the Treaty take any action in gross violation of the Treaty’.
It might be argued that violation of the treaty by its parties constitutes a fundamental change of circumstances justifying Protocol States in terminating their commitments.
The Chinese hinted at this by saying that such a violation might change ‘the status of the nuclear free zone’ and thus remove an ‘essential basis for their consent to be bound’.
Again this claim is only available to treaty parties.
Similar interpretative problems can arise with the Vienna Convention provisions on reservations.
Can parties to the treaty object to reservations to the Protocol on the grounds of incompatibility with the objects and purposes of the Convention, or can this be done only by parties to the Protocol?
If ratifying the Protocol is viewed as the conferral of rights on the treaty parties under Article 36 of the Vienna Convention, those States can decide whether to accept the rights, and might object to a statement such as that made by the Soviet Union on this basis.
Alternatively, if the Protocol is viewed as the written acceptance of obligations by the Protocol parties, the Soviet statement could be construed as a conditional acceptance.
If a third State has the right to refuse to accept an obligation contained within a treaty, it presumably has the right to accept it upon conditions.
The major objection to this argument is that the obligations are contained within the Protocol and not within the Treaty itself; there is no organic link between the two legal instruments creating a mutuality of obligations.
The South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone treaty impliedly modifies the Vienna Convention provisions on treaties and third parties by establishing its own regime, a course that is made necessary by the framing of so many of the provisions of the Vienna Convention in terms applicable only to parties.
Provided the third parties accept this (through ratification of the Protocol) there is no reason not to accept this device.
In both cases the treaties have been supplemented by General Assembly Resolutions.
While a General Assembly Resolution does not create legal obligations, the reiteration of the principles of the Conventions in this arena adds weight to the claims of the parties that they be respected.
3.2.2 Reciprocity
A treaty may provide that it will be applicable to a third party on the basis of reciprocity.
This is a device to avoid the disadvantages of the third party rule in particular situations.
It may be that a third party would be prepared to accept the commitments for a limited purpose without becoming a party to the treaty.
The goal of promoting conformity with the treaty might be sufficient to persuade the parties to use the device.
An example of such a provision is common Article 2 of the Geneva Red Cross Conventions, which provides that the parties shall be bound by the Conventions in relation to a party to the conflict which is not a party to the Conventions ‘if the latter accepts and applies the provisions thereof’.
It is desirable that as many parties to a conflict as possible apply the humanitarian provisions of the Conventions, and Article 2 facilitates this goal.
At the time of an international armed conflict it may be difficult to obtain a formal ratification from a non-party, but acceptance of the provisions for the duration of the conflict may be possible.
In Vernicos Shipping Co v. United States 217 the application of the Brussels Convention on State Immunity between Greece (a party) and the United States (a non-party) was considered.
The Convention allowed for application to non-parties on the basis of reciprocity.
Further, the parties had agreed not to allow a non-party to benefit from a waiver of immunity made in favour of the parties unless there was reciprocity.
There had been no express waiver by the United States in favour of Greece, but the Public Vessels Act allowed the United States to waive immunity in respect of a country which waives immunity for it.
The Court refused to allow itself to be caught in a circular argument as to which State needed to waive immunity first.
It held there was sufficient reciprocity between the Act and the Convention.
Both States had indicated their willingness to allow suits to be heard, so the reciprocity requirements should be interpreted to make this possible.
Third party problems can be avoided through the use of devices such as interlocking treaties, protocols, and reciprocity.
In these ways third States whose co-operation is required for the effective performance of a treaty can be brought within its framework, without necessarily becoming parties to it.
These arrangements do not always fit within the formal treaty rules, but can provide a practical means of ensuring that the rigidities of the pacta tertiis rule do not impede its performance.
However these devices still rest upon the intention and consent of both third parties and parties.
STATES AS THIRD PARTIES TO TREATIES: CLAIMS BY AND AGAINST THIRD PARTY STATES
CLAIMS OF PARTICIPATION
This chapter will examine actual and potential claims by and against third party States in order to clarify the current status of the pacta tertiis rule.
Claims of accession
A third party may claim that it can participate in a treaty either fully, by becoming a party, or partially, by becoming bound by certain sections.
For example, a third party may claim the right to accede to a treaty in accordance with its terms.
Article 11 of the Vienna Convention allows for consent to be bound by a treaty to be expressed in a number of ways including acceptance, approval, and accession.
These claims differ from other third party claims in that, if successful, the third party loses that status and becomes a party.
Accession is the traditional method whereby a non-signatory becomes a party to a treaty.
A third party has no right to accede; the treaty must provide for accession, or the parties must have subsequently agreed to it.
A general right of accession would have created a major inroad into the continuing bilateralism of even multilateral treaties.
In the absence of such a general right many multilateral treaties have accession clauses to encourage wide participation (especially from among States which may not have had treaty-making capacity at the time of the treaty's conclusion).
An example of a treaty which goes further is the South Pacific Driftnet Fishing Treaty which provides that parties shall consult with States eligible to become parties about matters relating to the Convention, and may reach agreements with such States.
Other treaties may limit accession to certain States, or categories of States.
An acceding State must satisfy any conditions laid down in the treaty, including the formalities for accession.
The rejection of a right of accession ensures that the intention of the parties remains the determinative factor in ascertaining whether accession is permissible.
A third State may claim that it has become associated with a treaty through acceptance or approval.
Brierly, the first Special Rapporteur on the Law of Treaties, proposed the rejection of all the traditional methods of becoming bound to a treaty in favour of a single, less formal concept of acceptance.
This would do away ‘with certain formalities (eg., the ceremony of signature), combine[s] various traditional methods, and make[s] the entry into force a more flexible and speedy process.’
This view was never accepted by the Commission.
Claims of adherence
Adhesion is not defined in the Vienna Convention but is accepted as a way in which a third party can become bound to certain parts of a treaty, but not its entirety.
O'Connell gives the example of a State that wishes to associate itself with the primary objectives of a treaty but not with its implementation.
He adds that the line between accession and adhesion is poorly defined.
Adhesion need not be a formal act and may be demonstrated through behaviour, although there appears to be a presumption against this.
In the North Sea Continental Shelf Cases, Germany, unlike Denmark and the Netherlands, had not ratified the Geneva Convention on the Continental Shelf.
The Court was asked whether Germany was bound by Article 6 of the Convention.
The Court acknowledged that third parties could accept treaty obligations informally, but found that Germany had not ‘unilaterally assumed the obligations of the Convention; or…manifested its acceptance of the conventional regime or…recognised it as being generally applicable to the delimitation of continental shelf areas.’
The behaviour of the third party in establishing its intent is extremely important, especially as the Court did not require a formal written undertaking.
For acceptance through estoppel all the conditions for estoppel would have to be satisfied, including reliance by the original parties — a form of assent to the adherence.
Although the case concerned the effect of a multilateral treaty establishing an international regime for the regulation of the continental shelf, the Court rejected any notion of a comprehensive norm-creating role for the treaty.
It required the applicant States to demonstrate that Germany had either consented to Article 6, or that Article 6 had become customary international law.
Neither of these could be assumed merely from the conclusion of the treaty.
The distinction that was drawn by the Court between the norm-creating character of Articles 1 and 2, as opposed to Article 6, rested upon the nature of these Articles as well as the restrictions upon making reservations to the former.
Article 6 assumes a series of delimitation agreements between adjacent States allowing for bilateral relationships within the overall multilateral regime.
It is precisely in such circumstances that the imposition of obligations upon third parties is most strongly resisted.
Germany was not bound by an agreement between the Netherlands and Denmark, and Article 6 could not be used to achieve indirectly what had not been done directly.
The Court's decision is a strong reaffirmation of the need for a State's consent to be bound by a treaty to which it is not a party, and a denial of any automatic acceptance of a lawmaking regime.
The Court also considered the reverse situation, where the third party claims that it has become entitled to the benefits of a Convention, either because it has declared itself willing to be bound, or because it has shown its willingness by its conduct.
Although implied assent to the acceptance of third party rights can be presumed where the parties have intended to accord such rights, the Court did not extend this to implied adherence to a multilateral convention for the purpose of claiming benefits alone, where ratification and accession are possible.
Indeed the inclusion of accession and ratification clauses suggests that the parties did not intend to confer third party benefits, but instead desired full commitment to the treaty.
This reasoning could be applied to claims by or against the United States with respect to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Unless there is a change of policy, the United States will be a third party on its entry into force.
The United States will not be bound by any obligations to which it has not assented, but the question of rights may be more problematic.
Former President Reagan announced in 1983 that it was United States' policy to accept the normative provisions of the Convention as reflecting customary international law.
While certain parts of the Convention almost certainly constitute customary international law, that is not necessarily true of all the provisions from which the United States might wish to benefit.
If the United States wished to claim such a benefit it should have to prove the particular provision to be customary international law.
The Court's dicta in the North Sea Continental Shelf could be used to refute a United States' claim for third party benefits on the grounds that the President's acceptance demonstrated approval of them.
States are prevented from adhering to conventional provisions that operate to their benefit while distancing themselves from any undesired obligations.
It has been argued that the ‘package deal’ nature of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea further strengthens the argument against its selective application.
However should the United States be able to demonstrate the necessary state practice and opinio juris to substantiate a claim of customary international law, there is no reason why such general principles of law should not exist independently of the Convention.
In any case ‘[a]bsent a treaty, and if necessary, the United States can take unilateral action by means of force to defend its freedom of navigation’.
A United States' claim that those parts of the Convention that it favours have become customary international law has considerable implications for the international law-making process and for the third party rule.
It would enable a third State to stand aloof from the deliberate fashioning of community policy through the treaty-making process, while simultaneously making claims of the creation of norms of customary law.
There is no easy solution to the problem this creates for treaty parties: it is to their advantage that a treaty be widely recognised as normative, and they cannot deny the application of customary law to a single State.
Inconsistent State practice would only defeat the entire purpose of the convention for a stable regime.
The ‘package deal’ approach and the prohibition of reservations245 prevents selective ratification of the Convention, but there is no comparable mechanism to limit selective development of customary international law.
Claims of assignment
A third party may claim that treaty rights have been assigned to it, or a party may claim that it has made an assignment and is thus discharged from that particular responsibility under the agreement.
An assignment requires A and B to be parties to an agreement and A, without B's consent, to transfer rights to X. The Vienna Convention is silent on the assignment of treaty rights, but it seems an evident consequence of State sovereignty that where a treaty provides for an assignment it should be enforceable.
Mann gives a number of examples of financial treaties (especially loan agreements) which allow for assignment.
There are certain treaties that by their nature cannot be assigned, for example extradition treaties, enforcement of judgment treaties, and mutual defence treaties.
The list could be expanded to incorporate any treaty which provides for mutuality, reciprocity, or where the personal identity of the other party is important, for then, by definition the parties cannot have intended to allow assignment.
McNair denies that there is a rule of international law ‘permitting a State to assign to C rights which it holds under a treaty made with B’, and could find no basis for the validity of such a principle.
This seems to be correct, for in a legal system where the potential treaty parties number only around two hundred, it is hard to assert that the identity of a treaty partner is immaterial.
Mann argues that the reasoning that rejects the notion of assignability of treaties resembles that which for centuries prevented assignment of debts in private law.
However the different structure of the international legal system makes it dangerous to accept automatically a development in municipal law into international law.
Mann concedes that non-assignability is likely still to be the rule in international law, and assignability the exception.
Where a treaty is silent on assignability certain factors should be weighed to determine its legitimacy, for example the intention of the parties and their interests, the background to the negotiations and the circumstances at the conclusion of the treaty, the subject matter and terms of the treaty, the identity of the assignee and its relationship with the treaty parties, the impact of the assignment on the original parties, and any domestic regulations that might be relevant.
Since these are questions of fact a decision-maker would have to make a full contextual analysis before reaching a decision.
Any purported assignment should also have been made publicly.
Claims of secret assignment should be rejected as incompatible with the other parties' right to performance.
While assignment might be established in exceptional circumstances, at the very least the presumption must remain against it.
Another context in which claims analogous to novation and assignment have been raised is State succession.
In claims of succession (or non-succession) to a treaty, two third parties are potentially involved.
The first is the successor State, which by definition was not a party to the relevant treaty; the second is the ‘genuine’ third party to a treaty concluded by the predecessor State.
One view is that successor States cannot be regarded as third parties because of the continuing link between their territory and the treaty.
This focuses upon the subject matter of the treaty, its scope, object and purpose, rather than upon the identity of its parties.
A territorial approach to treaty succession necessitates an abandonment of the ‘clean slate’ presumption of non-succession, as does the policy argument in favour of continuity in the development of international law through the conclusion of, and succession to, multipartite treaties.
At first sight it appears that the presumption of continuity was formally rejected by Article 16 of the Vienna Convention on Succession of States in Respect of Treaties.
This does not mean however that the ‘clean slate’ doctrine was unreservedly upheld: boundary treaties and treaties creating rights or obligations relating to the use of territory and considered as appertaining to the territory of the successor State are express exceptions.
In both cases, the subject matter of the treaty with respect to the territory in question, regardless of the identity of the controlling body, is treated as paramount.
This is so even though territorial rights previously granted by the predecessor colonial power to third States might be considered as of over-riding importance for a new State, and as an unacceptable continuing incident of prior colonial rule.
Recognition of these exceptions upholds the continuance of colonial boundaries in the interests of stability, predictability, and the facilitation of international communications.
These exceptions demonstrate that the rigid res inter alios acta rule has been formally set aside when it conflicts with other international community values.
Territorial exceptions are not the only provisions of the Vienna Convention on Succession to undermine the uncompromising tone of Article 16.
The immediately following articles give the newly independent State the right to succeed to any treaty which had been in force in its territory, regardless of the wishes of any other party to the treaty.
Moreover the conventional presumption is for continuity with respect to bilateral treaties, and for new States formed through union or dissolution of existing States.
Another third party situation in the context of State succession is where there was a devolution agreement between a colonial power and its successor State.
Certain colonial powers (notably Britain) entered into such agreements with their former colonies which were regarded as forming a ‘complete assignment of all treaties which, upon construction, were susceptible of devolution,…
‘. Among the juridical problems was the effect on other treaty parties, third parties to the devolution agreement.
O'Connell argued that these agreements could not impose burdens upon third parties and were therefore of little practical international effect, apart from putting the other treaty parties on notice of the presumption of continuity as expressed in the devolution agreement.
However, if the third party were informed of the agreement and assented thereto, a novation could be implied, effective to bind the third party.
After a period of time, silence on the part of a third party (the most likely response) could estop it from denying that a novation had occurred.
Under the Vienna Convention on State Succession, the conclusion of a devolution agreement does not of itself operate to transfer the obligations or rights of a predecessor State to a successor State.
The effect of a devolution agreement is not specified, so that many of the problems discussed by O'Connell remain.
While treaty succession is a specialised topic that cannot be developed here, many practical and juridical problems of State succession are equally relevant in an over-all consideration of treaties and third parties.
The appropriate policies that might influence a decision-maker are broadly similar in the two contexts.
The policies of continuity of treaty relationships and the predictability provided by the ordering of international affairs through the conclusion of treaties, which favour succession, have to be weighed against the independence and equality of new States which wish to be freed from all legal ties concluded before independence.
Jenks argued in the 1950's that these latter policies became less relevant when set against the need to promote the systematic development of international law through the conclusion of multipartite law-making treaties.
O'Connell concluded that it is difficult to reject the cogency of Jenks’ argument ‘that the sociological achievement of a complex, interlocking conventional system cannot be squandered through conservative reliance upon irrelevant political history and immature notions of the role treaties play in an advanced society.’
However this was to underestimate the sensitivities of newly-independent States.
Similar conflicting policies prevail in the context of treaties and third parties.
On the one hand, ordered development of international law requires wide treaty participation and flexibility, both in allowing third parties to become associated with treaties and in the application of treaties to third States; on the other hand, State sovereignty, equality, independence, and the need for the effective implementation of treaties militate against any imposition of rights and obligations through majority preference.
The vagaries of history may lead the same States to favour each policy in turn according to changing circumstances: newly-independent States may resist being held bound by treaties entered into on their behalf, and therefore tend to favour the ‘clean slate’ doctrine of succession, although their economic and technical interests may be better served by treaty continuity.
Once independent, however, these same States may argue for the law-making effect of both treaties and other ‘soft-law’ instruments, while the former powers tend in turn to resist any such development and to adhere to doctrines emphasising sovereign independence and the need for consent.
Both newly-independent and other States tend to oppose claims of secession, and thus to impose treaty and other liabilities upon any seceding entity.
In both the third party context and State succession different principles apply to treaties and customary international law.
It is accepted that upon gaining independence a new State is bound by the customary international law then in existence, and that a State is bound by customary international law even though it may not have directly consented to it.
Yet with treaties, lack of protest is viewed as irrelevant; the strong presumption that a State is not bound by a treaty which it has not accepted means that lack of response to a treaty communicated to it entails no acceptance.
It seems illogical to require response to a treaty which adversely effects a third State, as in the instance of a territorial settlement when the third State also has a claim, and yet to regard lack of protest to an evolving principle of customary international law as acquiescence to it.
It seems more reasonable to anticipate a response to a formal written instrument, especially one which may have adverse consequences on a third State, and thus to regard lack of response as acceptance of that agreement, than it is to demand early protest to an emergent rule of customary international law.
There seems to be no reason why different attitudes should apply to the two major methods for the creation and development of international law when both are ultimately founded upon consent.
The protection against being bound by a treaty to which there has been no express consent appears excessive, while it is easier to be held bound by customary obligations.
Claims of third party beneficiary
The claim may be made that a State is entitled to the benefits of a treaty because they were incurred on its behalf by another State.
This was argued by Lord Finlay in the Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Upper Silesia.
Poland (a third party) claimed various rights against Germany under the Armistice Agreement, 1918, and the Protocol of Spa, 1920.
The Permanent Court held that although the parties to a treaty could bestow rights upon a third party there was a presumption against this, a presumption which Poland had not rebutted.
Lord Finlay however concluded that treaty rights had been incurred on behalf of Poland.
Poland had supported the allies in the War, who in turn had intended Poland to benefit by the agreement once Poland became independent.
He drew an analogy with pre-incorporation contracts in domestic law, and concluded that similar agreements could be made in international law on behalf of States which are about to come into existence.
Lord Finlay implied that the trust mechanism could be adapted for use in international law, whereby a new State could be a beneficiary of rights contained in an agreement between other States which are bound by the agreement to accord it those rights.
However the analogy should not be over-extended: a new State cannot be bound by the terms of a trust concluded between other States, for that would be contrary to the incidents of Statehood, including sovereign equality.
The common law trust analogy has been drawn upon in the international legal system, most notably in the establishment of the mandate and trusteeship systems in the Covenant of the League of Nations and the United Nations Charter respectively.
The denial of statehood for the mandate or trust territory in these paternalistic arrangements avoided the problem of the bestowal of rights or obligations upon third party States.
These territories were theoretically viewed as the third party beneficiaries of an international status designed with the objective of promoting international peace and security, as much as for the advancement of the territory and its inhabitants.
The obligations of the mandate or trust power towards those third party beneficiaries may be clarified by the International Court in the pending suit brought by Nauru against Australia.
Importantly, Australia has impliedly conceded that the Nauruan people although a third party to the Trusteeship Agreement, formed a legal entity capable of relying on the Agreement in litigation  occurring post-independence.
Nauru's claim for rehabilitation rests upon the assertion that its territory was mined for the benefit of the trust powers, principally Australia, to the long-term detriment of its development and welfare, and in violation of the trusteeship agreement and of principles relating to self-determination.
Although there is no equivalent in international law to the fiduciary duties owed by trustees to the beneficiaries, a judgment in favour of Nauru would establish a principle of responsibility for abuse of the trusteeship system by subordinating the continuing needs of the inhabitants of the territory to those of the administering authority.
Claims of agency
Another device for achieving the result contended for by Lord Finlay might be agency: that is that the allies (agents) were acting on behalf of Poland (principal) which would subsequently be entitled to claim the benefits of the treaty.
If there was a genuine agency arrangement Poland would also be bound by the obligations of the treaty.
A number of theories have been proposed to support the recognition of agency in international law, in particular theories based on representation, control, interference, protection, dependence, and territoriality.
Verdross preferred the first three, but his analysis of the representation theory was rejected by the International Law Commission.
The proper conclusion appears to be that no single theory can  underlie all potential agency situations, and that these must be examined on a case by case basis.
Agency has been recognised in a number of international contexts.
One State may act on behalf of another, either on a one-off basis, or more regularly, as in the arrangement between a protected and protecting State.
A State as an artificial entity cannot act except through its agents; the full powers doctrine which enables States to exercise their treaty-making power rests upon agency.
The principles of State responsibility require that the acts of organs of the State or individuals within a State be attributable to the State for the purposes of establishing liability.
Most discussion of agency has focused on the attributability of the actions of one State to another for the purposes of liability.
In the present context, the question is whether one State can enter into a treaty on behalf of another.
An agent enters into a contractual relationship with a third party on behalf of a principal; the legal relationship is established between the principal and the third party, not the third party and agent.
The principal defines and limits the agent's powers.
This analysis makes agency inapplicable in the case of a new State.
The terms of the agreement are determined by the parties that concluded it (in Upper Silesia the Allies), and not by the subsequently emergent State.
The parties intended to remain bound even after the independence of Poland.
The agency analogy is no more effective for analysing the case than the trust one.
Upper Silesia is best considered through application of the usual principles relating to the conferring of benefits upon third parties; the question is then whether the allies intended to confer benefits upon Poland, and whether they in fact did so.
There are other situations where the agency analysis is more appropriate, for example the device whereby a protecting State could enter into treaties on behalf of a protected State.
In the Rights of United States Nationals in Morocco, it was undisputed that Morocco retained its Statehood even after the Treaty of Fez established the Protectorate and defined France's powers over it.
This treaty empowered France to exercise certain sovereign powers on behalf of Morocco, provided it respected all treaty obligations to which Morocco had been subject before the formation of the Protectorate.
This resembles an agency agreement with restraints imposed upon the agent's express authority.
If France had exceeded its authority it would have been in breach of this agreement, but the effects on the relationship between Morocco and a third party are less clear.
The protectorate agreement itself is not opposable to third States, although a third State that concluded an agreement with France with respect to Morocco would be acting in reliance of the bestowal of authority contained within it.
Following municipal law agency principles a third party could claim that it was bound with respect to the protectorate provided the agent had acted within the scope of its express, implied, or apparent authority.
The legal position of the City of Danzig was rather more explicit.
The territory was comparable to a protected State with added supervision by the League of Nations.
To protect the City from abuse of power by Poland, the High Commissioner of the League was given the express power to veto any treaty purportedly entered into by Poland on behalf of the City that was in excess of Poland's authority.
A third party which knows it is dealing with a State acting on behalf of another State should ensure that any agreements fall within the authority of the protecting State.
There can be no undisclosed principal in international law: any such claim should be dismissed as contrary to the principle of openness in international relations, and the right of States to select their treaty partners.
Assuming a treaty to be within the authority of the protecting State, should a claim be brought against it or the protected State?
The International Law Commission concluded that ‘modern doctrine is…in overwhelming agreement that the representing State should not, as such, be answerable for the internationally wrongful acts of the represented State’.
However, in many instances the arrangement represented the exercise of power and control over the protected State which was in a position of subordination, making it logical that claims should be made against the more powerful State.
The United States, for example, made its claim against France, not Morocco, which is indicative of the paternalistic and dependency aspect of the arrangement.
Despite assertions to the contrary, it is an indication that in reality Morocco had changed its status and become dependent.
This aspect distinguishes the arrangement from the typical commercial agency of municipal law.
A different claim was made in the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company Case.
The concession agreement between the Anglo-Iranian oil company and the government of Iran was concluded in 1933 as part of the settlement of a dispute between that government and the United Kingdom.
The Council of the League had been seised of the dispute.
The United Kingdom argued that its removal from the Council's agenda implied a commitment to observe the terms of the settlement, including those of the agreement which was argued to have acquired the ‘character of a treaty stipulation’.
The United Kingdom's argument was that the Company had entered into the agreement on behalf of the United Kingdom as part of that State's obligations towards the settlement of the dispute.
The United Kingdom's right of diplomatic protection of the Company may have influenced this argument, which was rejected by the Court.
The Company was not acting on behalf of the government when it entered into the concession agreement.
The background to its conclusion in 1933 did not affect its character as a concession agreement, and the United Kingdom remained a third party.
Claims of newly-independent States
The rejection of both the trust analogy and the doctrine of agency leaves unexplained the situation where a new State has come into being in accordance with a treaty to which it is not a party.
Is it bound by the rights and obligations contained therein?
It can be argued that the recognition and acceptance of the new State by the international community is conditional upon its acceptance of the treaty, but this is contrary to the objective criteria of Statehood, and does not conform with practice.
The recognition of Statehood by other States is discretionary and does not rest upon compliance with a treaty to which they too are third parties.
The relevant constitutive treaty may be bilateral and may not even satisfy the criteria for a dispositive treaty.
A new State is bound by the rules of customary international law in existence when it acquires Statehood.
Since these include the pacta tertiis rule, a precondition of Statehood cannot be the acceptance of third party treaty obligations.
An alternative analysis is that the treaty constitutes an offer of Statehood, the acceptance of which is an implied acceptance of the obligations of the treaty.
This too is unrealistic, and the contractual analogy does not stand up.
The acceptance of an offer would create a contract with all its terms in force between the parties, which is not the case where a new State is formed as a consequence of a treaty.
The Free City of Danzig was acknowledged by the Permanent Court to be a State despite the rights bestowed upon Poland, and the supervision of the League.
Danzig was a party to the Treaty of Paris of 1920 but not to the Treaty of Versailles, which was held to be the source of the rights conferred upon Poland and the organic limitations on Danzig.
Why this was so was not explained.
It may be that the subsequent Treaty of Paris was viewed as constituting written acceptance by Danzig of Poland's rights, and its corresponding duty to accept them.
Alternatively, the Treaty of Versailles, as a major peace settlement concluded in the public interest for the stability of Europe and conferring authority upon the League, could be seen as a dispositive treaty binding erga omnes .
While the parties to an agreement creating a new State may have intended that rights and obligations contained in the treaty would bind the new State, it is not apparent that the new State has consented to them.
More in accordance with reality is that the new State has no option if it wishes its status to be accepted; this is akin to necessity.
If it subsequently acted contrary to the agreement the parties could not terminate the agreement for material breach and deprive it of statehood, or even modify its rights.
The creation of a new State by treaty between other states requires a further exception to be accepted to the pacta tertiis rule.
This situation appears to be primarily of theoretical and historical interest, since the newly independent state is now more frequently party to the treaty in question, or, in most recent examples, has declared its statehood through secession from another state.
CLAIMS OF NON-PARTICIPATION
In many of the above examples the claim was that a third party had become bound by the treaty in whole or in part, and had ceased to be a third party.
Another claim is that a certain State has not become a party to a treaty, and therefore cannot share in the distribution of values projected by it.
It is not easy to draw any general principles from these claims for they rest upon the particular factual situation, and the interpretation of the relevant text.
For example, in Nicaragua the United States denied that Nicaragua had made a valid declaration under Article 36 (2) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice.
The United States argued that since Nicaragua had never ratified its declaration it had always been a third party to the jurisdictional scheme.
The Court recounted that Nicaragua's declaration had been reproduced in its first Yearbook with a note explaining the situation.
From 1968 onwards Nicaragua was repeatedly referred to in the Reports of the Court to the General Assembly as a State that had accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, and the United Nations Secretariat had made similar listings.
Neither Nicaragua297 nor any other State had challenged the statements, and they must therefore be deemed to have accepted the classification.
The United States attempt to modify its own declaration in April 1984 was an implicit acknowledgment that it believed Nicaragua to have a valid declaration.
This decision promotes uncertainty in distinguishing between parties and third parties.
States are entitled to rely upon compliance with prescribed procedures when determining which other States are parties to particular treaties.
The Court relied upon lack of protest coupled with public statements of the position, preferring overt behaviour to formal requirements.
Another situation creating uncertainty as to party status is where reservations have been made to a treaty which have been objected to by some States but not by others.
Article 20 (4)(b) of the Vienna Convention puts the onus upon the objecting State to make explicit that it does not regard the treaty as being in force as between itself and the reserving State.
However States do not always do this and there can also be uncertainty with respect to individual provisions which can be in force as between some parties but not others.
The Vienna Convention provisions on reservations create reciprocal relationships within a multiparty framework, despite the apparently objective limitation of compatibility with the object and purpose of the treaty.
While there is no third party mechanism for determining this, the breakdown into bilateral relationships will continue.
CLAIMS FOR PERFORMANCE
The policy of openness in international relations and the limiting of secret agreements300 enables States to monitor the performance of agreements to which they are not parties.
States may make subsidiary agreements based on their expectations of performance by other States.
They may also make projections as to their own future behaviour and the likely response of other international participants, in the expectation that a treaty between other States will be performed.
Breach or non-performance of an agreement can upset third party expectations, frustrate the performance of subsidiary agreements, and disrupt the stability and certainty supposedly engendered by the agreement.
However a third party has normally no right to demand performance of an agreement, or to make any claim in the event of breach.
A third party may of course make diplomatic representations or bring pressure to bear upon a State to perform what it perceives to be that State's treaty obligations with another State, although such action is likely to be resented as unwarranted interference in external affairs.
From 1984 the anti-nuclear policy of the then newly elected Labour Government in New Zealand led it to take successive steps which the United States regarded as contrary to its obligations under the Pacific Security Treaty.
Certain third States, including the United Kingdom and other European States, attempted to persuade New Zealand to perform what they perceived as its treaty obligations.
These European States, members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, regarded themselves as essential participants in the Western alliance and therefore as directly implicated in any perceived threat to it.
The United Kingdom, in particular, had an interest in protesting the closure of New Zealand's ports to ships which had not been confirmed to be neither nuclear armed nor propelled.
Its similar policy made it equally vulnerable to the change in New Zealand policy.
To protect their own interests these States openly condemned New Zealand's stance, although they had no direct claims under the treaty.
The dispute within ANZUS reveals the dilemma created by the conclusion of political and military alliances in treaty form.
The treaty instrument does not necessitate the creation of enforceable rights and duties between the parties, but instead may include ‘norms of various degrees of cogency, persuasiveness and consensus’.
The Vienna Convention defines a treaty as an agreement ‘governed by international law’ and does not require it to allocate legal rights and obligations.
The treaty form can be used for both binding and non-binding agreements and the definition does not assist in determining whether a legally binding agreement has been concluded.
It has been suggested that the appropriate test is ‘whether the parties are making some serious promises or undertakings’ which are intended by them to be acted and relied upon.
The treaty language may reveal whether the parties shared such intentions.
The Pacific Security Treaty is characterised by subjective language which is incapable of precise legal interpretation, and it has no enforcement measures.
However it also contains categoric assertions.
It has been argued that the North Atlantic Treaty, for example, is not a legally binding agreement and that such political treaties form a distinct category of ‘soft law’.
Similarly ANZUS can be regarded as a political treaty, but the Vienna Convention does not categorise treaties.
If it were accepted that the parties have no legal rights and duties under a political treaty, then even less could the legal position of third parties be affected by it.
In political terms the position might be quite different for parties and non-parties, as exemplified by the response of the United States and the concern expressed by certain European States at New Zealand's decisions.
The increasing use of non-legally binding instruments which create expectations as to future behaviour among participants in the international arena limits still further the applicability of the formal rules with respect to treaties and third parties.
CLAIMS THAT A TREATY SHOULD NOT BE ENTERED INTO OR PERFORMED
Treaties conflicting with the rights of third States
Many treaties are incidentally unfavourable to non-parties, but a third party generally has no grounds for claiming that other States should not enter into a treaty.
The duty of external non-intervention prohibits States from interfering with the valid performance of treaties that do not affect their own rights and obligations.
But it is questionable how far this duty extends.
Waldock, for example, considered that the ‘general duty’ upon States to respect the operation of treaties between other States, ‘even when limited to treaties not impairing their rights or imposing disabilities upon them seems to go beyond the existing law’.
The position may be clearer if the treaty infringes the legal rights of a third State.
In The SS Wimbledon, Judge Schucking (dissenting) asserted that ‘a legally binding contracted obligation cannot be undertaken to perform acts which would violate the rights of third parties’.
In this case the rights were those of neutrality, but the principle was generally framed.
While States may by treaty opt out of a rule of customary international law inter se , they cannot do so with respect to a third party which is entitled to have its customary rights observed.
Roxburgh concluded that ‘whenever a State concludes a treaty which violates the existing rights of a third State…the latter is entitled to intervene.’
He found no dissent from this view, although there was disagreement as to whether a State whose security was affected by the conclusion of a treaty between other States could likewise intervene.
Roxburgh's conclusions as to consequences cannot be sustained today in light of the United Nations Charter restrictions upon the use of force and intervention.
Thus McNair, writing in the post-Charter era, asserted that a State that becomes aware that a treaty concluded between other States will impair its rights can make diplomatic protests and, if it can establish jurisdiction, commence proceedings before the International Court, or take other steps in pursuance of a peaceful settlement to the dispute.
McNair gives no authority for this assertion, but it must rest upon the right of any State to protest against interference with its internationally protected rights.
Portugal has commenced proceedings against Australia, claiming that by entering into the Timor Gap Treaty with Indonesia, Australia has violated Portugal's rights as the legitimate administering authority in East Timor.
Portugal has not claimed that the treaty is void, but that its negotiation and conclusion are with a State that has no legal authority over the territory in question.
However, any conclusion that Portugal's rights have indeed been violated must imply that Indonesia was not a proper party to the treaty, which must therefore be invalid.
If a State concludes a treaty that conflicts with its obligations under an earlier treaty, other parties to the former treaty (although third parties to the subsequent one) can regard that State as remaining bound by its commitments to them.
The parties to the new treaty have similar expectations.
If the subsequent treaty prevents performance of a State's prior obligations, parties to the former may regard that State as committing a material breach of the earlier treaty and act accordingly.
This is not truly a third party claim, as the basis for the claim of material breach is party status to the first treaty; it is only with respect to the subsequent treaty that there is a third party relationship.
Subsequent treaty commitments are no defence to non-performance of the obligations of an earlier treaty; States are expected to ensure that they do not enter into conflicting treaty arrangements.
However States are not expected to monitor the prior treaty commitments of their potential treaty parties to ensure that they are compatible.
If the two treaties have identical parties the subsequent treaty is regarded as amending the earlier.
Conflicting treaties
A different claim is where an earlier treaty contains a restriction upon entry into subsequent treaties.
The question then is whether a State party to the first treaty can prevent another treaty party from entering into a later treaty from which it is excluded, but which would conflict with the first treaty.
The leading case is Costa Rica v. Nicaragua before the Central American Court of Justice.
Under Article 8 of the Canas-Jerez Treaty of 1858 between Costa Rica and Nicaragua, Costa Rica had a right to be consulted on any proposed regional canal route.
In Article 10 of an arbitral award on the effect of this agreement, President Cleveland, as arbitrator, restated the obligations of Article 8 and spelled out Costa Rica's ‘natural rights’ under the agreement.
In 1914 Nicaragua entered into the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty with the United States, whereby the latter acquired rights for the construction of a canal.
Costa Rica demanded unsuccessfully its rights of consultation under the 1858 Treaty.
Once Nicaragua and the United States had concluded the Treaty, Costa Rica brought its claim before the Central American Court, asking for a declaration that the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty was null and void as Nicaragua had no capacity to enter into it.
The Court held that Nicaragua was incompetent to conclude an incompatible treaty.
It did not declare the Treaty to be null and void, for the United States was not within the Court's jurisdiction.
However this was the inevitable conclusion of its holding, which placed third parties in a ‘caveat emptor ’ position in entering into treaties.
This case supports the right of a third party to challenge the conclusion of a treaty inconsistent with obligations owed to at least one of the treaty parties by another treaty.
Portugal could reason by analogy that the conclusion of the Timor Gap Treaty is inconsistent with its rights of administration that have been affirmed by the United Nations in Resolutions to which Australia voted affirmatively.
It also supports the principle that a party's right to treaty performance means that a voluntarily incurred treaty restriction (in this case a procedural restriction) upon subsequent treaty-making power will be upheld, even to the detriment of a subsequent third party,(the United States).
Although it seems evident the United States knew of the earlier treaty (President Cleveland had issued an arbitral award on its interpretation), notice on the part of the third party was not mentioned as relevant by the Court.
Municipal legal restrictions upon a State's treaty-making powers cannot support a claim of treaty invalidity unless the domestic restrictions are manifest and concern an internal law of fundamental importance.
It seems that a similar test might be applicable to international legal incapacity; where a prior treaty is well-known and public, a third party can be expected to be aware of any limitations upon the capacity of a treaty member to enter into a treaty with itself.
If nevertheless a treaty is concluded, the third party to the earlier treaty cannot claim that it was unaware of the restrictions.
A regime which imposed no limits upon States' ability to enter into conflicting treaties would cause unpredictability and undermine the usefulness of treaties.
It seems unreasonable that with respect to the United States Nicaragua was able to claim invalidity of the 1914 treaty and not be liable for non-performance.
The United States might have argued that Nicaragua's concealment of its incapacity constituted fraud and was thus a ground for invalidating its consent.
But such a strategy would not have served the United States' interests, for it desired performance of the treaty.
The ruling of incompetency supported Costa Rica's interests in a way that a holding of material breach would not.
Costa Rica did not want the treaty terminated or suspended: it wanted performance of its rights of consultation.
A judgment that Nicaragua could not enter into the later treaty without according Costa Rica its rights gave Costa Rica its preferred remedy.
The judgment effectively imposed an obligation upon the United States (a third party to the 1858 Treaty and the proceedings) not to enter into a treaty with Nicaragua without respecting Costa Rica's rights.
This is the problem of which of two innocent third parties should have to suffer the consequences.
Today, in light of the obligations of Article 102 of the United Nations Charter, it could perhaps be argued that each member State has constructive notice of the treaty obligations of all other members and therefore must be deemed to have notice of any restrictions upon treaty-making power.
However the vast numbers of international treaties alone makes such an expectation unrealistic.
There were a number of other factors which may have influenced the Court in deciding in Costa Rica's favour.
It found that had Costa Rica been consulted, its opinion would have been decisive, precisely the situation envisaged in 1858.
Nicaragua had previously respected the 1858 Treaty, and the Court emphasised that the past and future of the two Republics were ‘tightly bound together’.
It has been said that the real question in the case is the degree of restriction that can be imposed upon a sovereign State in negotiating with another State in matters that affect the vital interests of third States.
In a regional context restrictions seem more readily justified, but in this case it must be remembered that Costa Rica's rights had been accepted by Nicaragua in a treaty.
A problem that arises in the Timor Gap case is that, although the circumstances of Indonesia's invasion of East Timor in December 1975 are well known, there has been no authoritative judicial determination of its illegality, or of the legitimacy of Portugal's claim to be the continuing administering authority.
Fretilin had declared the independent State of Timor on 28 November days before the invasion, and certain states have recognised this, while another internal group declared integration with Indonesia on 30 November.
Portugal asserts in its Application to the Court that Fretilin abandoned its claim and acknowledges Portugal as the continuing administrative authority.
The General Assembly condemned the invasion and asserted the rights of the East Timorese people to self-determination, but the matter has not been voted upon in the General Assembly since 1982.
In 1978 Australia recognised the Indonesian annexation.
Australia cannot claim that it is unaware of the uncertainty about the legal status of Indonesia's assertion of jurisdictional authority in East Timor and the off-shore waters, and has relied upon its own determination of legality.
The claim in Costa Rica v Nicaragua was based upon a bilateral agreement whereby Costa Rica acquired specified rights.
Similar claims may arise out of multilateral treaties, especially those that create regional or other organisations.
The obligations of the United Nations Charter take precedence over any conflicting treaty commitments.
It is not clear whether a member of the United Nations, a third party to a conflicting treaty, can demand performance of the Charter by bringing a claim against the conclusion or performance of the conflicting treaty.
Nor is a conflicting obligation stated to be void or invalid.
In Oscar Chinn Judge Schucking thought that parties to a treaty which had placed restrictions upon conflicting treaties concluded by less than the full complement of parties to the former treaty, could regard as invalid a subsequent treaty concluded by a minority to the first treaty.
Any such conflicting treaty would be absolutely and automatically void, and the signatory States to the former treaty could invoke that invalidity at any time.
Judge Schucking referred to Article 20 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, which also prohibits conflicting treaties, saying that this provision ‘would possess little value’ unless inconsistent treaties were automatically null.
The majority of the Court avoided determining whether the first treaty prohibited a limited number of States from concluding a subsequent treaty.
Judge Schucking may have been influenced by the fact that the Convention in question was the General Act of Berlin, which had been concluded by the Powers to settle issues of colonial rule in Africa, and thereby to lessen friction between them.
He may have considered that a minority of States should not be able to counteract a general peace settlement, in the nature of a dispositive treaty.
He may have wanted to enhance the League's effectiveness.
These factors make it unlikely that his dicta , even if accepted by other members of the Court, could be given any more general applicability.
The International Law Commission considered the possibility of sanctions against a non-member State which entailed obligations upon a member State conflicting with a treaty obligation with the non-member State.
It found it ‘indisputable that under Article 103 of the Charter the Member State called upon to apply the sanctions could not claim to be debarred from doing so by a treaty binding it to the non-Member State which was the subject of the sanctions.’
Violation of the treaty would be justified by the collective interests of the international community.
The effect of this is to create a hierarchy of norms with conformity with the obligations of the Charter at the top.
However there are also regional hierarchies and the conceptual superiority of a norm of jus cogens .
Such duplication could cause juristic confusion and undermine the very values intended to be protected.
Similar problems arise with regional agreements.
If a member State of the European Communities concluded an agreement infringing an obligation under the Treaty of Rome, another member State could bring an action before the European Court of Justice.
A member State is not required to show any interest other than upholding the integrity of the Treaty.
There is no similar provision in the United Nations Charter or the Statute of the International Court.
Assuming jurisdiction could be established, it would be necessary for the Court to accept that all members of the United Nations have a direct interest in the observance of its provisions and therefore standing to challenge a conflicting treaty.
If standing was not granted, Article 103 would only have practical effect in the unlikely event of the Secretariat refusing to register the conflicting agreement under Article 102 of the Charter.
The United Nations could take political action through the General Assembly and Security Council against a State which entered into agreements in conflict with its Charter.
Under Article 6 a State which ‘persistently violate(s) the Principles contained in the present Charter’ can be expelled from the Organisation by the General Assembly acting upon the recommendation of the Security Council.
Article 6 has never been implemented and it is highly unlikely that it would be used in this way, especially as the consequence would be to release the offending State from those Charter principles that were not deemed to be customary international law.
Other treaties stipulate that no conflicting obligations can be made, but without specifying any consequence of breach.
For example, the North Atlantic Treaty provides:
Each party…undertakes not to enter into any international engagement in conflict with this treaty.339.
The very act of concluding a conflicting treaty would constitute breach and could be treated as such by its other parties.
The Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty states that in the event of any conflict ‘the obligations under this treaty will be binding and implemented’.
These clauses may be construed as ‘no amendment or termination’ clauses, for otherwise they have little substance; all treaty provisions are binding unless terminated.
Other treaties of alliance do not contain such precise prohibitions against conflicting agreements, but may be understood as forming part of a regional defence framework and thus as impliedly restricting future freedom of treaty-making.
An example might be another aspect of the dispute between the parties to the Pacific Security Treaty.
The United States has expressed its concern at New Zealand's joining the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty, although this treaty was carefully drafted to avoid conflict with the Pacific Security Treaty.
This is not a problem of conflicting treaties but of domestic policy conflicting with an agreement.
However had the United States regarded the joining of a nuclear free zone agreement as incompatible with the Pacific Security Treaty it could have made a claim of material breach and suspended the first agreement with respect to New Zealand.
Whether it could have claimed that New Zealand's commitment to the subsequent treaty was invalid is much less clear.
In Costa Rica v. Nicaragua the restriction was procedural (that a subsequent agreement could not be entered into without consultation) rather than conflicting substantive obligations.
In the Soering case the European Court of Human Rights faced the problem of conflicting treaties.
The United States sought the extradition of Soering from the United Kingdom for offences carrying the death penalty in accordance with the bilateral Extradition Treaty between the two States.
In accordance with Article 4 of this Treaty, the British government had sought and received assurances from the United States that if extradition were to take place, the death penalty would not be carried out.
Soering was not satisfied with these assurances and applied unsuccessfully to the English courts for judicial review.
The Secretary of State signed a warrant for his surrender to the United States.
Soering applied to the European Commission of Human Rights on the grounds that there was a serious likelihood that if he were extradited to the United States he would be executed.
He claimed that the circumstances of putting the death penalty into effect, in particular the likelihood of a long delay between sentence and execution during which time he would be on death row, would constitute an inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
The United Kingdom is a party to the European Convention while the United States is not.
The European Court of Human rights held that extraditing a person to a State ‘where substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person concerned,…faces a real risk of being subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the requesting country’ engages the responsibility of the sending State.
The Court held that compliance with the Extradition Treaty (which specifically included murder as an extradictable offence) by the United Kingdom in circumstances where the death sentence might be imposed would put that country in breach of the European Convention.
Two third party issues arise from this judgment.
First, the sending State's liability arises from acts that may be committed in a country which is not a party to the European Convention on Human Rights.
This expansive interpretation of the duties of the parties requires them to make decisions with respect to the behaviour of States which have themselves incurred no obligations under the same Convention.
The Court reiterated that ‘the Convention does not govern the actions of States not parties to it, nor does it purport to be a means of requiring the Contracting States to impose Convention standards on other States.’
Nevertheless, by making parties to the Convention liable for ‘all and any foreseeable consequences of extradition suffered outside their jurisdiction’ the Court requires them to direct their attention to actions in third States.
Secondly, the obligation to make the Convention ‘practical and effective’ coupled with an inherent obligation not to extradite in certain circumstances undermines the bilateral extradition arrangements entered into by States.
States which retain the death penalty may find it difficult to make effective their extradition treaties with parties to the European Convention or other human rights treaties with similar prohibitions of inhuman or degrading treatment.
Parties to such conventions are therefore able to give priority to the values protected by them.
Surrender of treaty-making power
A State may have accepted restrictions upon its treaty-making power by surrendering all or some of its foreign affairs powers to another State, as with protected and protecting States.
Restrictions upon treaty-making power and less than complete autonomy in the conduct of foreign affairs can prevent a State from entering into international organisations.
The Free City of Danzig was advised that it was incompetent to join the International Labour Organisation as the commitment could conflict with Poland's rights under the Treaty of Versailles.
A similar potential conflict prevented Liechtenstein joining the League of Nations.
A more recent example is the Compact of Free Association between the Federated States of Micronesia and the United States.
Under this agreement the Federated States are competent to conduct their own foreign affairs, including the power to join regional arrangements, subject ‘to the full authority of the United States in security and defence matters relating to the Freely Associated State.’
If the Federated States wanted to join a regional arrangement deemed undesirable by the United States (a nuclear-free zone treaty, for example) the latter, although a third party to the negotiations or concluded agreement, could claim under this provision the right to stop them doing so.
What is unclear is the effect of the Federated States entering into such a treaty in defiance of their contractual commitment, and against the wishes of the United States.
Associated status can be a means of fulfilling the right to self-determination, and limitations upon treaty-making and other foreign affairs powers can be a recognition of the limited economic and political capacities of micro-States.
However this is not inevitably the case; the United States' continued interest in the foreign affairs of its former Strategic Trusteeship territories is based upon its own national security and defence concerns.
Further, the Compacts of Free Association of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands preserve in the United States the subjective power to determine those security and national interests.
As the rejection of the several referenda by Palau shows, the interests of the United States and those of the islanders may not coincide.
The people of Palau have shown a marked reluctance to alter their nuclear policy to comply with United States' demands, which in turn has given rise to economic deprivation, intimidation, and violent criminal acts directed against the opponents of the Compact.
This places the people in a dilemma; while they reject the Compact of Free Association, the Trusteeship Agreement with respect to Palau remains in force, depriving them of their right to self-determination.
CLAIMS OF AMENDMENT
Amendment or modification of treaties is within the exclusive competence of the parties.
However third parties may be able to exert considerable pressure to set an amendment process in motion and to influence its outcome.
An example was the stance taken by non-parties to the Antarctic Treaty358 throughout the 1980s who asserted, inter alia, that the Treaty should be amended to take account of developments elsewhere in international law with respect to the equitable allocation of resources.
Another factor was the growing concern for the protection of the environment in Antarctica.
The parties were not able completely to disregard these claims for a number of reasons.
The non-parties were able to mobilise and use the institutional platform of the United Nations; the passing of General Assembly Resolution 38/77 calling for the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive factual study of Antarctica authorised a third party investigation into the regime; there were a number of third parties making similar claims rather than a single, isolated State; they placed the issue on the agenda of other international institutions; Article 12 (2) of the Treaty provides for a Conference thirty years after its entry into force; and the acceptance of the common heritage concept in other contexts gave legitimacy to third party claims.
One response by the Treaty parties was to encourage non-parties to become consultative parties.
The third party claims have lessened with the retreat from the Convention for the Regulation of the Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities, and the acceptance by the parties at Madrid in 1991 of a fifty year ban on activities relating to mineral resources other than scientific research.
However a continuing concern is that the operation of the Treaty system could come under challenge from third states who do not accept the ban, and who might endeavour to explore and exploit Antarctica's natural resources for their own benefit.
There is a similar situation with respect to the Law of the Sea Convention.
States which reject Part XI on the Deep Seabed have not pressed for amendment, but have taken steps to establish an alternative regime for the area.
If the United Nations Convention comes into force there could potentially be two seabed conventional regimes with parties to one constituting third parties to the other.
The activities of the Preparatory Commission which is already functioning have made the position even more complex.
Some of its activities have modified the understandings of the operation of the Convention, in effect constituting amendment through practice where there are no parties to a treaty in force.
These two situations create a number of theoretical third party problems.
First, States that ratified the Convention prior to amending actions by Prepcom are entitled to assert that they accepted the Treaty as negotiated; amendment under the Vienna Convention is a matter for the parties, not for an international body acting where there are no parties.
Second, are States which ratify the Convention closer to its coming into force bound by the terms of the Convention, or the terms as altered by subsequent actions of non-parties.
Third, there have been suggestions that to avoid the third party problem with respect to the deep seabed the operation of Part XI might be suspended.
This merely creates another third party problem.
No reservations are allowed to the Convention, which was concluded as a package deal.
Those States that have ratified have done so in the expectation of the coming into force of Part XI.
The suspension of an integral part of the Convention undermines their expectations.
It amounts to amendment not so much under pressure from third states, but by parties which are concerned at the identity and power of the non-parties.
Current treaty law does not cover any of these problems.
CLAIMS RELATING TO INTERNATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS
Interoceanic canals
Many third party claims arise out of regimes established for facilitating international transport and communications.
Where a treaty provides for rights of navigation through a certain route, for example an interoceanic canal, it is evident that third party claims to use that route will be made, and that third parties will expect those rights to be irrevocable.
Various rationales have been suggested for third party rights in communication routes.
Baxter, argued that third party rights could be justified on one of four bases: international servitudes; third party beneficiary rights; dispositive treaties; and, the view favoured by Baxter, a theory of dedication or reliance, which is closely connected with estoppel.
The United States argued in the context of Suez that there is a user right appertaining to all users of the Canal, including, presumably, potential users.
Where the treaty language indicates the parties' intention that the Canal shall have international usage, that the regime shall be permanent, and is to further the global need for open communication routes it seems that third party rights must be recognised.
Lauterpacht argued that there is a legal, although imperfect, right of international transit based upon the essential nature of global communications.
Alternatively third party rights in this context could be seen as a particular application of general international law: that State practice of both the treaty States and third parties has been that the canals are open for international navigation, and that there is sufficient opinio juris (demonstrated by protest to any closure) to support the view that there is a customary international law of transit through each canal despite their treaty origins.
This appears to have been accepted by Egypt at the time of the nationalisation of the Suez Canal Company.
Nasser did not dispute the principle of free navigation through the Canal, only the details of its operation.
In its unilateral declaration to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Egypt confirmed its resolve to ‘respect the terms and spirit of the Constantinople Convention of 1888.’
Whatever juridical basis is preferred, third party rights of navigation through international canals are accepted.
The corollary question is whether these third party rights can supersede those of the parties to the agreement, or whether they can be legitimately suspended or modified by the parties, and if so under what circumstances.
An original draft of the Hay-Pauncefoote treaty provided for notification to and accession by third States.
The United States Senate rejected this provision because it thought it would bestow legal rights upon third parties.
Arechaga concludes from this that the treaty in its final form could be amended by the parties without regard to third parties’ navigation rights.
While this may have been the assumption in 1903, it is not necessarily the case today that such treaties can be modified or suspended by the parties.
There are persuasive dicta in The Wimbledon to the effect that once a waterway has been ‘dedicated to international use’ the riparian State cannot unilaterally exclude the shipping of other States.
Shipping from the Soviet Union (a third party to the Treaty of Versailles) and Poland could not be excluded from the Canal as their navigational rights took priority over Germany's customary law duties of neutrality.
Third parties are able to accede to the Treaty Concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the [Panama]Canal and thereby accept the rights and obligations of the regime.
This is another example of a treaty device to include third parties in the treaty arrangement.
Third party navigation rights have been suspended at times of crisis.
The Suez Canal was closed to enemy shipping by Britain during the two world wars, and by Egypt with respect to Israeli shipping in 1956.
The United States took similar action with respect to the Panama Canal.
The international community response varied in these examples.
There was general acquiescence in the closure of the Canals during the two world wars suggesting that the extremity of the crisis justified an extreme response.
A treaty regime affording third party rights cannot outweigh a State's inherent right to self-defence.
The severance of communication passages would appear to be proportionate and reasonable as a response to the threat faced during these wars.
By way of contrast, the closure of Suez to Israeli shipping in 1956 and 1967 provoked considerable protest.
This suggests that a localised, contained conflict was not considered to justify discriminatory suspension of third party rights.
Only the most severe conflict where the territorial integrity and political independence of a State is threatened can justify interference with third party communication rights through strategic international canals.
Straits
A notion of third party rights based on the global needs of free communication is equally applicable to straits.
Certain straits have been specifically designated as international waterways by treaty.
The general right of innocent passage through international straits was asserted by the International Court of Justice to be customary international law, but the extended concept of transit passage through straits in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has no conventional forerunner.
If it were accepted that the language of the Convention demonstrates an intention to establish a permanent regime for freer global communications upon which all States could rely, the United States could claim the benefits of transit passage without having to prove that that concept had itself become customary international law.
The language of the Convention supports this position.
Transit passage is to be enjoyed by ‘all ships and aircraft’ not merely by the ships and aircraft of States parties.
Conditions are created for the passage of ‘ships and aircraft’, again with no limitations.
The prohibition of suspension of transit passage indicates permanency.
That it is for the common benefit of all States is demonstrated by its application to straits used for international navigation.
Treaty language suggesting applicability to all States has to be measured against pronouncements denying that it was the intention of the signatories to create third party rights.
Indeed, if transit passage could be held applicable to third parties as a general rule of international law of navigation rights through strategic communication routes, the United States has little to lose by refusal to become a party to the Convention.
Inevitably signatories of the Convention must now deny any such intention, although when the provisions on transit rights were negotiated it was assumed (or at least hoped) that the United States would ratify the Convention.
There was no perceived need to limit the relevant articles to the ships and aircraft of parties.
The current position is that the language of the Convention suggests one conclusion, while the intentions of the parties another; it is also possible that those intentions changed after the negotiations precisely because of the changed stance of the United States.
The Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel states that the parties consider the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of Aquaba to be international waterways open to all nations for unimpeded and non-suspendable freedom of navigation and overflight.
This freedom of navigation is wider than innocent, or even transit, passage.
It was an essential part of the peace settlement package but has a wider significance than just between the parties.
The parties to a bilateral agreement cannot impose these wider obligations on third parties, notably the other two Gulf States, Saudi Arabia and Jordan.
The United States, itself a third party to the Peace Treaty, has guaranteed the treaty's implementation.
The position could arise whereby the United States attempts to ensure one of the parties' access through these waterways as against a non-party to the Peace Treaty.
The United States would be in violation of its commitments to the parties if it did not do so, but would be in violation of general international law with respect to third parties.
The example illustrates the legal obstacles to parties to a treaty characterising as international waterways, areas that are not under their exclusive jurisdiction and control, rather than just making contractual commitments with respect to them.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AS THIRD PARTIES TO TREATIES
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AS THIRD PARTIES
As recognised by the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organisations or between International Organisations, international organisations can be third parties to treaties within the terms of that Convention.
An international organisation or specialised agency may also be an interested third party to a treaty between States.
A third organisation is defined in the Convention as an ‘international organisation, not a party to the treaty.’
A consequence of the definition of a third party organisation is that an organisation with identical membership to another organisation is, technically at least, a third party to a treaty concluded by the latter.
Multilateral treaties are the constitutive instruments of international organisations which have the separate personality necessary to allow effective and independent functioning on the international plane.
The opinion in the Reparations Case would not have been possible if the classic rule relating to treaties and third parties had prevailed; instead the Court considered the nature of the United Nations, the terms of its constitutive treaty, its composition, its functions, its rights and duties.
The Court's reasoning was based on personality, capacity, and functionalism, not the treaty law principle of res inter alios acta .
The separate identity of such organisations was accepted both on the purely factual level (a non-member cannot deny the factual existence of the United Nations) and on the legal level (a non-member may owe duties to an organisation and be able to make claims against it).
Whether an international organisation has personality vis a vis third States may be a question of acceptance and recognition by those States, these requirements being a necessary safeguard for them.
Such acceptance will rest upon the facts of a non-member's dealings with, and acknowledgment of, an organisation.
THE VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES BETWEEN STATES AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
Articles 34–38 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and International Organisations regulate the third party relationships which fall within the terms of that treaty in similar language to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
The differences rest upon the fact that an organisation's actions are limited by its constituent treaty.
Typical is the wording of Article 35 which states that ‘Acceptance by the third organisation of such an obligation shall be governed by the rules of that organisation.’
Unlike Article 35, which deals with third party States and third party organisations together, Article 36 separates the two.
In both cases, a right arises where the treaty parties intend it to do so, and the third party assents thereto.
The assent of a third party State can be presumed unless the contrary is indicated.
There is no provision that a third party organisation's assent can be presumed, but only that it must be governed by the rules of the organisation.
The requirement for the consent of an organisation is not to protect any sovereign status (which an international organisation does not have), but to ensure that the commitment is within its powers.
The separate international personality of an international organisation with treaty-making power sets up another third party relationship that did not arise under the 1969 Convention, that of the member States of an organisation to a treaty concluded between the organisation and a State, or another organisation.
It was questioned within the International Law Commission whether the Vienna Convention on International Organisations should differentiate between a State that is completely outside the treaty relationship, ‘a stranger’, and a member of the organisation, a non-party to a particular treaty concluded by the organisation, but nevertheless bound by its commitments of membership.
Paul Reuter categorised such States as ‘special third parties’.
An earlier description had been ‘more or less’ a third State!
Other members felt it inappropriate to distinguish between categories of third party: a State is either a party to the treaty or it is not.
This last view prevailed as the Commission rejected an intermediate third party status which would take account of this distinction, preferring to see all third parties in an identical legal position.
The peculiar situation of a member State of an organisation which is a third party to a treaty concluded by it was the basis of the proposed Article 36 bis in the Vienna Convention on International Organisations.
Article 36 bis provided that:
Obligations and rights arise for States members of an international organisation from the provisions of a treaty to which that organisation is a party when the parties to the treaty intend those provisions to be the means of establishing such obligations and according such rights and have defined their conditions and effects in the treaty or have otherwise agreed thereon, and if:
(a)
the States members of the organisation by virtue of the constituent instrument of that organisation or otherwise, have unanimously agreed to be bound by the said provisions of the treaty; and
(b)
the assent of the States members of the organisation to be bound by the relevant provisions of the treaty has been duly brought to the knowledge of the negotiating States and negotiating organisations.
This has been described as the most controversial Article in the International Law Commission draft.
It was envisaged as covering a special situation which should not be left to the more general third party provisions in Articles 34–38.
While it is apparent that members of an organisation will always be affected by a treaty concluded by the organisation in the sense that they cannot act contrary to it, the controversial question was whether they could be formally bound by it.
In this draft, the creation of rights and duties for member States (third parties to the treaty concluded by the organisation) rested upon the intention of the parties to the treaty and the consent of the member States, either given through the constituent treaty or by some other means.
There was no suggestion that they would be automatically bound.
To protect the ‘genuine’ third party, the consent of the member States had also to be brought to the notice of the other party to the treaty, a non-member of the organisation.
Many different opinions on the desirability and philosophy of Article 36 bis were expressed within the International Law Commission.
The need for a special provision, its likely application, and the interests it would serve were all discussed.
One argument was that agreements entered into by an organisation would be of little practical effect unless they were simultaneously binding upon the individual member States.
A response was that member States would be unlikely to give organisations such far-reaching powers and to empower them to implement such an agreement, unless the intention was to create a supra-national organisation.
Members of just such an organisation, the European Communities, saw the Article as having special application to them.
Article 228 (2) of the Treaty of Rome was suggested as an example of a treaty with a clause as referred to in (a) of Article 36 bis .
Other members of the International Law Commission felt that the European Communities is a unique organisation which did not need to be catered for by a particular Article.
Apprehension was also voiced that allowing international organisations to create rights and obligations for member States could threaten the sovereignty of States, and undermine the basic principles of the international legal order, by elevating the legal status of international organisations.
It was seen as a ‘progressive’ Article that pushed development of general international law in the direction chosen by the European Communities.
Another example of a treaty between an organisation and a State under which member States claim rights is a Headquarters Agreement.
Headquarters Agreements provide for privileges and immunities for officials of member States which they can claim by virtue of the treaty between the Headquarters State and the organisation.
It was argued that having accepted these rights, member States could not subsequently claim to be third parties with respect to any obligations of such a treaty.
An alternative way of examining this example might be to see the individuals as employees or representatives of the organisation, and thus as exercising the rights the organisation had gained for them through the treaty, independent of their member States.
Another perspective from which to consider Article 36 bis is that of the genuine third party — the State with which the subsequent treaty is negotiated.
Member States are generally in a good position to protect their own interests through the organisation.
However third parties may not be able to form a proper view of the extent of the powers of the organisation with which they must deal.
It is in their interests that member States be bound.
Article 36 bis would have clarified the position both for the benefit of the third party with whom the organisation had entered an agreement, and for member States.
It would have ensured that all member States were in an identical legal position and avoided the problem that some member States, but not all, might be separate parties to the particular treaty.
Article 36 bis spelled out that the basis for a member State of an organisation becoming bound to a third party with respect to a treaty concluded by the organisation was its express agreement.
However, if an express agreement is required, how it is to be given must be determined.
The need for flexibility in the giving of consent was weighed against the need for certainty and the risk of a State being held to have impliedly consented against its will.
The disadvantages of the Article were that it was perceived as dealing with ‘representational’ issues that were out of place in the Convention, that it undercut the position of non-liability of member States for treaties concluded by organisations, and that it placed excessive emphasis on the exceptional situation of the European Communities.
The International Law Commission finally accepted the Article in the form cited above.
However it was rejected at Vienna.
Article 74 of the Convention merely provides that ‘any question that may arise in regard to the establishment of obligations and rights for States members of an international organisation under a treaty to which that organisation is a party’ is not to be prejudged by the provisions of the Convention.
A member State of an organisation which is a third party to a treaty concluded by the organisation has no special status under the Vienna Convention on International Organisations; its position must be determined by application of Articles 34–38.
CLAIMS BY MEMBER STATES AGAINST INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
Claims that organisations are bound by their constitutive treaties
International organisations are bound by their own constitutive instruments.
Indeed it has been said that ‘[i]n reality in any legal system a legal person created by an agreement is not a third party to that agreement.’
In the Expenses case the Court considered whether the General Assembly and Secretariat had acted within their prescribed powers in categorising the establishment of UNEF and ONUC as legitimate expenses of the Organisation.
The Court undertook a detailed textual analysis of the relevant Articles of the Charter, as well as a purpose-oriented approach to the over-riding aims of the Organisation, to conclude that both bodies had acted intra vires .
The Court assumed the Organisation's power to be delimited by the Charter without examining why this is so.
The United Nations Organisation and its organs are not, and cannot be, parties to the Charter.
What then is the basis for the assumption that an organisation is bound by the terms of its treaty? 410
This may be analogous to the question why a newly independent State is deemed bound by a treaty which brought it into existence.
There is however a crucial distinction.
An independent State is presumed to have all the territorial competencies of a sovereign State from the time of its emergence as a State, irrespective of the terms of any treaty bringing it into existence.
There is no parallel principle with respect to organisations; the competence of any organisation is defined by the treaty creating it.
There is a lacuna between the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties and the Vienna Convention on International Organisations.
The former provides the criteria for determining when a treaty creates rights or obligations vis a vis third States, while the latter has comparable provisions with respect to third party organisations.
However this latter treaty applies to treaties between States and international organisations, or international organisations inter se , not to treaties between States establishing international organisations.
Furthermore, this Convention also requires that acceptance of the right or obligation by the third party organisation be in accordance with its constitutive rules, which again assumes that they are binding on the organisation, although contained in a treaty to which it is not a party.
Reasoning by analogy from the identical provisions of these two Conventions, the parties to a multilateral treaty which creates an international organisation intend the provisions of that treaty to establish obligations for, and accord rights to, the organisation.
Member States create an organisation with defined and limited functions; they intend the organisation to operate within these restraints, and their acceptance of the duties of membership rests upon this assumption.
Membership of an organisation necessitates voluntary restrictions upon the sovereign powers of States which can only be to the extent accepted by the members through the express or implied terms of the treaty.
The corollary is that the organisation has no existence except through the will of its members; member States can amend the treaty creating an organisation and even terminate its existence.
There is no concept of a society of international organisations.
A municipal sovereign body can create statutory bodies with legal capacities to act within the powers conferred.
‘The sovereign Parliament quite clearly could limit the potential activities of its creatures in any way it liked.’
Likewise in international law, sovereign States can create entities with restricted powers for particular purposes.
Subsequently in municipal law, bodies other than the sovereign body were recognised as having the power to create legal entities; a corporation exists within the terms of its Memorandum and Articles of Association, both of which are drawn up prior to incorporation.
The specification of the objects and purposes of a corporation was necessary for the protection of both investors and creditors, and as a matter of policy the Courts enforced the compliance of the corporation.
In a decentralised legal system there can be no formal requirement for the inclusion of an international organisation's objects, purposes, and powers in its constitutive treaty.
That they are included is as much for the protection of the member States themselves, who will be responsible for the budget of the organisation and need its field of operations to be defined, as for non-members who need to know the extent of the organisation's powers.
Claims that the actions of the organisation are invalid
Once an organisation is operational it is not unusual for it to extend its powers to matters outside the treaty, or to implement policies or decisions without following the procedural requirements of the treaty.
Further, an organisation may interpret its treaty in a broad manner that was not anticipated by some of its members, or is even contrary to their expectations.
An actively functioning organisation tends to generate its own dynamism so that it may eventually follow procedures and enter into transactions far removed from those envisaged by the treaty.
Member States may, of course, amend the constitutive treaty in accordance with any amendment clause it may contain, or under general principles of treaty law, to reflect the evolving practice of the organisation.
However the treaty is likely to represent a delicately balanced compromise between the varying interests of the member States which is not easy to disturb.
Formal treaty amendment of constitutive treaties is not lightly or frequently undertaken.
The increased or varied powers of an international organisation impacts upon both members and non-members.
The claims of the former will be examined first.
Member States may assume the validity of such extended powers through the implied powers doctrine, which allows competency to be implied from the express purposes of an organisation in order that it may function effectively.
This reasoning encourages broad drafting of the purposes of an organisation to widen the scope of its implied powers.
The reasonably incidental powers doctrine provides no basis for an extension of powers beyond the express or implied purposes of the organisation.
A claim might be made by dissentient member States that the actions of the organisation were not in compliance with its treaty.
This was the background to the Maritime Safety Committee case of 1960, where the Assembly of the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation asked the International Court of Justice for an opinion on the correct interpretation of the Convention for the Establishment of the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation.
Under Article 28 (a) of the Convention the Assembly of the Organisation was to elect the Maritime Safety Committee from the ‘governments of those nations having an important interest in maritime safety of which not less than eight shall be the largest ship-owning nations…
‘. Liberia (which held the third largest gross registered tonnage on the Lloyds Register of Shipping Statistical Tables, 1958) and Panama (eighth largest) were not elected.
The question before the Court was whether the members had a discretion to take into account that the flags of convenience policies of these two countries negated an important interest in maritime safety, or whether the eight States with the largest registered tonnage of shipping had a treaty right to be elected.
Liberia and Panama took the latter view, and claimed that the election was null and void from the moment Liberia was not elected.
Other States within the Assembly argued that an interest in maritime safety was the dominant condition, and that this was the prime purpose of the Organisation.
The Court held that the members of the Assembly had not complied with the Convention.
The majority423 asserted that Article 28 (a) as an entirety must be given its ordinary and natural meaning, and the word ‘elected’ could not be read in isolation so as automatically to imply a choice.
The context indicated a more restricted meaning for ‘elected’.
The majority supported their conclusion by explaining that throughout the drafting process of the Article, right until the final draft, the word ‘selected’ had been preferred.
The change to ‘elected’ was deemed to be inconclusive.
There was no argument that the failure to elect Liberia and Panama was an exercise of reasonably incidental powers, only that it was impermissible in the light of the wording of Article 28 (a).
The Opinion provides no theory of illegality or ultra vires with respect to international organisations, but relies on treaty interpretation.
Indeed the member States were acting qua members not qua Assembly when they voted on the membership of the Committee.
Acting unanimously, the member States could have informally amended the treaty provisions, but without such unanimity they each remained bound.
The Court was not asked to consider the effects of this violation and did not do so.
If the election had been declared to be void (as Panama and Liberia asserted), the Committee's actions in the intervening period would have been of no legal effect.
The Organisation would have been without a legally constituted Safety Committee and unable to perform its designated functions.
Lauterpacht concludes that the subsequent Resolution of the Assembly shows that the Assembly accepted the Court's opinion, although a diversity of views persisted on the nature of the effect of the election.
CLAIMS BY INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AGAINST MEMBER STATES
Claims that member States acted contrary to the constitutive treaty
The members of an organisation acting qua members can unanimously amend or even terminate an international organisation, either in accordance with an amendment clause or through the formal or informal conclusion of a subsequent international agreement.
If some members act in violation of the constitutive treaty can the organisation itself act against them?
The opinion of the Permanent Court in the Interpretation of the Greek-Turkish Agreement suggests that it can.
A Mixed Commission for the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations had been established by treaty.
The membership of the Commission comprised four members from each of Greece and Turkey, and three members from States that had not participated in the First World War.
In 1926 an agreement (the Athens Agreement) was concluded between Greece and Turkey to settle various difficulties that had arisen under the 1923 Lausanne Peace Treaty.
The Athens Agreement created further duties for the Mixed Commission, including the application of the Agreement.
A Final Protocol annexed to the Athens Agreement provided in Article 4 for recourse to the Greek-Turkish Mixed Arbitral Tribunal established by the Lausanne Peace Treaty, but did not specify who could submit questions to the Arbitral Tribunal.
Greece claimed that, as it was a party to both agreements and as it would be a party to any arbitration, it could unilaterally commence arbitral proceedings.
Turkey argued that this could not be done without a decision of the Mixed Commission.
The Permanent Court was asked for an opinion on the correct interpretation of the Athens Agreement.
The Court advised that the exclusive power of referral to arbitration belonged to the Mixed Commission, which had been established by the parties as a separate legal entity with specified functions.
The member States of the Commission could not carry out the duties entrusted to the Commission.
Individual members of the Commission had no powers to act outside the Commission; all actions within the Athens Agreement had to be taken after agreement by majority vote within the Commission.
The Greek and Turkish members of the Commission were not delegates of their respective States who could act on the instructions of the member States, but members of an administrative body.
Members of the Commission qua members of the Commission had to observe the rules in performance of the treaty.
The member States had no right to interfere in the working of the Commission, nor to take unilateral action within the terms bestowed upon the Commission.
It has been suggested that this opinion establishes that members of an organisation do not remain ‘masters of the treaty’ in that they were unable to amend the constitutive treaty.
However joint decisions by the Greek and Turkish members could not constitute a unanimous decision of the Commission in the face of opposition from the neutral members.
These neutral members were appointed by the Council of the League of Nations which therefore also had an interest in the treaty's performance.
It may have been these factors that encouraged the Court to give a restrictive opinion on the powers of the member States.
In the litigation in the English Courts arising out of the collapse of the International Tin Council the question was raised whether the Tin Council had a cause of action against its own members.
This issue arose out of the claim to appoint a receiver for the International Tin Council under English law.
It was questioned whether an organisation can demand the performance of its constitutive treaty from its members.
The question remained unanswered, for Counsel for the applicants accepted that any cause of action based on the treaty would not be justiciable in the English courts.
The administrative organs of an international organisation must be able to bring the requirements of the treaty to the attention of the member States, but if the members persist in their action, appear to have no further recourse.
In another related claim, Millett J. concluded that a winding-up order would be wholly inappropriate to terminate the existence and operation of an organisation founded by treaty between sovereign States.
Such an order would impinge upon the operation of the organisation; it would prevent the International Tin Council from having its Headquarters in the place stipulated by the treaty, and its members would be unable to perform their treaty obligations.
Third party creditors could not be allowed to use the forum of the English courts to interfere with the performance of an international treaty.
Claims that member States are estopped from denying an extension of institutional power
In the IMCO case member States of the Organisation claimed that other members had acted contrary to the constitutive treaty.
In Nicaragua, a member State claimed the actions of the United Nations Secretariat and the Registry of the International Court were contrary to the Statute of the International Court of Justice.
The United States argued that Nicaragua had not made a valid declaration under Article 36 (2), since the Registry of the Permanent Court had not received a notification of deposit of its ratification of the Protocol of Signature of the Statute.
In both the Reports of the Court to the General Assembly and the listings of the United Nations Secretariat, Nicaragua was included as having accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court through the operation of Article 36 (5) on its acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Permanent Court.
These were decisions taken by the administrative organs of the Court and the United Nations to accept Nicaragua as a State with an Article 36 (2) declaration, despite non-compliance with the formal procedural requirements.
The Court acknowledged that the Registry could not make a decision binding upon it in its judicial capacity.
It accepted that the administration of the Court (and subsequently the General Assembly) acting qua organisation, and not qua member States, had made a decision that did not comply with the formal requirements of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice, but held nevertheless that the Court had jurisdiction.
The Court did not say that the administrative organs had unilaterally amended the treaty; indeed under the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties amendment or modification can only be carried out by the unanimous agreement of the parties.
A draft Article allowing for amendment of treaties through subsequent practice of parties (not third parties) was rejected at Vienna as likely to promote uncertainty and instability in the performance of treaties.
The rationale used by the Court was that of estoppel: by acquiescing in the de facto extension of the powers of the organisation treaty parties had become estopped from denying its effectiveness.
Member States must be assumed to have actual or at least constructive knowledge of an organisation's actions, so that they cannot claim ignorance of them.
By failing to protest against the actions of the organisation itself through its administrative organs, member States may be held to have accepted the amendment of the treaty through practice.
Claims of status
The Admissibility of Hearings of Petitioners by the Committee of South West Africa illustrates another situation where a member State unsuccessfully claimed that an international organisation had illegally extended its powers.
The Court was asked whether the General Assembly could extend its powers under the Mandate system to authorise the Committee on South West Africa to grant oral hearings to inhabitants of the Territory.
Oral hearings were justified as a means of enabling the General Assembly, as supervisory body, to obtain detailed information about conditions in the Territory.
The Court held that the acceptance of oral petitions would be legitimate, although this power had never been granted by the Council of the League, was not directly authorised by the mandate agreement, and was strongly objected to by all the mandatory powers.
The General Assembly was not restricted in its actions to those performed by the League, provided it was satisfied they were necessary for the effective carrying out of its task of supervision.
The majority opinion emphasises the subjective condition that the General Assembly must be satisfied of the need for the wider powers, but does not make the power of granting oral hearings rest upon the precondition of failure of its duties by South Africa.
Judge Lauterpacht however felt that extension of the Organisation's powers could only be justified where it was necessary for the performance of its functions and, in this instance, was caused by South Africa's non-performance of its obligations.
The General Assembly was a third party both to the League Covenant, which provided the original authority for the Mandate system, and to its own Charter.
As the successor to the League it was also a third party to the Mandate agreement with South Africa.
In its earlier opinion on the International Status of South West Africa the Court had emphasised the status of the Mandate as ‘the sacred trust of civilisation’, which outweighed any principles of treaty law.
The status was intended to be enduring until its objectives were achieved, or until it was changed in accordance with the Mandate agreement.
It was created for the benefit of the inhabitants of the territory, not for that of the parties to the agreement.
An important aspect of the Mandate was supervision by the League to ensure observance of the arrangement.
Dissolution of the League did not entail the expiry of the supervisory function.
The General Assembly was available and equipped to fulfil this role, and it was therefore logical that it should do so.
In the Petitioners case the Court did not limit the General Assembly to the role actually performed by the League Council, and implicitly retreated from its earlier reasoning based on status.
By contrast, Judge Lauterpacht retained this emphasis in his insistence that the General Assembly could only authorise the oral hearings if South Africa continued to frustrate the operation of the Mandate; he laid stress on the continued status of the territory.
By downplaying this factor, the majority focus upon implementing a primary object of the Mandate agreement, upholding the rights of the inhabitants.
This opinion required that the other party to the Mandate agreement, South Africa, accept supervision by a body to which it had not consented and which was not even in existence at the time of the agreement.
This apparent third party relationship can be explained on the basis of the continued existence of the Mandate as an international status, on estoppel, and on the need to protect the rights of the inhabitants.
After the demise of the League, South Africa had on several occasions acknowledged that its obligations under the Mandate continued, and asserted that it would conform with these obligations.
In 1950 the Court had held these ‘declarations to constitute recognition by the Union of the continuance of the obligations under the Mandate and not a mere indication of future conduct of that government.’
South Africa could not subsequently retreat from that position.
In addition, the purposes of the United Nations as expressed in Article 1 of the Charter, give it an interest in the orderly and legal settlement of the dispute.
The General Assembly, as the third party, had both the duty of supervision and an interest in that task being effectively performed.
Although the Mandate was created by agreement, treaty arguments are conspicuously absent from the Court's reasoning in these two cases.
Even in the Petitioners case, where less emphasis is placed upon status, the Court does not resort to treaty arguments and indeed could not do so, for there was no treaty right of petition.
Only in Namibia, did treaty reasoning come to the fore, and that was in the context of termination of the Mandate by the General Assembly for material breach, when it was desired to establish a new legal regime over the territory.
These cases illustrate well that treaty reasoning is not dominant in third party situations where there are displacing factors.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO DISSENTIENT MEMBER STATES
Treaty amendment, other than in accordance with the terms of an amendment clause, has to be by unanimity amongst the parties.
Some member States may protest against actions of an organisation that they claim to be outside its powers as, for example, did France and the Soviet Union to the establishment of UNEF and ONUC.
The problem of extension of power was evaded in Expenses, where the Court found the Organisation's actions to be intra vires the Charter, and was side-stepped by the use of estoppel in Nicaragua.
If these outcomes had not been possible, would protest by sufficient members have been a significant factor in determining that the organisation had acted contrary to its constitutive treaty?
Would it have depended upon whether a majority of members had accepted the actions and, if so, where does that leave the dissentient minority whose membership entitles them to rely upon performance of the constitutive treaty?
A dissenting member cannot claim material breach of the constitutive treaty by the organisation, since the organisation is not a party to the treaty, although it can make such a claim against other member States.
Members of an organisation have a residual power to supervise the implementation of the constitutive treaty through the organisation.
The dissenting member may be able to protest, by analogy with customary international law: a State that protests from the outset is not bound by the rule, while protest negates the very possibility of estoppel.
Thus a member that protests from the outset of institutional action that is not sanctioned by the constitutive treaty should be able to claim that it is not bound by that action.
Protest would certainly negate any suggestion of tolerance of the situation, and would normally prevent the creation of expectations that it should continue.
A dissenting member has few options available to it in making its protest.
It may record its disagreement but ultimately accept the majority's support of the development; it may refuse to meet its financial obligations until the organisation ceases the action in question, although this may itself be contrary to the treaty; it may regard the action as having no legal effect; or it may withdraw from the organisation.
Nicaragua presented another alternative.
The United States argued that Nicaragua itself had previously represented that it, Nicaragua, had no binding declaration under Article 36 (2) and was estopped from now asserting the validity of its declaration.
On the facts the Court rejected this argument, but the operation of Article 36 (2) would allow a single dissentient not to be bound by the decision.
Since Article 36 (2) rests upon reciprocity it would have been open for the Court to find that there was no reciprocity between Nicaragua and a State that had protested against its listing as accepting the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court.
This distinguishes the position from that in Expenses where it was more difficult for isolated protesting States to remain aloof from the actions of the Organisation.
As the Expenses , IMCO, and Nicaragua cases demonstrate it may be possible to bring the question before an authoritative organ of the organisation, whose decision must be taken as conclusive.
In Westland Helicopters v. The Arab Organisation for Industrialisation; the United Arab Emirates; the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia; the State of Qatar; the Arab Republic of Egypt; and the Arab British Helicopter Company, Egypt as a dissenting member took other steps in response to what it saw as the wrongful dissolution of the Organisation by the other member States.
Egypt strongly resisted this move and promulgated a decree that the Arab Organisation for Industrialisation was still an international organisation with its business headquarters in Cairo.
It also brought an unsuccessful action for the annulment of the arbitration proceedings in the Swiss Courts, and instituted an action to annul the award.
CLAIMS BY THIRD PARTIES WITH RESPECT TO INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
The position of third parties
The legal effect of actions of an organisation in excess of its powers becomes even more complex in the case of claims by third parties against the organisation.
These claims may relate either to the internal procedures of the organisation, or to its activities.
A non-member of an organisation must first determine the powers of the organisation and its organs.
There are no requirements of publicity or of registration of the constitutional instruments of international organisations for the protection of third parties, apart from the general registration requirement of Article 102 of the United Nations Charter.
This Article does not require amendments or modifications to be registered, except where they constitute a new treaty.
An organisation has an uncertain existence in the sense that it is dependent upon the will of the member States, and third parties dealing with an organisation must take account of this reality.
The internal rules of an organisation may not always be accessible to them.
Even where a third party is able to determine the formal internal regulations of an organisation these may not necessarily be adequate.
Third parties need to be alert to the possibility of change and to the actual practices of the body.
The ‘operational code’ or ‘living law’of an international organisation is often very different from its ‘law on the books’.
The Court's use in the Expenses case of the internal management rule provides third parties with some degree of protection against a representative or organ of an organisation acting beyond its powers.
It has been argued that the rationale of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Articles 7455 and 46456 should be applied to the institutional context for the protection of third parties.
A third party should be entitled to assume that a person in an authoritative position within an organisation is competent to bind the organisation, and the organisation should not be able to plead violation of an internal rule unless ‘that violation was manifest and concerned a rule of its internal law of fundamental importance.’
Reverting to the analogy with corporations, at common law an ultra vires action by a corporation remains ultra vires for the protection of third parties, even if unanimously supported by all the shareholders.
This cannot be applied directly in international law, for treaties can be amended by the parties' unanimous agreement, and there is no over-riding regulation of international organisations.
States, unlike shareholders, do not merely own the organisations they have created but remain sovereign over them.
On the other hand, caution should be adopted in the interests of third parties, and there should be a reluctance to assume that the treaty has been amended to alter the objects and purposes of an organisation.
Paradoxically, third parties dealing with an international organisation may feel secure despite the lack of legal regulation.
The identity of the member States of an inter-governmental organisation is a matter of public record and the numbers are necessarily limited.
There are none of the problems of tracking down shareholders who may exist across a number of States, and who may be subsidiaries of other bodies.
A third party may be confident that the member States behind the organisation are secure debtors, particularly if they happen to be the main industrial powers of the world.
Nonetheless, third parties need to be alert to the dynamism of an organisation and realise it might have generated its own practices and activities, which need not necessarily be encompassed by the constitutive treaty.
Third party procedural claims
Some constitutive treaties provide procedural rights for third parties.
In the interests of the maintenance of international peace and security, Article 35 (2) of the United Nations Charter allows a non-member to bring a dispute to which it is a party to the attention of either organ of the Organisation, provided it accepts in advance the obligations of the pacific settlement of disputes for the purposes of the dispute.
This is a conditional right of access to the institutional procedures of the Organisation, but the Security Council is not apparently under any corresponding duty to put the dispute on its agenda, or to apply its procedures to it.
On the other hand the Security Council may investigate ‘any dispute’ which might lead to international friction, not merely those between member States, and any member State may bring such a situation or dispute to its attention.
Nor are the Security Council's powers under Chapter VII of the Charter limited to situations involving member States.
Only members have the duty to comply with decisions of the Security Council, or to make available armed forces to the Security Council, but the maintenance of global peace and security and the peaceful settlement of international disputes would be prejudiced if non-members were excluded from the dispute resolution processes of the United Nations.
These procedural provisions have their substantive counterpart in Article 2 (6) of the Charter, which obliges members to ensure that non-members comply with Charter principles for the maintenance of international peace and security.
If a non-member challenged this obligation, a dispute would arise, which could then be investigated by the Security Council.
THIRD PARTY CLAIMS AGAINST THE MEMBER STATES OF AN ORGANISATION
The internal management rule does not assist a third party which has dealt in good faith with an organisation which then defaults on its debts.
As a separate international legal entity the organisation is a party to the transaction, to the exclusion of the member States.
Where an organisation will not or cannot meet its obligations, a third party creditor is likely to press its claims against the members of the organisation, despite their third party status with respect to the particular transaction.
The rights of third party creditors against the member States of an organisation have been analysed in two major international incidents, Westland Helicopters and the litigation arising out of the collapse of the International Tin Council.
The Arab Organisation for Industrialisation was an international organisation established by agreement for the purpose of building up an arms industry for the benefit of its member States.
In 1978 the Organisation contracted in its own name with Westland Helicopters for,inter alia , the purchase of helicopters.
A year later, as a consequence of the Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel, three of the members purported to terminate the Organisation.
Westland claimed it could rely upon the arbitral clause within the contract to bring an action for breach of contract against both the Organisation and the member States.
The Arbitral Tribunal held that Westland could raise the arbitral clause against the member States on the ground that, exceptionally, ‘those who have not signed an arbitration clause are nevertheless bound by it’.
The Tribunal considered that there would be a real denial of justice if Westland was not able to bring the member States to arbitration.
General principles of equity and fairness allowed the corporate organisational veil to be lifted to protect the interests of the third party, Westland, which had contracted with it in good faith.
The member States had agreed to enter into the contract through the mechanism of the Organisation.
The Tribunal did not accept that the Organisation's independent existence provided the basis for any conclusion as to the liability of the members of the Organisation.
This depended upon the constitutive documentation of the Organisation, which was silent as to the liability of the member States, although Article 1 of the constitutive Treaty limited its personality to ‘operational needs’.
No injustice would be caused to these States by holding them to their agreement, for ‘as a general rule, those who engage in transactions of an economic nature are deemed liable for the obligations which flow therefrom’.
The member States were deemed to be at one with the Organisation and the Tribunal concluded that it had not been their intention to disappear behind its constitution.
In Westland the Organisation was split by dissent between its member States, whereas in the International Tin Council litigation the Organisation had financially collapsed.
Member States refused to meet the claims of the many and various creditors, third parties to the International Tin Agreement.
Member States were in turn third parties to the contracts entered into by the International Tin Council.
Third party claims were considered at first instance and in the Court of Appeal.
Further, in the Court of Appeal the reasoning of the Westland Arbitration Tribunal was considered, and rejected in favour of denying member State liability for the debts of the Organisation.
The Court of Appeal was not informed that the award of the Tribunal had been annulled with respect to Egypt by the Court of Justice for the Canton of Geneva, whose decision was affirmed by the Swiss Federal Tribunal.
These Courts held that since the Arab Organization for Industrialisation had its own legal identity separate from the four member States and enjoyed financial, procedural, and administrative autonomy, the latter could not be bound by obligations entered into on behalf of the Organisation.
The Swiss Courts and the Court of Appeal favoured a formal legalistic approach which, unlike the Arbitral Tribunal, refused to examine the realities of the Organisation, and which protected member States at the expense of third parties.
The judgment of the House of Lords rested upon the principle that municipal courts are not competent to adjudicate upon transactions entered into by independent sovereign States on the international plane, and did not directly address the issues raised by Westland.
The litigation has starkly exposed the defects in the regulation of international organisations' relations with third parties, and the lack of judicial remedy within domestic courts.
Eventually an out of court settlement was reached in December 1989 with the ITC agreeing to payment of 182. million pounds sterling to 20 brokers, 13 banks and 3 smelters.
The money comprised contributions from member States, which maintained their position of not being legally liable.
However the settlement leaves open the question whether member States can be found liable under international law for the debts of an organisation which has entered into transactions in its own name.
The view was presented to the Court of Appeal that:
Even though international organisations, as international persons, may be held liable under international law for the acts they perform, this cannot exclude the secondary liability of the Member States themselves.
When an international organisation is unable to meet its liabilities, the Members are obliged to stand in, according to the amount by which each Member is assessed for contributions to the organisation's budget.
This proposition is unsupported by authority and is based upon the assertion that there is no general international legal provision for the creation of international organisations with limited liability, and that member States are responsible for contributions to an organisation.
However the only financial commitment a State routinely makes to an organisation is to meet its membership contributions.
The Court could find no evidence that the parties intended to be liable on the contracts of the International Tin Council; the obligations they envisaged were those they owed to the Council itself and not to third party creditors.
Further, there have been differences of opinion as to whether any such liability of member States is joint and several, or proportional to budgetary contributions.
Analysis of liability in international law must rest upon the principles of State responsibility.
The requirements for State responsibility for an international wrongful act are breach of an international obligation which is attributable to the State.
Although the International Law Commission did not consider directly the liability of a member State for the acts of an international organisation it seems likely that these two requirements would nevertheless be applicable.
The first question is whether there was a breach of an international obligation, either breach of an agreement or an international delict.
Since the agreements were contracts made under domestic law, it would be necessary to establish that they were internationalised contracts with international law as the proper law of the contract for their violation to amount to an international wrong.
The existence of an internationalised contract between a private entity and a State is frequently asserted, and there does not appear to be any reason why international law cannot be the proper law of a contract between an international organisation and a private entity.
It can be justified as preserving the independence of the organisation, and the freedom of action to perform its functions.
A major criticism of the concept is that, in the absence of the express incorporation of international law as the proper law in the contract, the criteria for determining this to be the case are not settled.
In the Texaco v. Libya arbitration Professor Dupuy, an exponent of the concept, considered three factors to be relevant.
First was a reference in the contract to general principles of law, second a reference to arbitration in the case of differences with respect to the interpretation and performance of the contract, and third that the contract ‘takes on a dimension of a new category of agreements between States and private persons: economic development agreements.’
Even if these criteria were generally accepted as determinative, there is no evidence that all (or even any) of these factors were present in the contracts between the creditors and the Tin Council.
Their subject-matter was not broad-based, nor directed to the long-term development of any particular State.
Another proposed test is that contracts with international organisations are internationalised if they are on the subject matter of the organisation, and their performance relates to the functions of the organisation.
The creditors could argue that the contracts and loans related to the purchase of tin as encompassed in the objectives of the 6th International Tin Agreement.
However State practice does not support this test, and other arbitrations have rejected the internationalised contract concept.
Neither is there any strong reason for finding the contracts to be internationalised; they were straight-forward commercial contracts with no exceptional features other than that one party was an international organisation.
Indeed there was no suggestion in the cases that the contracts were internationalised.
Even if Article 36 bis had been included in the Vienna Convention on International Organisations it would not have applied in this situation.
The scope of that Article was to bind member States to treaties concluded by the organisation, not contracts under municipal law.
If the proper law of the various agreements is determined to be municipal law and not international law, it might be possible to establish that the member States committed an internationally wrongful act through their negligent supervision of the International Tin Council.
The Council comprised all the member States, which are each represented by one delegate.
The delegates do not act in their personal capacity but carry out the policies and instructions of their government, as shown by the provision that an alternate delegate can be empowered to act and vote on behalf of a delegate who is absent.
The Council has plenary powers to administer the Agreement.
It appoints an Executive Chairman who is ‘responsible to the Council for the administration and operation of the Agreement in accordance with the decisions of the Council.’
The Executive Chairman must decide the liability of the buffer stock account for any type of expenditure, and is answerable to the International Tin Council for any details of the operations of the buffer stock.
The buffer stock Manager is appointed by the Council and is answerable to the Executive Chairman; since the latter is answerable to the Council the ultimate responsibility of the former is also to the Council.
The Council regulates the financing of the ‘normal’ and the ‘additional’buffer stock of tin.
Of special interest is the Council's power to ‘establish operational rules which shall include,inter alia , financial measures to be applied to members which fail to meet their obligations under Article 22’, and the power to suspend certain rights of a member which fails to ‘fulfil its obligation to contribute to the buffer stock.’
These powers seem wide enough to assure the member States’ control over the activities of the Council.
The primary liability of the member States could be based upon their failure to supervise the International Tin Council adequately and their actual or constructive knowledge of the events leading up to its collapse.
Liability could only be incurred if this failure amounted to a breach of an international obligation, or, to put it another way, if there was a duty on the member States to ensure adequate supervision of the organisation they had created.
An analogy can be drawn with Corfu Channel where Albania was held liable for its failure to take action to prevent the mining of the British ships, and the Iranian Hostages case where Iran was liable for its failure to protect the American Embassy.
However in both these cases the State responsible had exclusive competence over the territory from where harm was caused to another State.
The territorial element is absent in the case of an international organisation, other than with respect to the Headquarters State, and any other State where the events occurred.
Further, in the Hostages case Iran had a treaty obligation to protect the premises of the mission, while the member States of the International Tin Council had no treaty commitment with third parties to supervise the actions of the Council.
It is hard to assert that a general duty of supervision exists in the absence of fraud by the member States, which would be hard to ascertain, or as a matter of policy to ensure the responsible operation of an international organisation.
Without such a duty member States can fail to control the actions of an organisation they have created to the detriment of third States, without incurring liability.
However, imposition of liability might result in member States becoming unwilling to allow international organisations to act independently and interfering in their day to day operation.
Third party creditors could seek their own legal safeguards before entering into arrangements with international organisations, however this too might impede the functioning of the organisation.
It might be possible to argue that the direction and control vested in the member States were sufficient to create an agency relationship between the Council and the member States.
Agency is used in systems of municipal law to maximise commercial dealings by avoiding the restraints of privity, and imposing liability where it should lie.
Just as a State may act on behalf of another State or other legal entity, so too an organisation might be seen as acting as agent for its member States.
It is therefore necessary to ascertain whether this device could be used to make the member States liable to the creditors in international law.
In J. H. Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd. v. the Department of Trade and Industry before Justice Staughton and in Maclaine Watson & Co. v. the ITC before Justice Millet in the Chancery Division, the agency argument was addressed.
It was argued that the Tin Council entered into the transactions with third parties as agent acting on behalf of the member States as undisclosed principal.
The requisite consent and authority to establish the relationship could only exist in the International Tin Agreement.
A differentiation was drawn between ‘factual’ agency for which express authority given by the members to to the Council would have to be established, and ‘constitutional’agency which could derive directly from the 6th International Tin Agreement.
As has been seen above the Council was organically and functionally the creation of the member States with no separate existence outside their control.
Millett J. concluded that the treaty was a membership agreement, not one forming an agency relationship.
It established the rights of members as members, not as principals to the transactions of the Organisation.
A member is different from both a shareholder and a principal.
The nature and functions of the Organisation were not those of a profit-making corporation, for the international regulation of the price and production of tin was paramount.
The member States had joined together for the collective achievement of this common purpose which demanded concerted action.
The capacity of a body corporate with which the International Tin Council had been bestowed by the English Parliament allowed it to acquire and hold property, and to perform other actions in its own name.
These characteristics militated against any assumption of agency.
Not all of this reasoning is convincing.
A natural person acting as an agent can act in his or her own name and can hold property in a personal bank account.
It may be essential to the conduct of business that the agent has the capacity so to act.
An artificial entity such as an organisation cannot function except in the name of a body corporate.
This capacity is no more than a device to enable the organisation to act, and should not be seen as either creating or weighing against an agency relationship.
Rejection of an agency relationship between the Council and the member States depends upon separating the members of the Council acting as members of the Council, from members of the Council acting as delegates of the States.
The International Tin Agreement defines the powers of the Council qua Council, rather than the authority of members qua agent.
Another problem is the identity of the principal; each member of the Council is the delegate of its own State, but the only possible principal is the body of member States acting jointly through the International Tin Agreement.
The International Tin Agreement also provided for executive staff who in the performance of their duties were prohibited from receiving instructions from any source other than the Council.
Each member State was under a duty to respect the international and independent character of the responsibilities of these staff.
Although the member States had created the Council, once established it became a separate entity with its own international executive.
The member States were external to the Council, and were included in the prohibition against taking instructions from external governments or powers.
This could be a persuasive argument against agency.
An agent cannot be prohibited from taking further instructions from the principal, and a principal cannot be prevented from giving instructions to the agent.
While the members may be delegates of the member States, the administrative officers were independent and exclusively international employees of the Council.
However the executive staff could receive changed instructions from the Council acting collectively, which amounts to more than the member States acting collectively through their delegates.
Indeed this is what should have been done to stop the actions of the buffer stock Manager.
In this sense the members are not prevented from changing the scope of authority of the executive staff, but to do this they would be acting collectively qua ITC not as individual members.
If an agency relationship were accepted, there would remain the problem of the extent of the Council's authority as agent.
It might be argued that the actions were outside the express authority of the Council, for there could be no express authority to incur debts that could not be honoured.
Reliance would then have to be placed on agency by estoppel, or apparent authority.
Millett J. rejected this argument too.
The third parties could not have assumed that the Council was acting on behalf of member States.
As a matter of principle this seems excessively hard on third parties; the buffer stock Manager was known publicly to be the representative of the International Tin Council, there was reliance upon this by the third parties and the States therefore should not be able later to deny their involvement.
Staughton J. thought there was ‘a good deal to be said for the argument of agency’.
He considered the role of the Council members as delegates to be suggestive of agency, but concluded that agency was defeated by the literal wording of the contracts which were entered into by the third parties in the following terms:
This contract is made between ourselves and yourselves as principals, we alone being liable to you for its performance.
These words were taken to exclude the possibility of an undisclosed principal, a position which was argued to be also in accordance with commercial reality and expectations.
Business deals would not be made where people did not know the other partner to the contract.
Assurances as to financial worth, character, and probity are typically sought before deals are entered into as people need to know their trading partner's identity.
Staughton J. thought that members of the business community would especially want to know the people with whom they were dealing and whether there was a parent company which would not allow its subsidiary to default.
It seems that financial prudence would have led third parties to ensure that the manager was acting on behalf of the Council, whose credibility and creditworthiness rested upon its character as an international organisation of member States.
On appeal the agency argument was rejected.
The Court of Appeal found that no express authority had been given to the Council by its members, thus negating any factual agency.
It also held that the 6th International Tin Agreement did not establish a principal/agent relationship between the Council and its members.
In the House of Lords, Lord Oliver emphasised that the law which was relied upon as creating an agency situation was the 6th International Tin Agreement, which was not justiciable in the English courts.
His Lordship indicated that even if this were not the case he would have rejected any agency argument on the same grounds as Staughton J., and the Court of Appeal.
However the degree of authority and control retained by the member States militates against this conclusion, and one is left with the over-riding formalism of the terms of the contracts.
In this the privity doctrine supersedes any other consideration, and denies the imposition of liability on member States.
The Westland Helicopters and International Tin Council litigation highlight a number of points relevant to the position of treaties and third parties.
A law of international organisations has developed to make effective the actions of international organisations, and has displaced the classic rule of treaties and third parties in this context.
However the law of international organisations itself rests upon treaties; this litigation reveals the inadequacy of that law, and its inapplicability in a domestic legal system where unincorporated treaties have no legislative effect.
The dilemma of third party creditors to an international organisation cannot be simply resolved by recourse to the domestic analogy of corporation law.
There is no separation of management and control in an international organisation, which is formed by member States with an executive drawn from among them.
There is no over-riding regulation of the activities of an international organisation.
The separation of the corporate personality from that of the shareholders is justified in domestic law by the need to promote investment; when international organisations enter the market place this need is not present.
Member States can thus shelter behind the organisation they have created for the regulation of trade in a commodity.
While stabilisation of the production and price of essential commodities can be seen as legitimate functions of an international organisation, they inevitably involve purely commercial dealings which should not be carried out without the objective protection of an applicable legal system and the availability of a judicial or arbitral forum for the resolution of commercial disputes.
This dilemma mirrors the development from the absolute view of foreign state immunity to the acceptance of the restrictive view, as States entered more frequently into commercial activities as opposed to traditional public activities.
The adoption of the restrictive view of immunity by many States demonstrates recognition of the need for judicial recourse in commercial disputes involving States.
This is equally the case with international organisations.
While the purpose of creating commodity organisations was neither to escape liability nor to create profits for the organisation itself, but to control dealings in the commodity for the benefit of member States, the consequence has been to deprive third parties who were dealing in good faith with the organisation of a domestic judicial remedy.
Establishing international legal liability also appears problematic, as there is apparently no norm of international law requiring member States of organisations to ensure that non-State entities are not harmed through their collective actions.
INDIVIDUALS AS THIRD PARTIES TO TREATIES
INTRODUCTION
The status of individuals as subjects or objects of international law has been controversial.
What is evident is that with the centralisation of collective State action through international organisations, an increasing number of rules of international law impact upon individuals.
The major instrument for shaping and formulating these prescriptions remains the treaty.
Treaties have been concluded to foster a common standard of treatment for individuals, to provide additional protection for certain categories of individuals, to impose obligations upon individuals, and to facilitate the exercise of municipal jurisdiction over individuals.
Even where State protection of individuals is supposedly guaranteed by treaty, the prime motivation has been the furtherance of international order through the preservation of international peace and security rather than a direct intention to provide international legal protection for individuals.
This can be illustrated by the early examples of protection for individuals in the special treaty provisions for minorities; the inclusion of human rights in Article 1 of the United Nations Charter in the context of the maintenance of international peace and security; and by the paucity of international mechanisms for the enforcement of those rights and freedoms.
Individuals as third parties to treaties are not in the same position as third party States or organisations.
In his Third Report, Waldock proposed an Article relating to individuals.
Draft Article 66 stated:
Where a treaty provides for obligations or rights which are to be performed or enjoyed by individuals, juristic persons or groups of individuals, such obligations or rights are applicable to the individuals…:
(a)
through the contracting States by their national systems of law;
(b)
through such international organs and procedures as may be specially provided for in the treaty or in any other treaties or instruments in force.
This provision was controversial and not included in the Convention.
It would have formalised the position that individuals can have rights and obligations imposed upon them by treaties to which they cannot be parties.
Individuals are not referred to in Articles 34–37 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, or the Vienna Convention on International Organisations.
They are not protected against revocation and modification of third party rights under Articles 36 and 37, nor any customary international law equivalent.
Under general treaty law and the law on State responsibility, States can amend or terminate treaties which provide rights for individuals.
Individuals enjoy any benefit bestowed by treaty with the continuing agreement of the States parties; they do not have treaty rights vested in them, unless those rights have become basic norms of municipal law, customary international law, or jus cogens .
STATES' CLAIMS ON BEHALF OF INDIVIDUALS
Individuals are not accorded the protection given to third States to treaties of having to assent in writing to the imposition of burdens upon them.
Individuals can only exceptionally bring claims against States in the international arena through mechanisms granted by treaty, or developed through the practice of international organisations.
More typically claims are made between States on behalf of individuals, for example under the traditional theory of State responsibility.
Some treaties provide specific procedures for claims of violation of the Convention, for example the inter-State complaint mechanism found in various human rights conventions.
Inter-State complaints are not made on behalf of an identified victim and, indeed, there may not even be such a defined person.
The claim rests upon the right of all States parties to take steps to enforce the obligations of the Convention against other States parties.
The experience of the European Convention has been that this procedure has been little used, with most allegations of violations of the Convention commenced through individual petition.
It has been argued that a State may intervene, even forcibly, in the affairs of another State without violating Article 2 (4) of the United Nations Charter, or the norm of non-intervention where the intervention is justified on humanitarian grounds, for example to stop gross violations of human rights.
If the target State is a party to any of the relevant conventions, humanitarian intervention can be categorised as a means of enforcing those treaty obligations on behalf of the victims.
Where there are treaty procedures these should be attempted first, unless the necessity for forcible action is overwhelmimg.
In the aftermath of the Gulf War in April 1990 the plight of the Kurds became a matter of international concern as thousands fled towards Iraq's boundaries with Turkey and Iran.
The Security Council insisted that Iraq allow access by international humanitarian organisations to those in need of assistance, and make available facilities for humanitarian operations.
The rescue operation for the Kurds did not involve the use of force by international bodies, and was justified by the threat presented to international peace and stability within the region by the repression of the Kurds.
Whether humanitarian intervention is legitimate within the terms of the United Nations Charter is controversial precisely because it permits a derogation of State sovereignty on behalf of individual rights.
Unilateral State intervention in the absence of an authoritative decision can promote international disorder and disrupt international peace and security.
Even advocates of the doctrine acknowledge that it must be exercised within defined limits, and not be allowed to serve as a facade for the furtherance of the intervening State's own ends.
INDIVIDUALS' CLAIMS BEFORE NATIONAL COURTS
The restricted access of individuals to international arenas, and the uncertainties of State action on behalf of individuals mean that many individuals' claims with respect to treaties are brought before national fora under domestic law.
International treaty law gives way to the constitutional law of the State in question which determines the effect of a treaty within the particular legal system.
Differences in municipal law prevent any overall conclusions.
Instead, some examples will be given of the type of claims that have been made in the courts of the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States, and of the responses that have been favoured by these domestic courts.
Treaty-making is within executive competence in these States.
Individuals have no standing to prevent or interfere with the executive's exercise of this power, as it would undermine the overall control of foreign policy.
To allow individuals to challenge an exercise of the treaty-making power could cause uncertainty and tension in international affairs, negate the intended beneficial consequences of the conclusion of a treaty, impede negotiations for subsequent treaties or informal agreements, and cause a State to violate its international undertakings.
Courts in the United Kingdom, Australia and the United States have been reluctant to interfere with executive treaty-making power and have used various judicial devices to avoid allowing individuals' claims.
One claim is that the conclusion of a certain treaty would violate constitutional principles, or deprive an individual of a constitutionally guaranteed right.
Even in the United Kingdom where there are no constitutionally guaranteed rights, a claim of this sort has been made.
In Blackburn v. Attorney-General a declaration was sought to the effect that by becoming a party to the Treaty of Rome527 and submitting to the law-making competence of the European Communities, Britain would partially surrender its sovereignty contrary to its law.
The English Court of Appeal held there was no cause of action.
In the particular case the Treaty had not yet been entered into and the Courts would not interfere with the course of treaty negotiations.
Even if the Treaty had been signed, the Court would hold it to be unreviewable.
An example of a treaty which apparently gave procedural rights to individuals is the Anglo-Irish Agreement on Northern Ireland.
The two governments undertook that ‘…any change in the status of Northern Ireland would only come about with the consent of the majority of the people in Northern Ireland.’
They also agreed that if at any future date the majority of the people of Northern Ireland ‘clearly wish for and formally consent to the establishment of a United Ireland’ the appropriate legislation would be introduced into the respective Parliaments.
These provisions appear to confer a treaty right upon a defined group of people, the inhabitants of Northern Ireland, not to have their future political status altered without their consent.
A number of potential scenarios can be envisaged.
The United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland might attempt to terminate or modify this agreement; or the government of either or both States might attempt to introduce legislation without seeking the views of the population, or against their expressed will.
Individuals might then seek to prevent such government action on the basis of the agreement.
In both the United Kingdom and Ireland an international agreement has no effect in municipal law unless it has been incorporated by legislation; therefore in neither State could individuals use this provision to bring a legal action to prevent their government from entering into a new or modified agreement.
Nor could the citizens of Northern Ireland claim that the agreement gives them a legal right (although possibly a moral or political right) to a referendum before the British Parliament passed pertinent legislation.
This agreement expresses an understanding and commitment between the two governments which under existing law cannot of itself have any internal legal effect.
Only if the British courts were to adopt a doctrine of incorporation of treaties comparable to that sometimes asserted for customary international law533 could it be used by individuals to provide legal restraints on future legislative or treaty action.
In the United States there have been a number of challenges to the Presidential power to conclude international agreements that allegedly interfere with constitutionally guaranteed rights.
The courts have been reluctant to undermine this power, typically either holding the claim non-justiciable as concerning a political question, or evading the issue by deciding the case on a narrower point.
In one case the opinion was expressed that the foreign affairs powers of the President are extra-constitutional, resting upon the international sovereign status of the United States and the necessity for that country to be able to perform effectively in foreign relations, uninhibited by domestic legal restrictions.
The Supreme Court decision in Dames and Moore v. Regan537 is especially interesting because of the large number of potentially affected individuals, including the hostages detained in Tehran, foreign and American banking interests, commercial enterprises with dealings in Iran, and government agencies.
The case arose out of the Executive Agreement concluded between the United States and the Islamic Republic of Iran which led to the eventual release of the hostages detained in Tehran from November 1979 to January 1981.
The two governments agreed to terminate all litigation before the municipal courts between the nationals of either country and the government of the other.
Most of these claims were to be heard by the International Arbitral Tribunal (the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal) to be set up under Article 2 of the Agreement.
This deprived litigants of access to the United States' courts, although some had cases already pending before the federal courts.
This was claimed to be contrary to the right to property guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment.
The Supreme Court held that the President was competent to make the agreement on the narrow ground that there had been implied Congressional acquiescence.
It drew an analogy with cases that allow the President to exercise a wide freedom of action when normalising relations with foreign countries.
In that context it had long been accepted that the settlement of individual claims might be incorporated into an overall package.
The Court felt that comparable powers are equally appropriate in the resolution of a foreign policy dispute.
The President needed room to manoeuvre in negotiated attempts to resolve the crisis.
Claims that the President is acting in excess of power would allow individuals to interfere in the conduct of foreign affairs: a successful domestic legal challenge to an agreement reached with Iran would have undermined the negotiation process and cast doubt on the efficacy of future negotiations with the United States.
Claims that a proposed agreement conflicts with basic law have been effective to prevent the conclusion of a Compact of Free Association between the United States and Palau.
The Palau Constitution restricts the use, disposal, and testing of nuclear and other weapons in Palau.
The restrictions are entrenched by the requirement that any agreement authorising such activities must be approved by ‘not less than three-fourths (¾) of the votes cast in such referendum.’
The Compact of Free Association and its Articles relating to nuclear activities have been submitted to successive referenda in Palau in accordance with the Constitution, and the required ¾ majority approval has not been achieved.
The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Palau in Gibbons v Salii has affirmed that there is no authority to enter into the Compact of Free Association without compliance with the Constitution.
The situation contrasts with that in the United Kingdom where there is no constitutional limitation on treaty-making power, and in the United States where the constitutional amendments are not directed at treaty-making and are more broadly worded.
American courts have devised strategies to preserve a wide discretion in the President when concluding treaties.
The Palau Constitution, by way of contrast, has specific limitations on the subject-matter of international agreements which are not open to be undermined by evasive reasoning.
Property rights have also been in issue in Australian courts, but there are two major differences with the American cases.
First, in Australian law, an action taken in consequence of an international treaty cannot deprive citizens of liberty or property; second, there is no Australian equivalent of the Fifth Amendment.
In Minister for Arts, Heritage and Environment v. Peko-Wallsend the property in question comprised mining rights held by the respondents in an area known as Kakadu National Park, Stage 2.
These rights were threatened by the Government's decision to submit the area for listing as a World Heritage area under executive powers bestowed by the World Heritage Properties Conservation Act 1983 (Commonwealth of Australia), passed to give effect to the Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage.
The case turned upon the review of Cabinet decisions with respect to the implementation of a treaty.
In the Federal Court, Beaumont J. held that the Cabinet decision to nominate Stage 2 for listing was void since the owners of the mining rights had not been accorded natural justice before the decision to list the area.
The Full Federal Court allowed the appeal on the ground that there had been no breach of natural justice as the respondents had been given a hearing and, in the opinion of one Judge, had not been deprived of any present benefit or advantage.
Bowen C.J. held that the listing decision had not been taken under the treaty-making power, and that the Cabinet was not acting under any internationally binding obligation.
Wilcox J. however accepted that the decision formed part of Australia's international relations, and that even without a specific international obligation relating to Stage 2, the Cabinet had been acting in implementation of a treaty.
These factors bolstered his conclusion that the decision was not reviewable.
Although in Minister for Arts, Heritage and Environment v. Peko-Wallsend the treaty had been entered into prior to the listing of Kakadu, in Re Ditford, ex parte Deputy Commissioner of Taxation the case was cited as authority for the proposition that Australian courts have disclaimed entitlement to adjudicate upon decisions by the executive concerning the exercise of its treaty-making power.
It was further argued that Australian citizens, like British citizens, cannot bring claims against their government for violation of Australia's international obligations.
Gummow J. accepted that agreements made between the government of Australia and foreign Governments are non-justiciable, but held that ‘the taking of a step in the conduct of international relations, whilst of itself neither creating private rights nor imposing such liabilities, may be a step in a process which as a whole may have that effect.’
INDIVIDUALS' CLAIMS TO STATUS
Certain treaties have been entered into between States, or between a State and an international organisation, to give protected status to an identified group of people.
Treaties for the protection of minority peoples at the end of the First World War provide obvious examples.
The guarantee of protection to these individuals was intended to remove a source of friction between States that was feared might escalate into further conflict.
Individuals in the various mandate (and subsequently trusteeship) territories were third parties to the treaties entered into ‘for the well being and development of such peoples’.
This stated objective was often at variance with the reality of the administration of the territory, and it was not clear whether the individuals had any basis for a claim for performance of the treaty in either an international or domestic forum.
In the Admissibility of Hearings of Petitioners the International Court of Justice advised that oral hearings before the Committee for South West Africa could be granted to inhabitants of the territory to further the development of the international institution, and to render effective the General Assembly's supervisory role.
Judge Kojevnikov went further and declared the presentation of oral petitions to be one of the ‘indefeasible rights of the population of the Territory.’
He held that this right derived directly from the Covenant of the League and the Charter of the United Nations.
He upheld the concept of a multilateral treaty creating direct rights for a group of individuals which did not depend upon the effective management of the mandate.
His reasoning recognises the over-riding principle of the mandate, and gives effect to the principle of self-determination rather than adhering strictly to treaty rules.
The international legal identity of the inhabitants of a mandate territory was also raised in Namibia, where the International Court of Justice recognised that ‘the injured entity is a people which must look to the international community for assistance in its progress towards the goals for which the sacred trust was instituted.’
This was given practical effect through the Court's warning that in implementing the duty of non-recognition, States should not refuse to apply multilateral treaties where the adverse consequences of non-performance would fall directly upon the people.
Claims have also been made by the inhabitants of protected territories in domestic courts.
An example is the litigation commenced by the individual inhabitants of the trust territory of the Pacific Islands against the trust territory itself.
The claims were for restitution of land allegedly seized by the Japanese as mandatory power.
The individuals had first to establish that the Trusteeship Agreement gave them standing as against the trusteeship territory.
It had been held by the Trial Division that the trust territory is not a separate legal entity but forms part of the Executive Department of the United States, and that the Trusteeship Agreement did not create a trust enforceable in the courts of equity.
The High Court of the Trust Territory rejected this excessively formalistic way of looking at the agreement and preferred to examine the underlying concepts.
It held that the Trust Territory had two functions: it was the mechanism through which the United States fulfilled its duties under the Trusteeship Agreement, and was also a body with a separate status.
It had, for example, appeared in previous judicial proceedings.
However the trust territory must operate in accordance with the agreement which provided specific enforcement provisions through the Trusteeship Council, formulated broad principles, and gave a wide discretion for their implementation to the trust territory.
These features excluded any intention of the parties to allow claims from the individual inhabitants.
In a subsequent decision the Court of Appeal thought many factors needed to be weighed before concluding that individuals could possess no such rights.
These factors include the suitability of the agreement for domestic enforcement, the availability of suitable domestic remedies and of appropriate alternatives, the purposes of the treaty itself, the intentions of its drafters, and the immediate and long-term social consequences (presumably national and international) of allowing direct enforcement.
The inhabitants' concerns were primarily economic and environmental rather than matters relating to security.
In this instance the Court felt that the immediate consequence of rejecting the claim would be to force the inhabitants to appeal to the United Nations Security Council, which would be an excessive burden to place upon them compared with local judicial fora.
The Court accepted that the agreement did not formulate precisely the inhabitants' rights but thought them sufficiently precise for judicial enforcement.
It concluded that the preponderance of characteristics of the Trusteeship Agreement (which formed the plaintiffs' basic constitutional agreement) suggested an intention to establish direct, affirmative, judicially enforceable rights.
As a procedural matter, the Court of Appeal determined that the inhabitants should bring their case in the High Court of the Trust Territory rather than in the District Courts of the United States, and rejected the claim.
It is doubtful whether this recommendation would have been made if the Court had assessed the matter as affecting the security of the United States; individuals' rights can be more readily accommodated when they do not impact upon vital concerns of States.
CLAIMS BASED UPON HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMANITARIAN PRINCIPLES
Certain human rights treaties grant individuals access to international arenas, when the State in question has expressly agreed to this procedure.
Interestingly, emphasis has been placed by the decision-makers within these bodies on the individuality of the complainant.
Collective rights have been less readily accommodated, as exemplified by the decisions of the Human Rights Committee that Article I of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the right to self-determination is not amenable to the individual communication procedure.
However the right to self-determination has been indirectly considered through recourse to other provisions of the  Covenant , notably Article 27.
Obligations can also be imposed upon individuals or groups of individuals by treaty.
It is accepted that common Article 3 of the Geneva Red Cross Conventions of 1949 imposes minimum standards of behaviour in non-international armed conflict contained therein upon ‘each party to the conflict’.
While one party to an internal armed conflict will be the government representative of the State party to the Convention, the other will be a body of individuals challenging the former's authority.
Article 3 explicitly states that it does not affect the legal status of the parties to the conflict and cannot be used to imply belligerent status for those opposing the government.
However it does recognise that sections of the community other than those with political authority may bear and use arms, and should accept and receive international guarantees of humane treatment.
A State can incur treaty obligations for individuals within its territory, but these Conventions bind individuals who are rejecting the very authority through which they are bound.
The rights and obligations in the Red Cross Conventions are reciprocal between the State party and the other party to the conflict, and cannot be sensibly separated.
The humanitarian goal of minimising the destructive effects of conflict demand that common Article 3 be complied with by all parties to an internal conflict.
Where Article 3 is applicable it is realistic to accept that both sides are engaged in conflict from the perspective of determining the claims of third parties.
The debate has continued with Protocol II, Protocol II applies ‘to all armed conflicts…which take place in the territory of a High Contracting Party between its armed forces and dissident armed forces…
’ It does not specify that it applies to all parties to the conflict, and is thus more ambiguous on this point than common Article 3.
At Geneva a number of States asserted that the Protocol did not confer rights and duties upon those opposing the legitimate government, while others disagreed.
One rationale for asserting that individuals are bound is that the treaty becomes incorporated into municipal law by ratification, and therefore creates rights and duties for individuals within the jurisdiction.
This is juridically an unsatisfactory explanation for those States where treaties do not form part of domestic law unless incorporated by legislation.
It is undesirable that the legal effect of Protocol II should depend upon municipal law doctrine as to its relationship with international law.
Cassese argues that in any case this reasoning misrepresents the relationship between municipal and international law, and that the true grounds for holding individuals to be bound are the intention and consent requirements of Articles 34–37 of the Vienna Convention to the Protocol.
Although there was no common intention expressed by the parties at Geneva, he deduces their intention from the wording of the Protocol: the opening words of Article 1 of Protocol II, the fact that the rebels must have achieved a degree of organisation before the Protocol can be activated, and Article 6 (5) of the Protocol all demonstrate an intent to bind both sides to the conflict.
Third party rebels can express their assent in a variety of ways, including notifying the government or the International Committee of the Red Cross, or by implementing the Protocol.
While the juridical basis for holding that Protocol II creates legal effects for individuals remains problematic, the underlying humanitarian reason is evident.
The desire to bring some regulation into internal conflict by imposing duties as well as rights upon individuals justifies Article 3 and Protocol II.
Their humanitarian impact would be significantly reduced if the duty of compliance was owed only to other parties to the agreements.
This justifies any discrepancy with the rigid treaty rule in favour of extending the rights and obligations under the treaties.