

An Introduction to Understanding Children
Robert Grieve and Martin Hughes
University of Edinburgh, University of Exeter
The present volume, in honour of Margaret Donaldson, has been written by contributors who have had the good fortune to have worked with her and been influenced by her during their academic careers.
Margaret Donaldson's own academic career began with her taking her Master's degree in French at the University of Edinburgh.
She then embarked on study for a Diploma of Education, but converted to a Bachelor's degree which she gained with distinction in psychology and education.
Thereafter, she completed her Doctor's degree.
During her studies in psychology and education, she encountered the work of Piaget, and discovered the fascination of trying to study and understand the development of children's minds.
She completed her Doctorate on ‘The relevance to the theory of intelligence testing of the study of errors in thinking’ in 1956, and proceeded to spend virtually the whole of her academic career teaching and researching within the Department of Psychology at the University of Edinburgh.
She was appointed to a Readership in 1969, and was made Professor of Developmental Psychology in 1980.
Thus while she may originally have thought of teaching children French, the bulk of her career has in fact consisted of teaching adults — her colleagues in developmental psychology, students, and teachers — how children's minds develop and how this development might best be studied.
Three main concerns are apparent in Margaret Donaldson's work.
Her concern with the development of children's thinking has been present from the start of her academic career, when she was considerably influenced by the European School, and notably Piaget.
This early work is exemplified in her book A Study of Children's Thinking , published in 1963.
During the 1960s and 1970s, influenced in part by the work of the Russian School, and notably Vygotsky, she became increasingly aware of the importance of language, and its relationship to thought.
Her work during this period was predominantly concerned with children's understanding of language and how this affected their interpretation of the tasks conventionally used to study their thinking.
This work resulted in a series of seminal papers on topics such as word meaning, classification, processes of comparison, conservation, reasoning, verification, and egocentricity — e.g., Donaldson and Balfour, 1968; Donaldson, 1970, 1971, 1976; Donaldson and Wales, 1970; Donaldson and Lloyd, 1974; Donaldson and McGarrigle, 1974; McGarrigle and Donaldson, 1974; Donaldson and Hughes, 1979.
Her third main concern has been with the educational implications of her work, and here the influence of developmentalists such as Bruner is apparent.
This concern has expressed itself not only in papers on children's acquisition of literacy (e.g., Donaldson, 1984, 1989), but also in the publication of a number of children's stories and of a reading and language programme for children in primary classrooms (Reid and Donaldson, 1984).
These three major concerns with children's thinking, their language, and their education — are brought together in the book for which Margaret Donaldson is undoubtedly best known,Children's Minds published in 1978.
Like all her writings,Children's Minds combines great clarity and lucidity of expression with original and rigorous thought.
It has served to illuminate and inspire many thousands of students, teachers and academics throughout the world.
What, then, are the lessons which Margaret Donaldson has tried to teach us?
One important lesson concerns the need to consider the whole child when trying to discover what a child understands or is capable of.
Traditionally, psychologists go about assessing children's capabilities by using some standardized experimental task.
The children are removed from their normal surroundings and presented with a problem which has been specifically devised to assess their understanding.
Such experimental evidence can of course be extremely valuable, but there may be occasions when it needs to be augmented by observations of children in more natural surroundings.
A good example of this arises in the study of children's reasoning, particularly in their ability to make what are known as transitive inferences.
Suppose we make known to a child that we have three sticks, all of different length.
The red stick is longer than the blue one; and the blue stick is longer than the yellow one.
There are now two questions.
First, does the child know that the red stick is longer than the yellow one?
In other words, can the child make a transitive  inference using rules such as‘If a>b; and if b> c; then a> c’?
However, there is an additional aspect to this inferential process.
From the premises a > b and b> c , it does not simply happen to be the case that a> c .
Given these premises, this conclusion must follow.
From such premises, the conclusion is logically necessary .
While in experimental studies we can observe when children draw the appropriate conclusion from the premises we present, how can we observe when children also appreciate the logical necessity of the conclusions they are drawing?
Experimentally, this issue is far from tractable, and here Donaldson points out the advantage of supplementing experimental evidence with naturalistic observation (see Donaldson, 1978, Chapter 5).
That is, while it may prove difficult or impossible to devise the appropriate experiment to get at young children's appreciation of logical necessity, they may reveal that they have a measure of understanding of logical necessity in what they say and do in everyday contexts.
The second important lesson which Margaret Donaldson has taught us is the need to consider the situation from the child's point of view .
This lesson is particularly relevant to experimental contexts.
Here the child is typically presented with various materials and asked various questions by an adult.
The adult will usually accompany these questions by various manipulations of the materials.
Traditionally, we have tended to see these situations from the adult's point of view.
The adult is trying to find out what the child knows or understands, and the child's responses are interpreted accordingly.
What Donaldson has taught us, however, is that at the heart of the experimental situation is a child who is actively trying to make his or her own sense of the situation — and in particular, trying to understand, from what the adult says and does, and from how the materials are manipulated, what the adult's motives and intentions might be.
Crucially, the child's interpretation of these factors might be quite different from that intended by the adult.
This lesson has been illustrated in studies of conservation, classification, and word meaning.
In studying children's ability to conserve number, when two rows of counters are initially lined up in one-to-one correspondence, the child will agree that the rows have the same number.
Instructed to ‘watch what I do’, the child then observes the adult transforming the spatial arrangement of one of the rows — e.g., it is spread out.
Asked again if the rows have the same number, four-year-olds will typically say ‘no’, that the spread-out row has more.
From the adult point of view, the child has failed to conserve number, apparently failing to appreciate that the spatial rearrangement of a set has no effect on its numerosity.
But from the  child's point of view, what might be going on?
The child has been shown two sets arranged in one-to-one correspondence, and agreed that they have the same number.
The adult has then drawn attention to a deliberate change in the array, and asked again about the numerosity of the sets.
Should the child match the adult's deliberate change in the array with a change in his or her answer?
If this is how the young child construes what is happening, it could begin to account for the response that four-year-olds typically give.
Further, if the transformation of the array is effected accidentally rather than deliberately, then the young child's construal of the context might differ.
Apparently it does, as reported in the classic ‘Conservation Accidents’ study of McGarrigle and Donaldson (1974).
Here, young children tended not to change their response about the numerosity of the sets following an apparently accidental transformation of the spatial arrangement of one of the sets by a now famous ‘Naughty Teddy’.
Another aspect of trying to appreciate the task from the child's point of view is found in studies of class inclusion, which involve an ability fundamental to classification.
In a class inclusion task, the child is presented with a class of objects (e.g., ten flowers), composed of two subclasses (e.g., seven roses and three daffodils).
Asked if there are more flowers or more roses, four-year-olds will typically say that there are more roses, for there are only three daffodils.
They compare the two subclasses of roses and daffodils, rather than the subclass (roses) and the total class (flowers) which includes the subclass of roses.
But what Donaldson points out is that the young child's construal of the task is different from that of adults or older children.
What influences the young child is not so much what is said or meant by the adult's question.
Rather, the young child's response is determined by what the child thinks the adult's question must mean.
Since the distinction between the two subclasses is immediately obvious, the adult's question must be referring to the relative numbers of roses and daffodils.
When the perceptual salience to the child of the class and subclasses is manipulated, as in some of McGarrigle's experiments (McGarrigle, Grieve and Hughes, 1978), then four-year-olds' understanding of the referring expressions in the adult's questions improves.
Young children's changing interpretations of word meaning dependent on their construal of context is also apparent in Donaldson and McGarrigle's (1974) study of semantic development.
Presented with a shelf of five cars, above another shelf of four cars, four-year-olds judge correctly that the top shelf has more.
If six garages are now placed over the five cars on the top shelf (leaving one garage empty), and four garages placed over the four cars on the bottom shelf (all garages being full), then about one in three four-year-olds now maintain that the bottom shelf has more cars.
Why?
All the garages on the bottom shelf are full, but one of the garages on the top shelf is empty.
Again we can appreciate the importance of trying to see the task from the child's point of view.
The child has initially been asked to compare the number of cars on the two shelves, and has done so correctly.
The adult has made a change to the array — introduced garages irrelevant to the number of cars.
Yet it is the number of cars which is ‘again queried.
In working out how to answer, a considerable proportion of four-year-olds are influenced by the alternative basis of response that the ‘irrelevant’ introduction of the garages provides i.e., the relative fullness of the two sets of garages, rather than the relative numerosity of the two sets of cars.
What Donaldson is drawing attention to is that the experimental context involves a complicated and subtle set of interactions between what is presented, said, and done by the adult.
Further, a fundamental aspect of the context is the young child's construal of the adult's words and actions.
This is why she places so much importance on the child's appreciation of the adult's motives and intentions in experimental tasks.
If these cannot be readily appreciated by children — as is often the case with young children who are typically limited to understanding tasks which make immediate sense — then children will produce inappropriate responses and apparently lack the mental capacity in question.
A further important lesson conveyed by Donaldson concerns both the necessity and difficulty of formal education for the young child.
Because of her sympathy with the child's point of view, and her belief that young children are frequently underestimated, Donaldson is sometimes associated with those educationalists who are opposed to formal education and who maintain that young children will learn all they need to know in informal contexts outside of school.
This, however, is a grave misunderstanding of Donaldson's position.
Her writings make clear her belief that it is vital that children acquire abstract modes of thought — in her terms, modes of thought that are ‘disembedded’ from the vicissitudes of immediate context.
She argues that if thought remains context-bound or context-dependent, control over one's thought processes is thereby constrained.
Since our culture places high value on thought which is abstract and independent, we need to gain a better understanding of how the transition is made from the embedded thought of the preschool child, to the disembedded thought of older children and adults — a process which is far from easy.
Here Donaldson draws attention to the importance of the new systems of representation that children encounter in school, in the acquisition of literacy and numeracy.
While the abilities to read, write, and be numerate are essential for negotiating one's way in society, their acquisition also has a profound impact on the nature of mental life.
Given the abstract nature of our alphabetic system for representing language, and the abstract nature of our wholly context-free numerical system, their acquisition is far from immediate or straightforward.
Their acquisition takes time, problems arise, children become puzzled, and they have to consider possibilities and alternatives.
In written language, for example, since there is no one-to-one correspondence between the marks (alphabetic representations) on the page, and how they are to be pronounced in speech, there is typically a range of alternatives as to how a written letter should be said.
But it is in encountering such difficulties, being puzzled, and arriving at resolutions, that children become increasingly aware of the nature of language and thought.
And it is this sort of awareness, which involves deliberation and reflection on instances of puzzlement, that allows children to exert increasing control over their mental life, ultimately leading to independence of thought.
In the present volume, where a wide range of topics in children's development is considered, the influence of Margaret Donaldson will be apparent.
Nowadays, about a decade after publication of Children's Minds , developmentalists write about children with a far better understanding of the importance of paying heed to children's abilities in everyday contexts as well as experimental ones.
The need to try to understand situations from the child's point of view is also much better appreciated, as are the difficulties involved in children functioning in disembedded ways.
The lessons which Donaldson has been trying to teach us are reflected throughout the following chapters.
The first three chapters are concerned with various aspects of children's ability to understand language.
The chapter by Eve Clark focuses on young children's acquisition of word meanings.
Here it is proposed that in acquiring the meanings of words, children operate on the basis of two fundamental principles — the Principle of Conventionality, and the Principle of Contrast.
The first principle holds that in stable communication, it is conventional to regard the same word as having consistent meaning from one occasion of use to another.
The second principle holds that different words will differ in meaning.
Following explication and illustration of these principles, Clark notes that earlier work by Donaldson and Balfour (1968) on young children's understanding of the words more and less appears to  provide an exception to the Principle of Contrast.
However, Clark argues that this exception is more apparent than real, arising from methodological procedures which essentially precluded scope for contrast.
The next chapter, by Morag Donaldson and Alison Elliot, considers children's understanding of explanations — a topic of interest in itself, and one which has fundamental implications for education.
The chapter begins with a critical examination of Piaget's view that young children are severely limited in their understanding of explanations which involve psychological, physical, or logical content.
Donaldson and Elliot develop an alternative taxonomy, in terms of empirical, intentional, and deductive modes of explanation.
Such modes of explanation are illustrated and distinguished with reference to various experimental studies, which provide an indication of when the different modes of explanation are understood by children.
Generally, five-year-olds are held to have ‘the basic cognitive and linguistic abilities required for giving and understanding explanations of events and actions’.
The chapter by Peter Lloyd is concerned with the development of children's skills in communication during the early school years.
The chapter first provides a critical overview of the standard ‘referential communication task’, where a child's skills are gauged when required to communicate with another about an array of objects or drawings, while speaker and hearer cannot see one another, being placed behind opaque screens to encourage verbal and preclude non-verbal communication.
Lloyd finds this paradigm wanting in various respects, and proceeds to develop an alternative approach in which the non-verbal channel of communication is precluded by asking children to communicate by telephone on a route-finding task.
Lloyd draws attention to what he terms a ‘communicative support system’, which familiar adults use to help young children learn to communicate effectively.
During the school years, children must learn to grow away from such a communicative support system, and increase their communicative independence.
The next four chapters are all concerned with some aspect of systems of representation — in reading, writing, computation, and pictorial representation.
Jess Reid's chapter undertakes an analysis of children's literature, which involves instances of the written speech and thought of individuals other than the author of the story.
Reid illustrates the subtlety of the inferences children must make in order to gain an accurate reading of the texts.
In so doing, she reminds us both of the considerable differences between spoken and written language; and of the complexity of the task children face in learning  to read and master the written representation of language.
In her chapter of the development of children's ability to write, Miranda Jones describes a longitudinal study she conducted in Edinburgh, which followed children's understanding of writing from the preschool stage, through to how their understanding changed as they learned to write in school.
The views of Luria, and the findings of more recent work by Ferreiro on South American children, are not well supported by the outcomes of Jones's Edinburgh study, where the developmental picture that emerges is less neat and tidy than Ferreiro's work would lead one to expect.
In conclusion, Jones notes the potential value of explicit instruction on the nature of writing at the preschool level for subsequent success in school.
In the chapter by Martin Hughes on children's uses of computers, both intellectual and social issues are addressed.
His basic concerns involve the effects computer-use might have in fostering children's ability to engage in disembedded thinking; and the possibility that girls might not gain so much benefit from computer-use in school as boys.
While some aspects of programming are relevant to the process of acquiring disembedded thought, Hughes suggests that much further work remains to be done.
For example, a computer pedagogy aimed directly at fostering disembedded thought needs to be devised, as do appropriate evaluation procedures.
On the social issue, Hughes notes the recent concern that girls may not benefit so much as boys from using computers.
Does this imply that in schools, girls should be introduced to computers in girls-only situations?
From the results of a preliminary study, Hughes urges caution, for when girls worked on a computer task with other girls, their performance was found to be noticeably poorer compared to girls who had partnered boys.
In his chapter on children's pictures, Roger Wales considers what is to be made of what children are doing when they produce a picture.
Do they draw what they know rather than what they see?
One approach to this problem, found in the work of Piaget, and of Goodenough and Harris, assumes that emerging features in children's pictures denote underlying changes in their conceptual development.
Another approach, exemplified by Vygotsky and Donaldson, supposes that children's pictures — like all other aspects of their behaviour — must be interpreted in the light of what we know about the context in which the picture is produced and the culture in which the child operates.
Through reference to pictures produced by Aboriginal children in Australia, Wales illustrates what can occur when children are exposed to quite different cultural influences.
In the same picture, a Walbiri child represents people in quite different ways.
Some (white?) people are drawn as ‘stick’ figures, while  Aboriginal people are drawn as semi-circles.
A semi-circle with a smaller semi-circle in it represents an Aboriginal mother and child.
Wales notes that great care is needed in making claims about the universality of the forms of children's pictorial representation.
There is a need to distinguish between a child's mental representation and the different ways that may be used to realize that mental representation pictorially.
In studying children's pictures, a wide variety of cognitive, personal, and cultural factors needs to be taken into account.
In the next two chapters, aspects of children's awareness and perception are considered.
In his chapter on children's awareness, Robert Grieve concentrates on children's awareness of language, and focuses attention on what appears to be an elementary question: when do children become aware of language?
Two main positions in the literature are described.
That of Donaldson emphasizes children's reflective awareness that becomes increasingly apparent around seven years of age when children can consider language independently of its everyday use in social interaction.
That of Clark draws attention to the phenomenon of speech repair in two-year-olds, where speech errors are spontaneously corrected, indicating that children must have awareness of language at some level virtually as soon as they begin to talk.
Examples of reflective awareness can also be found in two-, three-, and four-year-olds, usually when they are puzzled or teased about how things are said.
The answer to the question of when children become aware of language is far from straightforward.
In Lesley Hall's chapter on children's perception, the emphasis is on visual search and how it develops from infancy to childhood and maturity.
In reviewing the literature on children's visual search, and through description of some of her own studies on how visual search is affected by the language of instructions, Hall argues that simplistic conclusions about the limitations and inefficiency of search strategies in young children are often inappropriate.
If we are to understand visual search and how it develops in children, we need a fuller understanding of the interplay between task characteristics, children's linguistic comprehension of task instructions, and children's appreciation of the economy and efficiency of selective visual search in appropriate contexts.
Visual search is held to be multifaceted in nature, involving the growing regulation and interaction of children's visual, linguistic and cognitive systems.
In the final chapter, Robin Campbell and David Olson offer a framework for a theory of children's thinking and its development.
Thinking is held to be an effective activity which involves mental  ‘work’.
Such activity is difficult (even repugnant), for it involves struggling with mental symbols which enable the thinker to hold some entity — object, property, proposition, world — in mind.
Different forms of thought about such different entities are posited.
Unlike recent ‘innatist’ views of children's intellectual development, Campbell and Olson's framework represents cognitive development as ‘the accretion and expansion of representational powers’.
In reading the present volume, it will quickly be evident that while the contributors have been considerably influenced by the views and concerns of Margaret Donaldson, they in no sense follow any ‘Donaldsonian line’.
Indeed, at various points, the present set of essays will be found to disagree with Margaret Donaldson's views, either at the level of detail, or more fundamentally.
The reason for this is simple.
One of Margaret Donaldson's outstanding qualities is that she is highly adept at encouraging people not only to think and give rein to the excitement of ideas, but also to think critically, and, above all, to think for themselves.
The sort of independence of thought and mind so readily apparent in her own work, she also values in the work of others.
If the present set of essays exhibits independence of mind, this is no less than she would wish or expect.
Children's Language
Eve V. Clark
Stanford University
Building a vocabulary is fundamental to children's acquisition of language.
Words carry meanings, and so do combinations of words.
Without words, children could not use language to convey their intentions or attitudes to others.
Studies of language development, however, have followed different swings of fashion.
After several decades of charting children's vocabulary growth in the first half of the twentieth century, researchers began to focus on children's acquisition of grammar-the rules for combining words into the sequences permissible in a language like English, e.g.,the big boy but not *the boy big ,He brought the book , but not *He brought .
(Phrases marked with an asterisk indicate that the sequences are not permissible in English.)
Since then, researchers in language acquisition have shown that children play an active role in extracting regularities from the language around them.
And they apply what they have extracted when they talk themselves (see Maratsos, 1983).
Instead of feet , for instance, they say foots , adding the regular plural -s to the stem foot ; instead of brought , they say bringed , adding the regular past -ed to bring (e.g., Berko, 1958; Bybee and Slobin, 1982; Cazden, 1968).
Over-regularizations like these provide conclusive evidence that children take an active part in learning their first language.
The starting point is to discover what words mean.
Children just beginning on their first language have to solve the problem of how forms map on to meanings.
And of course they do not wait until they have mastered a meaning before using each word.
Instead, as soon as they have found out something of what a word means, they may make use of it.
Early word uses, as well as later ones, provide insight into children's hypotheses about word meanings and the conceptual categories on which the hypotheses appear to be based (e.g., Clark, 1983b; Donaldson and McGarrigle, 1974).
In mastering word meanings, children must learn the conventional meanings they carry within the speech community.
This often requires analysis of parts of words — the elements in a compound like dog-sled , or the added meaning attributable to the suffix -er in opener compared to the verb open —over and above the sense of each word.
And it may also demand analysis of the constructions that a word may appear in, for instance, that a verb like want can be followed by the term for what is wanted, as in I want that block ; or by a clause, as in I want him to come here .
The lexicon therefore offers a critical domain in which to observe the process of language acquisition in children.
In the present chapter, I shall focus on word meaning rather than grammar in lexical development, and look in particular at how children's acquisition of word meanings is governed by two pragmatic principles of language use,Conventionality and Contrast .
I shall then examine an apparent exception to the principle of Contrast, and argue that it is only apparent, and not real.
Two Principles
The first principle,Conventionality , is concerned with the maintenance of conventions about how expressions are used within a specific speech community.
It states that: ‘For certain meanings, there is a conventional form that speakers expect to be used in the language community.’
This principle captures the fact that the speakers of languages depend on consistency of denotation from one time to the next in the meaning of a word or expression.
In English, the term tiger picks out instances of the category ‘tiger’ today and will still do so tomorrow.
Conventionality in a system of communication offers stability, and thereby makes communication feasible from one occasion to the next.
Imagine how much time and effort would be required if each speaker had to establish the denotation of each term he produced on each occasion of use.
Without Conventionality, communication systems as complex as human language would not be viable.
Conventionality is complemented by the principle of Contrast .
This principle is concerned with the maintenance of distinctions between linguistic expressions.
It states that: ‘Every two forms contrast in meaning.’
That is, any difference in linguistic form in a language signals a difference in meaning.
This achieves a critical economy in language, in that it precludes the use of more than one conventional expression to convey a particular meaning.
Rather, each conventional expression expresses a different meaning.
The differences may be  subtle, and therefore pertinent only on certain occasions — e.g.,shut versus close .
Notice how this is exploited in a Scottish radio advertisement for an automatic bank system that goes: ‘Wouldn't it be helpful to have a bank that wasn't shut just because it's closed?’
Differences may reflect subtleties of attitude (e.g.,slim/thin, strong-willed/obstinate),of register (e.g.,numerous/many, attempt/try, cop/policeman ), and of dialect (e.g.,haystack/hayrick, sack/bag, tap/faucet ), over and above the various kinds of taxonomic differentiations possible among category labels.
Conventionality and Contrast together allow speakers to be consistent from one occasion to the next in their uses of the conventional meanings assigned to linguistic forms, and to maintain the same form-meaning pairings over time.
Contrast also grants priority to lexical expressions that conventionally convey a specific meaning.
If such an expression is lacking, though, Contrast allows for the construction of new lexical items, or new combinations of expressions, to convey the necessary meaning.
The restriction on lexical innovations is that they must contrast in meaning with conventional terms.
If they do not, they are pre-empted by the conventional terms since those have priority (e.g., Aronoff, 1976; Clark and Clark, 1979; Hofmann, 1982; Kiparsky, 1983; Zwanenburg, 1981).
When, then, do children begin to observe Conventionality and Contrast?
And what consequences do these principles have for children's acquisition of the lexicon?
Conventionality and Contrast Observed
Children appear to observe Conventionality from their very first words.
They attempt to adopt adult word forms and use them with increasing consistency from one occasion to the next.
And their uses from the start bear some relation to the adult conventions for those words.
Although a term like dog may be over-extended to pick out cats, sheep, and horses, it is also used to pick out dogs (e.g., Clark, 1973a, 1983b; Leopold, 1949; Pavlovitch, 1920).
From around the age of two years, young children also ask for the names of things.
Their intensive questioning, in fact, seems to coincide with two other developments in the lexicon.
First, as they add new words to their repertoires, they stop over-extending words from the same domain already in their vocabulary (Clark 1973a; Barrett, 1978).
Second, they start refusing to name things for which they lack words (Clark, 1974).
Further evidence that children are attentive to Conventionality comes from the repairs they make to their own lexical choices.
Children repair what they themselves say from as early as one or one-and-a-half  years of age.
They correct their own pronunciation, e.g.,fwo to fwog (for frog ); their own morphology, e.g.,the man go to the man going or the man's going ; and their own lexical choices, e.g., from ship to boat (for a rowing-boat), or from shoe to sandal (for a sandal).
Repairs to lexical choice, in fact, appear to account for over 40 per cent of the repairs found in the speech of two- and three-year-olds (Clark, 1982b).
Logically, children could start out just as well by assuming that each word carried a different meaning on each occasion.
They should then treat each word as if it were a demonstrative like this or that .
To assume the principle of Conventionality, then, is not the only option open to children.
Yet the evidence from their earliest word uses, their requests for the names of things, and their repairs to their own utterances, all indicate that they opt for Conventionality as they begin to use their first language.
The evidence that children observe the principle of Contrast is also strong (Clark, 1987,1988,1990a).
When children add new words to a domain, they typically assume that the words apply at the same level, and so contrast.
For example, although they may initially over-extend a word like dog to a variety of different four-legged mammals, they cease to apply it to any part of the domain newly taken over with the acquisition of a new word.
Once sheep is acquired, for instance, the word dog is no longer over-extended to sheep, even though it may still be used for other kinds of mammals (Clark, 1973a, 1978; Barrett, 1978).
Newly acquired words are treated as if they contrast with ones already known, and so serve to narrow down earlier over-extensions.
Adjectives like big and small are gradually restricted with the addition of pairs like tall and short for vertical extent, or long and short for horizontal extent (Donaldson and Wales, 1979).
Orientational terms like top and bottom are narrowed with the addition of front, back and side (Kuczaj and Maratsos, 1975; Clark, 1980).
In each lexical domain, children appear to make the same assumption: newly acquired words contrast with those already known.
Children assign distinct meanings to distinct forms,but the distinctions they make early on do not always coincide exactly with the conventional adult ones.
They may contrast deictics like here and there , for instance, but they may do so by using here to signal transfers of possession-'Here', said as a child hands a toy to a parent; and there to signal completion —‘There!’ as the last block is placed on a tower (e.g., Clark and Sengul, 1978).
They may also impose contrasts on different forms that are orthogonal to the actual adult contrast.
Deutsch and Budwig (1983), for example, found that children often used their own names in two-word utterances when they talked  about objects currently in their possession, but a pronoun like me or my when they were claiming something not yet in their hands.
Similarly, children may seize on different suffixes or constructions as marking a contrast, but not necessarily hit on the conventional contrast used by adult speakers.
Children assume, clearly, that differences in form mark contrasts in meaning.
A Constraint on Acquisition
The principle of Contrast places a strong pragmatic constraint on expressions in the lexicon.
If terms that differ in form must differ in meaning, then one should find no true synonyms.
Terms may overlap in meaning, but they may not carry identical meanings.
This principle, then, makes certain general predictions about acquisition.
If children observe the principle of Contrast, they should assume:
a
different words contrast in meaning;
b
priority goes to known, conventional words;
c
new words are to be assigned to gaps in the lexicon;
d
gaps in the lexicon can be filled, when necessary, with new words coined for the purpose.
We have already considered some of the evidence for the first prediction.
Children do appear to assume different words contrast with each other in meaning, and they impose contrasts in meaning where there are differences in form.
If they also observe the principle of Conventionality, then on those occasions where the meanings of new words would be identical to those of conventional words already known, they should give priority to the conventional words.
To what extent do they do this?
Children do give known conventional words priority.
Having learned one label for a category, two- and three-year-olds will typically reject a second label.
For example, if an adult asks of a two-year-old's toy bear, Is that your toy ?, a typical response is No, it's a bear .
That is, children at this age seem to make two further assumptions:(i) all labels belong to a single level, and (ii) they do not overlap.
These two assumptions, when combined with Contrast, become equivalent to Markman's (1984) principle of Mutual Exclusivity, and seem to reflect a fundamental factor in the organization of conceptual categories — namely, categories should be organized, at least initially, in non-overlapping fashion at the same level (see also Shipley and Kuhn, 1983, and Clark, in preparation).
The single-level assumption leads children to reject multiple terms  for the same category: they already have a label, and that label therefore has priority (e.g., Francois, 1977; Macnamara, 1982).
Of course, once children give up their single-level assumption, they accept the fact that terms at different levels such as dog and animal or bear and toy may be used to pick out the same object.
The single-level assumption appears to be given up somewhere between age two and three years, as children grasp the fact that categories and hence labels for categories may be organized as taxonomies with several levels.
Furthermore, once children have acquired the conventional word to express a particular meaning, they tend to use that, and not to coin a new form to use instead.
Occasionally, like adults, children may coin a term to fill a momentary gap — e.g., the construction of cutter when scissors was difficult to retrieve from memory (Clark, 1983a).
But, just like adults, children appear to repair such forms as soon as they retrieve the conventional word from memory.
When children acquire more than one language at once, they too begin by acting as if Contrast applied at one level only when they themselves are speaking.
In the earliest stages, bilingual children typically produce only one label for a category, despite exposure to the labels from both languages.
For instance, for one Spanish/English speaker, the adoption of leche for ‘milk’, temporarily precluded use of milk .
And for an English/French speaker, adoption of bird for a short time precluded oiseau Once such children realize they are dealing with two languages, however, they begin to use labels from both languages for the same category, both leche and milk They start to do this once they themselves can produce about 150–200 words (Taeschner, 1983).
One question here is whether bilingual children at the early stage of producing only one label per category in fact understand only the label they themselves produce, or whether they understand both labels.
If they understand both from other speakers, but produce only one themselves, then Contrast would appear to work separately in comprehension and production.
In comprehension, children might already be aware that different speakers used different terms for instances of the same category,bird and oiseau say, but they might still be unsure for themselves of the specific conditions under which a speaker used one or other term.
In production, therefore, they continue to play safe and so refrain from using one of the terms until they have worked out more fully what difference in meaning (here a difference in language) is associated with the observable differences in form.
Known conventional words have priority, it seems, whenever words new to children appear to be synonymous with what they already know.
They reject apparent synonyms within a language  until they discover that there is more than one level of categorization to which labels can be applied.
And they reject synonyms across languages until they realize that they are dealing with more than one language.
As predicted, children also assume, when they hear unfamiliar words, that these label unfamiliar categories.
Golinkoff and her colleagues (1985) showed that children as young as two years made this assumption.
The children played with novel objects mixed in with familiar ones, and then heard both familiar and unfamiliar labels.
They typically selected novel objects as referents for novel words, and appropriate referents for familiar words.
The children also extended the new words to pick out further exemplars from the novel category, and, when given a choice (with the introduction of a second novel word with further novel objects), the two-year-olds assumed that the second novel label must pick out as-yet-unnamed novel objects (Golinkoff et al 1985).
That is, once a familiar or unfamiliar category has been labelled, it is ‘taken’, so any further unfamiliar words must be labels for yet other unfamiliar categories.
Three- and four-year-olds appear to act on the same assumption.
When presented with an unfamiliar colour term in contrast to familiar ones, children assumed that the unfamiliar term picked out a tray of an unfamiliar colour (Carey and Bartlett, 1978).
In a series of studies, Dockrell (1981) showed that the immediate context of the contrast influenced the inferences children made in assigning a meaning to an unfamiliar word.
In the context of terms of shape, children inferred that an unfamiliar term picked out a shape; in the context of terms of colour, they generally inferred that the unfamiliar term picked out a colour.
That is, children relied on Contrast in making their inferences, and where specific ‘local’ information about the domain pertinent to the contrast was available, they made use of it (see also Clark, 1978a; Heibeck and Markman, 1987).
Familiar terms appear to offer children a specific location for the contrasts carried by an unfamiliar word.
This location may vary in specificity with the exact set of hyponyms given.
(In hyponymy, the meaning of a specific term, such as tulip , is ‘included’ in the meaning of a more general term,flower .)
Blue and green for instance, would seem to offer a more precise location for the meaning of a colour word like turquoise than red and yellow would.
In the former set,turquoise is a near neighbour of the two terms, whereas in the latter, the terms are all neighbours primarily in that they are all terms for colours.
Presumably, the closer the referents of the familiar terms in a domain are to the potential referent of an unfamiliar word, the more specific are the inferences that children can legitimately make.
Finally, again as predicted, children coin new terms to fill gaps in their vocabularies.
Although children begin with a very small vocabulary compared to the adult, they still manage to talk about a large number of things.
To do this, they stretch all the resources they have.
They extend (and over-extend) the words they can produce; they rely on deictic terms like that ; and they use general purpose verbs like do and go .
They construct innovative words (Clark, 1978a, 1982a, 1983b).
Their spontaneous coinages appear from as young as one-and-a-half to two years of age.
They coin nouns to talk about objects, verbs to talk about actions, and adjectives to talk about properties and states (Clark, in prep.).
Their coinages are often in explicit contrast to familiar terms or to other innovations.
For instance, two-year-olds produce many innovative noun-noun compounds, e.g.,penny-teacher for a teacher at Sunday School who collected the children's pennies, or oil-spoon , for the spoon used for cod-liver oil, versus egg-spoon .
In a corpus of over 300 such compounds produced by one child between the ages of two years two months and three years two months, over two-thirds marked explicit contrasts, e.g.,tea-sieve versus water-sieve for a small and large strainer respectively, or car-truck versus cow-truck for pictures of a car-transporter and cattle-lorry (Clark, Gelman and Lane, 1985).
And when children are asked to find possible labels for categories that lack conventional terms, they freely coin innovative nouns upon demand (e.g., Clark and Berman, 1984; Clark and Hecht, 1982; Clark, Hecht and Mulford, 1986; Mulford, 1983).
Children coin many words in the early stages of acquisition in order to fill what, for them, are gaps in the lexicon.
However, once they learn the conventional term for a specific meaning, they must give up their own coinage and begin instead to use the conventional term.
How do they do this?
The principle of Contrast itself provides the necessary mechanism.
Imagine that a child has expressed some meaning with an innovative term, a, and that this meaning is identical to the one expressed by term b, the term conventionally used for that meaning by adults — e.g.,plant-man versus gardener .
Once children discover that, despite the difference in form between a and b, there is no contrast in meaning between them, they are faced with a violation of the principle of Contrast.
At the same time, adults are consistent in using form b (gardener , let us say), with just the meaning assigned by the child to form a,plant-man .
At that point — and discovering such identity of meaning may take some time — children should give up their form in favour of the conventional one for that meaning (Clark, 1987, 1988).
The principle of Contrast, then, has as a general consequence the elimination of synonyms.
A difference in word form signals a  difference in meaning, so two different forms cannot carry the selfsame meaning.
Children, like adults, appear unwilling to tolerate violations of Contrast (Clark, 1987).
But at the same time, several classic developmental studies have reported apparent violations of Contrast: at some stage of language acquisition, children appear to treat certain word pairs as if both terms had the same meaning.
Do children really treat such pairs as synonyms and thus violate the principle of Contrast?
An Exception to Contrast?
One major exception to Contrast appears in studies of the terms more and less (Donaldson and Balfour, 1968; Donaldson and Wales, 1970).
These terms have traditionally been studied because of their role in cognitive development.
Roughly speaking, children under five or six years often fail to solve problems of comparison containing such terms, while older children evince no such difficulty.
Donaldson and Balfour (1968) showed that when three- and four-year-olds were shown two model apple-trees, with five apples on one, say, and three on the other, they consistently chose the tree with five if asked to judge which had more .
When asked to judge which tree had less , they again chose the tree with the greater number of apples.
Similar results were found in a construction task.
Shown a pile of apples and two trees, one with three apples and one with none, and asked to make the ‘empty’ tree so it had more , children added apples until there were more on the empty tree.
Asked to make the empty tree so it had less , children again added apples until there were more on the originally empty tree.
These findings were replicated, with both discrete and continuous quantities, by Palermo (1973,1974).
That is, when asked which tree had more or when asked to make a tree so it had more, children responded appropriately: they picked out the tree with the greater number, and they added apples until the target tree had a greater number.
But when asked which tree had less, or to make one of two trees have less, children again chose the tree with more, and they added to the target tree until it had a greater amount than the other.
These findings offered important support for theoretical proposals about children's acquisition of the meanings of more and less as well as of other adjective pairs (e.g.,big/small, tall/short, wide/narrow ), in that they appeared to show that children first learned the meaning of the unmarked term for a dimension (e.g.,big, tall ), and interpreted the marked (negative) member (small, short ) of the pair as if it had the  same meaning as the unmarked (positive) member (see H. Clark, 1970; Clark, 1973a).
However, other studies of unmarked/marked pairs did not offer support for this view.
Although children often seemed to understand and produce the unmarked adjective forms more readily than the marked ones, they did not appear to treat small , for instance, at any stage as if its meaning was identical to that of big (see Bartlett, 1978; Clark, 1972; Eilers, Oller and Ellington, 1974).
Rather, children seemed to grasp the fact that some terms pick out the positive end of a dimension, and others the negative end, before they necessarily identify which terms belong together as pairs.
Other researchers failed to find the ‘less is more’ effect.
Typically, such researchers used both more and less in their questions.
Weiner (1974), for example, added or subtracted counters from rows as two- and three-year-olds watched, and then had the children choose the row with more or with less .
Errors on less reflected chance performance rather than choices of the greater amount.
She suggested that the non-linguistic context might affect the kinds of responses children offered at a stage when they have an imperfect grasp of the meanings of one or both terms.
Where the only possible error consists of choosing the item with the greater amount, children may simply appear to treat less as ‘more’.
In fact, in situations that allow more than two choices, and use both terms, young children seldom make errors at all.
For instance, when shown arrays of beads on wire columns, of three different heights, children's choices for less were nearly always correct (Wannemacher and Ryan, 1978).
Also, when presented with questions like ‘What eats less, a horse or a bunny?’, or a practical situation like ‘Pretend you had to carry a bucket full of dirt and it was really heavy.
What could you do to make it so there was less dirt in your bucket?’, children were nearly always correct.
If they did not reply correctly, they either failed to say anything, or answered with ‘I don't know’(Wannemacher and Ryan, 1978; see also Grieve and Stanley, 1984; Kavanaugh, 1976; Trehub and Abramovitch, 1978).
Why then did children choose the greater of two amounts in Donaldson and Balfour's original study, and in Palermo's replications?
Part of the answer may hinge on children's reliance on non-linguistic strategies in the absence of lexical knowledge.
Klatzky, Clark and Macken (1973) found that children learned nonsense words for the positive, extended, ends of dimensions before they learned their negative counterparts.
They attributed this to a conceptual bias favouring greater extent over lesser extent, a bias that should allow positive, unmarked terms to be ‘mapped’ earlier than negative, marked ones.
However, this study looked only at physical dimensions  such as size, height, and width.
Trehub and Abramovitch (1978) showed that three- and four-year-olds exhibited a similar preference when simply asked to choose between two piles of different sizes: they preferred the larger one.
This preference showed up in 91 per cent of the children who, in another task, made errors on less .
It also showed up in 69 per cent of the children who interpreted both more and less correctly.
Errors on less , in other words, are probably attributable, in part or even entirely, to a non-linguistic strategy of choosing the greater amount, a strategy typically invoked when children are unsure of the response required.
But while a non-linguistic preference or bias might explain why the meaning of more appears to be acquired before that of less , there still appears to be some violation of the principle of Contrast when children respond to more and less as if their meanings were identical.
But did children really do this?
The answer, I argue, is ‘no’.
In fact, Donaldson and Balfour, and nearly all the researchers who followed them, gave children questions with more on one occasion, and questions with less on another, so the two terms never appeared in the same session or the same block.
When children hear both terms in the same instruction or in the same condition, they do not treat more and less as synonymous.
While Palermo (1973), for example, found that four-to five-year-olds responded appropriately to more nearly all the time, but to less only 39 per cent of the time, an earlier study by Griffiths, Shantz and Sigel (1967) reported that children of that age understood both more and less almost equally well (70 per cent and 65 per cent ).
What was the difference?
Palermo (1974) attributed it to ‘much more syntactic context…which may have aided performance’, but an alternative interpretation is that, because children heard both more and less in each question in the study by Griffiths et al .,
they had to take Contrast into account.
Instead of hearing blocks of questions that used only more , or only less , they had to respond to such questions as ‘Does this set of lollipops have more lollipops, less lollipops, or the same number of lollipops as this set?’
Similarly, when Wannemacher and Ryan (1978) in one condition asked three-to five-year-olds to identify rods with either more or less beads than a standard, the children did well on both more and less : 98 per cent and 95 per cent correct.
(Children saw three, five, or six rods at a time, with different numbers of beads on each.
The standard chosen was always a rod with a middle-sized number of beads.)
In this and a variety of other tasks, Wannemacher and Ryan were able to distinguish ‘incorrect’ from ‘opposite’responses.
Indeed, where no obvious alternative response was available in some of their tasks, children who did not know the  meaning of less typically opted for no response, or ‘Don't know.’
(As in previous studies, most three-year-olds did not understand less , and most five-year-olds did.)
Overall, Wannemacher and Ryan attributed their children's success to two factors: the presence of a standard for comparison (the rod with the middle number of beads), and use of both words,more and less , in the same trial.
As they pointed out, studies where children appeared to treat less as ‘more’ gave the two terms in separate sessions on different days (Donaldson and Balfour, 1968), or in different blocks (Palermo, 1973), or gave only one term, less, in all the questions (Palermo, 1974).
In other words, in those studies where children heard both more and less in the same trials or same sessions, and where there were more than two responses possible, they showed no evidence of treating less as if it meant more .
If they did not know the word less, their responses followed a pattern of chance responding; if they did know it, they got it right nearly all the time.
In addition, four- and five-year-olds often said explicitly that they did not know less , or even asked what it meant.
Further evidence in support of this comes from studies that introduced a third term, in the form of a nonsense word, in contrast to more and less .
Children who know the meaning of more or of both more and less are careful to distinguish them from each other and from nonsense words introduced in the same setting.
When asked to make one of two equal piles of pennies tiv , after having made one pile more or less than the other, three-to five-year-olds will do one of several things.
They may refuse to respond, on the grounds that they do not know what tiv means (see Carey, 1978); they may ask what tiv means, and having been told to guess, offer a response; or they may select a response without querying tiv .
When children who knew more and less did respond, they were consistent in differentiating their response from what they had done for more and for less .
One five-year-old, for instance, when asked to make one pile so it was tiv , picked up one coin from it, placed it between the two piles, and announced that it was tiv .
Another stirred one of two glasses of beans with his finger for tiv (he had added and subtracted appropriately in response to more and less ).
Another decided that tiv must mean ‘just a tiny bit’ and so added a teaspoon of water, compared to half a glass for more , and so on(Clark, unpublished data).
Children who were presented with a nonsense syllable alongside more and less in a variety of contexts made it contrast with more and less by adding or subtracting much smaller amounts; by adding or subtracting everything; by introducing some quite different manipulation (stirring, flicking, rolling, tossing up and down, mixing  both piles together), and so on.
Two- and three-year-olds, who did not yet know less , were not as consistent, and their responses to less and tiv — and possibly to more as well— suggested that, in the absence of lexical knowledge, they were probably relying on a non-linguistic strategy of choosing the greater amount (Trehub and Abramovitch, 1978).
When a second nonsense syllable was given following two instances of tiv , mixed in with several instructions containing more and less , the same children typically queried its meaning or responded with ‘Don't know.’
They did not treat it as equivalent to either the other nonsense word or to more or less .
These data, along with the findings from Griffiths et al .
(1967) and Wannemacher and Ryan (1978), offer further support for children's observance of Contrast in their acquisition of more and less .
In summary, the questions in studies of more and less have revolved around three issues:(a) whether children have full or only partial lexical knowledge about the pertinent word meanings;(b) the extent to which children rely on non-linguistic strategies in the absence of lexical information (clearly children know none of the pertinent meanings at first for a domain, and several studies have documented the kinds of non-linguistic strategies they then rely on in responding to instructions — see Clark, 1973b, 1979,1980; Donaldson and McGarrigle, 1974); and (c) whether children observe the principle of Contrast.
Most studies of more and less have focused on lexical knowledge of the pertinent terms.
These studies gave rise to the view that children went through a stage of treating less as if it was synonymous with more .
But these findings turn out to be artefactual.
Children were constrained in the kinds of response possible and so appeared to treat less as more ; the younger children probably relied on a non-linguistic strategy of choosing the greater of two amounts, and this would account for responses to both more (apparently correct) and less (apparently wrong) when combined with partial or even no lexical knowledge; and lastly, children were not given instructions with both more and less on the same occasion.
Once these conditions were altered, children clearly contrasted the meanings of more and less even when their lexical knowledge was still imperfect.
Equally clearly, they relied on non-linguistic strategies for deciding how their addressees wished them to act in the absence of adult-like understanding of an instruction.
Finally, they adhered to the principle of Contrast in distinguishing less from more .
Conclusion
Lexical development offers critical insights into the process of language acquisition.
What strategies do children rely on when they do not understand what is said, or only partially understand?
Where do children's hypotheses about word-meanings come from?
What stages do they go through as they acquire new words?
How do they organize and represent lexical knowledge?
What pragmatic principles govern lexical acquisition?
What principles do children rely on as they analyse the structure of words and make use of their knowledge?
To what extent can children be said to apply ‘rules’ in word-formation?
And when children over-regularize their systems, how can they eventually get rid of the over-regularizations?
These questions characterize some of the issues that research on lexical development has attempted to answer.
The focus here has been on Conventionality and Contrast, two pragmatic principles that together govern the lexicon.
They also, of course, govern linguistic units larger than words — idioms, phrases, and larger constructions.
These principles play a central role in how children make use of terms in the conventional lexicon, as well as when they go beyond those to coin new words.
These pragmatic principles offer a source of regulation for conventional forms taking priority over innovative ones, and for setting conditions on when innovation is allowed.
More importantly still, Conventionality and Contrast together offer a mechanism whereby children can eliminate their overregularizations.
Since each difference in form must signal a difference in meaning, children must make certain choices among forms when they find themselves faced with two different forms with apparently the same meaning — e.g.,bringed and brought , or cooker and cook .
If children can find no difference in meaning between such pairs, and yet wish to maintain the principle of Contrast, they must eliminate one member of the pair.
Which one?
Here Conventionality takes a role: the term to be retained should be the conventional one, the one used by adults in the speech community, and the term eliminated must be the innovative one introduced (as a regularization) by the child.
To discover that there is no difference in meaning between two forms may, of course, take children a long time.
The time it takes should vary from child to child, and from expression to expression.
The propensity children have for imposing meaning distinctions of their own in their adherence to Contrast may delay their discovery of  the absence of a difference between an adult form and a child innovation.
Children may ‘decide’ that the adult past brought , for instance, indicates distant past, while the child's bringed is retained to indicate more recent past.
(I am indebted to Jill de Villiers for this example.)
Cooker and cook may be distinguished on the basis of sex (male, female), or location (home, restaurant), and so on.
Even variant pronunciations of the same word may on occasion be assigned contrasting meanings.
For instance, US vase pronounced [va:z]was identified by one child as a smallish flower vase, while [veiz]was taken to be a really large kind.
(Both pronunciations are found, though typically not in the same speaker.)
To rectify such mistakes may take extensive exposure to different usage from other speakers around them, before children find out that they have a real case of no difference in meaning (Clark, 1987,1988).
Finally, contrast in meaning is a matter of sense , not simply of reference .
Children evidently realize this quite early in the process of language acquisition, and accept the fact that different words may refer to the same entity — e.g.,our dog, Fred, that wretched animal , and so on.
They take for granted that they themselves have a name they may be called by, as well as nicknames and endearments, alongside such designations as the kid, the boy , and so on.
They can formulate hypotheses about reference on the basis of the contexts in which they hear new words, and, with the help of Contrast, they also start out with a strong guiding principle about relations among word senses.
Namely, wherever there is a difference in form, they should expect to find some difference in meaning .
This assumption appears to be one that children take to heart very early, and rely on extensively as they acquire the meanings of their first language.
Children's Explanations
Morag L. Donaldson and Alison Elliot
University of Edinburgh
Adults have fairly low expectations about children's ability to explain things.
They are agreeably surprised if a child shows a grasp of a phenomenon, such as how a machine works, which they themselves have only recently mastered.
More often, they are indulgently amused by the cute tangles children get themselves into when they try to explain something, or to define abstract notions or emotionally laden terms.
This can become highly marketable entertainment, as demonstrated by the success of anthologies of children's letters to God or television comedy like ‘Child's Play’.
Furthermore, psychologists have added to the mistrust of children's ability to explain by publishing studies which show that their explanations are often inappropriate to the phenomenon in question (e.g., Piaget, 1929, 1930).
The ability to give and understand explanations is naturally of considerable educational importance.
Explanation extends our understanding of the world, by moving beyond simple observation of events to the causal links underpinning them.
Understanding a teacher's explanations, and also being able to have one's own attempts at explanation evaluated and discussed, are crucial processes in education.
Consequently, if young children really do lack the ability to handle explanations, their capacity to benefit from the early years of schooling will be severely restricted.
In this chapter, we will look at what is known about children's use and understanding of explanations.
As we will see, the ability to explain consists of both cognitive and linguistic components: the ability to understand a phenomenon; and the ability to communicate this understanding to others, usually, but not always, by using terms  such as because and so .
In the same way, understanding other people's explanations has both cognitive and linguistic components.
Thus the study of children's explanations is not only an important topic in its own right; it also bears on more fundamental questions concerning the relationship between cognitive and linguistic development.
Piaget's Studies of Explanation
Piaget argues that a major advance in children's ability to explain occurs around the age of seven years, and he views this advance as being attributable to the decrease in egocentrism which marks the advent of operational thought.
The picture which Piaget paints of young children's ability to explain is essentially a negative one.
He claims that until the age of seven years ‘causality and the faculty for explanation are still unexpressed’(Piaget, 1926: 49).
In support of this claim, Piaget presents evidence from several studies.
We shall consider the two studies which he reports in most detail, and which were most systematically carried out: a sentence completion study (Piaget, 1928), and a series of studies in which an adult interviewed children about causal phenomena (Piaget, 1929, 1930).
In addition, Piaget (1926) carried out an observational study of children's spontaneous speech, and a study in which children had to listen to a spoken explanation and then relay it to another person.
Piaget's sentence completion study involved asking seven-to nine-year-olds to write completions for each of the following written sentence fragments:
1
I shan't go to school tomorrow, because…
2
That man fell off his bicycle, because…
3
Paul says he saw a little cat swallowing a big dog.
His friend says that is impossible (or silly), because…
4
Half nine is not four, because…
These items were designed to assess children's ability to handle explanations involving three different types of content: psychological (item 1), physical (item 2), and logical (items 3 and 4).
Piaget defines psychological content as being concerned with actions, motives and intentions.
Explanations with physical content draw on the laws of physical causality.
Logical content involves rules, customs, or the classification of ideas.
Piaget argues that the ability to handle psychological content develops before the ability to handle physical content, which in turn develops before the  ability to handle logical content.
The findings from the sentence completion study seem to support  this argument, in that performance was better on item (1) than on item (2), and performance on item (2) was better than on (3) and (4).
However, the generalizability of these findings is questionable due to the very small number of items in each category.
Indeed, the fact that performance varied between the two logical items suggests that factors other than the physical/psychological/logical distinction may be responsible for the variations in performance.
Piaget describes two types of error which children made in the sentence completion task.
One type of error was to complete the sentence by referring to an effect instead of a cause, for example: 5 *That man fell off his bicycle, because he broke his leg .
(We shall use asterisks to indicate incorrect sentences.)
Such errors are known as cause-effect inversions.
Piaget views these inversions as evidence that children younger than seven years are confused about the meaning of because , and about the distinction between cause and effect: they do not know that because should introduce a cause rather than an effect.
However, in drawing this conclusion, Piaget is giving undue emphasis to the more negative aspects of his results.
In particular, he fails to comment on the fact that eighty-five per cent of the seven-year-olds passed item (1)— a fact which suggests that even younger children might have been capable of passing this item, especially if it had been presented in an oral rather than a written form.
(Piaget did carry out an oral version of the task, but he does not report details of the results.)
The second error involves completing the sentence fragment with an inappropriate type of content.
In particular, Piaget claims that young children tend to give psychological explanations — known as psychologizing — for physical and logical phenomena, such as : 6 Half nine is not four, because he can't count .
Further evidence of young children's tendency to psychologize comes from a series of studies in which Piaget (1929, 1930) interviewed children about the causes of various phenomena, such as dreams, the origin of the sun and the moon, the weather, the nature of air, the movement of the clouds, the floating of boats, and the workings of a steam-engine.
As one would expect, young children do not give explanations of these phenomena which are correct from the point of view of modern scientific knowledge.
However, Piaget claims that the children's explanations were not simply incorrect but were of the wrong type, in that the children tended to give psychological explanations for physical phenomena.
Unfortunately, Piaget's accounts of these studies are rather lacking in frequency data so the  extent to which the children psychologized is not clear.
Also, the causes of the phenomena which Piaget asked the children to explain were not directly available to them.
Thus it could be argued that children only psychologize as a last resort when they do not have ready access to information about plausible causal mechanisms.
Several studies (Berzonsky, 1971; Morag Donaldson, 1986; Huang, 1943) have provided empirical support for this argument, and in doing so have produced a much more optimistic picture of young children's ability to explain.
A further point is that although Piaget implies that explanations which combine two types of content are always inappropriate, this is not in fact the case.
For example, although item (2) in Piaget's sentence completion task is classed as a physical item, it could be appropriately completed with psychological content: 7 That man fell of his bicycle, because he wanted to attract attention to himself .
It appears that the content categories are actually rather more complex than Piaget proposed.
We shall explore this issue more fully in the next section.
A Taxonomy of Explanations
Imagine that John throws a ball at a window and the window breaks.
This sequence of events can give rise to several explanations depending on how we view the phenomenon.
Consider the following:
8
The window broke because John threw a ball at it.
9
John threw the ball because he wanted to break the window.
10
We know that the window broke because there is glass on the ground.
In these examples, the speaker is aiming to answer different kinds of questions about the phenomenon.
We shall categorize the explanations which result as being in different modes .
In this chapter we will concentrate on three different modes of explanation, of which the above are examples; namely, the empirical mode , the intentional mode and the deductive mode .
The explanation in (8) is in the empirical mode.
The speaker views the phenomenon as an event or state which can be explained in terms of another, temporally prior, event or state.
This type of explanation would be an appropriate answer to a why ? question (e.g.,Why did the window break ?) where why ? is interpreted as meaning ‘what happened to cause?’
Explanations in the intentional mode are also responses to why ? questions, but in this case why ? is interpreted as ‘for what purpose?’
Sentence (9) is an example of an intentional mode explanation.
The speaker is viewing the phenomenon as an action John throwing the ball) which can be explained in terms of the agent's intention to achieve a particular result (the window breaking).
Deductive mode explanations occur when the speaker views the phenomenon as a ‘mental act’ such as an idea, judgement or conclusion.
The mental act is explained by referring to another mental act, or a rule, or a piece of evidence, as in (10).
In giving an explanation in the deductive mode, the speaker is aiming to answer a How do you know ? question (e.g.,How do you know the window broke ?).
The explanations in (8),(9) and (10) are concerned with physical events, but psychological phenomena can also give rise to explanations in different modes, as in (11),(12) and (13):
11
John is happy because Mary has invited him to her party .
(Empirical mode)
12
Mary invited John to her party because she wanted to cheer him up .
(Intentional mode)
13
We know that John is happy because he is smiling .
(Deductive mode)
We noted earlier that Piaget distinguishes three types of causal relations: physical, psychological, and logical.
However, it is not clear whether this distinction applies to the type of phenomenon or the way in which it is being explained.
In this chapter, we shall describe the phenomenon being explained as either physical (as in (8),(9),(10));psychological (as in (11),(12),(13)); or logical .
And we shall describe the explanation itself as being in the empirical ((8),(11)), the intentional ((9),(12)) or the deductive ((10),(13)) mode.
We will now review evidence on children's ability to handle explanations in each mode.
Empirical Mode Explanations
We said earlier that the ability to distinguish between cause and effect is a fundamental component of the ability to explain.
In the empirical mode, both the cause and the effect are events/states.
Also, the event/state which is the cause occurs before the event/state which is the effect.
This is known as the principle of temporal priority (or temporal precedence).
These characteristics of the empirical mode raise two issues which have been explored in studies concentrating on the cognitive abilities underpinning this mode, namely:
a
At what age are children able to distinguish between causes and effects?
b
How is children's understanding of the cause/effect distinction related to their understanding of the temporal priority principle?
There is now considerable evidence that children are able to distinguish between causes and effects at a much earlier age than Piaget originally proposed — see the reviews by Bullock et al .,
1982; Sedlak and Kurtz, 1981; Shultz and Kestenbaum, 1985.
For example, Bullock and Gelman (1979) found that even three-year-olds are able to distinguish between causes and effects.
In their study, three-to five-year-old children observed causal sequences involving a Jack-in-the-box with two runways into the box.
The causal sequences consisted of three events: a puppet dropped a marble down one runway, then Jack jumped, and then another puppet dropped a marble down the other runway.
(Notice here that the ‘causal relation’ between the events is artificially contrived, and indeed the only basis for attributing causal status to the events is their temporal relation.)
The children were asked to carry out various tasks, such as choosing the marble which made Jack jump and explaining their choices.
The results indicated that even three-year-olds consistently selected the first event as the cause.
However, temporal order was only rarely mentioned in the children's explanations of their judgements, indicating that children may not be particularly aware of the temporal order information on which they base their judgements.
Bullock and Gelman also included a condition in which temporal priority conflicted with spatial proximity as a basis for judging which event was the cause.
They found that three-, four-, and five-year-olds based their judgements on temporal priority rather than spatial proximity.
However, Sophian and Huber (1984) found that when the causal task involved a larger number of conflicting cues, three-year-olds did not consistently rely on temporal priority cues, whereas five-year-olds did.
When empirical mode explanations are given for naturally occurring causal sequences, causes do precede their effects, as was the case in the artificial experimental sequences.
However, it can be questioned just how central this principle of temporal priority is to children's understanding of natural causal relations.
Shultz and his colleagues (Shultz, 1982; Shultz and Kestenbaum, 1985; Shultz et al .,
1986) argue that rather than temporal priority, the most important principle in causal reasoning is that of generative transmission.
They argue that causation involves one event (the cause) generating or producing another event (the effect), and that we can obtain direct  knowledge about this causal generation: we do not have to infer causality on the basis of temporal priority.
The generation of an effect by a cause occurs through some form of transmission (for example, of physical energy) between cause and effect.
Shultz argues that our understanding of causality is based primarily on knowledge about the ways in which generative transmission occurs.
In other words, we identify a particular event as the cause because we know how it could have made the effect happen, not because we know it happened before the effect.
Consequently, Shultz et al .
(1986) predict that children will be able to distinguish between causes and effects on the basis of information about generative transmission before they can do so on the basis of information about temporal priority.
In order to test this prediction, Shultz et al .
carried out an experiment in which four-, eight-, and twelve-year-olds were asked to indicate which member of a pair of blocks had made the other block move.
In the temporal priority condition, one of the blocks moved before the other block, but the string which connected the two blocks was screened from the children's view.
Thus the children were provided with information about temporal priority but not about generative transmission.
The converse situation applied in the generative transmission condition: the two blocks moved simultaneously (so there was no information about temporal priority) but the children could see the string connecting the two blocks (so there was information about how the cause generated the effect).
Children in all the age groups systematically made correct use of generative transmission information, whereas only the eight- and twelve-year-olds showed the ability to make use of temporal priority information.
Furthermore, Shultz et al .
found that when eight-year-olds were asked to justify their judgements, they showed a strong tendency to refer to information about generative transmission, even in conditions where they were supplied only with information about temporal order.
When we turn to the linguistic abilities which are required to give empirical mode explanations, we find that the role of the temporal priority principle is again a matter of debate.
In the empirical mode, the clause which immediately follows because describes a cause, whereas the clause which immediately follows so describes an effect.
Moreover, the event described in the clause following because will have happened before that described in the main clause, whereas the event described in the clause following so will have happened after that described in the main clause.
These points are illustrated in the following sentences:
14
The cup broke because it fell off the table .
15
Because the cup fell off the table, it broke.
16
The cup fell off the table so it broke .
If children do not understand this distinction between because and so , then they will be likely to produce errors, known as cause-effect inversions, such as:
17
*The cup fell off the table because it broke.
Similarly, children who do not understand the meaning of the causal connectives will be likely to confuse cause and effect in their comprehension of other people's causal explanations.
As we saw earlier, Piaget argued that children do not understand the directional component of the causal connectives' meaning until the age of about seven years (i.e., they do not understand that B because A and A because B mean different things).
Several more recent studies have provided support for Piaget's argument (Bebout et al .,
1980; Corrigan, 1975; Emerson, 1979; Emerson and Gekoski, 1980; Epstein, 1972; Kuhn and Phelps, 1976).
However, other studies have challenged Piaget's argument by showing that even three-year-olds are able to use causal connectives correctly and rarely produce cause-effect inversions (Hood, 1977; McCabe and Peterson, 1985; French and Nelson, 1985; Morag Donaldson, 1986).
This discrepancy in results coincides with methodological differences between the two groups of studies.
The studies which support Piaget's argument fall into two main categories: metalinguistic tasks and comprehension experiments.
In contrast, most of the studies which challenge Piaget's argument are observational studies of children's production.
This discrepancy between good performance in spontaneous speech and poor performance in metalinguistic tasks and comprehension experiments is not without precedent in the child language literature (e.g. Bloom, 1974; Chapman and Miller, 1975; Margaret Donaldson, 1978; Morag Donaldson, 1980; Hoenigmann-Stovall, 1982; Tunmer and Grieve, 1984).
There are several possible explanations for such discrepancies.
(For an extended discussion, see Morag Donaldson, 1986.)
For example, the linguistic representations guiding comprehension might be distinct from those guiding production and those guiding metalinguistic judgements.
Alternatively, the discrepancies might be due to characteristics of the tasks used to assess the different types of linguistic ability.
In particular, most metalinguistic and comprehension tasks are examples of what Margaret Donaldson (1978) refers to as ‘disembedded tasks’, and as such are likely to prove difficult for young children.
Success on such tasks is dependent on children's ability to accept the task as defined by the adult.
They have  to be able to set aside their own intentions, purposes, experiences, and expectations.
They have to consider the task in its own right.
In the case of metalinguistic and comprehension tasks, the disembedded quality of the tasks is often related to the requirement that children think about particular words or phrases in isolation from their linguistic and non-linguistic contexts, and in isolation from their usual communicative functions.
Furthermore, the design of a comprehension experiment reflects the experimenter's assumptions about the type of knowledge which is required in order to ‘understand’ a particular word.
Thus children may fail the task because their knowledge does not match the adult's assumptions.
We shall argue that, in the case of causal connectives, most comprehension experiments have assessed children's understanding of temporal order rather than causal direction.
To see how this argument applies, let us consider an example of a comprehension experiment in some detail.
Emerson (1979) presented six-to eleven-year-olds with a picture-sequence task.
For each item, the children heard a causal sentence (e.g.,The snowman started to melt because the sun started to shine ), and were shown two picture-strips.
Each picture-strip depicted both of the events referred to by the sentence, and the two strips differed only with respect to the order in which the events were depicted.
For example, in one strip the picture of the sun shining came first (i.e., on the left), and the picture of the snowman melting came second, whereas in the other strip the pictures were arranged in the opposite order.
Half of the sentences were of the form B because A (as in the above example), and half were of the form Because A, B (e.g.,Because the sun started to shine, the snowman started to melt).
The children's task was to choose the picture-strip which ‘goes with the sentence’.
Emerson found that the youngest group of subjects (5; 8 to 6; 7) did not succeed on this task, but that the older groups of subjects (7; 6 to 8; 6 and 9; 7 to 10; 11) did.
On the basis of these results, Emerson argued that children do not understand the directional component of the causal connectives' meaning until the age of about seven or eight years.
What Emerson demonstrated was that her younger children had difficulty in using the causal connective as a clue to the temporal order of the events described.
In the examples she used, which were all in the empirical mode, it was the case that the event following because was the one which happened first.
However, as we shall see, in other modes,because does not necessarily introduce the first event.
The relationship between the causal connective and the temporal order of the events is therefore complex, and depends on the mode of explanation.
On the other hand, it is always the case that the clause  following because will refer to the cause of the phenomenon of interest.
Young children may well appreciate this before they have sorted out the relation between connective, mode, and temporal order.
This leads us to propose the ‘causal direction hypothesis’: children learn about the role of causal connectives as indicators of which event is cause and which effect before they learn about their role as indicators of which event happened first.
They learn that because introduces the cause, rather than the effect, before they learn that in certain circumstances,because introduces the event which happened first.
Thus it is proposed that they will understand the directional component of the meaning of because in connection with the distinction between cause and effect (viz. the causal direction), before they understand the directional component of its meaning in connection with temporal order.
This hypothesis predicts that children will perform worse on tasks which require them to make use of information about temporal order than on tasks which allow them to make use of information about causal direction.
It also raises the possibility that the younger children in Emerson's task may indeed have understood that there is a directional component to the meaning of because , but that this was based on a grasp of causal direction and not the temporal priority for which Emerson was testing.
In other words, this may be a case in which the children fail the task because their knowledge about a word's meaning does not match the experimenter's assumptions about it.
According to the causal direction hypothesis, Emerson's task is disembedded in that it requires children to consider causal connectives in a way which differs from their usual communicative function.
When a speaker uses because in normal conversation, it is likely that her intention is to communicate information about causal direction she wants to inform the hearer that the event mentioned after because is the cause.
If the speaker's main intention was to communicate information about temporal order, she would be more likely to use a temporal connective such as before, after or then than to use a causal connective.
In other words, the primary communicative function of causal connectives is to signal causal direction.
Emerson's task requires children to respond on the basis of the causal connectives' secondary function of conveying information about temporal order.
Thus, it is difficult for children to relate the task to their own communicative intentions.
Furthermore, the causal direction hypothesis is consistent with the argument of Shultz et al .
(1986) that, as far as causal reasoning is concerned, the generative transmission principle  is more fundamental than the temporal priority principle.
In order to test the causal direction hypothesis, Morag Donaldson (1986) carried out an experiment with five-, eight- and ten-year-olds.
The children received either a task which required them to make use of temporal order information (the temporal task), or a task which allowed them to make use of causal direction information (the causal task).
The causal direction hypothesis predicts that performance will be better on the causal task than on the temporal task.
The items for both tasks were based on sequences of three events, A, B, and C, which were chosen so that A caused B, and B caused C (e.g., Coco pushes a cup; the cup falls; the cup breaks).
The same sequences were used for each task and video-tapes were made of each sequence.
For the causal task, the child was shown a video sequence (ABC).
Then the child heard a sentence fragment of the form B because …(e.g.,The cup falls because …) and presented with two single pictures of A and C. The child's task was to choose the appropriate picture and complete the sentence.
In the temporal task, the child was given a sentence of the form B because A (e.g.,The cup falls because Coco pushes it ), and shown two static picture-strips with a picture of event A either to the right or to the left of a picture of event B (the order BA, or the order AB).
As in Emerson's study, the child's task was to choose the picture-strip which matched the sentence.
In both the causal task and the temporal task the children were also given items using so instead of because .
The main difference between the two tasks was that the causal task required a choice between two different events (the cause and the effect of B), whereas the temporal task required a choice between two different event-orders.
Table 3.1 shows the mean number of correct responses given by each age group.
These results support the causal direction hypothesis, since performance is significantly better on the causal task than on the temporal task for each age group.
Also, the findings for the causal task indicate that even five-year-olds have some knowledge of the directional component of the causal connectives' meaning, in that their mean score is considerably higher than the score (of 8) which one would expect if they were simply responding at chance level.
Their performance on because items was particularly good.
(For further details, see Morag Donaldson, 1986.)
In summary, the evidence from causal connective studies indicates that from the age of three years children have some understanding of the directional component of the causal connectives' meaning.
They appreciate that B because A and A because B are different in meaning, and this understanding is probably based on causal direction rather than temporal order.
There is therefore not a large discrepancy   between studies of children's linguistic abilities in this area, and studies of their cognitive abilities which show that three-year-olds are able to distinguish between causes and effects.
Intentional Mode Explanations
Here we need to consider sequences consisting of three elements:
reason (e.g.,John wants the car to go)
action (e.g.,John winds up the car )
result (e.g.,The car goes ).
Explanations in the intentional mode express the relation between the action and the reason (e.g.,John wound up the car because he wanted it to go ).
However, since the reason corresponds to the agent's intention to achieve the result, intentional explanations include a reference to the result of the action.
This gives intentional explanations a forward-looking quality which contrasts with the backward-looking quality of empirical explanations.
Consequently, in the intentional mode, there is a complex relationship between causal direction and temporal order.
The task of dealing with explanations in the intentional mode imposes both cognitive and linguistic demands on the child.
It is cognitively demanding in that the child has to distinguish between the reason and the result, despite the fact that they are interdependent.
Indeed, in some situations, the child may have to exploit this interdependence to infer the reason on the basis of information about the result, while continuing to maintain the reason/result distinction.
To do this, the child requires considerable cognitive flexibility and a  good understanding of the concept of intention.
The task of dealing with intentional explanations is also linguistically demanding in that children have to show that they have maintained the reason/result distinction by using a linguistic construction which is appropriate to the intentional mode, such as:
18
John wound up the toy car to make it go.
19
John wound up the toy car because he wanted it to go.
20
John wound up the toy car so (that) it would go.
Despite these cognitive and linguistic demands, there are grounds for predicting that young children will be able to handle intentional explanations.
In particular, Margaret Donaldson (1978) argues that young children's cognitive and linguistic abilities are at their best in tasks involving intentions, motives or purposes, since such tasks make ‘human sense’.
Piaget would have agreed that intentions are particularly salient to the young child.
However, he devalued the ability to reason about intentions as he regarded it as an immature form of causal reasoning.
Yet the above analysis implies that intentional mode explanations are, if anything, more complex cognitively and linguistically than empirical mode explanations.
Shultz and his associates carried out a series of studies to investigate children's understanding of intentions.
They found that from the age of three years, children were able to distinguish correctly between intended actions and mistakes (Shultz, 1980).
In addition, five-year-olds were able to distinguish intended actions from reflexes and passive behaviours (Shultz, 1980); to distinguish between intending to carry out an act and intending to achieve a consequence (Shultz and Shamash, 1981); and to disguise their intentions deliberately from other people (Shultz and Cloghesy, 1981).
Thus by the age of five years, children have a good grasp of the concept of intention.
But the question still remains — do young children actually view intentions as causes of actions?
Shultz (1982) argues that they do.
Specifically, he argues that intentions are a form of generative transmission, and that children's causal reasoning about actions (like their causal reasoning about events) is based on knowledge of generative transmission.
Shultz supports this argument with evidence that children use certain rules in deciding whether or not behaviour is intentional (Shultz and Wells, 1985; Shultz et al .,
1980).
In particular, Shultz and Wells (1985) propose a matching rule which specifies that if the result matches the intention, then the result was intended.
They found that even three-year-olds were able to use the matching rule in a task which involved judging whether an agent had meant to achieve a particular result.
Moreover, children gave precedence  to the matching rule in situations where it conflicted with another rule.
In making use of the matching rule, children are comparing the intention with the result, and so they are showing the ability to coordinate these two components of a behavioural sequence.
Further evidence that three-year-olds are able to integrate intention and outcome information is provided by Yuill (1984), who asked children to make judgements about a story character's degree of satisfaction with various outcomes.
She found that even three-year-olds judged a character to be more pleased when the result of his action matched his intention than when there was a mismatch between the intention and the result.
Moreover, the findings from Stein and Trabasso's (1982) study of children's understanding of stories suggest that five-year-olds are able to use the matching rule to infer an intention from information about a result.
We have seen that young children have considerable understanding of intentions, and of the relationships between intentions, actions and results.
Such understanding is an important component of the ability to give and understand explanations in the intentional mode, but it is not sufficient in itself.
Linguistic abilities are also required.
A study by Astington (1986) explored children's understanding of linguistic expressions of intention, such as means to, is going to, wants to , and intended to .
Astington found that it was not until the age of nine years that the majority of children gave consistently correct responses.
However, in her experiment, the children's task was to match the linguistic expressions of intention with pictures which were designed to depict intentions.
As Astington herself acknowledges, intentions cannot be readily depicted.
It may well be that children younger than nine years have difficulty picking up information about intentions from pictures.
Let us now look in detail at the linguistic abilities required to handle intentional mode explanations.
Sentences in the intentional mode (such as(18),(19), and (20)) express a reason-action relation, and the verb which is used to refer to the result of the action occurs in its non-finite form (e.g.,go ).
This contrasts with sentences in the empirical mode which express an action-result relation, and in which a finite verb form (went ) is used to refer to the result of the action:
21
The toy car went because John wound it up.
22
John wound up the toy car so it went.
If children fail to observe this distinction between the empirical and intentional modes, then they will tend to produce cause-effect inversions, such as:
23
*John wound up the toy car because it went .
A further linguistic demand is that children have to distinguish between because and so constructions within the intentional mode.
In a because sentence, the reason is expressed by using a phrase which refers to the agent's desire or aim (e.g.,wanted to ), whereas in a so sentence the reason is expressed by using a modal construction (e.g.,would ), which refers to the predicted result of the action.
Again, failure to observe this distinction will result in cause-effect inversions:
24
*John wound up the toy car so he wanted it to go.
25
*John wound up the toy car because it would go.
(It should be noted that the distinction between correct and inverted sentences is complex, and related to the mode of explanation.
In particular, inversions such as (24) can sometimes become acceptable if they are interpreted as being in a different mode, such as the deductive mode.)
Studies of children's comprehension of causal connectives have tended to concentrate on the empirical mode.
On the other hand, studies of children's spontaneous production have revealed that most of the causal sentences which children produce refer to intentions (Hood, 1977; McCabe and Peterson, 1985).
This suggests, once again, that comprehension experiments may have been looking in the wrong place for evidence of young children's linguistic competence.
Morag Donaldson (1986) carried out a study which assessed five and eight-year-old children's ability to handle intentional mode explanations in an experimental setting.
The subjects received two tasks (on different days): a questions task and a sentence completion task.
For each item in both tasks, the child was presented with two pictures and was told a story about the pictures.
The top picture depicted an action (e.g., John winding up the toy car), and the lower picture depicted a result of the action (e.g., the car going).
In the questions task, the child was required to answer a why ? question about the action (Why did John wind up the car ?).
In the sentence completion task, the child was asked to complete a sentence fragment which described the action and which ended in because or so (John wound up the car because/so …
). The agent's intention was not explicitly mentioned in the story, nor was there any attempt to depict it (e.g., by making the agent look excessively pleased in the second picture).
Thus the task required the children to infer the intention, on the basis of knowledge of the result and of the action-result relation, while at the same time maintaining the distinction between the intention and  the result.
In addition, the children had to show that they had maintained the intention/result distinction by using a linguistic construction appropriate to the intentional mode.
The results indicate that five- and eight-year-olds are able to cope with all of these cognitive and linguistic demands.
In the questions task, eighty-one per cent of the five-year-olds' responses, and eighty-two per cent of the eight-year-olds' responses, were well-formed intentional explanations.
The corresponding results for the sentence completion task were sixty-five per cent and eighty-three per cent.
In the questions task, both age groups showed a strong preference for expressing intentional explanations by means of the infinitive construction (e.g.,John wound up the toy car to make it go ).
Nevertheless, the children also demonstrated an ability to use because and so constructions appropriately.
As Table 3.2 shows, the children produced more well-formed because and so sentences in the intentional mode than inversions.
Although the inversion rate was low for both age groups, it was significantly lower for the eight-year-olds than for the five-year-olds.
These results confirm previous findings which indicate that young children have a good understanding of the concept of intention, and are able to reason about intentions and results simultaneously.
But Donaldson's results extend these previous findings by showing that young children also have considerable linguistic abilities.
The five-year-olds in her experiment showed not only the ability to use causal connectives in the intentional mode, but also the ability to use linguistic expressions which refer to intentions, such as wanted to and was going to .
Thus young children have both the cognitive and the linguistic ability to explain actions in terms of intentions.
Deductive Mode Explanations
An explanation in the deductive mode is an explanation of a ‘mental act’(idea/judgement/conclusion) in terms of another mental act, or a rule, or a piece of evidence.
The contrast between the empirical and deductive modes is illustrated by the following sentences:
26
The window broke because a ball hit it .
(Empirical)
27
We can tell that the window broke because there is glass on the ground .
(Deductive)
In the empirical mode sentence,(26), one event (the window breaking) is explained in terms of another event (the ball hitting the window).
In the deductive mode sentence,(27), a conclusion (that the window broke) is explained in terms of a piece of observable evidence (there is glass on the ground).
As these examples show, a particular phenomenon (e.g., the window breaking) can be regarded either as an event, or as the subject-matter of a conclusion.
Similarly, the phenomenon which is treated as evidence in the deductive explanation (e.g., there is glass on the ground) can also be treated as an effect in an empirical explanation:
28
The window broke so there is glass on the ground .
Indeed, the speaker's knowledge of the cause-effect relation described in (28) forms the basis for the inference described in (27).
The deductive mode (like the intentional mode) is both dependent on and distinct from the empirical mode.
Sentences in the deductive mode sometimes contain deductive markers, such as we can tell that, know that, think, must, might , or perhaps .
Deductive markers provide a linguistic means of signalling the deductive/empirical distinction: they signal that what follows should be interpreted as a conclusion rather than as a description of an event/state.
However, it seems that deductive markers are optional and can sometimes be omitted from deductive explanations, as in:
29
The window broke because there is glass on the ground.
This sentence could be regarded as an elliptical version of the deductive explanation given in (27).
Alternatively, sentence (29) could be regarded as an incorrect empirical explanation.
In other words, such sentences are potentially ambiguous.
It is likely that in normal discourse, the context of the sentences will help to resolve these potential ambiguities.
In order to handle deductive mode explanations, children require  various cognitive and linguistic abilities.
They have to be able to distinguish between the empirical and deductive modes.
This involves understanding the distinction between cause-effect relations and evidence-conclusion relations.
It also involves understanding the linguistic cues (deductive markers) which can be used to signal the empirical/deductive distinction.
Within the deductive mode, children have to be able to distinguish between conclusions and evidence, and they have to know that so introduces the conclusion whereas because introduces the evidence.
Morag Donaldson (1986) carried out two experiments to explore the extent to which five-, eight-, and ten-year-old children possess these cognitive and linguistic abilities.
The deductive/empirical experiment assessed children's ability to distinguish between the deductive and empirical modes on the basis of linguistic cues provided by the adult.
The deductive marking experiment investigated the extent to which children take account of the deductive/empirical distinction in their use of language when they are cued into the deductive mode by the context.
In the deductive/empirical experiment, each child received either a questions task or a sentence completion task.
The items for both tasks were based on sequences consisting of three elements, such as:
A
= Mary hit John with the pillow.
B
= The pillow burst.
C
= Mary is covered in feathers.
In each sequence, A is the cause of B, and C is evidence that B occurred (and is also the effect of B).
The children were presented with two coloured pictures depicting A and C. In the questions task, children were asked deductive questions of the form:The pillow burst, didn't it?
How do you know the pillow burst ?
(Expected answer:Because Mary is covered in feathers ); and empirical questions of the form:The pillow burst, didn't it?
Why did the pillow burst ?
(Expected answer:Because Mary hit John with the pillow ).
In the sentence completion task, children were asked to complete sentence fragments which, for deductive items, were of the form:We can tell that the pillow burst because …
(Expected answer:Mary is covered in feathers ), and, for empirical items, were of the form:The pillow burst because …
(Expected answer:Mary hit John with the pillow ).
Both tasks were designed to assess children's ability to respond to some of the linguistic cues which can be used to signal the deductive/ empirical distinction.
The results presented in Table 3.3 show that, on the whole, the children performed very well on the empirical items.
There were no significant age effects for these items in either task.
This is consistent with the results we reported earlier showing good performance on the causal task (see Table 3.1).
However, on the deductive items, the children had more difficulty.
There were significant age effects in both tasks on these items, and many of the children in the two younger age groups failed to distinguish between deductive and empirical items and treated them all as if they were empirical items.
Similar results were obtained by Trabasso et al .
(1981).
They found that five-year-olds and nine-year-olds showed a tendency to respond to How can you tell that ? questions by referring to a cause rather than to evidence, though this tendency was less strong for their nine-year-olds than for their five-year-olds.
From these results, it would appear that the younger children were not able to pick up the linguistic cues to the deductive/empirical distinction contained in the experimenter's questions.
Would they make these distinctions in their own speech when given the opportunity  to do so?
The deductive marking experiment was designed to answer this question.
A different group of five-, eight- and ten-year-old children took part in the deductive marking experiment.
It was presented to them as a detective game in which they were encouraged to help the Pink Panther to solve some mysteries.
For example, the children were shown four pictures in each of which a cloaked and hooded figure was committing a ‘crime’, namely, stealing flowers out of a garden, eating a cake, breaking into a jeweller's shop, and painting red spots on a fence.
The children were introduced to a toy Pink Panther who, they were told, had caught the culprits but did not know who had committed which crime.
The children were then to be given clues to help them solve the mysteries and they were to tell the Pink Panther (who was not privy to this information) who had committed which crime.
The clues consisted of four pictures: Snoopy with cream on his face, Charlie Brown with red paint on his hands, Donald Duck with muddy feet, and Mickey Mouse with a necklace sticking out of his pocket.
For each item, the children either had to complete a sentence, such as Snoopy has cream on his face so …or they were given a description of the clue, such as The clue is that Snoopy has cream on his face , and were asked to tell the Pink Panther about the clue and what they had worked out.
These were referred to as the sentence completion condition and the open-ended condition respectively.
(Other similar tasks were given to the children and these are described in Morag Donaldson, 1986.)
The question of interest was whether the children would use deductive markers and causal connectives appropriately in these circumstances.
It was also important to establish whether adults would use deductive markers in these contexts, and so a written version of the tasks was given to a group of undergraduates.
The results for both tasks indicated that deductive markers were frequently omitted by all age groups, including the adults.
Fewer than half the responses from each group contained deductive markers, and in the open-ended task fewer than half the responses in each group contained causal connectives.
The five-year-olds were less prolific than the other groups in producing either deductive markers or causal connectives.
When the eight- and ten-year-olds did produce  causal connectives, they used them in a way appropriate to the deductive mode, by using because to introduce evidence and so to introduce a conclusion.
It would appear from these results that children's grasp of the deductive mode is less secure than their grasp of the empirical and intentional modes.
Five-year-olds did not show much understanding of the deductive/empirical distinction at all, even in the deductive marking experiment.
Eight-year-olds were beginning to acknowledge the distinction, in that when they used the causal connectives in the deductive mode they appropriately followed because with evidence and so with a conclusion.
However, even the ten-year-olds were still having difficulty in responding to the linguistic cues to the deductive mode, as was shown by the deductive/empirical experiment.
This difficulty may be related to the fact that deductive markers are optional — they were frequently omitted by both children and adults in the deductive marking experiment.
Thus it may be that children are not accustomed to relying on purely linguistic cues to the deductive mode.
Explanation in School
As we noted earlier, explanation plays a central role in education.
Teachers spend a substantial amount of time giving explanations.
Flanders (1970) found that, on average, two-thirds of classroom time is taken up with the teacher talking, and two-thirds of this talk consists of lecturing or explaining.
Furthermore, there is evidence that pupils regard the ability to give clear explanations as being the most important quality of the ‘ideal teacher’(Wragg and Wood, 1984), and that the clarity of a teacher's explanations is indeed positively associated with her pupils' educational achievement (Good and Grouws, 1977).
(For a review of such evidence, see Brown and Atkins, 1986.)
In addition to giving explanations, teachers try to elicit explanations from their pupils by asking questions.
Like explanations, questions figure prominently in classroom interactions.
One of the most typical structures in classroom dialogue is the teacher asking a question, a pupil responding, and the teacher evaluating the pupil's response (Sinclair and Coulthard, 1974; Stubbs, 1976).
In view of the educational importance of explanation, it is surprising that so little research has focused directly on the development of children's ability to give and understand explanations; or on how children actually cope with explanations in the classroom.
So far, we  have discussed evidence which is particularly relevant to the first of these issues, but which also has implications for the second.
We have seen that by the time children start school they have developed the basic cognitive and linguistic abilities required for handling explanations in the empirical and intentional modes.
While this evidence does not necessarily imply that children will always cope with empirical and intentional explanations in the classroom, it does imply that failure to do so is likely to be due to factors other than children lacking an understanding of causality, of intentionality, or of the causal connectives.
The nature of classroom interaction is one factor which may affect children's ability to cope with explanations in the classroom.
It has frequently been observed that many classroom interactions do not conform to the rules of normal conversation, and this applies particularly to teachers' use of questions (e.g., Barnes, 1969; Stubbs, 1976; Edwards, 1980).
Typically, teachers ask questions not because they do not know the answers, but because they want to test their pupils' knowledge.
Furthermore, the teacher will often have a specific ‘correct’ answer in mind.
The pupils perceive their task as being to figure out what the teacher is ‘getting at’, and so classroom interactions can become elaborate guessing games.
In everyday conversation, speakers usually ask questions in order to extend their knowledge.
Questions are asked by people who lack a particular piece of knowledge, and questions are addressed to people who are assumed to be more knowledgeable about that topic.
But in the classroom, the roles are often reversed: the person who asks the questions is the one who is assumed to be more knowledgeable.
Research into classroom interaction has not focused directly on children's explanations.
However, since explanations can be regarded as responses to explicit or implicit questions, the research into the pragmatics of questioning in the classroom provides hints about the pragmatics of explanation in the classroom.
In particular, it suggests that many of the explanations which children produce at school will be produced in response to the teacher's test questions, and so will serve to display rather than transmit knowledge.
Again, there is likely to be a mismatch between the function of explanations in the classroom and the function of explanations in everyday conversation.
Explanations can serve a variety of functions.
Two functions of particular interest are: ‘sharing’ and ‘displaying’.
These functions relate to the speaker's reasons for making public his understanding.
An explanation has a sharing function if the speaker is producing it in order to share his knowledge with other people, and so extend their  understanding.
Explanations which are produced in order to demonstrate that the speaker possesses a particular piece of knowledge have a displaying function.
It can be argued that the central function of explanations is the sharing function.
There is an obvious social motive behind explanations with a sharing function.
In Margaret Donaldson's terms, such explanations are produced for reasons which make ‘human sense’.
Explanations which are produced in normal conversation are likely to have a sharing function.
In contrast, many of the explanations which are produced in the classroom have a displaying function.
Such explanations tend to emphasize the possession of knowledge for its own sake.
Explanations in each of the three modes (empirical, intentional, and deductive) can serve either a sharing or a displaying function.
However, there seems to be a particularly close relationship between the displaying function and the deductive mode, in that both turn the spotlight on to the speaker's knowledge, and so have a more ‘reflexive’ quality than the other explanations.
An explanation in any mode will have a displaying function if it is produced to demonstrate what the speaker knows.
Deductive mode explanations are explanations of this knowledge.
Thus deductive mode explanations which have a displaying function are being used to demonstrate knowledge about knowledge.
In other words, they demonstrate not only that you know, but that you know how you know!
Such explanations are highly disembedded, and, like other aspects of disembedded thinking, they are of considerable educational significance, since they provide a means of checking that pupils actually understand what they are doing, and not just giving correct answers through chance, imitation, or rote learning.
Earlier, we saw that children have more difficulty with deductive explanations than with empirical or intentional explanations.
Given the educational importance of deductive explanations, it is important to consider some possible reasons for the children's difficulty.
One possibility would be that the children lacked the ability to think about epistemic states, such as knowing, thinking and believing.
However, several recent studies have shown that the ability to reason about and talk about epistemic states develops before the age of five years (Abbeduto and Rosenberg, 1985; Perner and Leekam, 1986; Shatz et et al .,
1983).
On the other hand, there is an interesting parallel between the five-year-olds' poor performance in the deductive mode experiments and Wimmer and Perner's (1983) finding that the ability to reason about another person's false belief develops between the ages of four and six years.
Wimmer and Perner argue that this ability  involves the ability to represent the relationship between two conflicting beliefs.
Since deductive explanations are most natural in situations where speakers encounter (or anticipate) a conflict between their own and someone else's beliefs, it may well be that the ability to represent the relationship between two conflicting beliefs helps children appreciate the need for deductive explanations.
This brings us back to the importance of considering the functions which explanations serve in particular contexts.
In the deductive marking experiment there was not a conflict of beliefs, so the five-year-olds' performance might have been due to the fact that the context did not highlight the need for a deductive explanation.
On the other hand, the context created in the deductive marking experiment did involve the child having knowledge which the addressee (the Pink Panther) lacked, and so it was probably more conducive to the production of deductive explanations than many of the contexts children encounter in school.
It is being argued that children's explanations will be at their best in situations which conform to the normal rules of discourse.
In a school setting, it may be possible to approximate to such situations by encouraging peer learning groups and discussions in which the teacher assumes a facilitatory role rather than a didactic role.
Future research could profitably explore the nature of children's explanations in a range of classroom contexts.
Concluding Comments
The material presented in this chapter echoes some of the themes developed by Margaret Donaldson in Children's Minds (1978).
One of these themes is that Piaget seriously over-estimated the extent to which young children are egocentric.
As we saw earlier, Piaget argued that children younger than seven years lack the ability to explain, and he sees this as yet another symptom of their egocentrism.
However, the more recent evidence reviewed in this chapter clearly indicates that children are able to give and understand explanations well before the age of seven years.
This evidence, like the evidence discussed in Children's Minds , provides support for the argument that young children are not nearly as egocentric as Piaget claimed.
A related theme in Children's Minds is that young children often perform less well on experimental tasks than in more natural situations.
This theme is echoed by the discrepancy in results between  experimental and observational studies of children's knowledge of causal connectives.
The theme of ‘human sense’ is particularly central to Margaret Donaldson's argument.
She argues that young children's cognitive and linguistic abilities can be seen at their best in situations involving intentions, motives, or purposes — situations which make human sense.
As this argument would lead one to expect, children showed considerable cognitive and linguistic abilities in handling intentional mode explanations, despite their complexity.
The converse of the ‘human sense’ theme is the ‘disembedded task’theme: young children are likely to have difficulty with tasks which are divorced from human sense.
Yet, as Margaret Donaldson points out, the ability to cope with disembedded tasks is crucial to educational success.
In other words, young children's area of weakness coincides with an area of considerable educational importance.
Again, a similar picture emerges regarding children's explanations.
Children are less competent at handling explanations in the deductive mode than in the empirical or intentional modes, yet deductive explanations are likely to be particularly important in educational contexts.
Although studies of children's explanations have identified some weaknesses, the overall picture, as with many other aspects of cognitive and linguistic development, is of an extremely competent five-year-old who has the basic cognitive and linguistic abilities for giving and understanding explanations of events and actions.
Children's Communication
Peter Lloyd
University of Manchester
This chapter will focus on the capacity of children to use language as a vehicle for communication once they reach school age.
Like most previously published research in this area, attention will be confined to primary school children aged between five and ten years.
Before outlining the scope of the chapter, a word is in order about the term ‘communication’.
When people communicate, they are not, of course, restricted to verbal language.
Moreover, it has been argued that whenever two or more people are together it is impossible not to communicate.
Silence itself is a form of communication, and the many ways in which human beings can send ‘messages’ by way of gesture, facial expressions, and non-linguistic sounds (the deep sigh much favoured by the late British comedian, Tony Hancock, is a good example) have been well documented.
Furthermore, verbal communication, the prime way of exchanging meaning between human beings who have acquired spoken language, is almost invariably accompanied by communication in non-verbal channels.
Recognition of this fact will emerge in some of the criticism to be offered of much work in this field.
Nevertheless, the focus of the chapter will be on verbal communication, since this is an area in which interesting and important developments appear to be taking place during the primary school years.
I start by reviewing research in the field known as referential communication, in which children are required to use language to help each other identify particular items, and then go on to outline some limitations in the standard experimental approach used in this area, drawing heavily on the work of Margaret Donaldson.
It will be argued that if studies of communication are to be artificially restricted  to the verbal channel, then a medium that does this ‘naturally’ like the telephone should be used.
A further case will be made that the standard speaker and listener measures used in referential communication research neglect a host of linguistic and pragmatic features which contribute centrally to the negotiation of verbal meaning.
Some work of my own which uses the telephone and takes advantage of recent advances in discourse analysis will be presented, and the idea of a communicative support system will be put forward as a possible explanation of the findings obtained.
This idea links closely both to Donaldson's notion of embedded and disembedded thought and to Vygotsky's demand that we look at the total context in which information is exchanged and understood.
It also helps create links between the additional context of the experiment and the real-life world of the classroom.
Studies of Referential Communication
Historically, work on verbal communication between children has taken place in two traditions, naturalistic and experimental.
Both of these found expression in an early landmark in the area, Piaget's Language and Thought of the Child (1926/1959).
Piaget's experimental studies required children to recount a story they had heard, or explain the working of an instrument such as a tap.
His results showed that children below the age of seven years did not structure their stories or explanations coherently, nor did they keep in mind the extent of the listener's ignorance.
This basic defect, also found in his naturalistic study of spontaneous dialogue among kindergarten children, was called ‘egocentrism’ by Piaget.
Egocentrism manifests itself in communicative terms as an inability to take account of another's point of view; instead, the world is seen rigidly from the standpoint of the self.
Since effective communication is to be regarded as an essentially cooperative enterprise (Grice, 1975), egocentrism would be an overwhelming handicap.
If children were egocentric, the capacity to sustain an effective dialogue would be impossible, for this requires the ability to switch speaker and listener roles constantly, to monitor the effects of one's messages, and to modify them according to feedback received from the listener.
Listeners have to recognize that for them, too, communication is an active process, requiring them to relate the utterance to the context obtaining and to signal any inadequacy or comprehension failure when it occurs.
There has been a wealth of research charting the development of these skills.
The area is known as referential communication, as the  role of the speaker is to describe verbally a given object (or, more rarely, an action or relationship), so that the listener, relying entirely on the language received, can work out what the message refers to.
In the standard paradigm the two communicators are seated at a table opposite one another but separated by a screen so as to restrict communication to the verbal channel.
The task is for the speaker to select and describe one of a series of items so that the listener is able to identify the chosen item from an identical set.
No limits are placed on what the participants can say, and the experimenter is able to control the complexity of the stimulus array in terms of the size and number of varying attributes.
This paradigm can be used to study child-child communication, but it can also be used in a more controlled fashion, in which the experimenter takes the role of one participant in order to control more precisely one side of the communication process.
Early studies in this area focused on the child's ability to enact speaker and listener roles.
The initial emphasis was on speakers and their ability to encode messages sufficiently clearly to enable listeners to identify the target object.
It was recognized that accurate message construction presupposed the capacity to identify the critical features of an item-that is, those features that uniquely identified the target.
Speakers who were unaware of or unable to select and then transmit these differentiating features were clearly going to be ineffective communicators.
It was further noted that when asked, either directly or indirectly, to provide further information, young school-aged children proved poor at responding.
Their standard reaction was to repeat the initial description without modification.
However, it has been shown (Lloyd and Beveridge, 1981) that when the task is within the child's realm of experience (familiar objects varying on comprehensible features such as size, form, and colour), and when paired with adult listeners who provide optimal feedback, even the preschool child is capable of repairing inadequate messages, leading ultimately to successful communication.
A similar finding has been reported with the child in the listener mode (Lloyd and Beveridge, 1981).
When presented with adequate messages, even though they may contain only the minimal information necessary to locate the target, young children are capable of the necessary perceptual discrimination and message decoding to perform effectively as listeners.
Following the demonstration that children could achieve various levels of skill in referential communication tasks, attention became increasingly directed at the reasons for the relatively limited success of preschool and early primary school children at these tasks.
There was mounting dissatisfaction with the concept of egocentrism as an  explanatory construct (see Donaldson, 1978; Lloyd and Beveridge, 1981, for a fuller account of this argument).
The research focus shifted to the role of the message in referential communication, and also to listeners who had hitherto been regarded as a somewhat passive element.
One of the problems which Lloyd and Beveridge (1981) identified as giving rise to poor performance on the part of young receivers of messages was the phenomenon they referred to as ‘premature selection’.
This was the strong tendency to select a referent before completion of the speaker's message, and, at times, before even the start of it.
Here, listeners were acting in a highly focused, not to say impulsive, fashion, and they were not carrying out analysis of the message at a level that would produce success.
In a series of studies in the late 1970s and early 1980s, Robinson and Robinson (e.g., 1983) drew attention to the critical connection between the message and the listener's perception of it.
They used a ‘Whose fault?’ technique, in which children were asked who was to blame for an unsuccessful piece of communication — e.g., where the listener's choice of referent did not match that of the speaker.
Robinson and Robinson found that children up to the age of seven years typically blamed the listener for failure, and seemed unaware that the message provided by the speaker might be inadequate.
Robinson and Robinson showed that a shift from listener-blaming to speaker-blaming, and a consequent recognition of the role of the message in referential communication, occurred during the early school years.
The attention given to the listener, however, did not result in a truly interactive analysis of peer communication.
Instead, studies were carried out with the focus now on the listener rather than the speaker.
Listeners were fed a mixture of adequate and inadequate messages, usually by an adult, and their reactions noted.
A series of studies by Patterson and her colleagues (e.g., Patterson and Kister, 1981) hypothesized that if children knew that they should ask questions when they were uncertain of a message's adequacy, then they would have a procedure for resolving communication failure.
Patterson trained her subjects to ask questions when they found that they could not choose between competing referents.
This resulted in more overt recognition of message ambiguity and subsequent discrimination.
A model was now starting to emerge which indicated that a number of stages were involved in the business of assessing the role of the message in communication (Ackerman, 1983).
The first stage was to detect ambiguity in a message — that is, to be aware that the information currently available did not allow an unequivocal choice.
The next stage was to carry out a proper evaluation of the message, in an attempt to determine what was giving rise to the ambiguity (i.e., what was missing from the message).
The final stage was to resolve the ambiguity, by formulating and asking appropriate questions in order to secure the missing information.
A complementary body of work was carried out at this time by Flavell and his colleagues (1981).
This also examined children's reactions to a variety of inadequate messages, and proposed a metacognitive explanation of the inability to recognize message defects (see also Shatz, 1978; Markman, 1981; Lloyd and Beveridge, 1981).
Essentially, the argument is that the information-handling resources which a young child brings to the communication task are limited.
They may be fully stretched by the cognitive demands attending to input; accessing the lexicon and syntactic knowledge; discriminating differences in the referent array; relating verbal input to the visual array; making a selection; and so on.
The more effort that has to be put into these component skills, the less processing space there is for monitoring the procedure — i.e., taking the message as a cognitive object and scrutinizing it for possible inconsistencies.
There is indeed some evidence to suggest that children recognize ambiguity in messages at a threshold ‘below’ the level of language.
In a study in which children's eye movements were recorded while they scanned an array and listened to messages to focus on items in the array (Lloyd, 1983), it was found that the number of shifts between the items in the referent array varied significantly as a function of message adequacy.
When a message allowed unambiguous identification of the requested target, children directed their gaze back and forwards across the array relatively infrequently.
However, when the message did not allow unambiguous identification but instead could have referred to one of two items in the array, the number of shifts almost doubled in number.
This finding suggests that children were signalling their recognition of ambiguity in the message by engaging in an increased amount of comparison activity.
However they were not, in the main, demonstrating this recognition verbally.
Indeed, they generally assured the speaker that they had found the target item.
Referential Communication: A New Approach
The standard referential communication approach suffers from a number of shortcomings.
These will now be briefly examined under the four headings of Task, Medium, Subjects and Data Analysis.
As  we do so an alternative approach will be offered which seems closer to communication in everyday situations.
Task
In the standard referential communication task the speaker describes one of a restricted set of items so that the listener is able to identify the target.
What this task lacks is a clear goal for the participants.
However carefully worded the adult's instructions, the task seems to be arbitrary, the interdependent nature of the enterprise not being clearly apparent.
Since communication is, first and foremost, a collaborative undertaking, a task where such behaviour is encouraged or even naturally elicited would represent the ideal at which to aim.
A task which fulfils these requirements is the exchange of route directions with the aid of a map.
One participant has to describe a route traced out on the map so that both speaker and listener follow the identical route.
Both participants are aware of the starting point, and that a final goal has to be achieved at the other side of the map, stopping at various intermediate points on the way (see Figure 4.1).
This means that despite the precise route being available to only one of the interlocutors, the shared knowledge and context, especially in terms of the goal to be achieved, allows the sort of negotiation that takes place in everyday communication.
The task therefore observes the principal of human sense which Donaldson (1978) has so clearly brought to our attention.
This is not to say that children have necessarily experienced the precise task that is being used.
However, the idea and goal of the game will be clear by its very nature.
Medium
In the standard paradigm the interlocutors are separated by a screen to ensure that communication is restricted to the verbal channel.
Another common procedure is for the subjects to sit back to back.
The artificial nature of such methods has often been criticized (e.g., Frederickson, 1981), and the benefits of face-to-face communication, where gestures can play their full part, demonstrated (Evans and Rubin, 1979).
Given that we do want to study children's capacities in a purely verbal medium we therefore need a medium which is essentially verbal but without artificial restrictions.
There is in fact a ubiquitous medium available for this purpose — the telephone.
Its incorporation into referential communication tasks obviates the need to prevent non-verbal communication artificially, with the degree of distortion to the communication process that this entails.
Moreover, children are attracted to telephones which ‘demand’ to be picked up and spoken into, and the prohibitions which adults usually place on children's use of these instruments serves only to enhance their attractiveness.
This supposition has certainly been borne out in our own research.
It quickly became evident that the telephone releases many of the inhibitions that are present in the standard referential research approach, and we have recorded long, frequently sophisticated, dialogues with children as young as seven years of age.
Subjects
The experimental study of peer communication has steadily diminished so that most studies of the ability of young children to communicate verbally place the child together with an adult, almost invariably the experimenter.
Ostensibly this gives greater control, but at considerable cost.
The issue centres mainly around the question of power.
The influence of the adult experimenter on the child's performance  is one that has concerned Donaldson, who has shown convincingly that the child does not always interpret adult meanings as intended (McGarrigle and Donaldson, 1975).
It has also been shown that more sensitive judgements can be obtained from children when the power figure — so often represented by the adult — is removed (Lloyd and Donaldson, 1976).
It is clearly ridiculous to suggest that effective research can be carried out only in the absence of an adult experimenter.
There is a case, however, for putting more emphasis on studies where the participating subjects have the destiny of the task performance in their own hands rather than sharing it, in some little-understood manner, with an unfamiliar adult.
A comparable area of research has been that by Genevan workers with a concern for environmental processes such as Doise and Mugney (1984) and Perret-Clermont (1980), who have claimed significant advances in cognitive development when children work in pairs on Piagetian tasks.
In our task situation, the children were left entirely alone in separate rooms, but in touch with one another by telephone.
The outcome was uninhibited dialogue with many examples of communication failures being followed by successful repair procedures.
Data analysis
The measures taken in referential communication research focus on the performance of speakers and listeners.
Speaker skills comprise such things as the ability to provide critical information, and the number of trials or messages to identify the target.
Listener measures have ranged from the simple identification of the target, where binary scores are noted (correct or incorrect), to the ability to recognize and act on ambiguity.
What has been noticeably lacking is any attempt to treat communication for what it is — an interpersonal, dynamic activity.
The sociolinguistic approach to peer communication records naturalistic dialogue and looks at the structure of conversation in terms of maintaining discourse effectively (Garvey, 1984; McTear, 1985).
In the telephone route-following task an attempt to combine the strengths of the experimental and naturalistic approaches has been made by using methods of discourse analysis to illuminate the communication success and failure of our child subjects.
A proper account of referential communication must grapple with the intrinsically reciprocal nature of conversation, not merely to satisfy the objections of sociolinguists but also to discover if a deeper analysis of discourse clarifies the procedures by which children use and make sense of verbal information.
Many possible measures might be used (Brown  and Yule, 1983), but following Garvey's lead with younger children (Garvey, 1979), the distribution and pattern of clarification requests has been used as a starting point.
Communicating Information by Telephone
The telephone route-following task has now been carried out with pairs of seven-year-olds, ten-year-olds, and adults.
It is clear that the task has achieved its aim of getting children to collaborate productively.
Even the youngest children worked assiduously to achieve the goal of a correct and mutually agreed route and destination.
When measuring success and failure, the standard referential communication approach to the problem is to carry out a task analysis to determine which critical features need to be communicated for a successful outcome.
The implication is that there is only one right way of doing the task.
It turned out, however, that it was possible to succeed on the present task by using one of several strategies.
Table 4.1 shows that the preferred strategy varies as a function of age.
The unsuccessful minimal strategy (in which no critical information is supplied) is most evident among the younger children, while the sophisticated directional strategy (which makes use of instructions involving ‘left’, ‘right’, etc.) is used with any frequency only by adults.
The older children prefer a components strategy (in which features of the relevant buildings are described) while the younger ones prefer a numbering strategy (in which items are counted off — e.g., ‘the third one’, etc.).
Even though identifying the range of strategies marks an advance over standard referential communication measures, information about the success or otherwise of these strategies is required as well as the form in which they were used.
Not surprisingly adults were the most successful subjects, with speakers and listeners achieving the correct route on 92 per cent of occasions.
However, ten-year-olds   were not significantly different from the adults, with an overall success rate of 86 per cent, though the seven-year-olds were significantly poorer with a mean of 57 per cent .
When we looked more closely at what adult speakers were doing, it seemed that the majority achieved greater efficiency by using a combination of strategies in their descriptions.
In (1), a combination of directional and components strategies is being used and this is clearly an effective procedure.
Combination strategies of this kind were extremely rare among the ten-year-olds, only one of the 24 subjects typically using this approach.
But a closer look at the data revealed many examples of different kinds of combinations strategy which were constructed jointly within the pair.
In (2) the listener is confirming a correct directional message with a components description.
In (3), an accurate numbering strategy is rescued by the listener enquiring about the components involved, causing the speaker to modify the description.
Clear examples of joint combinations were less common among the seven-year-olds.
However, these children did demonstrate the ability to shift or switch strategies if the one in force did not appear to be working — e.g.,(4):
Among the ten-year-olds, the protocols revealed the care and sensitivity with which ‘instructors’ responded to the needs of their ‘pupils’.
In (5) the speaker uses a ‘setting up premises’ procedure.
This is illustrated in (5) a.
The speaker establishes that the listener is at a decision point where the route will go via one of two houses (on the left in Figure 4.1).
In (5) c the speaker elaborates on the premise by setting out one choice option followed later by the other ((5) g).
There is a ‘loop’((5) d-(5)f) while the listener establishes the siting of the aerial but having established the options the speaker then goes on to indicate the next step of the route —((5) i).
What is impressive about this piece of route-giving is the way in which the speaker provides information in manageable chunks and waits for an acknowledgement after each bit.
In this way he ‘carries’ the listener with him.
Since the route-finding task took place within a discourse framework, unlike the conventional referential communication task where the activity seems to be virtually disembedded from natural dialogue, it was appropriate to use methods of discourse analysis to throw further light on the communication process.
Accordingly, two entire trials for each pairing were subjected to detailed analysis.
The focus was on the child as listener, since a classificatory scheme was available for this purpose — the system of clarification requests developed by Garvey (1979).
Garvey's clarification requests depend on a contingency pair analysis in which the second speaker comments on the utterance of the  first speaker by asking for a measure of clarification.
There are three main types: non-specific, specific, and potential.
Non-specific requests are of a very general kind, such as‘What?’ and ‘Pardon?’
Specific requests refer to a particular aspect of clarification, either a request for repetition, confirmation, or specification.
Potential requests ‘focus on an element which is missing from the surface form of the prior utterance but which is ‘potentially available’ ' (McTear, 1985: 165).
They therefore demand more work on the part of the listener.
McTear's version of Garvey's system has been adapted for this   purpose with the addition of one category — the potential request for specification — which our data seemed to demand.
The scheme, with an example of each category taken from our data, is fully set out in Table 4.2.
The results of the clarification request analysis summarized in Table 4.3 show that although the younger children are asking for more straightforward requests for repetition than the other age groups (perhaps because they do not attend as well as the other subjects), there are no significant differences in the other categories.
This is surprising given the demanding nature of the potential category, and at first sight disappointing, since it casts no light on why the youngest children (57 per cent success) do so much worse at the task than the older children (86 per cent success).
Two explanations for the result suggest themselves.
One is that younger children ask as many questions as older children but do not get the degree of cooperative response from their partners.
However, data do not support this hypothesis.
The other explanation is that because seven-year-olds produce more inadequate messages than older children, their partners need to do more than equal the performance of the other age groups — they need to exceed it considerably.
This seems to be correct.
If clarification requests are divided into just two categories, potential (being those categories where the listener actively contributes to the negotiation by introducing new information), and simple (the remaining categories), and these are set against the number of inadequate messages produced, a number of interesting findings emerges.
Confining the analysis to the children, we find that the younger children produce almost twice as many inadequate messages as the older children.
The younger listeners also produce about three times as many simple requests as the older listeners.
A   score can be computed which might be called the listener communication repair index.
This is the number of inadequate messages received, divided by the number of potential requests sent.
For the ten-year-olds this score was 1.86, and for the seven-year-olds it was 4.25, a difference that was statistically significant.
Another way of expressing this would be by means of correlation.
In the case of the ten-year-olds, the correlation between inadequate messages received and potential requests for clarification was 0.86, but only 0.49 for the seven-year-olds.
In other words, the younger children were much less likely than the older children to respond to an inadequate message with a request for further information.
The Notion of a Communicative Support System
Let us return briefly to the standard referential studies reviewed earlier.
The various explanations for communication failure that have been proposed — including not taking account of properties of the stimulus array, not asking questions, failing to perceive the role of the message, and having insufficient cognitive space to monitor the activity — seem to account for many of the experimental findings.
Nevertheless, a feeling of unease persists about the face validity of these accounts.
Why is it, for instance, that young children are not asking questions given that they have detected an ambiguity?
Is it that they lack the processing space to monitor the input effectively?
This may well be why older children do succeed at these tasks — they have independent resources on which they can rely — but it seems less convincing as a reason for the failure of younger children.
Anyone familiar with five- and six-year-olds would be puzzled to learn that they do not ask questions when they do not understand something: if five-year-olds have a failing it is that they never stop asking questions!
If this everyday observation is accurate, what is happening in referential communication tasks?
My contention is that what is really strange is not the behaviour of the child but that of the adult.
It is reasonable to suppose that children enter a communication task as active interactants ready to ask questions and generally negotiate meaning because that is what they do all the time in the world outside the laboratory.
Then they encounter an odd situation.
The other ‘player’ in the communication game is not observing the customary rules.
The usual cues, for instance, to indicate puzzlement or uncertainty are not being responded to; the child's feedback is not being acknowledged.
In other words, the communicative support that the child has every reason to  expect from an adult, or any competent communicator, is not forthcoming.
The effect of such behaviour is, we know, very dramatic even for babies (Murray and Trevarthen, 1985).
I suggest that the impact is just as forceful for older children.
When the communicative support system with which they have grown up fails to function in the usual way, the effect, arguably, will be to make the children regress or behave in some other aberrant manner — for instance, to stop asking questions or to agree with whatever the adult suggests.
The argument, then, is that for the young child, the familiar adult (e.g., parent) is seen not only as a resource from which the child obtains all sorts of information, but also as an extension of the child's cognitive and communicative system — a communicative support system (CoSS).
The term ‘support’ is used in a way analogous to the notion of ‘scaffolding’in some accounts of language acquisition (Bruner, 1983).
It is argued that the adult enables dialogue to take place by providing a number of important communicative functions, such as the following:
Some simple examples of the system in operation are provided in the following protocols involving an adult (myself) and various children from the research nursery of the Edinburgh Cognition Project, directed by Margaret Donaldson.
The task required the child to select one of a series of plastic pieces varying in form, size and colour, and to tell the adult which one had been selected so that he could select the identical piece.
Screens hid the material from the view of the other person.
In these examples the adult is doing some simple cognitive monitoring for the child.
It is well known that when parents talk to young children they repeat a great deal of what the child says (and, of course, also expand it).
This helps to pace the dialogue, model turn-taking, and give the child time to organize the next utterance.
But it also gives the child feedback on his or her own utterance.
Children do not listen to themselves in the way that adults (sometimes) do.
The echoic response provided by parents can alert children to possible inadequacies in their messages.
This seems to be what is happening in the examples above, where the adult is acting as a simple feedback loop.
The significance of the support system is that these messages are not held for inspection by the children themselves; rather, it is the action of the adult doing this — by simple repetition — that brings the message into the children's awareness.
Inadequacies can then be noted and remedied.
A communicative support system sounds a rather arid notion and so it is important to reiterate that it is embedded in a social relationship and only has meaning in such a flesh and blood context.
My claim is that it functions regularly whenever an adult or older child is in contact with a younger child.
To be sure it is not always functioning ‘with all the stops out’ as it might be in a problem-solving task.
But, even when simply passing the time of day with a child, I would maintain that we are backing up this interaction with the support system outlined.
The occasions when we fail to do this, I would further maintain, include the psychological experiment.
In  which case, one must ask what effect does this have on the child subject?
Evidence pertaining to this question is available from the eye movement research described briefly above.
It suggests that disengaging the support system is not simply an all-or-none affair.
The likelihood is not that the whole system is ‘switched off, but that parts of it are turned off in a very unsystematic way.
For example, in a normal conversation between a child and an adult, if the child said ‘er…um’ or looked puzzled in response to a question, the adult would attempt to resolve what appeared to be some problem of understanding by rephrasing the question or asking what the problem was.
In many experimental contexts this does not happen.
A demand is made, often not explicit to the child (and not always to the experimenter either), to which only a certain response is acceptable.
In the case of the eye movement study, subjects were presented with an array of four different squares, two large, two small, two with and two without a cross.
The procedure followed ensured that only a certain response would disambiguate the message.
In (10) the child's response in ‘normal’ conversation would be entirely successful in eliciting the response, ‘No, the small one’.
It is impossible to be certain that the child is making explicit his indecision about which square is being targeted (though the eye movement record suggested that this was the case).
What does seem to be a reasonable inference, however, is that this child would normally offer a response to an ambiguous or unclear statement on the confident expectation that his choice will be either confirmed or disconfirmed by the speaker.
This is an expectation which may well have been frustrated in the experimental situation.
On other occasions in this eye movement study the adult was behaving more like an orthodox communicative support system by repeating what the child said.
This sometimes led to a recognition of the problem.
More often, however, it did not, probably because the adult failed to respond to other cues given by the child.
It could be objected that too much onus is being placed on the contribution of the adult.
It could rather be the context itself that is determining the nature of the exchanges.
The context in the eye movement study was unusual in that only verbal communication was possible.
But this is precisely the situation used in our telephone work, and the dialogues resulting from this are of a different nature.
The following example of a telephone dialogue comes from a study carried out by Elena Lieven and myself, in which one child (the hider) was asked to explain to a friend where she had hidden an object in a room in which the friend was sitting.
All the communication was by telephone, and the finding child was instructed to look only where her partner told her to look and to make use of the telephone to discover the exact location of the object.
The details of the experiment are not really relevant; the point of extract (11) is to show how eight-year-olds use one another as a resource in the exchange of information.
We can return now to our results in the telephone route-finding task.
The difference between ten-year-olds and seven-year-olds may be that ten-year-olds are able to provide communicative support for each other in a way that is generally denied to the younger children.
The support is reflected, for example, in the way the older pairs draw the attention of their partner to information that is lacking from the original description — see (2) and (3), and the way information is presented in manageable chunks in (5).
The experience of the  seven-year-olds outside the communicative system is still limited, and their limitations are particularly exposed when it comes to repairing inadequate instructions.
Nevertheless, we should not lose sight of the fact that even such relatively immature communicators in terms of message evaluation — as the seven-year-olds are able to progress with a substantial degree of success given the opportunity to use their negotiating powers.
Their problem seems to be that very often they appear content to conclude the negotiating process before a satisfactory outcome has been achieved.
Conclusion
Our knowledge of the development of language in the primary school years has been informed by two approaches.
According to the experimental tradition, communication ability is a compound of fairly independent skills: speaking and listening, skill in composing the initial message and in asking questions.
In contrast, the sociolinguistic tradition has studied communicative competence in a broad sense, explaining it in terms of social and contextual variables rather than cognitive processes.
Standard referential communication tasks have used a structured setting and precisely specified tasks with the emphasis on the accurate transmission of referential information.
In contrast, sociolinguistic research has sampled natural settings, usually chosen and organized by the children themselves, and has stressed the maintenance of verbal exchanges and the role of social intent.
It has been argued that the limited success of children in referential communication tasks is due to a large extent to the tasks being extracted from a meaningful framework.
Too little attention has been given to pragmatic factors, many of which Donaldson drew to our attention with notions such as human sense as well as her analysis of the contextual factors which operate to hinder the child's grasp of intended meanings.
A communicative support system has been outlined to try to amplify the sorts of competencies in which the child must become autonomous before the skills which referential communication is measuring are functioning fully.
This critique should not be understood to imply that experimental referential communication research is wasted effort.
On the contrary, as Donaldson argued, perhaps the major task for the child during the school years is to learn to handle information that is decontextualized.
The strength of the referential communication approach, sensitively employed, is that it can model the decontextualized world of the classroom.
A teacher cannot hope to function as a normal communicative  support system in most classroom interaction since it is a one-to-many rather than a one-to-one situation.
Accordingly, we would predict that communication failure must take place rather frequently in the classroom.
This seems to be precisely what happens (Walkerdine, 1982; Edwards and Mercer, 1986), and it is undoubtedly significant that classroom studies have exposed children's unwillingness to ask questions (Hargie, 1978).
Experiments in referential communication allow us to study, outside the classroom, ways in which children learn to recognize communication failure and discover how to overcome it.
Some of the procedures of discourse analysis will make for a more profound examination of this process.
There is also a need for comparison studies to see what differences there are between the experimental situation and the classroom.
Research of this nature has begun, but there are many problems to be overcome before any direct extrapolation from laboratory to classroom is possible.
In the meantime there is surely more scope for capitalizing on the situation which appears to work remarkably well outside the classroom, namely peer communication.
If there is force in the claim that information exchange is best achieved through negotiation, then a programme in which pairs or small groups of children work together on tasks will be valuable.
But much more bridging research in this field is needed so that we can get beyond pious exhortation to tested procedures that have been shown to work in the classroom as well as in the laboratory.
Children's Reading
Jessie Reid
University of Edinburgh
In education, as in other disciplines, bodies of opinion may develop from time to time which present an unusually sharp challenge to accepted wisdom.
Within recent years, one such challenging view has taken shape concerning the teaching of reading.
Typical statements of this view come from Smith (1978):
Learning to read involves no learning ability that children have not already been called upon to exercise in order to understand the language spoken at home…and from Goodman (1972):
Reading is a language process, the direct counterpart of listening….
As long as they get some exposure to written language, most learners will acquire at least a modicum of literacy.
These two statements are striking in their optimism and confidence.
If Smith and Goodman are right, becoming literate ought to be an easy achievement which normal children can readily accomplish.
Why, then, has it given so much trouble to so many?
According to Smith and Goodman, the reason is that systematic attempts to teach reading have interfered with the natural processes of language learning, processes already well developed during the acquisition of speech.
They consider that reading, like listening, should rely on children's ability to ‘predict possible meanings’(Smith, 1978) and find their own answers to questions about written language.
They hold that the adult's role should involve helping children to understand the functions of print, including those of ‘public print’, reading stories aloud to them, and sharing books with them, but little  else.
Thus supported, children will go on to extend their knowledge of written language by themselves.
The process is usually known as ‘learning to read by reading’.
To understand how this view developed we have to recall the effect of the insights into oral language acquisition that came from the work of Chomsky.
For psychologists and educators concerned with the reading process or with the teaching of literacy, these insights marked a new beginning.
They shed much fresh light on the nature and development of reading skill.
They opened the way to more powerful ‘theories of literacy’.
Older associationist models gradually gave way to interpretations based on concepts of language learning.
For many, including myself, this meant looking at children's early attempts at reading in the context of what was known about the strength of their urge to find meaning, about their acquisition of grammar and syntax, and about their language awareness.
It meant a new way of looking at reading errors, seeing them as evidence of children's use of linguistic knowledge.
It had implications for the ways in which children should be introduced to written language, not just to its visual form but to its structure and purposes.
It argued for finding and using linguistic and conceptual links between the oral and written modes (see, for instance, Mackay, Thompson and Schaub, 1970; Reid, 1973).
For some, however, the implications went much further: they appeared to remove altogether the need to regard reading as something new and potentially hard to master — as an activity to which children had to be introduced in carefully planned ways with thoughtfully constructed material.
Seen thus, they resulted in the evolution of a language-based view of reading taken to one extreme position.
This view has been extremely influential.
Understandably, it has appealed to teachers reacting against older traditional methods, particularly if these divorced learning to read from any kind of true reading experience, or if they involved the use of books containing as many older schemes did — unnatural and stilted language which prevented children from using the linguistic knowledge they already had.
But such reaction can take many forms.
Where the extreme view differs from more moderate views is in playing down — or even ignoring — crucial differences between the contexts of learning that obtain for oral and for written language, and between the language modes themselves.
In the first place, the ‘making sense’ that is the foundation of a young child's acquisition of speech can operate because the language is met in, and relates directly to, experiences in which the child is  immersed.
The basis for making hypotheses about possible meanings is present.
Speech is, in Margaret Donaldson's (1978) term, ‘embedded’ in a context of relationships and personal concerns.
By contrast, written language found in books has no such contextual support.
Instead, the context has to be discovered and constructed from the text itself and from other existing knowledge the reader may have.
Some help may come from illustrations, but these have a limited role.
At best they are ‘stills’ from a sequence of actions; and they cannot portray anything that goes beyond visual observation.
Again, the interpersonal exchanges in which spoken language is first met may have strong emotional significance (Donaldson, 1984).
The language young children hear comes mostly from people who are closely involved with them.
It comes imbued with all the energy and variety of the living voice, the meaning pointed and enhanced by intonation, stress, volume and pace.
Voices may sound loving, or angry, or anxious.
On the other hand, the author of written language is absent and usually unknown.
The print itself is featureless and does nothing visually to capture the attention or involve the emotions.
We know that for people who can already read, the first sight of a foreign script can give the impression that all the words look alike.
Words spoken in a foreign tongue, on the other hand, though they may be unintelligible, have many audible contrasts.
The interpersonal exchanges in speech have other important advantages for the learner.
They limit the amount that has to be grasped in any one utterance.
Moreover, they allow the adult participant to supply prompts and respond to difficulties which the child may appear to have in comprehending or replying.
The author of written language, however, cannot respond in this way.
It is specious to claim, as some do, that there is interaction between text and reader comparable to what takes place in a conversational exchange.
The reader may question, but he must find the answer for himself (if indeed it is there).
The reader may object or contradict, but the text will not change by one word.
The reader may feel perplexity, but the text will not amplify what is there or rewrite itself in a simpler form.
For beginners, then, there is loss and change in the transfer to print — loss of immediacy of relevance, loss of vividness, loss of support in the search for meaning.
This is true even though they bring to the search the knowledge they already possess about how spoken language works.
But the problems do not end there.
As many people now recognize, learning to read entails massive amounts of new language learning.
It  entails the acquisition of a repertoire of words, syntactical forms and organizing principles that are seldom — and sometimes never — heard in unplanned speech (see, for instance, Perera, 1984).
As long ago as 1908, E. B. Huey pointed out the difficulties for readers caused by the style of the written English of his own day.
He believed, however, that these difficulties would vanish when the ‘language of books’ and the ‘language of men’became much more alike — a process which he thought would be hastened by the practice of dictating instead of writing (Huey, 1908).
We know today that things have not worked out as Huey hoped.
It is true that much contemporary prose has a clarity and directness that was often lacking at the time when Huey wrote, while technical aids have developed beyond what he could have imagined.
But the differences between our unplanned speech and the language we write are still there.
We now see more clearly than Huey did that they are not differences which improved technology will remove.
The differences have many origins.
Some of them result from the need for text to be explicit in ways that speech need not be.
Some arise from the need to achieve coherence over extended passages of text.
Many have to do with the aims and purposes of the writer, who may strive after qualities such as brevity, or elegance or drama, or precision, or logical clarity.
The resulting language varies from one author to another, but as written language it has many general features which can be described and analysed (Perera, 1984).
Learning to be reasonably at home with this formal and stylized ‘language of books’— primarily as readers but also as writers — is undoubtedly one of the major learning tasks for children in the upper primary and early secondary school.
It is true, as we have seen, that some attempts to teach reading have been unfortunate in having no psycholinguistic roots.
But it is equally harmful to swing to the opposite extreme: to claim that the enterprise of becoming literate is hard only because teachers make it so, and that children would succeed perfectly well if they were just provided with suitable books and left to themselves.
The enterprise is hard because it has to involve mastering new language in new ways.
To demonstrate something of the scope of the task which children have to undertake, this chapter examines one area of written discourse where language use deviates widely from the nearest oral counterparts, and where many variants have no oral counterpart at all.
This area is the handling, in fictional or factual writing, of the speech and thoughts of people other than the author.
Written Speech and Thought
In fiction, information about what the characters say and think is woven into the texture of the narrative.
In non-fiction, the other people whose words and thoughts form part of the information may be historical or contemporary figures, or they may be groups, or even humanity in general.
But all instances share one characteristic: the author's words become for a time the transmitters of other voices, voices that come from inside someone else's head.
There are certain precedents for this voice switch in oral language.
Children are not unfamiliar with situations in which they tell, or are told, what someone else said or thought; or in which they tell what they themselves said or thought at some point in the past or think at the time of speaking.
So it is all the more striking to see what happens when those known language experiences are translated on to the page of a book.
Two dichotomies are helpful in examining this area of discourse.
I shall use them first to illustrate the handling of written speech and then locate the way thoughts, beliefs, etc. are dealt with.
All the examples are taken from texts written for children, most by established authors.
(A list of texts appears at the end of the chapter.)
The speech of others
Firstly, the speech of others may be either quoted or reported.
(The traditional grammatical terms for this distinction are ‘direct’ and ‘indirect’speech.)
In the standard form of quoted speech, the actual words spoken appear, signalled normally by punctuation ('quotation marks').
In standard reported speech, the words of the speaker typically undergo certain rule-governed transformations affecting pronouns and verb tenses.
Also, they commonly appear as subordinate elements in a sentence where the main clause indicates the speaker.
For instance: ‘Henry said ‘I was there’ ', may become ‘Henry said (that) he was there’.
The former branch of this first dichotomy takes written language at once into a mode which speakers seldom use.
In conversation, direct quotation of the words of someone else is relatively rare.
Its most likely function would be to enable one speaker to convey not only the matter of a remark by another speaker but also the manner in which it was made.
For instance: ‘I asked her where David was, and she just said ‘I don't know’ very rudely.’
It can also occur in the handling of exclamations.
There is no appropriate way of turning ‘She said ‘Good  heavens’ ' into reported or indirect speech.
In general, however, the reported form is the normal conversational one, and is certainly the one familiar to young children in ordinary exchanges.
Their best chance therefore of becoming familiar with quoted speech in their preschool years is through hearing dialogue in stories read aloud.
But there they meet it enhanced by the living voice of the reader.
Even in the case of the more familiar reporting mode, however, the transition to written instances of it is by no means straightforward.
As we shall see, authors vary the handling of reported speech in many ways which depart from the forms which speakers commonly use and children commonly hear.
The other main dichotomy has to do with whether the dialogue is or is not attributed — that is, whether the text is explicit or implicit about who is speaking.
Here we may move, for the child, even further away from familiar ground.
When a child is a listener to adult conversation (which we may call ‘dialogue at first hand’) the identity of the speakers is normally obvious.
And if an adult, speaking to a child — or to anyone — were to introduce the quoted words of a third person ('dialogue at second hand') it would be very unusual for the source not to be identified.
Instances where an adult is quoting from a source too well known to need mention (e.g., saying ‘take no thought for the morrow’) are liable not to register with a child as quotations at all.
In written language, however, instances of quoted speech without explicit attribution are by no means unusual.
What picture emerges when the two dichotomies are combined?
When considered together, they produce a two-way table (see Table 5.1) in which each cell represents one of the ways in which children may meet, in a text, voices other than that of the narrator.
(Later it will become clear that this picture is somewhat over-simplified, for not all instances fall neatly into one or another of these categories.
There are some ‘grey areas’.)
Let us consider examples of these different kinds of written speech.
(a) Quoted speech, source explicit
This is traditionally a standard feature of story-telling, and may well derive from the oral tradition where the story-teller would switch from a narrative role to a dramatic one.
In spite of its rarity in oral language, it is widely assumed to be easy to read, and hence is freely introduced into children's fiction and other early reading materials.
Observation of children reading aloud, however, shows that they can have problems in adjusting to the change from third-person narrative (the author's voice) to quoted speech (the character's voice).
This can be very noticeable if the quoted speech is a question.
The question form seems to be seldom expected, and the child's eye may not catch the question mark at the end.
Some of the difficulty also depends on the position of the attributing clause (or ‘source marker’).
If the source marker precedes the quoted words, the reader is to some extent prepared.
This form is widely — though by no means universally — adopted in writing text for young children to read.
It is commonly found in texts designed for use in teaching reading, as one means of freeing the beginner from problems connected with syntax.
It can also appear in more sophisticated writing, used for effect rather than for simplicity:
Nick's eyes widened.
He said, ‘That dark place!’(a.1)
Often, however, the source marker does not precede the quotation.
It may, for instance, be interpolated between two sentences:
‘I can't think where it's gone’, she said.
‘I can't think.’
(a.2)
Immediately this happens, the reader has the problem of identifying who is speaking, and using this knowledge to make sense of what is being said.
The eye has to jump ahead to the source marker, or register it peripherally, and link it correctly to the preceding text.
But in the case just quoted, the last-named character happens not to be the one who speaks, so the word ‘she’ in the source marker becomes important.
On many occasions the interpolation splits the syntax of the spoken words in ways that require the reader not only to register the speaker but to store and carry over the syntax and sense of the quoted words:
‘I am afraid,’ said Grimble, ‘that after Christmas will be exactly too late.’
(a.3)
The latter example also shows the inversion of the subject and verb in the source marker — a form never found in conversation.
Yet this device, along with the interpolation of the source marker at an early point in the quotation, may well have originated in the oral storytelling tradition.
It is effective when read aloud, where the voice can be used to carry over the syntax and sense.
The dilemma for the author writing for readers rather than for listeners is to avoid delaying the source marker for too long, and yet to avoid destroying the dramatic effect by placing it first.
For young readers, however, the medially placed source marker is liable to increase the load on short-term memory.
They must take note, in passing as it were, of who is speaking, without any loss of continuity in following the quoted words.
These modes of structuring dialogue have to be learned, until they become familiar and recognizable.
The choice of speaking verb in the source marker can also be significant.
For instance, in Helen Cresswell's The Night Watchmen , Henry is listening to Caleb's description of the mysterious train:
‘She comes whistling out of the dark when folks is in their beds and the most they'll see of her is her green eyes and the red fires blowing up her smoke.’
‘Fires!’ cried Henry.
‘A steam engine!….’(a.4)
Two messages convey Henry's delighted surprise.
One is the exclamation mark, used twice.
The other is the word ‘cried’.
To understand Henry's response, the reader must see that Henry has focused on Caleb's mention of ‘fires’, must see that Henry infers at once that the train is due, and must grasp the importance of the speaking verb.
Notice, however, the complexity of what the child reader has to process.
Caleb is — or appears to be — a night-watchman.
But his sentence about the train is, to say the least, an unlikely one for any ordinary night-watchman to utter.
It has a poetic quality, with images of sound and colour.
And it contains a subordinate clause of time, followed by a complicated subject nominal consisting of a quantifier head plus a relative clause with deleted ‘that’.
Not all dialogue is as linguistically elaborate as this example.
But certain kinds of children's fiction do contain quoted speech which calls on quite advanced understanding of possibilities in expression, and an acceptance of its remoteness from the way people ordinarily talk.
(b) Quoted speech, source(s) implicit
‘Oh, all right’, I said.
‘I'll ride and you can follow me.’
‘I'll ride too.’
‘You don't have a bike.’
‘I have a Toddle-bike.’
‘You can't ride a Toddle-bike to school.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because you can't….’(b.1)
Written dialogue in which, as here, source markers are suspended is at once nearer to and farther from children's experience than is the form with source markers present.
In one sense it is the written version of what they constantly hear — two other people talking perhaps, as in this case, arguing.
In such a situation the flow of spoken words does not need to be interrupted by information about who is speaking.
But when it is transferred to the printed page, where it is read and not heard, all the clues necessary for following the exchange have to be extracted from other sources in the text.
It is up to the reader to keep track of whose turn it is to speak, and to retain the distinctiveness of the characters and their roles.
For in dropping the source markers the author has, for the moment, ceased to speak with her own voice — ceased to supply the narrative thread (which is what the source markers do)— and has let the characters take over.
Written exchanges with source markers omitted are thus a good example of the way in which the disembedded nature of all texts converts what might be an easy comprehension task into a difficult one.
The fact that it does may underlie a great deal of the difficulty experienced by many beginning readers.
For the most extreme form of quoted speech without source markers can be found on the earliest pages of certain infant reading schemes which are based on severely restricted vocabulary and a word recognition model.
Sentences like ‘Run, lad, run’, or ‘See the boats’, may often be the only text on the page.
Sometimes they are supposed to be said by characters in the illustrations, but there is nothing to indicate who is speaking.
Sometimes, more strangely still, they seem to be merely exhortations, addressed to no one in particular.
It is not surprising that many beginners find such text bewildering.
There is one type of implicit identification in which source markers are absent, but where other devices in the narrative serve as indicators.
For example:
Dad was at the top of the cliff, looking down.
He seemed a long way off.
‘Chutney, keep still.
You can't get down….’(b.2)
Here it is fairly obvious that Chutney is being addressed, and that Dad is the speaker.
But this is not stated: it has to be inferred.
Here is an example where two speakers are involved:
She stood still, heart hammering.
‘Is she in there?’
Albert's face was contemptuous.
‘Couldn't hurt you if she was, but she isn't, she's downstairs in her coffin….’(b.3)
This time, the signalling device consists of prefacing the quoted speech by a brief description of what the speaker does, or feels, or how he or she looks.
The effect is not unlike that of the script of a play with stage directions.
Again, there is no direct attribution; the child reader has to come to know the conventions which are operating and the inferences which can be made.
And if the dialogue is to be experienced with vividness and flow, these inferences about language role have to be made with accuracy and ease.
(c) Reported speech, source explicit
Here we are on ground more familiar to the pre-reading child, and there is less need to analyse straightforward examples.
But some of the variants are of interest.
For instance, the structure of the speech may produce, in the reported form, a word-string of considerable complexity:
Mary Lennox had heard a great deal about Magic in her Ayah's stories, and she always said what happened almost at that moment was Magic.
(c.l)
This sentence contains not simply a report of something said; but of something said on repeated occasions at times later than the ‘moment’ which is being described.
And it does so in syntax which calls for quite a feat of structuring and interpreting.
The next example shows how the reported form may sometimes have the reporting clause embedded as a parenthesis, so that the whole sentence resembles, in word order, the structure of quoted speech, but with only commas for punctuation:
Sometimes, Spiller explained, the grating slid easily, at other times it stuck at an angle.
In which event Spiller would produce a small but heavy bolt.
(c.2)
The above example also shows how reported speech may carry over into a second sentence without any reinforcing signal.
The reader must decide, by attending to other clues, whether the continuation is still part of the reported speech, or whether it has reverted to the ‘author's voice’.
The main clues here are in the linking phrase ‘in which event’ and the use of ‘would’.
Earlier in the same text there is yet another subtle variant.
Spiller is explaining to Pod how he proposes to move the grating over a drain.
The author writes:
The twine, Pod gathered, was a fixture.
(c.3)
The words ‘Pod gathered’ tell us that the sentence which they interrupt is a report of something said to Pod, namely still part of Spiller's explanation.
The speaker is thus identified, but in an oblique way, which the reader can comprehend only through familiarity with the idiomatic use of ‘gather’ as meaning ‘to deduce or conclude from something heard or read’.
(d) Reported speech, source implicit
As with quoted speech (see b.2 and b.3), it is possible to find instances of reported speech where the necessary clues to the identity of the speaker are found only in preceding text.
In this extract Roddy's parents want him to take up a useful hobby:
They tried to persuade him.
It wouldn't cost much.
His dad would help him.
If he would pay five pounds out of his savings his dad would find another five.
(d.1)
In some variants of reported speech where the speaker is only implicitly identified, the words may be not so much a straight transformation of what was said as a summary or paraphrase of it.
In this next example two Polish boys are telling an English girl how they came to be in France during World War Two:
Their names were Tadek and Stefek Pulaski.
Their home was in a village far away in the High Tatra Mountains.
‘They are very high,’ said Stefek.
‘Very high and very beautiful.
There are no mountains like these anywhere else in the whole world.’
Their mother had been English…(d.2)
It may be asked whether children need to see that the paragraphs beginning ‘Their names…’ and ‘Their mother…’are a condensed  report of what the boys told Janey, and not the ‘author's voice’speaking directly to the reader.
From one point of view it might not matter, for the paragraphs are in part devised to give the reader information.
But if they were in the author's voice, then the interpolation of Stefek's quoted description would be glaringly inappropriate.
And it is important, for an understanding of Janey's changing attitude to the boys, to know that she has been told their story.
This example, then, shows the need for a sophisticated awareness of how ‘background’ information may and may not be conveyed.
The thoughts of others
It is interesting to discover that many of the complicated variations used in handling the speech of others also appear when thought rather than speech is dealt with (see Table 5.2).
‘Think’ is of course an ambiguous term.
It can mean to hold an opinion or a belief, it can mean to reflect, it can mean to have an idea, and it can mean to wish.
All these different kinds of thinking appear in the examples that follow.
(e) Quoted thought, source explicit
This is very similar to the corresponding category for speech, and the verbalized thoughts are often put in quotation marks just as if they were speech.
The following example occurs in The Night Watchmen .
Henry is trying to trace the two men with whom he has struck up an acquaintance:
‘If only I were a dog!’ he thought desperately.
(e.1)
There is, of course, a degree of artificiality in this form.
A boy in Henry's situation would be unlikely to think so explicitly in words.
However, the ‘If only…’ form is almost a conventional signal for the  expression of a wish in story-telling, and as such is something children have to learn.
Sometimes there is no use of quotation marks, in which case the transition from author's to character's voice has to be deduced purely from the wording.
The following example occurs at the beginning of a chapter:
I don't suppose, said Grimble to himself, that we need have a very large turkey…(e.2)
(f) Quoted thought, source implicit
Since thought is solitary, there is no parallel to the dramatic interchanges without source markers which can occur in quoted dialogue (see b.1).
But the next example shows an effective alternative to the use of the explicit marker ‘he thought’:
And there, as he (Tethra) lay face down in the lee of an upturned boat,…he let his thinking catch up with him.
‘I do not belong with these people; they are not my people, and I do not belong here at all….’(f.1)
The key phrase is, of course, ‘he let his thinking catch up with him’, with its subtle implication that Tethra has been trying to run away from the knowledge that he does not belong.
(g) Reported thought, source explicit
Like its counterpart in the handling of speech, this is common, but it may present more in the way of reading problems.
For one thing, the ‘thinking verbs’ can be very varied.
Characters may realize, suppose, guess, expect; they may doubt, hope, wish, fear, suspect, wonder; they may conclude, decide, assume, believe; and so on.
Many subtleties of meaning are carried by words in this category, and these meanings have to become attached to the written forms so that they readily convey to the reader what kind of thinking is taking place.
From the syntactical point of view, difficulty can be created when the form is the reported counterpart of (e.2), with the source marker interpolated:
…the air from that point onwards, Arrietty noticed, smelled far less strongly of tea-leaves. (g.1)
Impersonal forms can cause problems too.
It is not uncommon to find reporting clauses in the form ‘It occurred to her….’,
‘It dawned on me…’, and so on.
(h) Reported thought, source implicit
Examples of this were widespread in the texts analysed.
Often the attribution is implied by the preceding text, as it was for speech in (b.3):
She (Carrie) felt mean and dirty — and scared too.
Suppose, when they got back, he asked her what Miss Green was up to?
Suppose he said, ‘I know what's going on, did you find anything out?’(h.1)
This example contains the added complication of a piece of imagined quoted speech embedded in the reported thought, and forming part of the questions in Carrie's mind.
What the child reader must be alive to is that the questions are in Carrie's mind.
They are Carrie saying ‘What if…?’ and not the author raising possibilities in her own voice.
The next example offers even less guidance.
In The Secret Garden Mary has been watching a robin which has let her come quite near.
The text goes on:
Oh! to think that he should actually let her come as near to him as that!(h.2)
This ecstatic thought is not the author's: it is Mary's.
But nothing in the text says so.
There is only the fact that a modern author would not write ‘Oh! to think…’ in his or her own voice.
A switch of a very subtle kind appears in another passage from The Night Watchmen .
Henry is out in the countryside at a favourite spot:
Giant trunks of trees reared on either side, their roots exposed because of the steepness of the slope.
Beautiful roots they were, grey and sculpted and somehow bony , clutching at the steep fall of clay.
(h.3)
The paragraph begins by describing the tree roots — what Henry sees.
But at some point it switches to what he thinks about them.
How do we know?
Because of the inversion in ‘Beautiful roots they were’, the printing of ‘bony’ in italics, and the use of ‘somehow’.
All three features are designed to convey that Henry is not just looking at the roots but reflecting on them and struggling to think what it is they  bring to mind.
From ‘Beautiful roots…’ onwards, the text is reported thought.
Sometimes an author may combine two of the (e),(f), and (g) categories in ways which blur the edges but create a particular effect.
In this extract, Charlie has tripped over the dog Floss in the dark, and to his astonishment someone speaks to him:
Charlie's first, confused thought was that Floss had spoken: the voice was familiar — but then a voice from Floss should not be familiar, it should be strangely new to him—…(h.4)
In this instance, the ‘thought’ is actually a fusion of quotation and report; the use of ‘should not be’in the present tense contrasts with the third person pronoun ‘him’.
The confusion in Charlie's mind is well conveyed, provided that there is none in the mind of the reader.
In the next example the character's thought spans more than one sentence.
It begins by being reported, then switches to quotation.
Note the salience of the word ‘tomorrow’: it is the only clue that the ‘voice’ is Sue's.
The author in her own voice would have had to write something like ‘the next day’:
Sue sighed as she regulated the dial for the toast.
The holiday began tomorrow — in fact it had as good as started already, since Bill was staying at home — and holidays always seemed to point the problem more sharply.
One of these days, she thought, I really shall have to make my mind up.
Which am I?
Bill or Fay?(h.5)
These latest examples are from books for older children.
But the next extract, from a story for quite young readers, switches ‘voices’ in a quite complicated way.
Then he met a man who had a goose for sale.
Goodman thought, ‘I'll change this sheep.
I'll change it for that goose, I will.’
And he did.
He and his wife would eat that goose and it would be delicious.
The goose was in a bad temper…(h.6)
This time, the only clue to the status of the penultimate sentence (where the ‘voice’ switches to being that of Goodman thinking) is the use of ‘would’.
The sentence is not a ‘prediction in the past’ by the author; it is a report of Goodman's thought ‘I and my wife will eat…
‘. The last sentence, however, reverts to the author's direct narrative.
Reported thought with source implicit is also not uncommon in  information text.
There, it often takes the form of a question.
For instance:
In the 1960s, an astronomer named Gerald Hawkins worked on another idea.
Were the other stones also set up to locate other sky times?
Was Stonehenge really an ‘astronomy clock’?(h.7)
In the next example the topic is the cultivation of vanilla:
The planters were puzzled.
Why wouldn't the seed pods form on their vines?(h.8)
In neither of these examples is the question from the author to the reader.
Both are reports of questions in the minds of the people who figure in the passages.
In this third example, however, the question has a different origin.
The author has been describing how Stonehenge might have been built.
He goes on:
But how, without machinery, did they get the top stones up and across the standing ones?(h.s)
Here the author raises the question in his own ‘voice’, as a means of focusing on a problem.
In all three examples, clues to the type of question are contained in the preceding sentence.
In examples (h.7) and (h.8) there is reference to someone working on an idea or being puzzled.
In the third example, the preceding sentence is straight description, with no intention of thinking or problem-solving.
Yet paradoxically, the reaction expected from a reader is in the opposite direction.
It is the second type of question which is aimed at arousing speculation about possible solutions.
Nothing on the surface of the text indicates which kind of question is being asked; yet it is important that young readers should be aware whether they are being directly invited to find an answer, or whether they are being led, as in (h.7) and (h.8), through the history of a discovery.
It is one more thing they must learn to judge.
Discussion
The foregoing samples show that the representation of dialogue in written narrative can give rise to linguistic complexities of numerous kinds.
Further, they show that many of the forms evolved to  represent dialogue are also used by authors to represent thought.
Text of the kind exemplified makes up a significant part of what children in primary school are expected to read.
The language in the samples contains syntactic patterns and inter-sentence relationships not found in oral language.
Many of these have to do with shifts of ‘voice’ between author and character.
Often the clues to meaning lie in subtle implication rather than in explicit statement.
In order to make sense of them inferential skills may be needed, as well as an understanding of certain principles not unlike the minimal distance principle that operates for pronominal reference.
In my experience these features present problems for many young readers.
Yet they must not be regarded merely as ‘difficulties’ in the text.
They are there because to have something distinctive to say can frequently call for a distinctive way of saying it-a way that will make an author's words come fresh and vivid off the page.
But the existence — and the prevalence — of this rich variety raises important questions about how children's reading competence can become a match for the challenge it presents.
It is clear from reports of children's progress that at present there is, for many, no easy progression from the simpler language and narrative line of stories written for inexperienced readers.
Teachers complain of problems in ‘comprehension’.
Children fail to become keen independent readers.
They do not learn effectively from the written word; and listening to children reading aloud will invariably uncover a whole spectrum of difficulties concerned not only with vocabulary but with the ways in which words are strung together and the ways in which, even in straightforward narrative or information text, sentences cohere and relate.
Children who are struggling at this level will also have problems in grasping more complex aspects of text construction, such as the shifts of voice studied in this paper.
These problems, however, may escape detection.
What kinds of help can be offered?
Those who are against explicit teaching of reading (e.g., Meek et al .,
1984) often speak of allowing children to ‘predict their way through the text’ with their minds focused on meaning, rather than encouraging them to attend to features of print.
In ordinary usage, and also in science, the term ‘predict’ is used of a conscious, deliberate attempt to make a forecast of a future event on the basis of existing knowledge and assumption.
But when it is used to describe what happens during reading, or any attempt at reading, it seems to stand for something less focused and further from full awareness — something which might more appropriately be called ‘anticipation’ or ‘expectancy’.
All language-based  views of reading take account of it; but the prominence given to it is the main distinguishing mark of the view of reading held by Goodman and Smith with which this paper began.
Goodman sees reading as ‘tentative information processing’(Goodman and Gollasch, 1980).
Efficient readers ‘sample’ the text, make predictions about meaning, and confirm or correct these by the use of further cues.
The process is seen as cyclical, but dominated by the construction of meaning.
Close attention to the words on the paper is not of the essence, and is regarded as potentially counter-productive.
Smith would go further and say it results in ‘tunnel vision’ and a loss of grasp on sense.
Both Smith and Goodman believe that skilled adult reading is far from error-free, and that errors can be a positive sign that the sense of the text has been grasped.
Models of this kind, where the construction of meaning dominates — and influences — the perception of the marks on the page, are often called ‘top-down’ models.
The reader is said to be ‘concept-driven’.
The derivation of these models from theories of early speech development is clear.
The reading process can however be conceptualized in other ways without necessarily abandoning a language-based position.
There are many contributors to this debate who see both short-range ‘prediction’(e.g., of the next word) and higher-level construction of meaning as integral to efficient reading.
However, they believe that the whole process depends on the words on the page — and proceeds in phase with them — in ways that the ‘top-down’ theorists would not allow (see, for instance, Laberge and Samuels, 1974).
These latter theories are often called ‘bottom-up’, and efficient readers described as being ‘text-driven’.
It is not hard to see how the two positions may be invoked in support of very different views on how children should learn to read.
The differences become more apparent once the earliest stages have been left behind.
There are probably few people who would now dispute that beginners' use of their existing knowledge of language is important and should be encouraged.
The studies of Clay (1969), Weber (1970), and Biemiller (1970) remain key sources of understanding on this topic.
Let us look now at what can happen when the ‘top-down’ view that children should learn to ‘predict their way through a text’— is put into action with children whose reading has fallen behind even average expectation.
Achieving Literacy (Meek et al .,
1984) describes how a group of teachers of English, critical of orthodox remedial teaching, set about applying the principle of ‘learning to read by reading’ to some retarded readers aged around twelve years.
At one  point, one of the pupils renders ‘…who lived in a pretty house with a large garden’ as ‘…who lived in a palace house with a little grandfather’.
This reader is using prediction.
The sentence begins ‘Paul was a little boy…‘; and boys in stories do, after all, quite often live in palaces.
The reader then attaches ‘with’ syntactically to ‘lived’rather than to ‘house’, and using few graphic cues arrives at a person with whom Paul might reasonably live.
The result is not only misleading in itself: it is an inauspicious basis for predicting what may follow.
Another child renders ‘…hidden in the ruins of a house’ as ‘happened in the rain, runs to a house’.
The teacher working with this pupil tells how children would ‘…exchange one mistake for another and incidentally change the syntax so that an appalling mess developed’(Meek et al.,1984:189).
The trouble in this example starts with the misreading of ‘hidden’ as ‘happened’.
Was this due to a failure of prediction — or to a failure to see that the word had ‘dd’ in the middle and therefore could not be ‘happened’?
The error certainly blocks any subsequent attempt to construct a meaningful sequence, especially since the child is totally defeated by ‘ruins’.
Having tried ‘rain’(because a noun is called for) she presumably sees the terminal ‘s’ and substitutes ‘runs’; and is then forced (again by syntactical constraints) to misread ‘of as ‘to’.
An appalling mess indeed.
Does the way to make these children better readers lie through still more prediction, particularly of this haphazard kind?
I do not think so.
I think a more fruitful model is one which sees the role of expectancy as providing narrowed fields of options rather than firm hypotheses.
I see a grasp of graphic features not just as the basis for confirming or disconfirming guesses, but as a direct source of meaning-in-context, to be called on when expectancy has nothing to say.
This view comes close to that of Stanovich (1980), who describes his model as ‘interactive-compensatory’.
Of course, not all examples of children in difficulty show confusion and collapse to the extent seen above.
Goodman substantiates his view of reading as a ‘psycholinguistic guessing game’(1972) with accounts of children who managed to battle their way through unfamiliar syntax and uncertain word recognition to some kind of understanding of the text.
In Piagetian terms they assimilated the language to what they knew, yet managed to preserve at least part of the meaning.
But even if we allow that this can be a beneficial experience, we must question the wisdom of seeing it as the only valid way in which reading can be learned.
The avoidance of confusion at the time of reading is not the only reason for arguing that children should be helped to become aware of what is actually on the page.
Learning takes place through successive cycles of assimilation  and accommodation; and it is at the accommodative phase that this clearer vision is needed.
As we have seen, young readers meet many new words and novel variants of word sequence.
They find new possibilities in meaning and expression.
They must in some way make these their own — take them into their personal repertoire.
They will not be helped in this task if the way they read does not allow them to perceive with clarity what they are learning to interpret.
It is even plausible to suppose that having to depend excessively on prediction from prior context may take up so much of a reader's cognitive resources that more wide-ranging comprehension is blocked (Stanovich, 1980).
A further difficulty in relying entirely on a ‘top-down’ model arises because of the differing ways in which spoken and written language are received.
In the spoken mode listeners receive whole utterances.
These come at the speed of the speaker and the listeners do not need to make any physical adjustment.
Ears, unlike eyes, do not have to be focused and moved.
The words are not interrupted if a failure of comprehension occurs.
Most importantly, the context remains.
Written language, on the other hand, is experienced at the speed of the reader, who also controls the sequence in which words are perceived.
If difficulty is encountered, the normal result is that the input is disrupted in various ways.
Moreover, owing to the limitations of short-term memory, the context may be lost, and with it the basis for an attempt at constructing ‘possible meanings’.
Disintegration of this kind has implications that go beyond the children's grasp of the text they are actually trying to read.
It has crucial importance for the accommodative phase of reading progress.
For although individual words and syntactical patterns recur in written language as they do in speech, most actual sentences are unique, and thus cannot be ‘recognized’ as wholes.
It is therefore necessary to become able to recognize and attach meaning to the words and to the patterns of which the sentences consist.
And if these patterns, with their changing lexical content, are never experienced except in distorted or fragmented form, the necessary accommodation will not take place.
The problem is compounded by the fact that children in the junior school are increasingly expected to read silently, and thus without help.
The nature of the change from oral reading assisted by a listening adult, to ‘silent independent’ reading, is a neglected area, partly because it is difficult to study (Pugh, 1978).
But difficulties of transfer undoubtedly interact with those arising from the need to master the ‘language of books’.
The arguments for help in this learning task seem overwhelming.
So what kind of help can be given  that will not kill what Margaret Meek calls ‘the magic’ stone dead?
Earlier in this paper, in the discussion of the difficulty presented by quoted speech in stories, we saw how young children could become familiar with this narrative feature through listening to stories being read aloud.
And it is well known that children who have been read to in their preschool years have a general advantage when the learning of reading begins.
There is much to be said for continuing the practice of reading to children right through the later primary years, letting them hear the cadences of book language and, where possible, letting them follow the text as well.
In the course of this reading there can be pauses for discussion at appropriate points, when carefully chosen questions can be introduced to explore possible failures in the children's understanding, not just of terms and ideas but of the interrelationships which the syntactic structures convey.
All who view reading as a language process would probably agree.
Another helpful procedure would be to let children who are learning to read silently have some experience of reading aloud, to one another, passages of their own choosing, not ‘from cold’, as a test of reading skill, but after they have become familiar with a text in general terms and have perhaps had a chance to look closely at syntax or vocabulary found to be perplexing.
These practices may help in another important way.
One area of controversy surrounding the nature of the change to ‘silent independent’ reading has to do with the role of ‘inner speech’— what we may call ‘the voice in the head’.
Huey (1908) believed that some kind of internal auditory imagery of words was a legitimate feature of skilled silent reading, and devoted an entire chapter of his book to the functioning of inner speech.
Some years ago, interest in ‘speed reading’ caused many people to think that all auditory imagery should be suppressed, a view which Smith (1978) also supported.
But more recent studies have restored it to respectability (e.g., Hanson, 1981).
There is a suggestion too that poor readers are deficient in an internal articulatory code (Briggs and Underwood, 1987), and that this is in itself a source of difficulty insofar as it deprives them of one lexical route — that is, one way of identifying what words mean.
What is certain is that for many competent readers the ‘voice in the head’ is there — flickering in and out of consciousness, audible when helpful, silent when not.
There are times when we become particularly conscious of it — when we read poetry, or when we come to something we cannot easily follow.
And it contributes greatly to the reading of all text in ‘character's voice’— the kind of text exemplified in this chapter.
We need the sound of words, too, when we ourselves come to  write, for the prosody of written language is an important element in its clarity and power.
So practices that might strengthen the inner ear are to be commended.
I believe that continuing to hear the language of books as well as to see it gives developing readers a valuable resource in this domain.
So far, the kinds of help given have been what one can call ‘incidental’.
But I would argue that there is a place too for a more structured approach — for the inclusion in the language curriculum of some kind of planned study of the way written language works.
Some teachers and psychologists are against all study which makes language, in Cazden's term, ‘opaque’(Cazden, 1974).
Language, they claim, should never be other than a transparent medium through which the meaning can be seen.
This again is in line with a prediction-based view of reading.
Yet when written language is imperfectly identified and not fully understood it will tend to seem opaque in any case.
The meaning will not shine clearly through.
I believe that it is valuable for children to learn to use this experience, and to become able, at will, to look at language rather than through it, to think about it as well as with it.
This gives an important role to word-recognition skills, but it is a role which recent studies are tending to support (see, for instance, Gough, 1984).
In the material analysed in this chapter there are occasions when interpretation calls for attention to the clues given by specific words (as in examples c.2, c.3, and h.3), to unusual syntax (as in examples c.1 and g.1), to unstated shifts that have to be inferred (as in category h), and to a variety of quite subtle clues to the sources of speech and thought.
It seems reasonable to suggest that children should in fact learn to read in more than one way — to be mainly concerned with overall sense when the going is easy, but to be able to switch to a mode where they become more aware of and attentive to the actual text.
It is in the development of this flexibility that structured language work has a part to play.
Language work is of course already done in many schools.
However, much of this work is heavily weighted towards the study of individual words, even though it is widely recognized that most vocabulary growth comes from encountering words in the course of reading.
Moreover, many activities do little else than test word knowledge rather than teach it.
At the other extreme, language work may consist mostly of the provision of stimuli to ‘creative writing’.
The crucial middle ground — the exploration of how words can be manipulated on paper and the effects such manipulation can achieve — may be seriously neglected.
Most of the extracts studied in this paper were taken from accepted  and acclaimed examples of literature for children, written with what we recognize as style.
The remainder were from a reputable information book written for use in school.
But they speak a language far removed from the home, the street, and the playground.
If we offer this kind of text to children, and if the gulf between the two languages is to be bridged, then we must not play down the magnitude of the learning task which children face.
And we must remember that bridges are built from both sides.