

Motherland Awake INDEPENDENCE NOW!
MARTYR
George Seawright was shot by the Marxist-Leninist IPLO on 19th November 1987 and died on 3rd December.
Unlike the politicians we will never forget him.
No surrender.
For him no evasions, no half-truths, no lies,
For him no surrender, no coward's compromise,
Cast off but undaunted, he alone took his stand,
For the love of Ulster and the Loyal Red Hand.
No hilltops at midnight or other draft stunts,
No RTE chat-shows — or fines paid in punts,
No ‘once a year’ outing in a sash on the Twelfth,
No asking of others what he'd not do himself.
Remember George Seawright when you speak of the brave,
As a true son of Ulster his dear life he gave,
From his dying hands, take the torch that he bore,
So that Ulster as Ulster will remain evermore
Had he stayed in Scotland, he'd still have his life,
To spend with his children and his brave loyal wife,
If you had the option of all this to lose,
Which road would you travel?
Which way would you choose?
No tired old speeches that weary our ears,
For we know them by heart after 18 long years,
He said what he meant and he meant what he said,
And for that he was butchered, for that he is dead.
Remember George Seawright when you speak of the brave,
As a true son of Ulster his dear life he gave,
From his dying hands, take the torch that he bore,
So that Ulster as Ulster will remain evermore.
INDEPENDENCE
EDITORIAL
YOUNG LEGION
For Motherland, Folk and Honour
Ulster Youth!
We live today in an age where the dark plague of liberal decadence casts its shadow everywhere and all about us, from the school gates to the political system.
Chaos and Hate have replaced Order and Love in our daily lives.
Sterility and Ugliness have replaced Vision and Beauty in Art and Culture.
The idiocy of Urbanism and of urban life have replaced the inspiration of Ruralism, of living and working on the land.
To those who have enslaved our Nation — the Capitalists and the Marxists — the very ideals of Motherland, Folk and Honour are but ‘myths’ to be annihilated in their attempts to construct a deadening, soulless and hideous concrete world.
A City of Ruins where the faceless tyranny of the towerblock dictates to all.
Only in nature and by a return to the land — in song, symbolism, in hiking and comradeship around the campfire — can we find that true alternative to the meaninglessness of modern life and its grasping materialism.
Only then can we defend with patriotic idealism and in poetic struggle the noble values of Tradition, Family, Hearth and Homeland.
Through the ancient mist of an Ulster Dawn, a people, a new folk shall emerge, arisen in National victory.
Join with us — the future is ours!
Together we shall resurrect above the ruins the banner of Legionary Youth — the symbol of an Ulster Nation of new, inspiring and romantic beauty.
Forging an Alternative for Youth and Nation
GET IT REGULARLY
News Around Ulster
Power, Wealth And Arms In The Hands Of The People!
Democracy in Ulster today is totally  non-existent .
Our people are denied even the semblance of political power, electing careerist politicians who allegedly represent our interests.
To even the most politically retarded this is a nonsense.
Real power is exercised through the Northern Ireland Office and its Irish counterparts.
It is these foreign and hostile agencies that have imposed the hated Anglo-Irish Agreement on our land.
The overwhelming majority of Ulster's people remain  implacably opposed to this diktat and its contention that our land must be jointly governed by the English and Irish bureaucrats.
As Ulster patriots we completely reject this dictatorship, believing that the Ulster people themselves must control their own affairs.
Even if Westminster were to realise its folly in being a  signatory to the Agreement, we believe that it is too late to accept continuing Westminster domination and their future treacherous schemes for  our land.
The British state has presided over Ulster's long war for over 20 blood splattered years, all the time working hand in glove with our enemies in Dublin and Washington to eventually hand Ulster to Eire on a plate.
We, like our growing number of thinking Ulsterfolk, envisage no future under Westminster dictatorship.
The union and its unionist parties are a part of our history, we too shall become part of history, largely forgotten in a ‘United Ireland’ should we fail to achieve Nationhood and break the chains of Westminster mis-rule and Eire Imperialism.
Those who we elect to office to ‘represent’ us have failed to achieve anything on our behalf.
Today those thought of as our ‘leaders’ are tired, weary old men who are without vision of a brighter tomorrow.
For years they have marched, waved flags and mouthed slogans whilst the people elected them to offices of wealth and  privilege .
Indeed the careerist political prostitutes have grown fat on the crumbs thrown from Westminster's groaning table of goodies, whilst our people have faced the hard cold reality of deprivation, poverty, unemployment and even the daily threat of death at the unshackled hands of the Marxist terrorists.
What alternatives do we then propose?
Firstly we believe representative government to be an unprincipled fraud and propose a radical alternative in the form of participative democracy.
By the system proposed by the Ulster Movement, power will stem from the people themselves, implemented by street councils with the residents delegates to area councils.
Above area councils, there will be district councils, community county councils and so forth, right up to the Ulster National Council — but at all levels the individuals will never be anything other than delegates responsible to the people.
Through participative democracy the hopes, wishes and aspirations of Ulster's people will be expressed and acted on.
Should some delegate impede the wishes of the people, it will be an easy matter of removing him.
This system will do away with the careerist politicians and their parasitical political parties.
Our people will have a real and meaningful stake in their communities, lives and land.
THE AUTHORITY OF THE PEOPLE
KEY:
General secretariat of the general people's congress
General people's committee
Congress secretariat
People's committee for the different executive sectors (Agriculture, Education, Health, Housing…
Etc.)
Vocational Popular Congresses
ulster movement
Ever since the rise of Irish Republicanism the people of Ulster have remained loyal to Britain, loyal to a great Empire in days of  yore and to not such a great Empire in recent times.
Ulster blood was spilt in two World Wars and is still being spilt here in our own mother country and what does Britain give us in return?
Slap after slap in the face.
They tried to give us to our ancient enemies in 1912, 1974, 1985 and now we've had the ‘Brooke initiative’ which was another attempt by Westminster to be rid of us.
Picture yourself if you will as a small child who under great danger to yourself gives all to help your parents when they are in time of peril and in return you get a slap in the face.
 Let's face it, that is exactly what Britain has done to us.
It is time this child grew up and got its independence.
If you call an Englishman British he would reply, ‘British if you must, but English first.’
Here in Ulster, we've been so busy saying that we are British that we have lost our true identity.
Where does your loyalty lie?
With an imperialist regime that has no love for Ulster, or does your loyalty lie with Ulster and her people?
If you are truly loyal to Ulster then rally behind the cry for independence.
More and more Ulsterfolk are having their eyes opened and are realising that independence is the only way forward.
Wake up Ulster, wise up Ulster, turn your back on the years of folly, of remaining in the UK and join the struggle for independence.
Become an Ulster Movement supporter.
For £12 a year you will receive five copies of each issue of Ulster Dawn, which you can then sell or give to friends or family.
You'll also get a  supporter's card, regular bulletins, copies of leaflets, stickers and posters that we print.
Discounts on selected U.W.F. items  is also available to supporters.
Fill in the form below and post it with a cheque/PO for £12 to: ‘Ulster Movement’, PO Box 20, Portadown, Co.
Armagh, Ulster, BT62 3PX.
Analysis: THE PLO, IRA, PALESTINE, ISRAEL…
AND THE TRUTH.
ISRAEL, ULSTER'S FRIEND — OR…
THE SCUM OF THE EARTH?
‘An Independent Ulster should look to brave little Israel for a good example of a security policy.’
The above statement and similar ones have been made at many public meetings called in support of an independent Ulster.
Unionist politicians are always falling over themselves in their rush to praise the Zionist state of Israel.
So let us take a look at the true history of that state.
Until 1948 the British ruled Palestine, but on 15th May that year the British mandate came to an end, and they handed over the country to the Jews.
Yet the first British census of Palestine showed that Jews only made up 11% of the population.
(That's about the same percentage that vote Sinn Fein here in Ulster).
On the 2nd November 1917 the Balfour Declaration was issued with total disregard for the views of the majority of the population (i.e. well over 80%).
This declaration stated that ‘His Majesty's Government view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object.’
But after a while the Zionists got impatient for ‘Brits Out’ so they started a ‘Kill the British’campaign.
In February 1944, the Irgun Zwei Leumi,(the Irgun, in short) killed a British police inspector and constable.
In March they killed a further eight British policemen.
On August 8th, they tried and almost succeeded in assassinating the British High Commissioner in Palestine, Sir Harold Macmichael, and killed ten police constables in the process.
On November 1st, two Zionist terrorists from Palestine murdered Lord Moyne, British Resident Minister of State in the Middle East, in Cairo.
These scum went on to kill 92 people in the King David Hotel on 22nd July 1946.
Then in 1947 they threw a bomb at the Red Cross cinema and two days later they attacked the Cairo Haifa train.
On July 24th 1947, Irgun kidnapped two British Army sergeants, Clifford Martin and Mervyn Paice.
On July 31st their dead bodies were found hanging from eucalyptus trees in a grove in Nathanya.
Their hands were tied behind their backs.
Pieces of shirt had been wrapped round their heads.
A notice reading: ‘This is the sentence of Irgun's High Tribunal’, was fastened to one body.
The area around was mined, and as one of the bodies was cut down it exploded, having been booby trapped, and severely wounded a British officer.
On September 26th, they killed four more policemen while robbing a bank.
On the 29th, nine policemen were killed in a bomb attack on Haifa Police Headquarters.
During June 1947, the Zionists tried a new atrocity measure.
Explosive letters were sent by Irgun to various high British officials, including Prime Minister Attlee, Foreign Secretary Bevin and Winston Churchill.
By the time Britain withdrew her forces, some 200 British soldiers and 90 policemen had been killed by the Jewish terrorists.
Almost all were in circumstances of cold blooded murder, including shooting in the back, shooting the wounded in hospital, and by explosives planted in buildings and on roads.
You may well ask what became of the Zionist terrorists after the British left?
Menachem Begin the leader of Irgun, who was wanted for the murders of sergeants Martin and Paice (see Daily Express) went on in time to become the Prime Minister of the Zionist State of Israel.
This state then turned it's attention to the majority population of Christians and Muslims.
Their aim was to drive the majority out of their homeland.
To do this they then sent their terrorists (now called an army) out to massacre whole villages.
In Deir Yassin they rounded up and butchered 250 people.
They bayoneted 25 pregnant women in the abdomen and beheaded 52 children.
Martin Smyth MP says that ‘Israel is the only true democracy in the Middle East’.
By that reckoning the provos must be on a par with the boy scouts or the girl guides!
Wise up Mr. Smyth.
But Israel supports Ulster doesn't it?
‘Our’ MPs seem to think so (if the word ‘think’can be applied to Ulster MPs), but the truth is quite the opposite.
Yitzhak Shamir, Israeli Prime Minister and former  Foreign Minister claims to have ‘Irish Connections’.
He revealed this to a group of Irish journalists who were visiting the Zionist Terror State.
During the British mandate in Palestine he was a leading member of Irgun.
He told them, ‘Everyone had a codename in those days and, because of my admiration for the Irish struggle for Independence, I chose ‘Michael’, a name I called myself after Michael Collins.’
The truth came out again during the 1985 visit of the Israeli President to Dublin.
Belfast-born Chaim Herzog spoke of the links between Israel and Eire, the small countries which took on and drove out the ‘common enemy’— Britain.
These two men and their terrorist state may be friends of Peter Robinson and David Trimble, but their feelings towards Ulster, and our people, are in line with the IRA.
In fact the tactics of the provos today are  the same as those used in the 1940's by the Zionists.
But don't the IRA support the PLO?
Yes, the provos do claim to support the PLO, but the PLO do not support the IRA, as they make clear; ‘No connection of any nature has existed, does exist or will exist between the internationally accepted representative of the people of Palestine, the PLO, and the illegal organisation, the IRA’.
The spokesman goes on, ‘What the PLO desires for the Palestinians, is what the majority of people in Northern Ireland require for their people the right to live in a democratic society free from fear.’
There are two differences between the Zionist state and the provos.
One is that the Zionists are not Marxists like the IRA.
The other is that the Zionist terrorists have (with the help of the British government) stolen a country, and the provos are still trying to do so.
If Ulster ever ends up being ruled from Dublin, then a child on the Shankill throwing stones at the Irish army (which would then be the provos in new uniforms), would be a hero and not a terrorist.
Think about that the next time you hear about a Palestinian child murdered by the Israeli army (who are Irgun in new uniforms), for throwing stones.
N.B.: We have only listed a few Zionist atrocities as to list them all, as with the crimes of the IRA, would fill a book or two.
If any of the three MP's mentioned in this article would like to dispute the truth of the comments, we will gladly print their views in the next Ulster Dawn.
If you would like more information about Palestine, Zionism etc. send three 1st class stamps to:
READ THIS AND PASS IT ON
JEWS — THE SERVANTS OF GOD?
‘Next to the Devil you have no more bitter, more poisonous, more vehement an enemy than a real Jew who earnestly desires to be a Jew.’
Who was responsible for the above statement?
Hitler?
Himmler?
Or some latter day nazi?
You may be surprised to learn that it is taken from the book ‘The Jews and Their Lies’ by Dr. Martin Luther the great Protestant reformer.
The book is a damning indictment of the Jews and the anti-Christian basis of their bizarre religious beliefs.
In addition to drawing heavily on biblical condemnation of the Jews, it must be remembered that Luther was himself an eager student of  Hebraic religious literature.
From intensive study of both sources, the great reformer reached the conclusion that the Jews, far from being ‘God's chosen people’(a myth that Jews promote to this very day), are according to John 8:44 ‘Ye are of your father the Devil’.
Indeed, Dr. Luther with his masterful knowledge of the scriptures, uncovers the hidden truths behind many of the distortions and falsehoods pertaining to the Jews and their claims of a ‘special relationship’ with God.
Throughout the book Luther adds his own outspoken opinions on the Jewish question, drawing upon the scriptures to justify what he says.
We make this book available to our readers, not to promote anti-Jewish feelings, but to put forward another point of view, a suppressed and controversial opinion, based upon scriptural foundations.
A viewpoint which is in stark contrast to so many so-called protestants who grovel at the feet of Israel and its un-Godly and alien occupants.
Perhaps this book will give some of ‘our’ elected representatives second thoughts on their continued support for Zionist expansion and aggression in the Middle East.
We have  acquired a limited number of English Language translations of this suppressed and largely forgotten manuscript, printed by a small American publishing house.
The publishers' introduction is somewhat ecumenical.
For a copy of ‘The Jews and Their Lies’ by Dr. Martin Luther send a cheque/PO for £3.90, payable to ‘ULSTER WELFARE FUND’to: PO Box 20, Portadown, Co.
Armagh, Ulster, BT62 3PX.
THE OTHER ISRAEL
In addition to our new book, the UWF is now offering a video dealing with Judaism, its origins, historical roots and religious codes of practice.
‘The Other Israel’ is an hour long, fact filled video imported from America and produced and directed by patriotic Christians.
For too long many Ulsterfolk have looked favourably upon Israel and its inhabitants, mainly due to Biblical misrepresentation and distortion.
The Other Israel presents a different picture by carefully examining the Biblical, racial and historical facts surrounding Zionism and Jewry's claim to Palestine, hidden and suppressed facts which certainly surprised this reviewer.
The Other Israel examines Jewish religious literature and the anti-Christian basis of the Judaic tradition.
The Talmud, Jewry's  equivalent of the Holy Bible is exposed as a depraved work, which amongst other perversions, advocates sexual relations with very young children.
Talmudic  scriptures condemning Christ and ridiculing Christian ethos are also studied in depth, as are the assertions that Talmudic law permits its adherents to lie, cheat and even murder non-believers.
Perhaps Judaism's peculiar and perverse teachings explain their persecution and repression of the Palestinian Nation and people.
Christ's and the Bible's thoughts on Jews are also examined in detail as is the Jewish role in Christ's  crucifixion .
The wrongful acceptance by Christians that the folk and stories of the Old Testament are the  forebears of Modern Jewry is also exposed.
The Other Israel looks at Jewry's alleged Biblical claim to Palestine and finds that 80% of Israel's occupants are descendants of East European/Asian 10th Century converts to Judaism and thus have no moral, racial or Biblical claim to the land of Palestine.
Jewish migration to central Europe is traced as is the persecution of its  adherents , due to the financial usury and its bizarre and perverse religious practices.
Hence many of the  aforementioned deviant religious practices were discreetly hidden and even  today's  Orthodox Jews are not completely aware of the sinful and immoral origins of their faith.
Jewry's role in the revolutions of the 19th and 20th Centuries are also brought to light, from leading the 1798 French Revolution to the origins of Communism and the 1917 Russian Revolution, a revolution financed by New York's Jewish-owned Wall Street Banks and led by imported American Jewish revolutionaries.
Also exposed is the prominent role played by Jews in anti-Christian and Communist politics in the USA.
A frightening, hidden power base is  unravelled , detailing Jewish political, economic and media power in America.
The Other Israel whilst seeking to expose the hidden truth regarding the Jews is not anti-Jewish and openly condemns nazism and its fellow travellers.
The Other Israel is critical of Zionist power, influence and its barbarity in the Middle East, as are we.
However, it also lists Jews who have made advances in the arts and science as well as those who have made positive contributions to mankind.
The UWF's stated intention is to educate, and where necessary to expose.
We feel that this video can make a positive contribution to these aims.
For a copy of The Other Israel, send a cheque/PO for £20 made payable to ‘ULSTER WELFARE FUND’,.
News Around Ulster
NO DUBLIN INTERFERENCE
We were amused to notice at this years Twelfth of July demonstrations that the Orange Order displayed pathetically small little notices on top of their banners which read ‘No Dublin Interference’.
However  heartfelt this gesture may have been and even though all the lodges did not display the sign, do the people of Ulster not realize that the Dublin government is interfering in the affairs of our beloved Nation.
We were also given cause to laugh by a comment made by a prominent Unionist MEP at a Twelfth demonstration in Armagh who said something along the lines of ‘The people of Ulster will not tolerate Dublin rule’.
Does he not realize that the people of Ulster are quite passively tolerating Dublin rule and have been since the 15th of November 1985.
How blind are our so-called leaders and how blind are the people that follow them aimlessly up the garden path?
Are the people too blind to see that the Dublin government is telling us where we can and where we cannot parade, where we can and where we cannot fly the Ulster flag and that a  foreign flag can fly on our soil?
Can the people not see that the Dublin government is waging a more destructive war against the UDR than the republican paramilitaries who they claim not to support.
It is time for Ulsterfolk to open their eyes and see the Anglo Irish diktat for what it is, to rub from their eyes the scales of unionism and its false hopes and then at last with a new vision to see independence in its full light and potential as the only way forward for Ulster.
Independence is the only way to guarantee that Dublin has no say in Ulster's affairs.
At present Dublin has more say in Ulster than the people of Ulster.
It is time for Ulster's people to make Ulster's laws.
Join now in the struggle for independence.
Join the Ulster Movement and play your part in gaining self determination for our ancient homeland.
ULSTER NEEDS YOU
The execution of a provo murder gang in Coagh a few months ago brought about the usual uproar from the republican politicians.
Once again the cries of innocence along with that other famous propaganda weapon ‘shoot to kill’ were heard.
Again we were told about the unjustified actions of the British Army in shooting these men.
Calls for a public enquiry were once again echoing on our television screens.
Where is the justification in this when for the past 22 years this same scum have killed and maimed the people of Ulster.
No inquiries have been made into the 240 Ulster soldiers who sacrificed their lives for their country instead we see them being framed by our so called police force and left to spend their lives in a prison cell for crimes they didn't commit.
The British Government have become spineless jellyfish who seem prepared to stand back and watch these Marxist death squads murdering their way through the people of Ulster not doing anything too ‘adventurous’ in case they upset friends in Dublin.
Carrying out the odd execution now and again is not enough.
The time is now right to rally round the call for independence.
In our own Ulster Nation we would have a free hand in bringing to justice and finally ridding the country of these butchers.
In a new Ulster there would be capital punishment, so any crimes or treason would be dealt with in the appropriate manner.
The time is now!
The people of Ulster have suffered enough.
Too much blood has been shed.
Too many lives forfeited.
Let us wash our hands of those who do not care for us.
LET US RISE!!!
Support the Ulster Movement in its struggle for a better and brighter Ulster for all…
Ulster needs you.
8/8/1941 — REV.
ROBERT BRADFORD — 14/11/1981
‘The time might come when Ulstermen would have to become Queen's rebels in order to remain citizens of any kind.’