

COVER
Mr Ed he isn't, but that doesn't mean our cover horse is not trying to tell you something.
His ears show that his full attention was focused on the photographer until the moment of exposure, when a noise on the left switched one ear in that direction.
And if you could watch him for a while longer, you might discover just what he — a descendant of herd-living, company-loving, fast and flighty wild horses — feels about domestication.
To get a little ‘Horse sense’, as understood by Lucy Rees, turn to page 34.
And look out for The Zebra in Your Stable , the Christmas special on BBC1 — details in tv listings on page 65.
The Baines Report
BY CHRIS BAINES
Are we really hearing stirrings of green-ness from our political leadership?
Is 1992 going to be the first true Year of the Environment?
Come on, it's January, the month of optimism, and we might as well let ourselves think so.
And if it turns out that the right mood has arrived at last, there are plenty of ideas waiting for attention.
Could 1992 be the year when the environmental revolution really comes of age?
We've seen a few encouraging signs in the past month or two — Bellamy addressing the Confederation of British Industry, for instance, and Michael Heseltine, Secretary of State for the Environment , daring to finance an energy -efficiency campaign.
In election year, anything could happen, and because January is traditionally the month for hopes and dreams, here are a few of mine.
I long for a more matter-of-fact, common sense approach to environmental action.
Take town traffic jams.
They're polluting, wasteful and an incredibly expensive drain on national and personal economics.
Could ‘super clippie’ save the day?
Driver-only buses have become the norm, and may have increased privatised profitability, but they've decreased traffic flow.
Cars stack up behind every bus, while passengers queue to pay their fares.
With the return of the clippie, pick-up time would be dramatically reduced, and so would fuel consumption, air pollution and driver frustration.
In the national scheme of things, clippies would pay for themselves in increased efficiency, but more direct finance could come from super-taxing car fuel to penalise the gas guzzlers, and by re-allocating the tax benefits which currently go to company car drivers.
There must surely be an end to the crazy system which pays most to those who drive the furthest, in the biggest cars.
Tax is a powerful mechanism for stimulating change.
It's high time VAT was dropped from purchases with obvious environmental merit.
Does it really make sense for the Government to spend £10 million advertising the global benefits of energy savings while still adding 17.5 per cent VAT to insulation materials?
We could make more efficient use of power generation too.
Our power stations are notoriously inefficient.
No matter which of the fossil fuels they burn — oil, coal or the eco-fashionable gas — all of them throw away two thirds of the stored energy.
It is simply squandered as unused heat.
We've had a decade or more of development corporations and government enterprise zones, and most them seem to have been environmentally brutal.
How about a new development strategy which concentrates heat-hungry projects in the shadows of the nation's cooling towers.
Most power stations are surrounded by extensive buffer-zone landscapes.
Building there would provide a ready market for the wasted heat; and often offer the bonus of a working rail link for environmentally friendly access.
Of course, the fundamental barrier to such solutions is compartmentalised government.
A scheme like this would fall between the ministry stools of energy, transport, environment , and trade and industry .
On the rural front, it must be that same tunnel-vision imperialism which is preventing the very obvious adoption of a positive farm-waste strategy.
We could direct polluting silage run-off and slurry from dairies and pig farms into small-scale local power plants.
The Danish model of combined heat and power at village level really works, with waste from neighbouring farms being tankered in, converted to biogas for fuel and, after processing, returned to the land as improved compost.
But is it the Department of Energy, the Ministry of Agriculture, or the pollution inspectorate that need to take the lead?
Maybe this is the year for finding out.
Already the Government has issued ambitious instructions to reduce waste disposal.
By the year 2000, local authorities must recycle 25 per cent of what we throw away.
That's actually very easy.
Any council which has adopted ‘wheely bins’— those menacing lidded daleks that line the pavement once a week — will know that they have increased the average volume of collected waste dramatically.
In Luton, their adoption produced an increase of 37 per cent almost overnight.
A return to the old plastic sack would presumably produce an equally instant reduction.
Twenty-five per cent?
No problem!
Most of the wheely bin increase seems to be organic.
Garden waste in particular now slips easily out of sight and out of mind beneath the black plastic lids.
In the few authorities where waste goes to modern landfills and methane is piped off for positive use, there is some energy payback, but there must be more incentive to separate the 40 per cent of the domestic waste that is vegetable-derived, and recycle it as compost.
Those local authorities that are investing in the necessary shredders and mechanical mixers are finding that the savings of landfill charges go a long way towards paying for the environmental gain.
Capital grants or loans would encourage more of these projects.
Finally, for now at least, there should perhaps be a national suggestions box for bright ideas.
That works in industry, where many of the most cost-effective environmental initiatives have come from those closest to the opportunities, in the office print room or on the shop floor.
Here are a couple of suggestions from me as a customer of the high street.
Why can't I take back the dozen ski-holiday brochures I'm leafing through, and be rewarded with a discount from the travel agents, and the knowledge that they're recycling them?
Even a small agency gets through 50,000 each season.
And why doesn't British Rail offer a recycling facility for my old two-inch-thick timetable, when I replace it with the new edition twice each year?
NEW MOON JANUARY
A monthly nature almanac compiled by Michael Clark of the Mammal Society, Chris Mead of the British Trust for Ornithology, Trevor James of the British Naturalists' Association, and Richard A Jones of the British Entomological and Natural History Society.
Wildlife gardening notes by Chris Baines.
New moon on the 4th.
Squirrels mate noisily in the woods.
Foxes mate even more noisily in town and country.
Kingfishers driven to the coast in icy weather.
Stinking hellebore flowers in southern woods.
Full moon on the 19th.
MAMMALS
On 1 January 1785, Gilbert White noted that moles were working despite the considerable depth of snow on the ground.
More than 200 years later, we still have much to learn about the species.
If you catch sight of moles above the ground, dead or alive, send details of the date and place, and state or behaviour of the mole (such as cat-caught, crossing a road, foraging in grass), to: Dr Martyn Gorman, Department of Zoology, University of Aberdeen, Culterty Field Station, Newburgh, Ellon AB41 0AA.
Also send in any records of mole remains in owl pellets or the diets of other predators.
The records will be invaluable in determining the times of the year at which young moles leave their mothers' territories in different parts of the British Isles.
The Mammal Society has recently reported on the success of the Vincent Wildlife Trust's otter projects over the past six years.
More than 50 orphaned or injured otters from all over Britain have come in to the trust's rehabilitation centre in south-west Scotland.
This is a marvellous record of caring.
There are also several studies being made of how otters are coping with the pressures that we are imposing on them.
Send a note of any encounters with otters on roads, whether alive or as traffic mortalities, to: J and R Green, Barjarg, Barrhill, Girvan, Ayrshire KA26 0RB.
We can all do something to help endangered species by supporting or taking part in such survey work, because many small observations, when put together, can reveal a hidden solution to a conservation problem.
Dormice, like bats, may rouse on mild days, and their precious stores of fat may be used up too fast; continuous warm, wet spells will prevent deep, undisturbed torpor.
Trial reintroductions of dormice have been made possible by the imaginative captive-breeding programmes of Dot Heaton at Windsor Safari Park.
Paul Bright, the Mammal Society's conservation officer, discusses translocation in the society's latest newsletter.
Paul keeps up a hectic programme of lectures on the species, and has amassed a considerable amount of information on the pros and cons of reintroduction.
A study of disease in dormice is also in progress.
Winter, when bats are generally quiet and sedentary, presents a good opportunity to check the numbers and species of bats in hibernation roosts such as icehouses, caves and cellars.
Some species hibernate in tree roosts, which are much more difficult to detect.
Anyone inspecting a bat roost must have a licence from English Nature (or the Scottish or Welsh equivalents).
It's best to join in surveys organised by your local bat group — your county wildlife trust will put you in touch with them.
Keep an eye open on muddy paths or patches of snow for the tracks of hedgehogs.
They may break hibernation as a result of any sudden change in temperature, and not just on warmer days.
Our wild coastlines have fewer human visitors than in the summer months, but if you brave the elements you may be lucky enough to see grey seals hauled up on beaches and rocks.
Many females land now to moult (the males moult later in the spring).
PLANTS
This is the time of year when the end of last season's growth slides imperceptibly into the beginning of the next's, with more or less of a halt depending on the weather.
There are still quite a few trees and bushes festooned with the fruits of last year.
The ash is a classic example of a tree which holds on to its fruits well into the next season even though they may have been ripe since October.
The dry, rather large brownish seed is enclosed in a long, blunt wing or ‘samara’, which, when it falls, spins and aids dispersal.
It can be hard to predict where the familiar clusters of ash keys will appear, because this tree has the peculiar propensity of varying the sex of its flowers according to the season.
Sometimes, a tree may be all female, at other times, mostly male with just a few branches carrying fruits from female flowers, and at other times again, the flowers will have both male and female organs, as is the case in most other flowering plants.
Of the hedgerow shrubs which still hold fruits, the hips of the various species of rose may well be the most obvious, often being among the last fruits to be eaten by hungry wintering thrushes.
The hips of the dog rose Rosa canina are the most likely to be seen in England and Wales.
These can be very variable, partly because many so-called dog roses are, in fact, hybrids.
In general, though, they vary from long-oval in shape to almost globular, are borne on rather long peduncles and, by now , will have almost entirely lost the wizened remains of the flower's calyx.
In more wooded country with old hedges, you will almost certainly come across the field rose R. arvensis , the hips of which tend to be more orange than red, becoming blackened as the winter progresses.
They can also be distinguished by their almost globular shape and the long protruding remnant of the style sticking out on top.
An interesting species in the way it overwinters is the wayfaring tree Viburnum lantana .
This shrub is found on more calcareous soils in southern Britain, usually in old hedges and the edges of woods, sometimes in long-established scrub.
The buds are naked, without the usual covering of scales, and consist of miniature, developed leaves, closely wrapped around each other and protected by their dense felty hairs.
Inside, you can see the miniature flowerheads, waiting to develop.
A few plants will still be in flower.
Some bloom for most of the year regardless, such as white dead nettle Lamium album .
Unless it is really icy, this species is quite capable of withstanding  the low temperatures of winter, though quite why a plant which is designed to be pollinated by bees should flower in winter is a bit of a mystery.
In more sheltered woods, though, you may find that real spring plants are already beginning to move.
One of the first to break its buds is honeysuckle Lonicera periclymenum , the first grey-green leaves venturing out with the slightest hint of warming.
On the ground, sprouts of shiny dark-green bluebell plants Hyacinthoides non-scriptus will be pushing through the leaf-litter, along with the odd twisted shoots of cuckoo pint Arum maculatum .
This plant is more susceptible to frosts, and often a too-hasty specimen will be found with brown crispy edges to its leaves.
INSECTS
Snug in their beds, insects wait for warmer days to come.
But where do they find safe shelter during the cold and wet British winter?
Some of our larger insects, such as butterflies, seek out hollow trees, rock crevices or, as in the case of the small tortoiseshell, inviting nooks around buildings.
But smaller creatures can find shelter enough in the unlikely setting of a scruffy grass tussock.
The large clumps of tufted hair grass Deschampsia caespitosa or soft brome grass Bromius mollis around the edges of woods or in rough meadows are veritable insect palaces.
At the base of each clump, the stems are tightly packed, but there is just enough flexibility in the stems to allow all manner of tiny beasts to push their way down into the relatively mild and (most importantly) dry centre.
Here they remain, protected from winter's ravages by their natural thatch.
The insect population of a single large tussock has been estimated at more than 1,000 individuals.
Many of these, such as the pretty yellow and black Orchesella cincta , are minute springtails, so called because of the hair-like organ at the tip of the abdomen.
It is usually held flat against the underside of the body, but if disturbed, the springtail flicks it backwards, projecting the animal into the air and out of harm's way.
Ground beetles — normally fierce predators — often bed down with the same insects that they hunt in warmer seasons.
In open meadows, the pretty red and blue Lebia chlorocephala may shelter in the same tussock as the metallic Chrysolina leaf beetles on which its larvae feed.
Likewise, the distinctive black and yellow ichneumon wasp Amblyteles armatorius will crawl in beside the very same moth caterpillars that it may later parasitise with its eggs.
BIRDS
The old epithet ‘sea gull’ just isn't appropriate any more, now that gulls are a familiar sight inland (without having been driven there by gales), and more are around in winter than in summer.
All gull species have shown this spread inland during this century, none more so than the small blackheaded gull.
It is very much commoner, everywhere, than it used to be — Central and Northern European populations have increased two-, three- or even fourfold.
And in winter, hundreds and thousands of these continental birds stream south and west to winter in Britain and Ireland alongside our breeding population.
The gulls you see cadging bread in London parks could just as well have been born in Finnish  Lapland as on the North Kent marshes — it's impossible to tell from their plumage.
But ringing has shown that the same birds return year after year to patrol the same wintering areas, the oldest birds having done the round trip up to 30 times.
Plumage differences do allow you to distinguish the young birds born last summer, which retain some of the brown juvenile wing coverts.
The handsome summer plumage of chocolate-brown head and neck may be coming through on some adults already, but birds which are not in good condition may not attain full breeding plumage until late spring — if at all.
There are plenty of other gulls to be seen inland: common and herring gulls in particular, and increasing numbers of lesser blackbacked gulls, though the greaters still tend to stay on the coast.
This adaptable group of birds has been very successful at exploiting food resources made available by humans.
Their habit of feeding on rubbish tips can be hazardous to us — they could spread pathogens from tips and sewage farms to the reservoirs where they roost, and large flocks near airports are a danger to aircraft.
But they face a threat from the rubbish themselves.
Waste material in the ubiquitous black plastic bags brews up and is broken down by a common bacterium,Clostridium botulinum , which produces a very potent toxin.
This is the cause of botulism, which is implicated in the recent downturn of several large breeding populations of gulls around Britain.
The vast flocks of gulls at rubbish tips do not normally compete for food resources with other birds, but black-headed gulls do sometimes take advantage of other species' food-finding skills.
In flocks mixed with those of lapwings, for example, the observant gulls will steal food from the plovers, and on lakes they will steal food brought to the surface by diving coots.
This is the kind of bustle and action which makes gravel pits and reservoirs such fine birdwatching locations on a bleak midwinter's day.
Wildlife Gardening Notes
To get the best out of your wildlife garden, you really need to echo nature.
Make a resolution to spend more time in the coming year visiting inspiring wild habitats.
There are precious few surviving landscapes managed principally for nature — but every county has its gems.
Make this the year you join your local county wildlife trust.
For a modest annual fee, you'll be given access to a wealth of local inspiration, and while you're leafing through the trust's reserves handbook, planning your ‘research visits’ for the coming seasons, you'll be helping to ensure the survival of that unique ‘library’of wild places.
Now that Santa's grottos have been dismantled, and the inflatable reindeer packed away, many garden centres are stocking the shelves with an array of aids to instant wildlife gardening.
It's marvellous to see the wide variety of bird feeders, pond liners, wildflower seeds, nest-boxes, butterfly border plants and other merchandise marketed in this way, and, of course, it's to be encouraged in an industry which has for too long simply serviced the chemical-warfare approach to gardening.
But while you're keeping up with the latest ‘squirrel-proof’ bird feeders and designer nest-boxes, do keep a critical eye open, too.
Garden centre managers need to know that wildflower seeds have to be grown from native stock; that highly ornate ‘mock-Tudor’ nest-boxes put nestlings' lives at risk by attracting predators; that the natural balance of a pond is not best served by chemical algicides; that salted peanuts are a killer for birds; that eco-friendly insecticides are a contradiction in terms; and that wildflowers and buddleias are little help to wildlife if they're grown in peat-based compost.
BREAKTHROUGH
The latest revelations from the natural world
The dead giveaway
During a recent study in tropical America, stingless bees of one particular species were observed on numerous occasions foraging en masse ‘on dead animals including snakes, lizards and in one instance a large oligochaete worm.’
Feeding on carrion might seem strange behaviour for a bee, but in fact many tropical species do supplement their pollen-and-honey diet in this way.
But the snake- and lizard-eating species Trigona hypogea has taken the carrion-eating habit to the extreme, depending on it totally for protein.
This species and two close relatives of similar habits,T. crassipes and newly discovered T. necrophaga — whose specific names translates as ‘carrion-eater’— have formed the basis of the new study, undertaken by Dr João Camargo, of the University of São Paulo, Brazil, and Dr David Roubik, of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Panama (Biological Journal of the Linnean Society , vol. 44, pp13–39).
It was 10 years ago that Dr Roubik first discovered that some stingless bees are exclusively carrion-eaters, based on a complete absence of pollen in the nest, and the absence of the usual pollen baskets on the hind legs of workers.
Since then, investigations have continued, though given the difficulties of studying these bees in the lowland wet and moist forests of Panama, Brazil and Columbia, it is no surprise that further details are only now emerging.
The three species of bee seem so closely related that they must have evolved from a single carrion-eating ancestor.
The bees somehow convert the soup of rotten meat they've collected into a more or less stable paste for storage in the nest cells.
Bees normally use microbes to ferment food proteins, much as we deal with cheese or yoghurt.
In the nests of the few species that feed exclusively on carrion, the queen cells and food storage cells are much the same size.
Perhaps, in the ancestral species, this led to a frequent but happy error soon ‘fixed’ by evolution: food intended for queen larvae went into a food store by mistake, where it was mixed with saliva to produce a new storable food which could replace pollen.
One unexpected observation was that the carrion-eating bees have an exceptionally high proportion of queen to worker cells in their nests, apparently because their high-protein diet makes worker bee larvae grow much faster than those of other species.
Toothed jaws are certainly effective at removing flesh, and stingless bees have other features that probably helped carrion dependence to evolve — their aggressive behaviour, which drives away other scavenging insects, and the use of pheromone scents to organise mass recruitment to newly located food sources.
Not least, stingless bees as a group are naturally inventive, and although only some species feed on carrion, many others supplement the basic nectar-and-pollen diet with a wide variety of foods such as rotten fruit, sap, faeces and human sweat.
MIKE TAYLOR
The original Big Bird
In North America 55 million years ago, it was not the mammals that ruled the roost, it seemed, but Diatryma gigantea .
This huge flightless bird has regularly appeared in illustrated fossil books as a giant carnivore.
This idea made sense because Diatryma's potential competitors were either extinct, as in the case of the dinosaurs, or had not evolved, as in the case of the modern specialist carnivorous mammals.
But there was a conflicting theory that it ate leaves.
Tyrannosaurus rex substitute or overgrown goose — which was it?
The impasse remained until 1987, when new Diatryma bones were discovered in north-western Wyoming.
Drs Lawrence Witmer and Kenneth Rose of the Johns Hopkins University's School of Medicine realised that Diatryma was so much bigger than other birds that simple analogies of shape no longer applied.
For example, the type of parrot beak that cracks Brazil nuts admirably would, on Diatryma , be wildly oversized for even the most enormous nuts.
In any case, big birds tend not to bother cracking nuts, but swallow them to be pulverised with grit in their muscular gizzards.
The researchers went back to first principles by making a detailed mechanical analysis of Diatryma's head.
The jaw muscles turn out to have been placed to generate the most powerful bite possible, especially when Diatryma brought into play the powerful downwards hingeing action of the upper beak on the skull.
The skull and beak could withstand enormous stresses during biting, far beyond anything conceivable for a leaf or nut-eater.
(Paleobiology , vol. 17, pp95–120).
Diatryma seems, after all, to have been a meat-eater, its head reinforced not so much to cut through meat as to cope with the sudden shocks when its bite hit bone.
The researchers estimated Diatryma's athletic ability as quite adequate to catch most of the contemporary mammals.
Perhaps, with its powerful jaws, it also routinely crunched up bones of dead carcasses to get at the marrow, a scavenger-cum-predator like today's lion or hyaena.
HUGH MILLER 
Prime forest movers
Ants are resourceful creatures, especially when it comes to forging profitable alliances with other living things.
In Britain, for example, many ants enjoy remarkably cordial relations with colonies of aphids.
The aphids suck sugar-rich sap from plants, extract what they need and excrete the surplus as honeydew.
The ants take the sweet honeydew and, in exchange, protect their ‘herds’ of aphids from predators, such as ladybirds and hoverfly larvae.
Ants, aphids and plants together make up a kind of farming economy based on sugar.
In the rainforests of South-east Asia, this agrarian way of life has been taken to extraordinary lengths, according to Professor Ulrich Maschwitz and his colleagues at the University of Frankfurt.
The ant Dolichoderus cuspidatus is a case in point.
This expert pastoralist acquires all the food it needs from its herds of mealy bugs, which, like their relatives the aphids, make a living by sucking plant sap.
From the ant's perspective the only snag in this excellent scheme is the quality of its diet.
Honeydew is rather like junk food; it is high in sugar, but can be low in amino acids, the building blocks of proteins.
To get round this, the ant stations its herds of mealy bugs on fresh young foliage — as that is where the most wholesome sap is to be found — and when the level of amino acids drops, it simply ups and moves the bugs to a more nutritious spot.
It is difficult to avoid comparisons with nomadic human herdsmen — a parallel which is apt in other ways too.
Unlike most ants,Dolichoderus does not built an expensive permanent dwelling; instead, it creates a temporary nest wherever it chooses to settle.
In the ant's case, construction costs are further reduced by building the nest out of the living bodies of workers.
When the time comes to move to a new territory, the nest dissolves and its residents decamp, taking their herds with them (German Research , 2/91, pp4–7).
Nomadism is not the only unusual farming practice to have come to light as a result of the team's research in the rainforests of South-east Asia.
Ants of the genus Polyrhachis , for example, build verdant byres for their insect herds beneath bamboo leaves, using a web of silken threads secreted by their own grubs.
Another farmer,Crematogaster borneensis , is no less solicitous; it excavates chambers in the stems of the Macaranga tree (a member of the spurge family) in which to shelter its brood and its livestock.
Crematogaster has become utterly dependent on its host plant — it dies if it cannot find a tree of the correct type — but the relationship is by no means one-sided.
The ant repays the tree by sweeping it leaves free of fungi, by assaulting any leaf-eating animals that it encounters and by attacking any competing plant that dares come within chewing distance.
Ants make fearsome enemies, but as friends they are second to none.
STEPHEN YOUNG
Fast breeder reactors
The sight of a tiny warbler frantically feeding a fledgling cuckoo twice its size is one of the most incongruous in nature.
But the effect on the host warbler is not, of course, just to make it look ridiculous — the bird that rears the parasitic fledgling will fail to rear young of its own.
So what can the host bird do to protect itself?
In Central Japan, a naturally unfolding experiment has revealed that the key to the host's defence is learning, which can happen a great deal faster than was previously thought.
The experiment has resulted from the steady progression towards each other of the common cuckoo Cuculus canorus and the azure-winged magpie Cyanopica cyana , culminating in an overlap in ranges over the past 20 years.
About 60 years ago, one of the cuckoo's main hosts was the Siberian meadow bunting, but it has become very good at recognising and rejecting the cuckoo's eggs, despite the fact that they're very similar to its own.
The arrival of a new host in the form of the azure-winged magpie must therefore have seemed a godsend to the oft-thwarted cuckoo.
But the naivety was not to last, as Dr Hiroshi Nakamura and his colleagues at Japan's Shinshu University discovered.
Certainly in the first 10 years that the two species overlapped, the proportion of magpie nests which were parasitised rocketed from a quarter to more than three quarters, as the cuckoos switched away from the more discriminating meadow buntings.
As a result, the magpie population dropped dramatically: in one village, from 259 birds to just 77.
Another 10 years down the track, though, and the magpies started to fight back.
Their aggressiveness to cuckoos — whether real or stuffed — started to increase, as did their ability to discriminate between their own and foreign eggs.
Between 1985 and 1989, there was a four-fold increase in rejection of cuckoo eggs, either through being ejected from the nest or by desertion of the parasitised nest entirely.
What was the most surprising was the speed with which the magpies changed their behaviour, apparently contradicting the traditional view that such ‘counter-adaptations’ evolve, rather than are learnt.
Dr Nakamura believes that these changes happen within the lifetime of a magpie, suggesting that the birds may be improving their powers of discrimination through learning.
Direct evidence of a rather different sort of learning comes from a study of great reed warblers and cuckoos, also in Central Japan, undertaken by Arnon Lotem and Amotz Zahavi of Tel-Aviv University, in collaboration with Dr Nakamura.
By placing experimental cuckoo eggs in the nests of warblers throughout the summer breeding season, the biologists established that egg rejection rates changed during the breeding season: the rejection of the cuckoo eggs was high at the beginning and end of the season, and low in the middle.
At the beginning of the season only older birds are nesting, and they, it seems, have learnt over previous years what their own eggs look like.
Some birds manage to nest a second time within the season, and it is these birds, again with recent experience, which breed at the end of the season.
They, too, have learnt what a great reed warbler egg looks like.
In the middle of the season, though, it is the juveniles and first-time breeders doing the nesting.
It is their naivety, apparently, that makes them vulnerable, lending weight to the view that, in  combating cuckoos, experience does count.
MILES BARTON 
Many happy returns
Although the common toad Bufo bufo is one of the most familiar of animals, surprisingly little is known about it, and much of the knowledge we do have is anecdotal rather than scientifically proven — hence the value of a recent study spanning the UK and Sweden.
The common toad occurs throughout Britain (but not Ireland), most of Europe and parts of Asia.
Females are larger than males, though of course this isn't much help unless you have a pair for comparison.
A more reliable method of sexing an individual is to look at its inner three fingers.
Only in males do these sport dark ‘nuptial’ pads, which are used to grasp the female.
Toads hibernate during the winter, and become active again when the temperature rises to about 6°C, migrating to their breeding ponds with the first mild weather of the spring.
The young toad's growth rate depends, as does that of most amphibians, on the supply of food, but typically a toadlet will leave its pond when 8–9mm long, and will measure 40mm or so on its first birthday.
On the anecdotal side, males (but not females) are said to squeak when picked up.
It is also claimed that males walk to the breeding pond, while females walk and hop.
More plausibly, both males and females are said to return to the pond of their birth to breed, and it was this aspect of toad lore that Dr Chris Reading of Furzebrook Research Station of Dorset and Drs Jon Loman and Thomas Madsen of the University of Lund in Sweden set out to investigate (Journal of Zoology , vol. 225, pp201–11).
Dr Reading and the Swedish scientists began their work independently, neither knowing that the other was working on virtually the same project.
As Dr Reading told BBC WILDLIFE: ‘We met at the first World Congress of Herpetology at Canterbury in 1989, and subsequently arranged to co-ordinate the two projects.’
Field work was carried out during the spring breeding seasons of 1987–90.
The English study site, in Dorset, was a group of four old flooded clay pits between 225 and 830m apart; the distances were critical because, in addition to finding out how often toads moved between ponds, the researchers wanted to know if their movements were related to the distance between ponds.
In Sweden, five ponds were selected, four of them 60–100m apart and connected by a stream, and another 1.9km away.
In both countries the toads were marked for identification.
More males than females were found in each breeding pond.
In England, only one toad was caught in more than one pond in a single year, but in Sweden, a relatively large number moved between ponds in a single season.
In both countries, though, significantly more toads moved in subsequent seasons.
Nonetheless, it seems that the traditional view of a toad's faithfulness to its birth pond is justified: this study found that between 79 and 96 per cent of toads returned to their original ponds, and, not surprisingly, that the greater the distance between ponds, the less likely toads are to move between them.
The researchers offer several possible explanations for toads making the occasional move: conditions in the initial pond may deteriorate; a male may be carried to a new pond by a female with whom he has paired before reaching the water; or perhaps a toad encounters a new pond on the way to its old one.
Though pond fidelity was what the researchers were primarily interested in, the marking and measuring of individuals in Dorset did provide an unexpected bonus: the largest toads ever recorded in the UK, a male 85mm long, and a giant female 113mm long, almost 15 per cent larger than the previous record.
KEITH HARDING
Crop circles reach the beach
When huge pits started mysteriously appearing in the tidal flats of Puget Sound, the local fishermen were understandably concerned.
These flats are home to huge numbers of ghost shrimps, a popular bait item which supports a small but expanding fishery.
Under authority from the Washington State Department of Fisheries, individual fishermen are given exclusive rights to harvest shrimps from particular beaches — so whoever was creating the pits, and taking the shrimps, was doing so unlawfully.
Or so it initially seemed.
But when the culprits were identified, it turned out that their activities were perfectly legitimate, if a little unusual.
They were 35-foot-long grey whales, who were subsequently seen wallowing in the shallow water at high tide scooping mouthfuls of sand off the beach and straining out the abundant ghost shrimps from it.
Says, Jay Odell, of the fisheries department: ‘Normally about 21,000 grey whales migrate from Baja California to their summer feeding grounds in the north Bering Sea, where they forage on the sea bottom, usually in much deeper water, for small crustaceans.’
But last summer, almost 20 individuals chose instead to spend their summer feeding in Puget Sound, near Seattle.
This might well have saved them not just travelling time, but also energy.
Research undertaken by Odell with Washington University graduate student Laurie Weitkamp suggests that Puget Sound ghost-shrimp beaches contain ‘maybe two to five times as much food per mouthful as the whales’ traditional feeding grounds.’
What still isn't clear is why the whales have recently started making use of this resource.
‘The pits are so dramatic, and there's so many of them, that we feel someone would have noticed if the whales had been there in such numbers in previous years.’
Now that commercial whaling has stopped, the grey whale population is thought to be increasing steadily each year.
John Calambokidis, who runs the non-profit marine-mammal organisation Cascadia Research, based in nearby Olympia, says that 1991 was the year that his team saw the most whales come in to Puget Sound, and stay the longest.
‘It's too early to say for sure that this is a trend.
But in any case, it would make sense, given that the grey whale population has been increasing steadily overall, for whales to be exploring and utilising more areas.’
What he does know is that at least some of the whales seem to have started making Puget Sound their regular summer feeding ground.
‘We have identified three different individuals that have been seen in Puget Sound in previous years, two of which were spotted in the area of the pits.’
KATE SCOTT 
Underwater adoption racket
Egg-dumping is certainly not confined to birds.
Fish, too, can sometimes find themselves with the eggs of another species, as in the case of perch and minnows (see BBC WILDLIFE, December, p824).
And now, two researchers working in Costa Rica have uncovered an even more outlandish example, involving fry rather than eggs.
Brian Wisenden and Miles Keenleyside, of the University of Western Ontario, have spent the past two years studying the convict cichlid Cichlasoma nigrofasciatum (named for its distinctive stripes), a species already known to have the common cichlid habit of forming monogamous pairs to bring up the next generation.
By watching pairs of convict cichlids through polarised glasses, the scientists were hoping to put together a comprehensive picture of the convict's lifestyle.
They found that the two parents claim and defend a territory of a few square metres in the shallow stream in which they live.
Together, the parents excavate a small cave 10–15cm deep, with an entrance of about 2–3cm in diameter.
The eggs are then laid on the cave ceiling.
Once the fry have hatched, both parents remain on guard, leading the fry out of the cave in a school to feed, and returning them to the safety of the cave at night.
Every week, the scientists would catch the individually marked pairs of fish, and count and measure the fry in each school.
To their surprise, they found that some schools had grown in number from one week to the next.
In each case, the new school now contained fry of two different sizes, and so it was clear that some must have come from another family.
At the same time, broods in adjacent territories suddenly disappeared.
What was going on?
In most recorded ‘adoptions’, the new fry were smaller than the parents' own offspring.
To investigate this pattern, the researchers transferred fry in the study stream to 25 pairs and, sure enough, only fry the same size or smaller than the pairs' own offspring were accepted into the fold, while larger fry were eaten or driven away.
It seems that the genuine offspring might gain some protection by becoming part of an enlarged brood.
Fry adoption can be explained, in part, by the ‘dilution’ effect.
Given that predators will attack the brood, parents can reduce that probability of their own fry being eaten by diluting their brood with foreign fry.
But there seemed to be more to the fry adoption story than the dilution effect.
Predation experiments showed that when presented with a school of fry of mixed sizes, predators ate smaller fry more often than larger fry.
Therefore, by adopting only smaller, slower-moving fry, a pair may further deflect attacks from its own offspring.
So where were these sacrificial adopted broods coming from?
During the rearing period, about one in 10 pairs were found to lose one parent, usually the male, through desertion or predation.
Single parent families are much more vulnerable to attack, and so it seems that the best option in this situation is to put the whole brood up for adoption.
In the one case of adoption observed from start to finish, the abandoned mother swam rapidly into the territory of the neighbouring pair of cichlids.
Though they came out to attack her, she led her young right into the midst of their offspring before turning to flee, leaving the two broods mixed.
MILES BARTON 
Wolves in sheep's clothing.
When bees go food-collecting in the tropics, it's not necessarily flowers they're after — for Trigona hypogea , a dead toad will do just as well.
The kiss of death.
A reconstruction of the prehistoric Diatryma gigantea suggests that this two-metre high bird also had a predilection for meat — in this case, the carcass of an early horse.
Friends indeed.
Any vines that dare to lean against this tree risk being vigorously chewed.
In the event of danger, these ants will pick up ‘their’ mealy bugs, which will also climb on board themselves.
The push-over.
When an azure-winged magpie is fooled into accepting a cuckoo's eggs, the cuckoo chicks will take the first opportunity to push the magpie's own eggs out of the nest.
Living in the past.
When a toad looks for a pond in which to spawn, chances are it's going on memory.
Plane view.
From above, the trail of devastation at Puget Sound is clearly visible — but who was responsible?
Parental concern.
When it comes to looking after its fry, does the convict cichlid live up to its name?
QUESTIONS
Whistling in the dark
Last spring, a whitethroat set up its territory in a field of rape near my home.
During the middle of May it continued to sing after dark, often reaching a peak around midnight.
How common is this behaviour?
At least one aspect of this question is very modern.
The recent development of the widespread cultivation of oilseed rape has, for the first time, provided some of our birds with an arable habitat in which they can nest — sedge and grasshopper warblers are other summer migrants that make use of it now.
In most cases, nocturnal singing, such as your whitethroat indulged in, also comes about through human interference.
Birds nesting close to artificial light are conned into thinking that night is actually day.
You don't mention it, but the M40 extension has recently opened near your home, and the motorway lights may be a factor.
In places where it is light at night, robins are the most commonly heard songsters, and dunnocks and song thrushes are quite often heard too.
Many species will, in complete darkness, utter a few snatches of song if disturbed at their roosts.
And just before dawn, often while it is still completely dark, the male reed warblers in a reedbed will club together in an exuberant chorus to try to lure down migrating females.
But in the absence of any artificial light source, it would be very unusual to hear any of our songbirds in full song at night — except, of course, for the nightingale.
CHRIS MEAD (British Trust for Ornithology)
Raindrops keep filling up my web
This spider's web (in a Welsh drystone wall) had become a watertight hammock after a heavy shower of rain.
How could it have held such a volume of water (estimated to be about 10ml) for a whole day without leaking?
This can only be the web of Textrix denticulata , a small and prettily marked relative of the large house spider, which makes sheet webs in houses and outhouses.
Textrix — its name is Latin for ‘weaver’— is common wherever biggish stones are available for it to take shelter among and sling its web.
Textrix weaves a sheet web composed of extremely fine and closely woven silk.
The elasticity of each silk line and the large numbers of them, coupled with the surface tension of water, keeps the drop of water in place until it evaporates.
Provided the stress on the web is applied gradually — as here, with tiny droplets slowly filling the sheet — a surprising amount of water can be retained.
Spider silk is made from proteins, and is nearly as strong as nylon, though it can be stretched twice as far as the man-made material.
Threads of spider silk are between 0.01 and 2 microns thick, depending on the spider making them and the purpose for which they are intended — the gossamer sheets of Textrix employ some of the finest and are probably the only webs that could hold water.
The only reason spider silk is not produced commercially is the difficulty of housing and maintaining the spiders — it's far easier to keep silk moth caterpillars.
DICK JONES —(arachnologist)
Sounds out of place
The Australian kookaburra has a very distinctive call, which I am sure I have heard on the soundtracks of films from other locations in Africa, South America or the Florida Everglades.
Do film-makers just make use of the kookaburra to conjure up exotic tropical atmosphere — or are there birds with similar calls?
Yes, the laughing kookaburra does have a distinctive voice, described as ‘a boisterous laugh, a rising staccato shouted ‘kook-kook-kook-ka-ka-ka’ which then fades’: it is unlike that of any other bird in the world.
And, unfortunately, you are also correct that, in feature films and, to a lesser extent, in tv programmes, the sound is used for exotic effect.
It is sad that film sound-tracks are not treated with the same care that goes into the pictures.
If you listen carefully to the sound-tracks of old Tarzan movies, you will hear the sounds of animals from Africa, Asia and South America all mixed together — with a liberal sprinkling of great northern diver!
Similarly, some cowboy movies — the spaghetti westerns made in Spain — show circling griffon vultures (rather than North American turkey or black vultures), and compound the mistake by making (normally silent) birds squawk.
At the BBC, we try to reproduce sounds as accurately as possible, particularly in wildlife where we go to great lengths to find the right noises to fit the locations and species.
Even so, I can't help noticing the occasional clanger in films made by non-wildlife departments — a recent example being bee-eaters calling over the English countryside in winter.
NIGEL TUCKER (BBC Natural History Unit sound recordist)
Forest close-ups
A decade ago, the forest-dwelling chimpanzees of West Africa — stars of this year's ‘Wildlife on One’ series — were virtually unknown to science.
And even though it was generally accepted that they, along with the better known chimps of East Africa, were our closest relatives, few would have guessed that their relationships would be, well, so very human.
That we know so much today is due to the dedication and persistence of Hedwige Boesch-Achermann and zoologist Christophe Boesch .
One of many legends on the closeness of human and chimpanzee has been told to us by an old man in the village of Daobli, near our study site in Taï national park.
Gy François says that his people regard the chimpanzee as a brother, and on a special day every year, still celebrate the relationship.
Many years ago, according to the legend, the first daughter of his people's lineage went missing in the forest.
Weeks later, when the mourning for her had already begun, chimpanzees were heard calling near the village.
The calls were strange and insistent, and the whole village went into the forest to find out what was happening.
There they found their beloved girl, surrounded by a horde of chimpanzees that had found and taken care of her.
She had undergone a strange metamorphosis: from her waist upwards she was still the lovely girl everybody knew, but her lower body was now hairy and muscular, much like that of a chimpanzee.
She seemed happy, though, and announced her intention to stay in the forest with her new family.
Her father respected her wishes, and declared that from that day on, they were all brothers, and no one would do any harm to any chimpanzee.
Gy François then led us to the village's chimpanzee sanctuary, a small grass-covered shelter where rice is regularly laid on a few very old-looking chimpanzee skulls.
He said that whenever members of his family come across a dead chimpanzee in the forest, they dig a grave and cover the body, perhaps with a small piece of cloth, and ask the deceased to greet people in the other world.
We have heard many more such stories, evidence of a continuing brotherly regard for chimpanzees among the older members of the local community; it causes great concern to them, and to us, that many of the younger members take no interest in these traditions.
Given these long-standing traditions, it seems amazing that, as recently as a decade ago, the scientific world knew almost nothing of these forest chimpanzees.
In 1979, when we started our long-term study here in Taï —s on the western border of the Ivory Coast, adjoining Liberia — we were not fully aware of the difficulty of our task.
But we were full of enthusiasm, essential to survive that first rainy season in the forest.
Habituating a community of chimpanzees — gaining their acceptance as we followed their daily movements through the forest, and learning to  recognise the animals as individuals — took us five years.
It was certainly frustrating at times, but even before we were able to watch the chimps, we could learn a great deal from listening to their noisy nut-cracking, often audible up to a kilometre away, and deduce much about their elaborate use of tools.
But we did have to wait until the chimpanzees completely accepted out presence before we were able to observe the other food-gathering behaviour that truly sets apart the forest chimpanzees — regular co-operative hunting.
Twelve years on, the main conclusion of our study is that tool usage, co-operative hunting, sharing of food, and various forms of teaching are all common behaviours in the forest chimpanzees of the Ivory Coast.
The most widely accepted theory of human evolution — proposed largely by anthropologists, and based on fossil findings — connects the transformation of our early ancestors to some geological changes which trapped them in the eastern side of Africa's Rift valley, in an environment that was suddenly drier and more open.
The main problem with proving this theory is that, while we have a relative abundance of fossils of human ancestors from the east of the Rift, we have none from the  west.
Why?
The western side of the Rift valley is covered by the tropical rainforest of Central Africa, and perhaps always was.
In such conditions, animal bones of any kind degrade very fast, and no fossilisation occurs.
So the absence of fossils from the west is not enough to prove that humans did not originate there.
In looking for some test of their hypothesis, scientists have tried two approaches.
One has been to study living human populations of hunter-gatherers.
This sort of work can supply us with clues to the possible way of life of our ancestors, but it doesn't really contribute much information about our origins.
The other approach has been to study our closest living relative, the chimpanzee.
In the early sixties, two long-term chimpanzee projects were set up in Tanzania: Jane Goodall's in the wooded savannah around the Gombe Stream Research Center, and Toshida Nishida's in the Mahale Mountains, some 200km south.
It soon emerged from their observations that chimpanzees were both using tools and hunting for meat.
But what about the majority of chimpanzees — the ones that live in the dense, dark forests of West and Central Africa?
Quite simply, until the 1980s, the scientific community knew almost nothing of the way of living of these chimpanzees.
Our recent study of the forest chimpanzees of the Ivory Coast has revealed tool-use and hunting behaviour even more sophisticated than that found in chimpanzees elsewhere.
We believe that our observations suggest a much greater similarity between the behaviour of chimpanzees and humans than has ever been considered.
The example of teaching is particularly revealing.
Teaching is regarded as a basic way of transmitting human culture, and is considered b; y some to apply only to humans.
It may be surprising, but when a cat brings a live mouse to her kittens — perhaps for them to first play with and then kill, or perhaps so that she can kill it while they watch — this is not considered by some experts to be a form of teaching.
For psychologists to accept a behaviour as a form of teaching, they have to be convinced that the behaviour of the mother is intentionally designed to influence the youngsters’ behaviour.
The kittens are certainly influenced by what their mother does, but there is no evidence that her action is directed at one specific behaviour, rather than simply providing them with an opportunity to behave generally with the victim.
When she then kills the prey, it is impossible to prove that she does so to demonstrate the act of killing, because she would have killed it in any case, in order to eat it.
One of the Taï chimpanzee mothers, Ricci, was kind enough to provide us with the first record of observable active teaching (acceptable to a psychologist) in a non-human animal in the wild.
Like most Taï chimpanzee mothers, Ricci had generously shared any nuts she cracked with her daughter Nina, for the first four years of her life.
By the time Nina was five, though, Ricci was sharing fewer nuts with her, but had started to provide her with convenient wooden hammers and uncracked nuts, thus stimulating Nina  to start cracking nuts on her own.
This is similar to that of the mother cat giving her kittens a mouse, but it goes a step further, because Ricci usually abandons her own hammer to Nina.
Ricci's behaviour is adapted to the technical level achieved by her daughter.
Only when the youngster gains sufficient strength and skill does her mother start to switch from providing opened nuts to providing a hammer and unopened ones.
The ability to evaluate the performance of a pupil and adapt to it is a prerequisite of being able to teach, and all Taï mothers appear, in the context of nut-cracking, to do it, though nothing similar has been observed in Gombe.
And four years ago, Ricci took it a step further.
Nina, had been trying to open nuts with an irregularly shaped hammer.
For eight minutes she struggled unsuccessfully, changing her posture, hammer grip and the position of the nut, while Ricci rested nearby, apparently just keeping an absent-minded eye on her daughter.
Finally, Ricci got up and walked over to her daughter, who immediately handed over the troublesome hammer.
Very deliberately, Ricci slowly rotated it into the best position for nut-cracking.
as if to emphasise the significance of this movement, Ricci took a full minute to perform the simple rotation.
Then, with Nina sitting in front of her and watching carefully, Ricci opened 10 nuts (of which Nina ate six whole ones, and part of the rest) and then left her daughter to carry on.
Nina resumed cracking nuts, adopting exactly the same grip on the hammer her mother had demonstrated, and successfully opened quite a few.
Even when she later encountered more difficulties, she tried all sorts of positions, but never changed her grip on the hammer.
In this example, Ricci goes much further than evaluating her daughter's performance.
She compares it with what she thinks is the right behaviour, judges what is wrong (in this case, everything was right except the way Nina was holding the hammer), and then corrects the mistake by demonstrating the right way.
The ability to understand the mistake made by another individual and the willingness to make the effort to correct it have been considered too much for non-human animals, because of the implication of intentionality of behaviour, and of a kind of consciousness.
The record of Ricci's behaviour is, to our knowledge, the first clear case of teaching in any non-human animal.
So why hasn't such behaviour been recorded before?
Part of the answer is simply that until very recently, most chimpanzee research was done on captive animals, who lead a very boring life, are often kept apart from other members of their family, and have a constant abundance of food.
These are not the best conditions in which to study an animal — certainly, no psychologist would dare to make assumptions about normal human abilities by studying imprisoned young orphans!
But even in the wild, such teaching behaviour will occur only when necessary.
Without specific teaching, young chimpanzees, like young children, are extremely keen to copy their parents' behaviour from a very early age.
(At Taï, a young chimpanzee will often harass its mother in order to use her tools, to eat her fruit or to sit on her branch.)
What is special about nut-cracking is that it is particularly difficult and energy-demanding, and an adult standard of performance is reached only after 10 years of practice.
Since a mother generally has a new baby every four and a half years, there may have been pressure on her to speed up each youngster's training, to leave time to care for the latest addition to the family.
This example illustrates wonderfully how important long-term studies are — and how risky science can be!
Only once, after eight years of life in the jungle, did we observe this sequence of teaching behaviour.
How lucky for us that on that particular day we did not instead to the Taï market, or stay in bed because of malaria, and that we followed Ricci rather than Brutus, Héra, or any one of the others.
Our other major food-related observations, of cooperative hunting, have also added to our understanding of the similarities between human and chimpanzee societies.
A key stage in human evolution is thought to have been reached when our ancestors moved towards hunting of large prey, doing so in groups and bringing the meat back to the campsite to share with others.
In this scenario, man became the  hunter, woman the gatherer.
Observations on modern hunter-gatherer societies confirm the generality of division of labour between the sexes, the fact that a certain portion of the food is shared between group members, and that hunting tends to be a male activity.
In Taï chimpanzees, too, we find a tendency towards such social distinctions, though the divisions are far from straightforward.
Female chimpanzees do not often hunt, but they nevertheless play an important role in hunting, and they usually end up gaining access to significant portions of meat.
The quest for meat is hazardous and complex.
The hunters, usually dominant males, spend a great deal of time together in the process.
As with other primates, male chimpanzees have a clear hierarchy that controls access to females.
This order is regularly tested and fights between rivals are generally avoided through the use of signals that express submission or dominance.
But to be able to hunt successfully, males have to remain close together — sometimes, when hunting success is low, for many hours and over several kilometres, and so unusual tolerance of each other is called for.
During the hunts, females are left on their own lot, and so to enable the whole group to re-form after the hunt, the two sexes have to co-ordinate their separate movements, staying within calling distance of each other.
The extreme flexibility in social structure can be illustrated by the range of behaviour recorded during one hunt from 1990.
It was right at the end of the main hunting season, and we had already watched as a group of males had twice unsuccessfully hunted the same group of colobus monkeys that day.
By the third try, the colobus were scattered, making the job more difficult.
After 20 minutes, Kendo, the community's  large and powerful dominant male, had isolated a small group of monkeys and was very quickly forcing them towards the north.
His younger brother Fitz, who had been running on the ground, now took over Kendo's role and chased the monkeys further, while Kendo followed on the ground, along with Macho, Ulysse, Brutus and several females.
After five minutes of rapid chasing, Fitz had isolated a large group of adolescent colobus, and all the chimps in the trees started making the typical exciting hunting barks.
Macho and Ulysse were by this time standing upright, concentrating on the movements of the colobus high up in the trees.
The monkeys jumped south to avoid Fitz, but Macho was there and rushed up a tree to block the route, while Ulysse, anticipating Macho's move, rushed into a tree east of both Fitz and Macho.
Pressed by Macho, the colobus jumped into Ulysse's tree, and then into the one guarded by Fitz, who, with an impressive rush, caught the colobus.
By then more females were following the hunt from the ground, and all screamed at the top of their voices.
Kendo, Brutus, Darwin and the dominant females Ondine and Loukoum climbed up Fitz's tree.
Kendo then took the prey from Fitz, having let him tear out a large piece of the monkey's intestines.
The excitement was very high, and the pressure of the other chimpanzees in the tree forced him down on the ground, where he was greeted by the screaming females.
The screams reached their peak as the remaining males descended to the ground and started charging through the group.
Kendo could not resist the excitement, and in joining in the displaying dropped the remains of the colobus; it was immediately grabbed by Ondine and Loukoum, who were quickly surrounded by the other females.
Ulysse and Brutus, both low-ranking males, soon moved in and started eating with the dominant females, who showed no aggression towards them.
By now the pressure from the other group members was enormous, but the four in possession of the body resisted by staying close together.
There were repeated charges from Kendo, and the number-two male, Macho, but they were always chased off by Ulysse, Brutus, and sometimes even Ondine, while the rest of the feeding party lent their support with aggressive barks.
It was Darwin, the lowest ranking male, who finally broke into the group by approaching slowly, all the while making soft, submissive grunts.
He was never allowed to hold the colobus, though, and sat eating his piece of meat apart from the others.
Having cooled down somewhat, Macho tried the same submissive approach, and was allowed to take some small pieces of meat.
Meanwhile, the remaining males carried on displaying wildly — Fitz and Rousseau remaining at a distance, and only Kendo daring to charge right over the scrum — all to no avail.
Thus the remarkable situation developed in which the top-ranking male Kendo and his younger brother Fitz were completely excluded from the meat-eating scrum, and the number-two male Macho was barely tolerated and allowed only a few tiny morsels.
In the centre, Ulysse, a male well down in the hierarchy, had control of the prey, which he now ripped apart, allowing the formation of several sharing groups.
Five minutes had now passed since the capture, and Ulysse left the site with the upper half of the monkey, which he then shared with Brutus.
The dominant females also had their share — Loukoum took the lower half, and Ondine had a good portion of the internal organs.
As the feeding group dispersed, the atmosphere rapidly calmed down, and the screams gave way to a succession of peaceful feeding grunts.
From then on, sharing was the rule.
Ulysse and Brutus were joined by Rousseau, Darwin, and several females; Loukoum by many of the younger females and Macho.
Everybody ended up with at least a bit of the meat — apart, that is, from the top male Kendo and a few of the shyer females.
This episode reveals a flexibility of social structure that was thought only to occur in humans.
Taï chimpanzees clearly have different dominance orders for different situations.
There is a ‘classic’ one, with the strongest male at the top, for ordinary social situations.
There is a second hierarchy for the all-important meat-eating sessions.
And there is at least one more.
Though Brutus lost his alpha rank three years ago, and is now fourth down the ladder, he is still the uncontested leader when the group is on the move, and in territorial encounters with neighbouring groups.
Certainly the debate on how close chimpanzees and humans are is far from being closed.
From the viewpoint of a molecular biologist, the distance between us seems to decrease as our knowledge increases.
The latest results are that, genetically, the difference between humans and chimpanzees is certainly less than the difference between the chimpanzee and the gorilla, or between the horse and the zebra.
When studying wild living apes, the contribution to this ongoing debate is a relatively easy one (though it does require time and patience), consisting of making enough observations and asking the right questions.
When studying small bits of fossilised bone, perhaps a knee joint or part of the jaw, it is much more difficult to speculate on the behaviour of our ancestors.
For both sides, utmost care and modesty is required when it comes to intercepting the results, and speculating on the closeness between the species.
Eight-year-old Gerald pauses mid-way through extracting the marrow from a colobus bone with a short stick (held between thumb and forefinger), which he had first stripped of leaves and broken to length.
To young to join in the usual share-out of meat after a kill, he had waited instead for his mother to give him a portion of hers.
Coula trees grow close together at Taï, and so coula-nut-cracking is often quite a social activity, with up to a dozen chimpanzees feeding together.
Being able to see all the chimps together is unusual, though.
This clearing, along with the observation tower above it, was created to enable cameraman Mike Richards to film the chimps' behaviour.
Says Mike, ‘When the chimps first saw the platform, they stared at it for a long time, and then they realised it was just me up there, and carried on.’
This was towards the end of the filming, by which time most of the chimps recognised Mike, and allowed him to approach them.
‘It was through their trust that I was in this unique position to walk among them, and I felt I owed it to them not to let them down.’
Macho, a 25-year-old male in his prime, cracks coula nuts.
At Taï, the chimpanzees make use of many other tools, such as long sticks to extract ants from a nest, and bunches of leaves to soak up water from pools in trees.
Incredibly, there was a time when we liked to think that sophisticated tool use was an exclusively human domain.
Right:Though coula nuts are easily cracked with a wooden hammer, a chimp will favour a stone one if it's available.
Here Joma does the cracking while her five-year-old daughter Joshu holds a supply of coula nuts in readiness.
Opposite:To crack the much tougher panda nuts, a large rock hammer is essential.
Such rocks are rare in the forest, and so sometimes a queue forms to use one.
Here, Kendo (on the right), an adult male, is doing the cracking, while Gitane waits her turn, and her five-year-old daughter Goyave looks on — and learns.
At this age, Goyave has trouble lifting such a large hammer, but she has a go whenever it is left unattended.
Hunting sequence.
Centre:Brutus holds a red colobus he has just caught with the help of several other members of the group.
Crowding round him for a share are, from left to right, Rousseau, Poupee and Héra (her tiny son Hector just visible on her belly).
Opposite top:Immediately after the kill there is great excitement, with all members of the group — in this case Gypsy (Gitane's adolescent son) and Rousseau — joining in a bout of screaming.
Above:As soon as they prey has been divided up, all becomes calm.
Here, Rousseau eats his share.
The half-hour marathon
It generally takes between six and eight weeks to film a half-hour documentary for ‘Wildlife on One’ slot.
To complete ‘Too Close for Comfort?’, wildlife cameraman Michael Richards and producer Alastair Fothergill spent a total of six months in Taï, spread over five different filming trips.
Filming nut cracking and other behaviour in the dark forest was difficult enough, but it was the inherently fast-moving activity of hunting that provided the real challenge.
I will never forget the day Mike collapsed with complete exhaustion.
As he lay on the floor of the Boesch's simple straw-covered house, moaning and groaning, I grew increasingly worried.
I have never seen anyone so completely shattered.
We were in the heart of the rainforest, a day's travel from the nearest hospital.
Eventually, though, Mike recovered, and after a day's rest we carried on.
During that trip — the first of three planned to film the chimps for The Trials of Life — we were hoping to film the chimps hunting and catching colobus monkeys.
Two weeks after arriving at Taï, we had managed to film nothing at all.
Mike and I had quickly established a routine: our day would start at 4.30am, when I would cook a massive breakfast to last Mike the whole day.
Then it was a half-hour's drive from our base to Christophe and Hedwige's house, and from there Mike would set off on an hour's run with Christophe through the forest, still in darkness, to ensure they reached the chimpanzees' nest site before the occupants moved off for the day.
Chimps make new nests every night, and to keep track of them, you have to be there before they rise, and keep up with them until they settle down for the night.
The early morning run was the worst part of the day.
If Mike fell behind, he would be lost in the forest.
And Christophe, keep to keep up his research, could make no concessions for a cameraman weighed down with 40kg of gear.
Christophe was extremely fit and used to the 100 per cent humidity, and had learnt a long time back to carry the absolute minimum — a battered still camera and two oranges for lunch — for a full day in the forest.
During that first two weeks of running through the forest, it was all Mike could do to keep up, as Christophe pursued chimps that Mike hardly ever saw.
‘They are just black shadows in the vegetation,’ he told me, increasingly worried that we might not get any shots at all.
When Mike finally did collapse after two dreadful weeks, it was clear that we either had to give up, or drastically change our approach.
To avoid disturbing the chimps, Christophe had hoped to keep numbers entering the forest to an absolute minimum, but it was now obvious that Mike would need help carrying the camera gear.
Gregoire Nohon, an Ivorian research assistant who had learnt how to find his way in the forest alongside Christophe, kindly agreed to help.
A special light-weight tripod was sent out from the UK (and after much greasing of palms, finally made it through customs).
We also decided that Mike would have to take every third day off to recover, while Christophe continued to follow the chimps, so that he and Mike would know where to find them the following day.
It was on one of Mike's rest days, when I went along with Christophe to do some sound recordings, that we got the first view of what was to become an obsession for Mike and me over the next two and a half years.
The male chimps hunted with spectacular success, catching a big colobus monkey, which they had to bring to the ground to eat, rather than remaining in the trees as they usually do.
What followed was quite extraordinary.
The whole chimp group screamed, seemingly with blood-curdling excitement, splitting my eardrums and sending the needle on my tape recorder smashing into the red.
At the same time all the adults rushed to the kill, piling into a fierce scrum for meat.
I was crouching just feet away, terrified that at any moment one of the massive males would charge into me in the desperate struggle.
To my eyes, the scrum was terrifying.
I had never seen any animal, human or otherwise, so wild — so determined, so excited, so driven.
To Christophe, all the while recording his observations on a tiny dictation machine, it was an organised share-out of the kill.
Because he knew all the individuals, he could keep track of who was getting the lion's share of the meat.
And when eventually the colobus had been ripped into pieces, and the forest went quiet, he pointed out the way the chimps shared their spoils with their nearest relatives.
I knew then that, whatever the problems, we just had to film one of these extraordinary meat scrums.
By the end of that first trip, our goal still seemed a long way off.
In fact, we had managed to film just one colobus capture.
The monkey was eaten up in the trees, and was half hidden by leaves, but it did provide the key shot for the closing sequence of the ‘Hunting and Escaping’ programme in The Trials of Life .
Most of the remaining shots, though, were rather dark and disappointing.
As Mike had feared, the chimps did appear on film rather like dark shadows lost in the leaves.
To complete the hunting sequence, we would clearly have to film many more hunts, and piece together all the moments we managed to capture.
During the next two filming trips for Trials of Life we grew more used to the forest, and the chimps became more confident with Mike.
He found that he could sit right among them, and equipped with faster film, a special lens, and a waterproof housing for the camera, the results continued to improve.
We still hadn't filmed a meat scrum, though.
And the forest continued to take its toll.
After one trip, Mike spent six weeks on crutches because of a badly infected leg, and after another, Sally Wilson from the Natural History Unit, who helped set up the trip, spent almost six months in hospital with an unidentified infection.
The fourth trip to Taï proved the most successful, though it was too late to include the footage from it in Trials of Life .
The chimps hunted as they never had before.
On one memorable day they made three captures, with Mike rushing exhausted around the forest trying to keep up.
It was not easy — rainstorms like waterfalls would drown the camera, the eye-piece repeatedly steamed up making focusing difficult, hanging vines did their best to strangle…and the chimps just kept moving.
Eventually, Mike managed to film two meat scrums on the ground.
It was exceptional trip.
To complete the footage for the Wildlife in One , we went back to the forest yet again, for six weeks.
We had good footage of the capture and the scrum, but we still needed footage of the hunt itself.
This takes place mainly up in the forest canopy, and so is almost impossible to film from the ground.
The solution was provided by Mark Cole, a brilliant climber and naturalist who had come from the UK with us.
He built us nine platforms up in the canopy.
Fifty metres up, the view is magnificent, but all you can do is sit and wait for animals to come by.
Mike spent more than 30 days waiting on one or other of the platforms, and it was not until the last day that the colobus monkeys came close enough for him to get good shots of them moving through the trees.
(A pair of crowned eagles proved much more cooperative, accepting a hide near their nest straight away.)
We left the forest that last time with mixed feelings.
Mike says that filming the hunt was be far the hardest job he has ever done, and he was certainly relieved to see the last of running through the forest during the rainy season.
On the other hand, we had learnt to recognise many of the chimps as individuals, and felt they had become firm friends.
Most chimp activity takes place at least within sight of the ground, but to film all the stages of a hunt, cameraman Mike Richards (left ) also had to take to the air.
Enter climber-turned-platform-builder Mark Cole (opposite ), who would shin up the chosen tree, attach a climbing rope, and then accompany Mike on each subsequent climb.
Of the nine filming platforms, the highest — at 50 metres — was needed to film the colobus's other main predator, the crowned eagle (above ), which also features in the programme.
Above : Piment tries some berries that her mother Poupee has just been eating.
At almost a year old, Piment would have already been experimenting with solid food for a few months, though probably more in play than serious eating.
TV Link
Too Close for Comfort?, the first film to show, in detail, the behaviour of rainforest chimpanzees, can be seen on Monday 6 January at 8.30pm on BBC1, launching this year's Wildlife on One series.
The Taï chimps also featured in several sequences in The Trials of Life (see BBC WILDLIFE, October 1990).
Authors
Hedwige Boesch-Achermann and Christophe Boesch (here with son Lukas) have spent more than 10 years studying chimp society in the Taï forest.
Until 1990, the whole family lived most of each year in the Taï forest.
Lukas, now eight, and Léonore (right ), now three, were each introduced to the forest when about six weeks old.
‘As a mother,’ says Hedwige, ‘the main problem was the thought that they might fall ill.
Fortunately they never did, as the nearest medical care was in Abidjan, 600km away — though of course we had a stock of medical books and instruments in case.
We never considered giving up our work with the chimps when the children were born, but it would not have been possible for us to continue without the help of the Africans — I always had two men employed to take care of the children when I went with Christophe into the forest.’
KING of the WOODS
The books tell you that badgers love peanuts, but what they don't tell you is that a plastic peanut packet is likely to go off in your pocket with a high-decibel rustle that will send any self-respecting badger right back underground.
Simon King knows a lot of other things you won't find in books: take his advice and learn to be your own badger expert.
My first encounter with a badger, as a lad of 10, was as exciting as I could have wished.
I was with my grandad at a lake in Gloucestershire, night-fishing for tench by the light of a tilley lamp.
It was dark and all was quiet when, suddenly, a commotion broke out in the undergrowth behind us.
The snuffles and crunches of some unknown thing convinced my grandad that we were about to be mugged.
I dived into the bushes to find out what it was, ignoring grandad's faint cries of ‘come back, Simon, you're not allowed to go in there.’
My reward was a badger.
The very next day I started  ferreting around in the woods and came upon the most magnificent fortress of a sett.
Its tunnels were almost big enough for me to go down, and sticking my head down one, I had my first smell of badger — and, of course, completely ruined my chance of seeing any animals that day.
That's how it was with me and badgers then.
A matter of trial and error, doing all the wrong things, but little by little getting to know their ways.
And it was nice to learn it by myself  rather than be told it.
Of course, it's good to know the ground rules about wearing the right clothes and not jumping on the sett (certainly, from the badger's point of view), but the consequence of picking up badger-lore slowly — getting closer to the smells, scratches and signs — is that you not only find it easier to watch badgers but also more enjoyable.
You become a detective in the woods, rather than being led around them.
But it's still useful to discover short-cuts or be given practical tips.
So here are a few of mine, mixed in with answers to those questions you might have felt too silly to ask.
What do badgers smell like?
Badgers smell musky, which is not surprising because they habitually deposit tiny amounts of musk, a smelly fluid secreted from a gland near the anus, to mark the home territory and individuals within that territory.
It is a sort of ‘clan pong’, an olfactory badge that  tells each badger in the group who its friends are and whether or not it is in the right place.
Having been marked personally by both wild and captive badgers, I can testify that the immediate effect is quite powerful and distinctive.
The only other smell you are likely to encounter that could be confused with badger musk is that of the fox.
By comparison, badger aroma is much less pungent and less acrid, though it can be quite strong in the vicinity of the sett, where the occupants have repeatedly marked both the ground and each other.
To me, the smell is not unlike fresh human ‘BO’, but a bit sweeter; it also has quite a peppery hint to it and a touch of wood smoke.
Fox is a much stronger smell, more aniseed in base (sometimes, old wet straw has a hint of ‘foxy’ smell about it).
If you get a sudden whiff of musk as you walk along a path in the early morning, this is almost certainly fox and not badger, which is rarely powerful enough to hang in the air.
What sounds do they make?
Badger vocabulary is quite extensive.
The vocalisation you are most likely to hear is that produced by juveniles when they are playing.
It is often described as ‘whickering’, a pretty good term once you've heard it but not a lot of good if you haven't.
That's probably because, like smells, sounds are difficult to put into words.
But I'll have a go anyway.
OK, imagine you are trying to clear your throat — politely, not a great hacking cough, just a ‘pre-after-dinner-speech’ kind of a snort.
Now, try doing it five or six times in quick succession, all within a second if possible.
Add a high-pitched hint of sound from your voicebox.
Repeat several times and you're whickering (nearly).
There is an adult version of this sound.
Females often produce it as a contact call for their cubs, particularly when they start going out on rambles together for the first time.
It's the same sort of sound but much lower in volume and pitch — it almost sounds like a stomach rumbling.
Males produce a similar call, but lower still than females.
I have heard it most often during the period from February to April and have always associated it with mating.
Indeed, when a male is following a female at this time he seems to produce this ‘chuntering’ sound almost continuously.
When badgers are alarmed, they snort.
It sounds like an airy sneeze.
This is probably the most frequently heard sound experienced by people who are new to badger watching and if you do hear it, it is probably time quietly to get up and go home.
I have only once seen a serious fight between badgers, and the sounds on that occasion were terrifying.
Six animals were involved, five attacking a lone female who was new to the territory.
The calls were a cacophony of piercing screams, low growls and a host of other noises.
It left me in no doubt that somebody was being hurt.
A sound I have often read about, but never knowingly heard, is the scream produced by male badgers.
I don't know why I haven't heard it.
I have to assume it's because they produce this call only very rarely, since I have spent quite literally thousands of hours in the woods at night.
The scream of a fox, on the other hand, is quite distinctive: a wailing, wavering shriek that has given rise to many a false report of a midnight mugging.
Badgers also produce a few other noises that aren't vocal but, none the less, are very badgerish and are often the first sign that one is nearby.
One is scratching — not the ground (which they do a great deal) but of themselves.
Since they have very coarse fur and stout claws, badger hygiene tends to be an extremely noisy affair.
I have, on more than one occasion, managed to entice a badger to within a few feet, simply by scratching my head, the inquisitive animals searching for this new ‘badger’ grooming in the shadows.
I am sure that sometimes it has even started one off on its own grooming session.
Another is sniffing.
When a badger is foraging, especially for the earthworms which it loves, it will stuff its nose into the earth and vegetation and make a noise like a pig rooting.
And last is the sound of badgers eating.
They are very noisy eaters.
Whenever I put food out around a sett prior to an evening watch, I can usually hear a badger munching a peanut or two for some time before the first animal comes into view.
What could I feed them?
There are quite a few people who would say that you shouldn't feed a wild badger at all.
The argument is put forward that if a badger associates humans with food it may one day wander up to the wrong person, with fatal results.
In my experience, badgers that are fed do not get used to people in general, but only to those who visit and feed them regularly (or those people that badgers meet in gardens on their regular nightly wanderings).
Even at the most constantly watched setts, the badgers can sometimes become  nervous if they catch the scent of a stranger, particularly if there are none of the usual human visitors present either.
Once, when I was hand-feeding peanuts to six badgers at a sett in the east of England that had been watched and provisioned with food regularly for more than 30 years, the badgers were scared off merely by a distant snapping twig and the far-off murmur of voices.
One of the problems that can develop through the feeding of wild animals is that of dependency, particularly in the case of those animals which live in urban areas where natural foraging opportunities are few and far between.
So, once you've started to feed badgers, it is imperative that you keep it up regularly.
This doesn't apply, however, if you're only offering them a small amount of food to keep them hanging around the sett for a little longer than usual.
Peanuts are perfect badger bribes — just the same type that you buy to put out for the birds.
A couple of handfuls scattered over the area surrounding the sett, an hour or two before dusk, will often convince the resident brocks that it's worth staying a while longer before going off to forage.
But not all badgers instantly discover a taste for peanuts: it may take a few visits on your behalf before they catch on that these small pellets are good to eat.
And it's worth remembering to carry the nuts in a soft cloth bag and not a rustling plastic one.
Other ‘brock-munchies’ are brown bread, meat, fruit and veggies.
Being omnivores, badgers will get used to eating just about anything, though very little will interest them on rainy nights, when the chance of getting their favourite food — earthworms — is high.
They do love sweet stuff such as honey, jam, chocolate, and biscuits, and some people even prepare special badger cakes to proffer to their local clan.
But I can't help feeling that sugar doesn't do their teeth any good, and so I wouldn't recommend feeding them too much of it.
Personally, I have always found peanuts, raisins, brown bread and earthworms to be the perfect combination.
How do I know when I've found a sett?
One hole can often look much like the next, and a newly dug or outlying sett can be mistaken for a fox's earth.
There are, however, certain signs to watch out for.
The first (and most diagnostic) is the presence of bedding — not a duvet and pillows, but rather grass, dead leaves or other vegetation that the occupants have collected to cushion and insulate their chambers.
Some other mammals do make use of bedding, it's true.
Otters gather a certain amount, but an otter holt is usually a natural hole between rocks or roots, and much smaller than that of a badger.
And though rabbits use grass to plug their nursery holes, these are diminutive by comparison with a hole excavated by a badger.
Badgers gather bedding throughout the year.
Just what gets them in the mood I'm not sure, but I have seen them indulge in this activity in all but the wettest or snowiest conditions.
One thing that certainly gets them going is the availability of good bedding material.
I have often put out some dried grass or leaves and had badgers make use of my offerings the very same evening.
Watching a badger move bedding can be very amusing.
The animal gathers up its intended cushion between its chin and chest and then makes its way to the sett, backwards.
It often loses its grip on the ball of bedding along the way and has to regather the bundle.
Sometimes it gives up, leaving a tell-tale roll of vegetation near the sett.
The younger animals sometimes have trouble navigating (nor surprising, if you're walking backwards and your own rather large bottom is blocking your view), and frequently get into quite a pickle, backing into fences, down ledges or into trees!
Such activity is naturally a bit messy, and those left-over bits of bedding that litter the area around the sett, within the spoil heaps and down the tunnels, are a dead give-away.
Old, well established badger setts are often huge fortresses where, over the years, tons of soil have been shifted, forming mounds and tips.
It's not unusual to find 30 or more entrance holes all associated with one colony.
An average tunnel has a diameter of between nine and twelve inches (22–30cm), but the entrances may be much, much wider.
Badger hair is quite distinctive, too, and there are usually a few stray guard hairs lying around, loosened as the animals groom.
These are the coarse outer hairs which overlie the thick insulating underfur.
They are not a uniform grey, but rather pale at the base, dark in the middle, and pale again at the tip.
Mammal footprints are rarely as clear as the textbook illustrations.
But badgers' often show up better than most, and because they are endowed with stout claws on their front feet, there may be four or five distinct claw-marks showing even if the ground is too hard to reveal the rest of the print.
Much more tricky than knowing if you've found a badger sett, is knowing whether or not it is still active.
This has now become particularly important, since recent laws have made the disturbance or destruction of a badger sett illegal, so long as it is in regular use.
But what constitutes ‘regular  use’ is still a bit of a grey area.
For example, many badger communities use one group of holes for several years, leaving others in the territory to fall into decay, only to uproot and re-open them on a whim.
If they turn up to discover a human housing estate instead of the expected hole in the ground, it must undoubtedly stress them.
Even at setts which are used regularly, the signs are not always clear if there are only a few animals present.
Hair seems to be well-nigh everlasting, and so discovery of a tuft or two does not guarantee recent activity.
Well trampled ground may remain that way for some time.
And a cobweb across an entrance hole tells you that nobody has passed that way for the past few hours, but little more.
Evidence of fresh digging is a sure sign that active interest is being shown at the sett, and a careful look at the badger paths that lead to and from the area should reveal how frequently animals pass along it.
Also, a nearby shallow hole or scrape with badger dung in it — a latrine — is a sign that badgers are about.
But the only sure way to tell if the sett is in use is to watch it.
Not just for one night, but for several, and to develop an intimate knowledge of the local badger community.
How do I avoid scaring them?
Badgers vary enormously from one individual to the next.
You could fire a starting pistol next to some and they would barely look up.
Others seem to hear your heartbeat and remain in a constant state of nervous tension.
All badgers will get used to anything in time, but the new and unexpected will make even the most stable of badgers worried.
If you're watching a sett that isn't often visited by humans it's as well to be extra careful and observe the following basic rules.
Get there early — at least one hour before you expect to see the badgers — and don't walk over the sett or across the entrances.
Sit downwind, of course, but be aware that wind often swirls in woodland clearings, so look at the leaves on the tops of the trees to make sure you are not being misled by the wind direction at ground level.
Quiet clothes are a must: no rustly nylons, and lots of woollies.
And absolutely no fidgeting.
That's not easy if you are sitting for three or four hours, but imperative if you're watching nervous badgers.
There are, however, certain noises you can't help making.
Archenemy number one to a badger-watcher is a cough.
That insignificant little tickle that develops into an eye-watering, throat-gripping, lung-bursting agony when you're not allowed to let it out.
I was recently working with some badgers in Lancashire, and I still had the remnants of a cold.
At 7 o'clock I was fine.
By 8.00 I felt the first slight warning tickle.
By 9.00 a badger was warily sniffing the air in front of me, as I struggled for breath in the shadows.
Fortunately, there were sheep in the adjacent field and to prevent complete suffocation, I tried out my best ‘sheep coughing’ impersonation.
The badger, though startled, accepted my rendition and continued to forage.
Thank goodness for asthmatic sheep!
The other bane of a badger-watcher's life is sneezing.
There is nothing else in a British woodland that sneezes like a human, so the only way to avoid startling Brock is to stifle it.
This does feel a bit like you are trying to blow your eyeballs out of your ears, but it is the only way to avoid disaster.
And if you get an itch, you can scratch it, so long as you do so badger-style: five to six rapid scratches per second.
The most human-hardy badgers actually respond positively to certain noises, be it a soft voice, a rustle of peanuts in a bag or even, in back gardens, a door opening.
With setts that I watch regularly, I usually talk to myself in a low, quiet voice as I arrive and just before I leave.
This way the badgers are never startled by the sound of my movements
It's a good idea to clear leaves and sticks from your path during the day to make your passage to and from the sett less obtrusive.
Even if the badgers are used to a bit of noise, there is something vaguely sacrilegious about snapping twigs in the woods at night.
Left:Playground.
Your best chance for successful badger-watching is carefully to stake out a sett before dusk.
If you're able to read the signs and identify an area well used by badgers, you just might be rewarded by a sight like this: a bundle of young badgers at play on their log in the fading light of a summer's evening.
Above:Scratch ‘n’ sniff.
Grooming is a necessary ritual after a day spent in the close confines of the sett, a way of easing the effects of parasites and, when indulged in with another badger, of spreading the colony smell between individuals.
On dark nights, the sound of horny claw against coarse hair or the vocalisations of two badgers enjoying a bout of mutual grooming are often the first give-aways of emergence.
Below right:Cub scouts.
June is one of the best months for badger-watching.
By then, the four-month-old cubs are well grown and emerge regularly from the sett, often well before dusk.
They will spend 20 minutes or so playing and exploring around their home before rambling off to their feeding grounds.
Some peanuts, judiciously scattered, may persuade them to linger for a while more.
A full sett of evidence.
1.
The well worn paths around a sett lead from the currently used exits to nearby dung pits, and then off towards the badgers' feeding grounds in fields or gardens.
2.
You'll rarely find such a perfect pair of paw prints as these.
Each shows the wide pad clearly, as well as all five toes and their claws (longer on the fore foot); and, characteristically, the hind foot has overprinted on the fore.
3.
The parallel rakes of badger claws show up on scratching posts, such as fallen logs or the trunks of trees, as well as in the bare earth surrounding a sett or on a badger's path over a hedgebank. 4.
Barbed wire snatches tufts of badger hair, as do brambles.
Where badgers have shouldered their way under sheep-fencing, look for dried earth or polishing on the wire, and for the odd loose guard hair.
TV Link
Simon's latest wildlife drama for Christmas follows the trials and tribulations of a young male badger.
Dusk the Badger will be shown on Sunday 29 December at 6.40pm, on BBC2.
Author
Simon King has been watching badgers since the age of 10, and filming them since he was 16.
His latest series,Walk on the Wild Side , is about animal behaviour, and will be shown on BBC1 in the spring.
Later in the year he will be starting work on his next animal drama, featuring Indian elephants.
Savings accounts
In the run-up to a major meeting in March, at which the ban on trade in ivory will come under pressure again,Martin Wright surveys ways in which WWF is protecting elephants on the ground in Africa.
Africa's elephants are still in trouble.
Though the much trumpeted ivory ban has blunted the immediate threat, they are still menaced by poaching, as well as by human population pressure and loss of habitat, across much of the continent.
Five hundred years ago, some 10 million elephants roamed Africa from the Mediterranean to the Cape.
By the end of the 1970s, numbers had fallen to around 1.3 million.
Over the next 10 years, half of Africa's remaining elephants were wiped out, mostly by the poacher's bullet.
Today, about 600,000 are thought to remain.
The loss is not only that of a magnificent animal: the decline of the elephant hurts the wider environment.
As one of Africa's prime tourist attractions, it draws in desperately needed funds for the conservation authorities.
And on a more down-to-earth level, its foraging habits have helped shape and preserve many of Africa's habitats, from the semi-desert of Namibia to the rainforests of the Cameroon.
The sheer range of its habitats, and the variety of threats facing it, make WWF's battle to save the elephant an uphill task.
As WWF senior conservation officer Simon Lyster explains: ‘We have to target our efforts on those areas where we can have a real impact — both inside and outside existing ‘protected areas’.’
Poaching remains the chief threat, but it's also one which is susceptible to prompt action.
In Tanzania, WWF provided emergency funds to cover a highly successful anti-poaching sweep, which led to the arrest of more than 1,000 people, ranging from the poachers themselves to corrupt officials, many of whom had been involved in the ivory trade.
In Namibia's vast Etosha Game Par, WWF has scored a major success with the creation of a new, highly trained anti-poaching unit, which has dramatically reduced the numbers of animals lost.
Remarkably, the unit has been forged from members of both the former SWAPO guerrillas and the South-African backed koevert counter-insurgency force, who only two years ago were locked in a ferocious bush war.
Their methods are a far cry from the widely held (and largely inaccurate) image of anti-poaching units as bunches of trigger-happy paramilitaries.
As chief warden Allan Cilliers explains: ‘We achieve much more by persuasion than by brute force.
The guys do a lot of work in the villages on the borders of the park, talking to the headmen, explaining the dangers of poaching.’
Even when poachers are apprehended — often as a result of expert tracking by the former bush fighters — fire-fights are rare.
Most simply give themselves up, and, in the case of those who have done no more than poach the odd buck for a little bushmeat, are often let off with a caution.
Outside the relatively well managed southern African reserves, the picture is less clear.
In many areas, elephant conservation will only succeed as part of a wider programme to protect a whole environment.
Such a project is under way in Gabon, the tropical forests of which are home to an estimated 70,000 elephants — believed to be Africa's largest undisturbed population.
The title of WWF's five-year programme in Gabon —‘Conservation before the Crisis’— reflects the fact that the country remains relatively unscathed by the environmental catastrophes which have ravaged much of Africa.
But as revenues from oil, Gabon's principal export, fall, so pressure on the forest — and its elephants — grows.
WWF is working here to establish a network of protected areas, and a similar process is under way in the Korup rainforest of Cameroon — something of a flagship project for WWF and its partner agencies.
There are two key tasks in these areas: first, the regions have to be thoroughly surveyed, which in the case of elephants often involves tracking of tagged animals by VHF radio or even satellite.
This can be dangerous work: three field workers in Korup were trapped behind a tree by an enraged elephant after their tranquilliser dart missed its target.
A second essential component in all such programmes is winning over local people.
In Gabon, WWF is supporting the development of sustainable forest industries, to provide the human population with alternatives to logging or hunting; while in Korup, some of the forest's inhabitants are being trained as game guards.
Such ‘integrated development’ is vital for any long term protection of elephants, and other wildlife, because it gives local people a stake in conservation.
In Zambia, WWF supports a government programme which allows plentiful game animals to be killed to provide bushmeat for villages, and which also provides them with a share in the revenue from the strictly controlled trophy-hunting.
WWF's Zambia representative Richard Jeffery, acknowledges that such a project may raise hackles in the northern hemisphere, where the killing of large, attractive African mammals may be viewed with alarm.
But in cash-starved rural communities, where every extra pound of meat is a godsend, it can do more to win the active support of local people than any number of anti-poaching patrols.
As such, it is vital for getting the community involved, getting people on the side of wild-life conservation, and dissuading them from poaching.
(A similar wide-ranging scheme in Namibia is proving to be a great success, as described on the WWF page in October 1991.)
As Ed Wilson, of the East African regional office in Kenya, points out, conservation cannot thrive in isolation.
‘Many of our projects now include some development aspects.
After all, many of the communities living on the edge of a protected area have traditionally enjoyed hunting rights in the area itself.
If they exercise those rights today, they'll be pursued as poachers.
It's far better to work with them, rather than against them.
Programmes like these have been hailed as the future of conservation, and rightly so.
But, particularly while the door to the ivory market remains ajar, they are unlikely to remove the need for patrols and game guards.
As Richard Jeffery notes: ‘There's a lot of talk at the moment of community development programmes as a sort of panacea.
There's no doubt they can help enormously, but in a country like Zambia, with 50 per cent of its population crammed into urban areas, there's always going to be someone tempted by the rich pickings of poaching.
One guy with an AK-47 can wipe out 50 elephants in a day — we can't afford to relax our guard.’
For more information about the World Wide Fund for Nature, send an sae to WWF Communications, Panda House, Weyside Park, Godalming, Surrey GU7 1XR.
Tuskers' last stand.
In the bid to save Africa's elephants, WWF is spending more than £2 million a year on 30 projects in 14 African countries.
Laird of Creation
One excuse always follows another for some kind of human management of the unpopulated regions of Scotland.
Now that the recession is in the process of revoking the latest of those excuses,Richard Mabey has a suggestion: let's re-examine the conceit of the indispensable human imprint and return some of the land, at least, to Nature.
Photographs by Laurie Campbell .
There is a sad inevitability about the battles which wage continuously over the future of the wilder uplands of Scotland.
It is one of the rules of the ‘progress’ game: vast reserves of empty land attract people eager to appropriate and exploit them.
In the Highlands the process has been all the more hurtful because the usurpers have so often been outsiders with grandiose ambitions.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the native pinewoods — one of the last extensive remnants of the north European forests — were looted for the English navy.
In the nineteenth century it was the native inhabitants' turn, and the Highlands suffered the terrible injury of the Clearances.
In Sutherland alone, one third of the population was evicted (by burning down their homes in most cases) to make way for sheep ranching and game shooting — which ensured in their turn that the pine forests would stand little chance of regenerating.
In the twentieth century, much of this open country has been put under another alien regime — huge shrouds of conifers that during the 1980s gave tax relief to absentee entrepreneurs and speculators.
Now power and ownership have drifted ever further offshore, and walkers and birdwatchers just up for the day from Clydeside can find themselves fenced out of the moor by the multinational grouse-shooting and deer-stalking syndicates.
But recently the Highland bubble has looked like bursting.
Forestry companies no longer granted tax concessions have been trying to offload their holdings.
Big corporate estates, pressed by the recession, have been put on the market.
From the Cairngorms through the Spey valley pinewoods round Abernethy and Rothiemurchus, out to Wester Ross and even the inner isles, so much wild country is changing hands — or at least changing status — that is has begun to look as if Scotland might at last be able to possess a tract of untroubled land, a sanctuary free of commercial pressures and of what the poet Thomas Grey called ‘the pomp of power’, where native wildlife could flourish and humans meditate upon their species' past follies and arrogance.
In fact, a kind of wilderness.
I use the word with hesitation, since in these days of global tourism and ubiquitous pollution it is, to say the least, a somewhat relative term.
It is also a contentious one, that riles both ecologists and landworkers.
When I was writing in this magazine [October 1987]about the troubles of the Flow Country in Sutherland (christened then ‘Britain's Last Wilderness’), I suggested that the concept tends to devalue ‘the presence of humans in remote areas and overvalue their contribution elsewhere.’
Yet on an island where even nature conservationists seem bent on taming every last acre, I think that the time may be ripe for bringing the word — and the kind of land it refers to — back into currency.
And the Scottish Highlands may be the only remaining region in the UK where we could find it.
But up on the estates, even the dismembered ones, old limbs are still twitching with archaic reflexes.
The sanctity of traditional ownership and lineage are hoisted like clannish flags.
The ‘stewardship’ and  ‘caretaking’of nature are spoken of as if they were self-evidently desirable aims in a wild place.
And a host of urgent, practical problems are clouded by old border feuds and special pleadings.
Even in these great spaces we seem unwilling to let go of the reins.
The case of Mar Lodge has been the most publicised, because of its somewhat tawdry recent history.
This 77,000-acre estate has been described as ‘the jewel of the Cairngorms’, but it has been passed around like a shop-soiled Rolls Royce.
It was owned for years by a Swiss businessman, who installed ski-lifts where there was never any snow and scarred the hills with new tracks.
He sold it in 1989 to John Kluge, the richest man in the US, whose wife fancied living next to Balmoral.
It was their divorce in 1990 that led to the estate going on the market.
Many organisations and individuals have entered the bidding (including, with poetic justice, given our attitude towards their forest, a Brazilian), but Kluge is still keeping negotiations open with the consortium of conservation bodies attempting to purchase it.
The consortium has underwritten half the purchase price, but has asked the Government to come up with the other half.
At the time of writing, no money has been forthcoming, though the Natural Heritage Memorial Fund is being pressured to release the additional five million pounds.
Yet Mar Lodge remains a remote and beautiful place, and full of superb examples of almost all the classic Highland habitats, from the flood-plain terraces of the River Dee to the montane grasslands of Ben MacDui, the second highest peak in Scotland.
It has golden eagles and wild cats, and a fabulous alpine flora on the high crags.
It also has probably the finest and most ancient native pines in Scotland, venerable trees whose gnarled, weatherbeaten habit has more in common with old oaks than with the conifers we are used to seeing.
The problem is that there are very few young trees to succeed them.
As in other remnants of the Great Wood of Caledon, pine seedlings (abundant enough to begin with) are mostly browsed away by red deer.
Deer numbers have been climbing steadily ever since the animals became a valuable resource for owners of stalking rights, and in many areas of the Highlands are now at levels which the land cannot easily support.
What to do about them is one of the biggest practical obstacles to the creation of truly wild reserves in Scotland.
The most obvious and frequently canvassed solution is regular, heavy culls.
The distinguished Scots ecologist Adam Watson believes that the native pinewoods cannot even survive without a great initial reduction in deer numbers followed by a regular programme of culling.
Dr Watson has worked in and watched the region for 40 years, and his opinions  carry great weight.
So I hope it isn't just sentimentality that makes me baulk at his drastic solution.
There is, after all, more than a mite of sentimentality behind his cautionary picture of the consequences of not culling: ‘Nature will produce her own solution with mass starvation.
I have seen hundreds of dead adults and calves in woods and treeless glens after a snowy winter.
They were emaciated, with their ribs sticking out, and in summer their decomposing carcasses made the glens stink.’
It is a dismal and discomfiting picture, but it is at least a ‘natural’ one.
This is the way that wild animals do die in times of hardship, and perhaps we need sometimes to see, on our doorsteps, the consequences of our past plunderings of nature.
But I am more bothered by the implications of losing what may be the last chance of a home-grown refuge free from ongoing human interference.
The alternative currently being offered — where the population of the largest mammal is planned by humans, and its desirable genetic characteristics chosen by stalkers, where the whole environment is a delicate and discreet piece of stage management — is not, for me, a wilderness at all.
Over in Water Ross the deer are just part of what is seen as the larger problem of who is in charge, and who makes decisions about wild places.
West of Loch Maree, the Countryside Commission for Scotland (CCS) is considering the possibility of creating a national park on the English model, to include as its core the wild and remote mountain tracts of Strathnasheallah, Letterewe and Fisherfield forests, collectively reckoned to the largest ‘roadless’ area in Britain.
The local landowners and crofters have countered with an alternative proposal for a Wester Ross Wilderness Area.
It is an acute and intelligently framed plan, which suggests that the encouragement of, or even provision for, large-scale recreation in these remote heartlands is quite inappropriate, that pressure needs to be taken off, not increased.
It also argues with some force against the human-centredness, the ‘anthropocentrism’ of the CCS scheme, and that in these places the interests of wildlife and ecology should be give absolute priority, even above human ‘spiritual replenishment’.
It reads at first sight like a selfless Magna Carta for the wild — until you begin to glimpse (as in that ancient charter) the barons' hidden agenda.
The Wester Ross Wilderness proposal, it appears, only objects to the centredness of certain kinds of humans (mountain bikers, Monro-baggers, etc) and it urges the CCS to recognise the crucial role of the local landowners as ‘good stewards’ of this region.
to acknowledge how ‘well run’ the wilderness has been (and presumably would be under the same regime in future) and how adept their bailiffs and stalkers have been at pursuing ‘a careful policy of highly selective culling, a scientific approach to hind and calf management.’
If this diligently managed site is a wilderness, then it is one where the word has radically changed its meaning.
Of course, no definition of wilderness these days can aspire to an absolute absence of human influence.
There is now nowhere on earth which is immune from man-made changes in the atmosphere or radioactive fall-out; only a few remaining places where no humans have trod; and in our own islands, only a handful of inaccessible sites which have escaped some deliberate interference with their ecology.
Nor can any reconstructed, facsimile wilderness ever approach the condition of nature as it was before human influence became dominant.
Even in the most jealously guarded ‘non-intervention zones’, the absence of big predators makes them a shadow of what they were in the past.
In his seminal study Wilderness and the American Mind , Roderick Nash makes the point that ‘wilderness was a state of mind — a perceived rather than an actual condition of the environment.’
To one child he spoke to, wilderness was ‘the dark space under my bed.’
To Wordsworth, who wrote some of the earliest and stoutest defence of the concept (including a damning comparison between plantations and naturally sprung woods in the Lake District), it was a condition of the spirit as well as of the land.
To those who framed the US National Wilderness Preservation System, a wilderness was an area which ‘appears to have been primarily affected by the forces of nature…where man himself is a visitor who does not remain.’
Indeed, the permanent absence of humans has rarely been cited as a condition.
Yet surely the one point at which the word does become nonsensical is the idea of a ‘well-run’ wilderness.
We may argue about the importance of a site's past history, and the relevance of purely accidental human influence (the ‘fall-out’ effect).
But the idea of wilderness becomes meaningless unless it implies a state of affairs in which, over some quite large tracts of land, deliberate human control has been removed.
A wilderness is a place of contrast, where our own rules and values for living can be challenged, where we can learn something about humility and the inventive resilience of unmanaged nature.
Wester Ross and Mar Lodge, could, I fancy, fit most definitions of a wilderness, provided all humans entered them as equals, and on the same terms as their animal inhabitants — on foot, and unarmed.
But ‘calf and hind management’, pest control, special tree-planting or ‘encouragement’ schemes seem to me incompatible with these aims.
They may be entirely acceptable procedures in nature reserves with clearly defined goals, but not in a place given back to nature.
A wilderness must follow the possibility of things turning out quite differently from expectations, of disaster, and maybe even degradation, as well as creative surprise.
But can we really afford to take such risks with our limited space and natural resources in Britain?
Shouldn't the over-riding aim of conservation be the saving of natural species and ecosystems, regardless of how much unnatural management this may entail?
But there is another point of view.
In his important best-selling book The End of Nature , the American writer Bill McKibben argues that nature holds other crucial, non-material values for us, and that with the onset of man-made global warming and the spread of genetic engineering, ‘our sense of nature as eternal and separate will be washed away.’
He goes on:
‘Before any redwoods had been cloned or genetically improved, one could understand clearly what the fight against such tinkering was about.
It was about the idea that a redwood was somehow sacred, that its fundamental identity should remain beyond our control.
But once that barrier has been broken, what is the fight about then?
It's not like opposing nuclear reactors or toxic waste dumps, each one of which poses new risks to new areas.
This damage is to an idea, the idea of nature, and all that descends from it.’
He attacks, too, the idea of becoming stewards of a managed world, ‘custodians’ of life.
‘For that job security, we will trade the mystery of the natural world, bursting with exuberant creation?’
McKibben was writing about a global crisis.
But his  defence of an independent natural creation seems to me to apply just as powerfully to our home acres.
Yet, unlike America, the idea of unmanaged wild places is almost universally rejected in Britain.
Of course, our landscapes are most small-scale, fashioned by centuries of human work; and there is a strong argument that the conservation of species (not of wildness) is best achieved by conserving ‘traditional’ patterns of management.
Yet the case is rarely put as calmly and pragmatically as this.
It is tinged sometimes with a blinkered nostalgia, a belief that there really was a Golden Age in the countryside when humans and nature were in harmony; at others with an ugly neo-colonialism, a conviction that wilderness are all right for the Third World, but not for us civilised folk.
When the idea of ‘set-aside’ was first mooted a few years ago, the hostility reached almost hysterical proportions.
In The Observer , a normally wise and balanced political commentator outlined a vision of what the English countryside might become if abandoned to nature, which was like something out of a Dark Ages bestiary, a nightmarish waste of swamp and scrub, thick with rats, disease and the remains of derelict farm machinery.
Nature conservationists and farmers (who both understand what does happen to abandoned land) should know better, but in the past few years, seem to have become possessed by the same fear of some dark, prolific genie escaping from the bottle.
Of course, heaths, downland and coppice all need management if they and their customary inhabitants are to survive (though we seem to have conveniently forgotten that though these habitats are manicured, they are not man-invented, and all have prototypes in the wild created by fire, storm, flood and wild grazing animals.)
But conservation orthodoxy is beginning to resemble the credo of a business study course.
Everything must be managed.
After the 1987 hurricane, the Tree Council went as far as to say that ‘unless positive encouragement is given to owners to restore these woods…they will revert to scrub and never recover.’
So much for several million years of woodland evolution.
Do we really want nature to be so comprehensively at our back and call?
Do species have to be maintained so uniformly and tidily, so predictably, as if they were part of a genetic card index?
Don't we also want revelation, surprise, inspiration from the wild?
Those unbidden spurts of protean growth or sheer defiance that can scupper scientific smugness and fashionable pessimism alike?
It is wilderness that gives the best chance for such events.
One of the classic cases in Britain is Lady Park Wood, an ancient and very mixed coppice in the Wye valley, which has been kept as an unmanaged reserve for nearly half a century.
Up to the 1970s it was presumed to be proceeding towards the beech high forest which ecologists believed was the stable climax on limestone.
Then came elm disease, followed by smartly by the drought of 1976, which killed off many of the beeches.
Gales and hard winters followed, including one severe ice-storm which welded coppiced small-leaved lime branches to the ground — where they promptly took root.
Lady Park is now dominated by survivors, especially ash and bizarre lime trees — and has become an exciting, vital wood which has transcended ecologists' narrow predictions for it.
Yet even scientific curiosity in such places is minute in this country, and I fear that our national outlook is still tainted by that Anglo-Saxon authoritarianism that the first English settlers took with them to the New World.
When William Bradford stepped off the Mayflower he described the North American landscape as a ‘hideous and desolate wilderness,’ and promptly set about bringing it to heel just his ancestors had done so successfully throughout Europe.
Fortunately, North Americans pulled back from total destruction before all their wild land was gone, and that sense of a still-existent frontier in nature is reflected in their writing.
To match our quiet, domestic landscape, we have the intimate, closely observed writing of Gilbert White, Richard Jefferies and Edward Thomas.
They have the vast scope and imaginative daring of Thoreau, Loren Eiseley, Edward Hoagland and Annie Dillard.
I hope I won't be misunderstood here.
I love the English countryside, though I think we all sometimes deceive ourselves about its idyllic past.
I accept that downs and heaths and the like need management if they are to survive.
I even admit, with sad reluctance, that red deer may need to be reduced in parts of Scotland.
But I find it hard to accept that all our land should be so buttoned up, and that we should allow ourselves the arrogant and indulgent belief — against every lesson in history — that we can run things better than nature.
My first published piece of nature writing was about the pinewoods of Abernethy.
I had gone to visit the RSPB's osprey reserve at Loch Garten, and had been struck by the symbolism of that site, where the birds flew free and the humans were, in effect, in a cage.
That, of course, was a classic piece of management legerdemain.
But I don't think my long walk through the forest in an April dawn was.
It remains one of the most vivid and magical memories of my life.
For hours I strolled through the birch and Scots pinewoods with herds of roe deer only yards in front of me.
Crossbills and red squirrels showered stripped pinecones around me, and I saw my first crested tits, trapezing in the canopy.
Turning a corner along a narrow track, I came face to face with a blustering capercaillie, as big as a turkey.
And echoing across Loch Garten I heard the last wintering whooper swans and the trills of common sandpipers.
It was like a vision of Scotland before the Fall.
I don't think it was an illusion, a clever deceit produced by scientists culling and stringent access modelling.
But the odd thing was that it didn't fill me with the slightest sense of humility or feelings about the separateness and ‘otherness’ of nature, but with sheer, shouting joy at sharing that old world on a new morning with my wild Scots kinfolk.
Author
Richard Mabey is a writer and broadcaster on country and environmental matters.
Among his best-known books are Food for Free, The Common Ground, The Unofficial Countryside, The Flowering of Britain and Home Country .
He writes a regular column for BBC WILDLIFE.
Bog asphodel and damselfly. ‘…it has begun to look as if Scotland might at last be able to possess a tract of untroubled land, a sanctuary free of commercial pressures…where native wildlife could flourish and humans meditate upon their species’ past follies and arrogance.’
Rannoch Moor, Perthshire.
‘The ‘stewardship’ and ‘caretaking’of nature are spoken of as if they were self-evidently desirable aims in a wild place.’
Top : Red deer stag.
Middle : Mountain hare.
Above : Otter.
Below right : Bogbean.
Opposite, top : Oystercatchers.
Opposite, bottom : Spear thistle.
‘Do we really want nature to be so comprehensively at our beck and call?
Do species have to be maintained so uniformly and tidily, so predictably, as if they were part of a genetic card index?
Don't we also want revelation, surprise, inspiration from the wild?’
Horse sense
Inside your intelligent, sociable and docile pony is an intelligent, sociable, docile wild horse.
And the reason it likes you is not because of the bucket of wild oats you bring but because it thinks you are a horse too.
To help you get a lot more information straight from the horse's mouth (and nose, and ears, and tail),Lucy Rees breaks you in gently to the basics of equine body language.
The horse galloped madly round the pen, head turned to the outside as he searched for an opening.
But there was none.
The smooth high bars encircled him inescapably.
In the centre of the circle was the man.
The horse knew that men were hunters.
They trapped him in corners, caught him and drove him into small dark spaces that rattled terrifyingly.
They put ropes on his head and tied him up.
He had learned that fighting the ropes was pointless.
Even when the men touched him, he did not fight, though he hated their touch.
Beneath his skin the muscles were tight with tension, and so the sensation was alarming.
Now, without a rope to restrain him, he put as great a distance as possible between himself and the man.
After a while his initial panic died down and he settled down into a steadier gallop, still with his head turned to the outside.
But he could glimpse that the man was no longer standing but walking in a small circle, keeping level with the horse's shoulder as he galloped.
This was a sinister development; the horse straightened his head so that he could see better, and cocked an ear at the man.
‘Thanks,’ said the man.
‘Decided to pay me some attention, eh?’
It was easier galloping with his head straight, and the horse could now see that the man was quite relaxed.
He did not have the tense, predatory look of a stalking wolf, nor the jerky movements of a frightened horse; rather, he looked more like a dozy mare watching her foal.
The horse slacked his pace, swung his neck down to ease the tension in it, and relaxed his tail.
The man stepped back into the centre of the circle, and seemed almost to go to sleep.
Feeling the pressure of his nearness reduced, the horse slowed to a trot.
When the man resumed his slow circling, the horse sprang to a gallop, but soon slowed down again.
When the man stepped back he trotted, stretching his neck to the ground.
It felt good.
As they worked on in this way, the horse's alarms became briefer, his paces slower, until eventually he dropped to a walk.
Finally, when the man stepped back, the horse stopped and wheeled to face him, blowing down his nostrils as a warning.
‘Oh, okay,’ said the man, and squatted on his heels.
The horse watched him intently.
He had never examined a man before: whenever they had been near before he had been too busy looking for an escape route.
So he peered, leaning forward to catch a whiff of scent, listening to the man's quiet muttering.
When he had finished his scrutiny, he rocked his weight back, relaxed one hip and waited.
The man stood up and moved slowly towards him.
When he was a couple of paces away, the horse's nerve broke.
He wheeled and galloped away.
‘If you want to leave, I'll help you,’ said the man, waving him forward gently.
But this time it took fewer repeats before the horse calmed and stopped.
When the man came forward, he left a good three paces  between them, watching the horse shrink back on to his heels.
He stepped back again.
The horse straightened.
The man turned and walked away.
The horse leaned forward, watching him.
The man walked back until the horse pulled back, then stopped and turned away again.
Back and forth their bodies went, like a pair of dancers connected by an invisible bond, a bond that grew stronger each time it was tested.
But when the man reached out a hand towards his nose, the horse shook his head and shied away.
Within 10 minutes, the horse understood all the moves of this game, for it was the same game that he played with his herd-mates.
When the man flicked his hand as an irritated horse flicks his tail, the horse moved away.
When he dropped his shoulders and stood still, the horse stopped.
The man knew how close he could approach, then he would turn, drop one shoulder and half-glance behind him, as a mare watches the foal following her.
And the horse followed.
Three paces apart, they walked round the ring, stopping and starting in unison.
Suddenly, the man bent down.
The horse found his nose above the man's shoulder, smelling him, smelling his hair, feeling his ear, feeling the man shake with laughter at the tickling whiskers.
The man waited until he had finished, then stood up slowly.
They stood almost touching each other for a full minute.
Then the man put his hand on the horse's shoulder and began to scratch, as one horse nuzzles another when they have decided to be friends.
It felt good.
At last he was safe.
On the second day, the man rode the horse.
And that felt good too.
This is not fiction, nor is it sorcery.
It is a training method developed by enlightened horse handlers.
It depends on an understanding by the man of the horse's natural reactions, knowing that if he recognises the horse's signals and makes the right moves, the horse will treat him — and trust him — as he would another horse.
Equally, it depends on the horse's intensely social nature, his own understanding of the use of visual cues, and his desire to stay close to those who make him feel safe.
Until the last couple of decades, the understanding of horse behaviour depended more on the insight of sympathetic and thoughtful trainers than on scientific knowledge.
Horses, along with most other domestic animals, were neglected by ethologists.
How, the argument ran, could one study the ‘normal’ behaviour of a species subject to artificial breeding, rearing and living conditions.
Truly wild animals in the sunny Serengeti, for example, were a far more attractive  prospect.
The Victorian view of horses as God-given servants of mankind was no help either: many a trainer, and many a book, regarded horses as ‘stupid’, ‘nervous’, ‘irrationally flighty’ and so on.
One was exhorted to ‘teach the horse who's master,’ without questioning whether the horses understood the concept of ‘master’.
Now, however, the mounting body of research has reinstated horse behaviour as interesting per se , as well as providing guidelines for the welfare and handling of domestic horses.
Clearly, the starting point has been the study of wild horses.
But, strictly speaking, there are none left to observe.
Pure Przewalski's horses, genetically the closest to the wild progenitors of domestic breeds, are all in zoos.
If there are any wild ones left in Mongolia, they're staying well away from prying eyes.
But there are plenty of feral horses, descendants of escaped domestic horses that have lived and bred in the wild, often for hundreds of years.
They thrive in a wide variety of environments: semi-desert as in the western United States and in Australia; steamy marshes such as the Camargue; the high slopes of the Rocky Mountains; and windswept islands such as Sable Island in Nova Scotia, and the Falklands, or more temperate ones, such as those off the Virginia coast.
Some of these isolated populations are subject to predation, others to starvation, flooding, severe winters or summer drought.
But their behaviour under this range of conditions and despite differing genetic origins, is essentially similar, as it is in the abundant free-living herds where only minimal management (usually stallion selection) is practised.
The striking success of feral horses is ample proof that their behaviour patterns are not only persistent but survival-oriented.
You might be surprised that this needs mentioning; but it is precisely because these same strategies are maladaptive in many domestic situations that horses are labelled stupid.
The horse is large, relatively defenceless and, as the French would agree, delicious to eat: in other words, a prey animal.
A horse's instant reaction to any large unfamiliar animal, or even the hint of one, is to run away.
After a short run, it will stop to turn and examine the potential foe from a safe distance.
This is a perfectly sensible strategy.
Unlike a predator, which can live to learn better, a prey animal cannot afford even one mistake.
And it has no need to approach any other animal except another horse.
So it  plays safe.
But when a horse crashes into a fence in an attempt to escape a hump-backed monster (in reality, his owner carrying a sack of oats), small wonder that he is liable to be thought stupid.
A horse's intense desire for company, too, may be protective, or related to its breeding strategy.
Wild horses live in breeding groups comprising one stallion, a handful of mares and their youngsters.
Surplus males form bachelor groups.
A solitary horse is a rarity, and generally a casualty of circumstance: an old stallion ousted from his harem and unused to male company, for instance.
By choice, no horse would live alone.
A harem stallion defends his mares against the attentions of other males.
Mostly, he avoids conflict by simply driving his mares away.
Sometimes an elaborate display involving ritual dunging on the same spot (like dogs peeing on car wheels) is necessary.
Battles are rare, and mostly involve a stallion in his prime making a determined effort to wrest the harem from an older stallion.
The invader may even enlist the help of his bachelor buddies to distract the stallion while he pinches the mares: horses, especially stallions, are quite capable of devious and even elaborate plots to achieve their aims.
They will also adapt their social structure under different environmental conditions.
Generally, each band has a ‘home range’, several of which may overlap.
But on the rich and overcrowded parts of the Shackleford Banks off Virginia, for example, stallions are territorial, defending a plot of land rather than particular mares; on the poorer parts of the island, they occupy the usual home ranges and defend harems.
Bands of feral horses in the Camargue group together in summer, apparently as a defence against biting fleas.
But this is usually the time when a stallion is most intolerant of other males, and even in this particular co-operative situation, a stallion will not allow another one to mate with ‘his’ mares.
Usually, a stallion drives his sons out when they reach sexual maturity (the fillies wander off, to be snapped up by some lucky bachelor); but some stallions will allow their sons to stay on for years, co-opting their help in defensive action or mare-collecting raids.
The norm, though, is a free-ranging, single-stallion band.
Group life in the wild is peaceful, with little of the squabbling to be seen in domestic groups.
There is no overcrowding or competition to arouse aggression.
Unfortunately, aggressive acts are easily observed; and humans are often impressed by aggression as a determinant of social order.
This leads to a great deal of emphasis being placed on ‘pecking order’.
There is no evidence that horses take much notice of pecking order, except in competitive situations.
In the wild, what matters most is not bullying, which is disruptive and dispersive, but the peaceful bonds of friendship and kinship.
These bonds, subtler and more difficult to observe and interpret, have been most extensively studied in the experimental herd of Camargue horses at Tour du Valat.
Untouched and unmanaged by humans, these horses are nonetheless used to researchers watching them closely, and their interrelationships are will known.
The bonding between mare and foal is most obvious; but the same affiliative behaviour — staying close, playing, calling, touching, nuzzling, licking  and mutual grooming — is shown between other members of a band.
Sisters or brothers are often close, and youngsters of the same age often strike up friendships; but other horses may become friends for no apparent reason.
Friendship between domestic horses is well known, and the need for attachment is so strong that lone horses will become firm friends with cows, goats, pigs and even people.
It seems strange that this phenomenon, so necessary both for social cohesion and for the development of real harmony between ourselves and our horses, has been given less attention than pecking order: a reflection, perhaps, on the observer more than on the observed.
Concomitant with bonding is leadership, for where the bolder of two friends, or the elder of a related pair, goes, the second follows.
This may lead to the whole group moving, tugged along by a complex web of bonds.
Except in the case of the stallion deliberately herding his mares, this is not a question of dominance or bullying.
By the accepted definitions of dominance and submission, an individual shows submission ultimately by moving away from the dominant, not by following it.
The man in the notional training sequence I described ‘led’ his horse on an invisible bond as strong as a rope.
That bond was not created by dominance —‘I'll teach that horse who's master’— but by manipulating the horse's curiosity, his desire for safety, and his overwhelming need for bonding.
Horses communicate these feelings, and many others, in an abundance of ways: with smell-messages, or pheromones; by calling to each other; visually, by general body tone, and by specific movements or expressions; and through taste and touch.
While we can see that horses are adept, sensitive and subtle communicators, human observers suffer from the disadvantage that our sense organs do not work in the  same way as theirs.
We cannot smell their pheromones, though it is clear from their behaviour that smell plays a great part in social life: in mother-foal bonding, group identity, individual recognition, mating, tracking, perhaps recognition of home range, and so on.
We know nothing about what a horse really tastes and feels when he nuzzles another horse.
But we do know that when two strange horses meet, they exchange a rapid-fire barrage of signals: calls, and movements of ear, tail and legs, together with heavy breathing, nuzzles and other touches.
But even when we can interpret the signals, we cannot predict whether they will fall in love at first sight, remain indifferent, or loathe each other.
Being so visually oriented ourselves, we understand the visual signs best.
Which of these are deliberate displays is sometimes debatable, but horses certainly act on them.
They read our body language better than we do ourselves, and signal to us just as they would to each other.
Sometimes they will use an escalating series of signals to make their meaning clearer when we don't seem to understand.
For instance, my old pony, Pete, who is used to my interpreting his slightest signs, gets annoyed when others do not.
If he is not groomed the way he likes (he's ultra-ticklish), he wrinkles one nostril.
If this is ignored, he wriggles his skin, as if to disturb a fly.
Then he swishes his tail; points his nose at the offending brush; flattens his ears; thrusts his head; raises a warning back foot; and finally, if nothing brings satisfaction, drives the person away in exasperation.
He would use the same series of signs to a horse that ignored him.
As a whole, body outline and tone show a horse's level of excitement, while other cues indicate the reasons.
An excited horse has an exciting outline: he raises his head and tail, his movements are elevated, and  if he is alarmed, jerky.
A horse that has spotted a possible predator arouses other horses' attention in this way, and they all prepare for flight.
Other signs of tension and fear are a tight mouth, stiff neck, and flared nostrils.
Horses are very sensitive to signs of tension in humans, too.
With charming naivety, they do not imagine that they themselves are the source of it: they behave as they do when they see a frightened horse, becoming agitated and desirous of flight.
Lower body tone indicates lower levels of excitement: a relaxed horse carries his head and tail low.
This type of stance adopted by a person reassures a horse that there is no danger about.
Thus, the trainer is our example was watching for relaxation before he made any demands on the horse, and also communicating his calm confidence.
But, again, a low level of excitement may have several causes.
A sick horse has the same outline, and often the same slack mouth; it may by only the slight tension around the nostril, or an unusual lack of interest in life, that indicate that anything is amiss.
Horses that are depressed, withdrawn, or wish to ignore their surroundings have this ‘don't-bother-me’ look in situations that other horses would normally find quite interesting — a bustling riding school or a market, for example.
These horses turn their ears sideways, with the opening facing the ground, deliberately, cutting off auditory input.
A cringing, shrinking stance, with flattened tail, is adopted when the horse is thoroughly terrified.
The tail is an obvious and potent signaller: the raised tail of a mare in oestrus catches the stallion's attention, while a stiff tail denotes tension.
Tail whisking is one of the movements which has taken on expressive value, becoming emancipated from its original function of removing flies: horses whisk their tails at anything they want to remove from their vicinity, such as other horses, inept grooms or riders, or even irritating conditions such as being confined or tied up.
Ears signal where the horse's attention lies.
When a startled horse pricks his ears at the source of his alarm, other horses look in the same direction.
(Most handlers tend to look at the horse instead, which merely makes him point more agitatedly.)
But a horse that anticipates trouble flattens his ears to get them out of harm's way.
When turned back, though not flat, they show that the horse is interested in what is behind him, usually checking that the escape route is clear; so does a rolled-back eye which reveals the white of the eyeball.
Contrasty bits of anatomy, such as bared teeth, whites of eyes, pinkly flashing vulvas or the pale underside of a hind foot are good signalling devices, often used when more subtle cues have been ignored.
Calls, too, can supplement other signals when horses are too close or too far apart to see each other.
A mare can nicker when her foal has strayed towards a danger that she would not approach herself, and lost friends can locate each other vocally.
Longer-term states are generally communicated through pheromones, which can be left for whoever may pass.
‘She's mine,’ proclaims the stallion's urine sprinkled over his mare's dung; ‘I'm ready,’states the oestrous mare's urine; ‘we are we,’the members of a band affirm by rolling in the same spot.
Different sensory modalities, then, are used to convey different types of message, forming an enormously rich communication network.
Wherever they come from, horses have no difficulty in understanding each other; there appear to be no languages or dialects in ‘Horse’, though domestic horses sometimes invent unusual signs to communicate with their owners.
In language, as well as in social life and predator-avoidance tactics, the broad base of behavioural strategy is common to all horses, domestic and wild, though they are inventive and adaptive about the details.
Yet there are limits to their inventive adaptability, limits beyond which we often push them.
They learn not to fear enclosed spaces, but still show signs of stress when stabled constantly.
They learn to jump, but crack if asked to do so too often.
They lose much of their natural paranoia about predators, but is never disappears entirely.
The moment we put them back in the open spaces where they belong, in the social life they intuitively understand, horses use not only their innate behaviour but also their intelligent adaptability to its fullest.
As a trainer, I have found that the brightest learners (and the best, funniest and most communicative partners) were not domestic horses, whose natural ability has been stunted, but wild ones in which the capacity for learning and communicating was rich and well developed.
All it takes is learning to speak Horse.
TV Link
The Zebra in Your Stable , narrated by Desmond Morris, is due to be shown on BBC1, at 3.50pm on 22 December.
The film looks at the domestic horse's herd instincts, translates what it's really trying to signal to us, and explains the natural behaviours exploited in horses on sentry duty, in dressage or in the rodeo.
Author
Lucy Rees — zoology graduate, behavioural scientist and passionate horse-lover — trains horses (and their riders) in both the UK and the States.
In 1985, she starred in the ITV film To Ride a Wild Horse , which contrasted her way of breaking wild mustangs with the ‘traditional’ cowboy's way (see the picture on p41 for a taste of that).
She has written several books, including The Horse's Mind (published in 1984 by Stanley Paul), which expands on her fresh approach to understanding the equine intellect.
She was adviser on The Zebra in Your Stable .
Horse lineaments
Body outlines signal a horse's state of arousal: curved outlines excite other horses, while smooth ones soothe them.
A displaying stallion raises his tail in excitement, swells his muscles and prances.
A mare in oestrus, in typical ‘saw-horse’ position, raises her tail attractively but maintains submissive, flattened ears.
A relaxed horse rests one hip and presents a ‘dull’ outline.
The ‘startle’ posture is the most eye-catching: high head, pricked ears, arched neck, high tail and tense muscles.
A horse dozes on its feet, resting one hip and showing a minimum of tail.
A herding stallion lowers his head to threaten his mares, and lifts his feet high.
Man's humanity to horse
Anyone who has ever admired ‘well kept’ horses in immaculate stables might like to ponder on the fact that wild horses don't:
live alone;
take up residence in caves, deserted houses or barns; nor are they seen in enclosed places such as box canyons and gullies, or anywhere they could be trapped;
wean their foals abruptly and completely (generally a foal is gradually discouraged from suckling as the next one is on the way, but won't leave its mother until it is two or three);
prevent their youngsters from exploring and learning;
eat concentrated meals at strict mealtimes (those bristly jaws are working some 16 hours a day);
bring each other presents of food;
confine their activities to daylight;
or jump anything which they could normally avoid.
Isolated horses can develop depression, over-excitability or an inability to relate sensibly to other horses.
Stallions may show a lack of normal courtship behaviour, raping or savaging mares or displaying an inability to mate.
Signs of confinement stress in horses include stall-walking, weaving (rocking from side to side), pawing, banging the door and stamping; those related to restricted munching include crib-biting, wind-sucking, chewing of rugs or woodwork, eating of bedding, and licking of lips or anything else; signs of general irritation are skin-wriggling, head-tossing or shaking, tail swishing, rubbing against walls or doors and biting of themselves; those related to aggression include head thrusts, ear-flattening, and kicking at walls or thin air.
Colic and ulcers seem to relate more to general stress levels rather than to poor or erratic feeding.
Social isolation contributes to confinement stress.
Many horses which ‘have’ to be kept stabled can be helped by visual and tactile communication (a stable companion, or a hole knocked through partition walls), more bulk in their food, or food which takes more work to eat (turnips, or small-mesh hay-nets), the provision of a playpen outside, and the realisation by the owner that keeping an animal in stressful conditions amounts, quite simply, to cruelty.
By a nose
A submissive ‘mouthing’ gesture: as used by a foal in the presence of an older horse.
A nose wrinkle, with nostrils flaring backwards: betrays annoyance or disgust.
Flared nostrils and tight mouth: an expression of fear or excitement.
‘Flehmen’: usually shown by a stallion in response to a mare's urine.
A loose, long nose: signifies the urge to scratch, roll or engage in mutual grooming.
The ears have it
Ears pricked: in alarm, or on meeting another horse.
Ears turned forward: the horse's attention is to the front.
Ears turned sideways: the horse's attention is to the side.
Drooping, ears are a sign of doziness.
Ears turned backwards: the horse's attention is to the rear.
This is also a sign of submission or fear.
Ears flattened: in anger or fear.
Perfume sample.
The Flehmen response forces air into the vomeronasal or Jacobson's organ, a pouch deep within the nose which analyses sex pheromones and other smells.
Flehmen is shown a great deal by stallions during mating, but also by other horses in response to other smells or tastes.
This Przewalski's stallion has the typical dun coat of a truly wild horse.
A bit of a thrill.
An Arab mare and her young foal play at being startled.
The mare's head and tail held high would provide clear alarm signals to any other horse, but her forward-pointing ears give the game away — she's not running away from anything.
Playing helps a young horse to practise adult behaviours: exchanges of social signals, following, grouping, escape moves such as bucking, twisting and racing, mounting and play-fighting are all common.
Above:Boys will be boys.
Stallions usually only fight when in direct competition for a harem or a waterhole.
Each combatant aims to floor his opponent, by knocking him off his feet or biting him behind the elbow.
Note the ears, flattened out of harm's way.
Most of the other horses are relaxed in spite of the fracas — their ears show whether they're attending to the fight or to the cameraman.
The bay youngster (centre ) is getting out of the way; behind him a bay mare with turned-back ears, a tight mouth and flattened tail is also trying to back away, but she's blocked by the grey mare, who is more interested in the camera.
The bay shows signs that she'll kick if ignored for much longer.
Right:Band on the stroll.
Horses normally group tightly when they feel threatened, though these show no signs of fear.
The stallion (left ) is relaxed but vigilant; the mare next to him is bothered by the foal pushing between them from behind: her ears show the focus of her attention, while her wrinkled nostril betrays irritation.
Above:Making friends.
In mutual grooming, each horse scratches and nibbles at the other's mane, withers or rump.
Horses groom their particular friends rather than just any old herd-mate — it's a sign of special bonding and probably reinforces the bond.
Some domestic horses scratch their owner's backs while being brushed; others who have been punished for putting their mouths on humans, merely make strange mouth and jaw movements.
Centre spread:Male run.
The curved, crested neck of a stallion is the only real sign of sexual dimorphism in horses.
Weight and size aren't big factors in a species in which not a lot is decided by fighting.
And, anyway, it's not the strongest stallion but the most persistent that wins a contest.
The wrong way.
Sit on his head, so he can't get up.
Then castrate him to render him docile.
It sure saves all that hassle of getting to know and understand him.
Opposite:Overture.
A courting stallion stays out of kicking range while he smells the mare cautiously.
Her backwardly turned ears and slightly lifted tail show that she is interested in mating, even though she may not be ready yet.
He will continue to woo her by nickering, licking and muzzling, or by prancing around her.
Left:Family ties.
Touching and smelling play an important part in reinforcing natural bonds, as well as identification.
Daily loaf.
These horses show relaxed, peaceful outlines, with friends standing particularly close together.
If anything were to disturb them, their heads would instantly rise.
Anyone dealing with horses should try to adopt a similarly relaxed, peaceful stance.
The beautiful American
The addition of the American mink to the British fauna has not exactly been met with jubilant welcome.
Being both an exotic and a carnivore, it has started out with a double disadvantage, and sections of the rural population hate it with an intensity normally reserved for foxes or, worse, polecats.
But, in fact, it doesn't seem to be doing much harm and may be filling a niche that, in the absence of European mink in these islands, was lying empty.
Anyway, it's a charming animal.
Here, wildlife cameraman Nick Hayward describes the challenge of filming mink for the forthcoming ‘Wildlife on One’ programme, and on page 47 biologists Nigel Dunstone and Jane O'Sullivan tell how well the animal has settled in.
The first time I tried to film mink in the wild was in the spring of 1990, in mid-Wales, where I was making a 15-minute programme for Channel 4.
The floods of past winters had piled up a huge logjam just below a fishing lodge on the River Usk, and a female mink had set up her den there.
I set up beside that.
Waiting on the bank of the river to film mink is, in many ways, a very rewarding experience.
Stay still and wear camouflaged clothing and you blend into the bankside vegetation.
Then anything can happen.
Often, a flash of azure draws you eye to a kingfisher, speeding like an Exocet missile a couple of feet above the water.
Sometimes a kingfisher will perch on a nearby overhanging twig, cock its eye to the water and plunge in for fish.
Herons land nearby and stalk the shallows or stand and roost.
Green woodpeckers search the grass above the bank while great spotteds peck through the trees.
I have seen foxes playing in the brambles, and once a red deer walked past on the opposite bank.
Time becomes meaningless as the water and the clouds flow past.
But one way the experience isn't very rewarding is in glimpses of mink.
They are small, dark animals that move very quickly, always under cover.
This makes them incredibly difficult to see, let alone capture on film.
And once they have spotted you they suddenly disappear among rocks or melt into the vegetation.
At best, I would only see ‘my’ mink once every five or six hours, when she would emerge to hunt for eels to feed her growing family.
(In the whole time I was there, all she ever caught was eels.)
Sometimes I watched a den for hours, waiting for some action, only to see the mink return with a freshly caught eel, having made an invisible exit earlier.
Another thing that makes the animals such difficult subjects is the fact that they are so heavily persecuted.
I was hoping to film the kits growing up and discovering the world around them, but before they were old enough to fend for themselves, a fisherman trapped and killed the mother.
Starving, the kits left the den in a desperate search for food.
One by one, they, too, were trapped and killed.
In the end I had got just enough to make the short film, but it didn't tell the story I had hoped to tell, and I was angered by my subject's persecution — by the way the whole species was treated.
Why was it necessary?
The answer, of course, lies in a general prejudice against carnivores, compounded by a righteous antagonism — not always unjustified — towards introduced species.
Until early this century when American mink Mustela vison first began to escape from fur farms, there had never been such animals in the British Isles, not even the European mink M. lutreola , and our countryside had not experienced such a versatile and opportunistic predator before.
Mink are well adapted to hunting prey in a variety of habitats.
Being semi-aquatic, they are able to catch waterfowl such as mallards and moorhens on the surface.
Under water, their needle-like, razor-sharp teeth enable them to take fish as slippery as eels, through they are not good enough swimmers to prey regularly on the fast-swimming fish such as salmon or trout.
With their lithe bodies, they can follow rabbits down burrows and chickens into coops, but they will just as readily deal with carrion such as a dead lamb.
But contrary to the popular belief that mink have been wiping out waterfowl and outcompeting the native otter, detailed studies have shown that over much of Britain the animal was either sharing abundant food resources with other predators or exploiting a niche which was previously unoccupied.
Up in the Hebrides — and in time I would find myself filming mink there, too — the effect of the animals on ground-nesting birds such as common and arctic terns appears to be serious.
Like many predators, mink ‘surplus-kill’.
They have been known to swim to an offshore tern colony and kill dozens of chicks and adults in a single night.
Populations of these species may not be able to tolerate this type of predation because they have evolved in the  absence of ground-based predators.
But this is the only instance where American mink are a proven threat to their adopted ecosystem.
After some experience, I learned that mink are easiest to film in June, when the females are regularly active in daylight hours, busily feeding their growing kits.
In the summer of 1991, I had another mink film to make — this time for Wildlife on One — and the first place I thought of was the logjam on the River Usk.
I set up on the same spot as in the previous summer, but this time my luck was different.
Within an hour, there among the logs, intent on its search for eels, was a mink — a silver- ‘blue’ one.
This is a naturally occurring colour, comprising 5–10 per cent of the wild population in the UK, that is bred into minks.
Now that I had found my silver-grey subject I could begin filming.
But unlike the mink I had filmed the previous year, this one appeared not to be very active.
Often I could wait a whole day and not catch sight of it.
And eel-fishing looked much harder this time, the silver-grey often returning to its den empty-handed.
The year before, I had never seen the mink I was filming return without an eel, usually within 15 minutes.
But this mink sometimes took as long as two hours to catch one.
Perhaps there were fewer eels in the river than last year.
Maybe, if she was a recent escapee, she had never learned how to fish well.
Or, as it was earlier in the year this time, there may not have been the necessity since the kits would have been smaller.
Or perhaps this one did all her fishing at night.
When you're observing real animals living real lives, it's often very hard to know anything for certain.
Filming this silver-grey had been very exciting, but for the programme we needed shots of the more typical chocolate-coloured animal, too.
Luckily, I had heard of a suitable den on the River Wye.
Mink had been seen in a small culvert created by a spring on a long grassy bank.
I set up my equipment at this new site, and watched and waited.
Suddenly, the grass around the den began to rustle and clumps of it fell down the bank.
Then I got a clear view of the mink, which was grabbing tufts of grass in its mouth and dragging them backwards into the den.
I had never observed this behaviour before, and I was very excited.
As I watched the den over the next few days, I began to appreciate the set pattern of this mink's activity.
She normally emerged every five or six hours for a hunting trip of about half an hour, returning to the den with eels.
Once, though, she brought back a young rabbit fresh from its nest.
It was while filming at this den that I heard of yet another place, only a few miles up the Wye, where mink had been seen killing mallard chicks.
There, a large rotten tree had fallen into the river.
The inside was completely hollow, and broken limbs had left several holes that mink could enter through.
It provided a perfect roomy family den, and it even had its own door sign — a large red disc used by canoeists for navigation.
Early one afternoon, I began my vigil.
Soon, something caused a rustle in the undergrowth.
I only caught a glimpse, but it was definitely a mink with a mallard duckling.
Unfortunately, it used a back entrance to  the den and disappeared from view.
But shortly after, to my surprise, I saw the female and two kits peering out from one of the branch holes, surveying the river, and for the rest of the day I was treated to some amazing mink behaviour.
Mother and kits would emerge from one hole, walk over the tree and disappear down another hole.
Often the female dragged or carried one of the kits, which would give a continuous high-pitched call.
Halfway through the afternoon, the female started to transfer food between the holes.
Her larder was quite large and included eels, ducklings and, perhaps surprisingly, a mole.
By the end of that day I had my first shots of a mink family in action.
Early the next morning I was back.
And to my delight, mother and kits continued as before.
It was Saturday, and a stream of canoeists paddled past.
As they stared intently at a cameraman lurking on the bank, a family of mink, unnoticed peered curiously at them, from only a few metres away.
By afternoon, there was heavy, persistent rain.
For the rest of the weekend there was a downpour, and by Monday, when it finally abated and I could get back to the den, the mink had gone.
The mother had moved her family to another den, and I couldn't find it.
Under dark, heavy clouds, I returned to the den on the river.
After about four hours, I heard the familiar squeaks a bit further downstream, and in a while, they appeared, travelling through long grass, the female carrying one kit while another three followed closely.
I was surprised to see them up in the tall grasses, instead of moving along the exposed bank, but I realised that the rising river level had forced them up.
It was difficult to get good shots of them in dense undergrowth, and once again, British rain had upset my hopes.
The family moved on past their old den, over the bank and out of sight.
Despite extensive searching I was never able to find them again.
It was now early July, and I went back to the Usk to film the silver-grey mink.
At last, warm weather — but alas, no mink.
After three days searching, I gave up.
While I had been away at the Wye, the silver-grey had either moved her family to a new nest of had fallen foul of a fisherman's trap.
The next part of the job was to film mink where they are most likely to be an ecological threat — the Outer Hebrides.
By the end of July, it had dried off down south, but I wasn't there any more.
I was on Harris, suffering the unpredictable weather of the Scottish islands.
Occasionally, the clouds, cleared and I was able to film mink scavenging along the rocky shoreline at low tide.
More rarely, I watched them diving in the sea for sea urchins or other easy prey.
On one special occasion (ie, a dry day) I saw a female lead her pack of four kits along a small sandy bay.
Following their mother closely, the family moved in a slithering mass.
One more adventurous youngster searched through some seaweed and found a crab.
It seemed surprised when the crustacean raised its claws and valiantly fought back.
A moment's hesitation allowed another kit to dash in to steal the prize.
It was a lovely moment, but this sort of excitement was rare.
Mostly it rained.
In spite of the rain's best efforts, I was pleased that I had been able to observe and film interesting mink behaviour.
And I had developed respect for these beautiful predators.
If it's ever proved that the mink has had an unacceptable effect on the environment, then it might be difficult, if not impossible, to redress the balance.
Humans have introduced mink to the British countryside — and the animals have proceeded to put themselves permanently beyond human control.
Like it or not, American mink are now a part of British wildlife.
It's a fact we might as well learn to live with, and enjoy.
On the fur trade's coat-tails
Mink have bee part of our wildlife for barely 30 years, but they are already common in most corners of the British Isles.
It is not unlike our once-familiar polecat, except that the mink carries the stigma of an unwelcome intruder, and to many rural people, it is a fierce and passionless killer of wildlife and domestic stock.
But this same animal was once revered as a symbol of romance and beauty.
Have we so quickly forgotten the fountain of wealth which the mink represented during the conquest of North America?
The exploitation of fur-bearing animals was the incentive for much of the early exploration of North America.
As early as 1670, the Governor and Company of Adventurers of England Trading in Hudson's Bay — a precursor of the Hudson's Bay Company, the oldest business institution in North America — began a trade in fur which continued until very recently.
When Europe had its first taste of the wealth of the northern colonies, a flood of fortune-seekers journeyed to the frontier.
Early explorers traded directly with Indians for furs, but the white trappers eventually evicted the native Americans so that they could control the precious resource themselves.
Wild mustelids, principally mink and otter, constituted a large proportion of the trade, and together with two large rodents — beaver and muskrat — they fuelled the economy of the northern lands.
Trappers and traders penetrated all parts of the continent, and there were frequent territorial conflicts between representatives of the different European fur companies.
But the initial rich plunder became a lean living as the animals were overexploited.
Increasingly, trappers had to move to ever more remote places when the wildlife was depleted locally.
For the sea mink Mustela macrodon , overexploitation led to extinction.
Once common along the coast of Maine, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia and a prize catch for the local Indians, sea mink disappeared by 1874, when the last known pelt was taken in the Bay of Fundy.
Populations of many other fur-bearers — particularly the large, solitary and slow-breeding mustelids — were greatly reduced by the early 1900s.
Concern for the loss of such an important economic resource led to research on population dynamics and resulted in close seasons for hunting, even though all the Canadian provinces and 47 of the United States still allow at least a limited harvest of wild mink.
A few states conduct population estimates, but the lack of a consistent downward trend in the number of pelts harvested is taken to indicate that the populations aren't overexploited.
The US still traps more animals for their fur than any other country, with the possible exception of the Soviet Union.
These days, only a small proportion of the pelts are of wild mink — some 300,000–400,000 are trapped annually, with the bulk coming from Minnesota, Wisconsin, Alaska and Iowa.
In Canada, 1986 statistics show  approximately 88,000 wild mink pelts, in addition to the 1.5 million ranched pelts on the market.
Captive production marks the second stage in the relationship of mink and man — a mixed blessing for the mink, as there is little doubt that the ‘fur factories’ took pressure off the wild populations.
The earliest attempts were made in Canada around the turn of the century, using locally caught mink to get the breeding colony started.
At first, the trade preferred wild-caught pelts, which had denser underfur and better resistance to fading.
But eventually selective breeding turned the tables on quality, and the economic boom that followed the First World War brought an explosion of demand for fur, for the first time a high-fashion commodity.
High prices led to the severe depletion of wild mink, marten, river otter, and beaver populations, and ranch-bred fur came into its own.
The North American mink is a highly varied species, with some 15 recognised subspecies.
They range from the robust Alaskan strains to the now endangered Florida Everglades mink, and include the western shore-dwelling variety, which is still commonly seen scavenging the beaches of California.
With the spread of the fur factories, this hybrid stock (ranched animals are a mixture, mostly from eastern Canada and New England, and Alaska) was transplanted throughout the northern latitudes of the globe.
In Scandinavia and Britain, particularly, the industry burgeoned from the late 1920s into the 1970s, and escapes were inevitable.
In fact, they were frequent, as the mink is a true Houdini of animals.
By the 1960s, wild breeding colonies were present in almost every area where ranches had been established.
This brings us to the third stage: the arrival of a new and sometimes troublesome predator in the British countryside.
Hybrid vigour may well have contributed to the robustness with which the ranch escapees established themselves so widely, quickly spreading along the waterways and coasts and filling a niche left virtually empty after the removal by gamekeepers of otters, stoats and polecats.
Early attempts to eradicate mink failed, despite a reward on its tail, but the relaxation of bounty-hunting does not mean an end to suspicion and enmity.
Why is the feral mink regarded as a pest, when in its native America it is not normally seen as a significant problem?
A comparison of the habitat and diet might help explain.
The mink is an opportunistic predator, taking a wide variety of mammals, fish, birds and invertebrates.
Basically, it will eat whatever it can find and catch.
On the American lakes and swamps, waterfowl are an important resource, and over the summer months, the vulnerable chicks and eggs are a boon to a mother mink raising a demanding litter of kits.
Waterbirds are common in much of the mink's European range, and around the coastline, ground-nesting seabirds and waders provide a substitute.
On smaller watercourses, where birds are not readily available, the summer usually brings a flush of young mammals to fill the gap.
In North America, the muskrat (the bearer of musquash fur) is perhaps the mink's most important mammal prey.
The extent of exploitation of one valuable fur-bearer by another, to the detriment of commercial hunting, led to a close examination of the interrelationship of these animals.
The muskrat is a swamp-dwelling rodent something like a large water vole.
Its size and strength make it formidable but rewarding game for the mink, which, like all predators, faces a risk/benefit problem.
As an early observer remarked, ‘If a big muskrat goes after a mink with mayhem in mind and carving tools in front, the mink may not care to accept the sporting challenge.’
It became apparent that the muskrats which possessed an adequate territory were generally safe from  mink predation.
The most vulnerable were the surplus individuals, the wounded losers in territorial battles and those with a poor winter food store and the need to venture out to forage.
Minks also eat muskrat carrion, and abandoned lodges provide valuable denning sites.
Hence the mink is not so much a threat to the muskrat population as a direct competitor with muskrat trappers.
In parts of North America where there aren't any muskrats, the cottontail rabbit may be the main mammal prey.
The European rabbit is also important in the diet of the feral mink, which is given little credit for culling this acknowledged pest.
But rabbits are most accessible to the mink in the spring and autumn, and much less so over the winter.
For the mink in America, winter is one of the best times for muskrats.
Fish, which in the cold European waters are sluggish and easily caught, often provide the staple for mink over the winter.
But on many streams which mink have colonised, particularly those close to intensive agriculture, fish are no longer abundant.
A hungry mink might be forced to stray beyond the normal limits of its range, and it might easily find an undefended chickenhouse or trout pond.
On the whole the differences in prey availability between the continents is equivocal and less important than the differences between one location and another.
Geography appears to be more important.
As the number of people in Europe has increased, animals that could cohabit with humans thrive while others are marginalised.
Two of the mink's relatives illustrate the point.
The stone marten has readily moved into buildings and even urban landscapes, and the native European mink has all but vanished.
Despite its similar looks, the European mink is not closely related to the American mink.
This smaller and shyer animal once ranged from the Spanish Sierra Nevada to the Urals, but has suffered greatly in the last century from hunting and the disturbance of agricultural development.
Although American mink are sometimes blamed for the disappearance of the European mink, the latter were already rare before American mink were introduced.
In some parts of Russia, where American mink have been deliberately introduced as free-ranging fur stock, the two species may conflict, but the main problem for the European mink is the indiscriminate trapping of its American cousin for pest control.
The American mink normally shuns human settlement and confines itself to natural, or at least loosely managed, environs.
But compared with the European mink, it is more tolerant of human disturbance close by.
For example, mink have been radio-tracked along river banks inside major cities.
Europe, and particularly Britain, has become a close tapestry of intensive agriculture with small pockets of natural habitat.
In it, the feral mink often finds itself to be a close neighbour to vulnerable domestic stock.
Most attacks on stock occur in the autumn, when the young mink disperse to find their own territories, and in the spring, when males wander in search of females.
These attacks represent chance encounters by the roving mink, rather than deliberate forays by local territory-holders.
In its native North America, the scale is quite different.
The availability of land and the cost of transport make it less likely that intensive livestock units will be within reach of suitable mink habitat.
As a competitor for wild game, the mink is not resented for fulfilling its natural role.
But it does endure its share of predation by man.
The mink has had a chequered relationship with us, but we must remember that the changes are of our own making.
Whether we covet, confine or curse it, the mink is only minding its own business.
The separate sexes
Evolutionary pressures have separated the male and female mink, so that they appear to be (and are sometimes mistaken for) two distinct species.
This ‘sexual dimorphism’ means that female mink normally weigh from 500 to 800 grams, and the male often twice as much.
Size has considerable implications for the ecology and behaviour of an animal.
The habitat that suits the male of the species may not be ideal for the female.
On the other hand, their differing tastes in prey may reduce the competition between them.
Is the size difference an adaptation to reduced competition?
Males take more rabbits, and females more fish and small mammals, but this is not to say that a female can't kill a rabbit or that a male won't kill mice.
It is a matter of efficiency: the higher energetic cost of hunting a rabbit encourages a female to choose smaller prey, while the greater appetite of the large male is more efficiently met by a large item.
For dimorphism to evolve, both sexes should benefit from their divergence.
But as the male can just as easily catch small prey, the female would seem to be disadvantaged.
It is more likely that the different reproductive roles of males and females have led to the divergence of size.
Sexual dimorphism is most pronounced in those species whose males gain access to more than one female during the breeding season.
The requirement for large body size arises from the fierce battles between males for access to females.
A large mink can also travel further and defend a larger territory.
He then has more chance of meeting females and is better equipped to overpower them in mating fights.
Largeness is clearly an advantage for the male.
The question that remains is why selection favours smaller females.
Small size could help her reduce her energy demands, so that she can channel more of her food intake into reproduction.
On the other hand, her workload is not reduced, as she takes a greater number of smaller prey.
When we look at growth, the costs of large size become obvious.
For the young male mink, the first few months of life are his hardest test.
At the end of the summer, he must seek out and defend a territory.
If he can't feed himself well, he won't reach his full potential size before winter comes and the food supply dwindles.
He won't get a second chance.
The female doesn't endure such stress.
She has other ways of protecting her stake in her offspring.
Female mink permit several matings with a number of different males over a protracted mating season.
A worthy father should pass the tests of strength and endurance, and so she rewards the efforts of those who are still fit enough to subdue and defend her at the end of the arduous rut.
Nevertheless, she can't afford to waste the earlier encounters.
She doesn't begin to ovulate until she has been mated and will not become fertile for another two or three days.
She must be mated again, and the first mate has to guard her or risk his groundwork going to benefit another.
In practice, he may have several females within his territory, and so has a dilemma: he can't guard them all at once.
But if an intruder does sneak in, all is not necessarily lost.
On the second and subsequent matings, the female may be fertilised, but she will continue to ovulate, giving a chance to further males.
Indeed, she may give to a litter of mixed paternity.
Fertilisations may occur over a period of a month, but the most recent foetuses have the best chance to develop.
So the persistence of the last male to mate her is rewarded, as he is father to most of the kits.
For the male, it is a stiff competition, but even the strongest can be unwittingly foiled.
Thus male mink show no paternal care of their young: the risk of investing in another's offspring is just too high.
Only the female can guarantee her parenthood, and to her descends the task of single-handedly rearing the young.
TV Link
Invasion of the Killer Mink , which compares the mink's terrible reputation with its actual behaviour in the wild, will be shown in the Wildlife on One series on 13 January at 8.30pm.
Authors
Nick Hayward is a freelance television cameraman specialising in wildlife film-making.
Some of his recent projects in his native Australia include films on catching crocodiles and on skills for surviving in arid regions.
Dr Nigel Dunstone lectures in the department of Biological Sciences at Durham University.
A self-confessed minko-phile, he has observed the behaviour of mink in the wild and laboratory for more than 20 years.
In recent years he has become increasingly involved in the conservation of neotropical mammals, and now has a deep involvement in research studies in Peru and Ecuador of the mountain tapir, ocelot and giant otter.
He has acted as scientific adviser on a number of television documentaries including Giant Otter, Beauty and the Beast and Invasion of the Killer Mink , to be screened as part of the new series of Wildlife on One this month.
For the past few years he has been joined in aspects of his research and conservation work by Dr Jane O'Sullivan, an agricultural scientist with an interest in the relationship between humanity and the natural world.
The old country.
The American mink Mustela vison was one of the reasons for the speed of the early European exploration of North America.
Along with otter, beaver and muskrat, it was relentlessly pursued by trappers, who opened up the continent to all the other stages of civilisation.
Anything goes.
When mink and otters manage to share a habitat — and, on both sides of the Atlantic, they often do — it's usually because they don't compete too much for food.
Both animals eat fish, yes, but mink eat almost anything else as well.
If there are otters in the neighbourhood monopolising the fish supply, the mink simply turn to small mammals and birds.
The only time one animal pushes out the other is when fish is the only food, and then it's the mink that loses.
Very close cousins.
One of the main ways of distinguishing a European mink Mustela lutreola from this American one is by looking for a white patch on the upper lip.
The European is also generally smaller and, unlike the otter, can be displaced by the American alien.
That's a problem for the Continent, though — there never have been any European mink in the British Isles.
Sex discrimination.
Different mink species are more alike than the male and female within the species.
He is twice the size of her.
American mink in British brambles.
When fur farms were first being established in this country, anybody could have predicted — and a lot of people did — that the result would be a British population of feral mink.
Now that there is one, it's a little late to get hysterical — better to accept the consolation that the animal has integrated itself into the landscape, almost as if a place was waiting for it.
And, come to that, it's nice to have around.
Facts of Life
BY JONATHON PORRITT
In the first instalment of a new monthly column that contrast the reality of nature with the dreamworld of conventional business and politics — and suggest various ways of injecting the one into the other — Jonathan Porritt looks at the build-up to next year's ‘Earth Summit’ and wonder if the US Administration's chronic inability to face facts will finally be the thing that scuppers the planet's ‘last chance’.
I'd hate to be responsible for organising an event billed as ‘our last chance to save the Earth’.
Yet that's the ticket that now hangs around the neck of the so-called ‘Earth Summit’, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), to be held in Rio de Janeiro in June next year.
Any self-respecting sceptic might be tempted to point out that conferences have a pretty poor track record in saving anything, let alone the Earth.
But this is not just any conference: it's apparently going to be the greatest ever gathering of world leaders in one place at one time.
Any self-respecting sceptic might be tempted…
It's certainly easy to be sceptical about the Earth Summit.
There is a strong possibility that it will be reduced to just another global talkshop, with a succession of world leaders vying with each other for media-rich prizes in green rhetoric.
The amount of hot air likely to be generated over the 12 days could trigger off the kind of chain reaction that global warming scientists only refer to in hushed tones.
And the prospect of the world's leaders prattling away while the Earth burns around them is a pretty gloomy one.
But such pessimism seems to me to be somewhat premature.
True enough, the preparatory process leading up to the summit has got badly bogged down, and the number of logjams to be cleared between now and June will keep the UNCED secretariat in hectic action 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
For one thing, it's a fearsome collection of issues for which the summit has to find solutions: global warming, deforestation, loss of biodiversity and technology transfer, let alone promoting sustainable development in the South.
And that's before they go on to discuss what has been dubbed ‘Agenda 21’, a comprehensive greenprint for transforming the world economy.
Little wonder that the odd logjam has formed.
Even when you rub their noses in it, politicians can be remarkably slow to recognise reality for what it is.
We've all been trucking along for so long on the back of the post-war consensus (more growth, more production, more consumption, more jobs, more energy, more roads, more hospitals, more rubbish, etc), that most people are understandably reluctant to get off the treadmill — even though they can see it's falling to pieces.
Life was relatively simple when all a politician had to do was generate a bit more economic growth and hope that enough of it would ‘trickle down’ to keep the wheels turning both nationally and internationally.
It worked well enough for some, but it can't work for all.
Simply because the planet is inevitably being eaten up, polluted and stripped bare in the process.
Hence the current emphasis on sustainable development (meeting our needs without making it impossible for future generations to meet their needs), which is what the Earth Summit is meant to be giving some practical expression to.
And it still could.
There are enough scientists, politicians and diplomats who have seen the writing on the wall.
Just as the 1972 Conference on the Environment and Development in Stockholm is said to have ushered in a new era of international cooperation (at the very least, it led to the creation of the United National Environment Programme), so its 1992 successor could just provide all world leaders with some kind of working map for the future.
But a lot of that depends on us.
Politicians aren't going to stick their necks out to help break up the various logjams unless we're shouting and yelling at them from the bank — for the most part to encourage them, but also to warn them of dire consequences to come if they get out of the hot water before the job is done.
Nowhere is that task more necessary than in the United States.
The only part of the natural world that the US delegation to the Earth Summit seems to be interested in is beavers, and how best to build dams and systematically reinforce the logjams that others are striving to break down.
President Bush has yet to be convinced that ‘going green’ will translate into real votes come the presidential election later in the year, and his advisers (who enjoy nothing so much as bashing a few Greens on the media before breakfast) have sown so many doubts in his mind about ‘the lack of scientific evidence’that global warming is not seen to be one of the challenges he now faces — despite the fact that his country is responsible for nearly 30 per cent of all emissions of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas.
Back in November, Mr Bush got a rude shock when his ‘Energy Strategy’(which amounted to little more than building a few more nuclear reactors and opening up every remaining square inch of Alaska to further oil exploration) got kicked out by the Senate.
Go back and think again, they said, this time with the emphasis on energy efficiency and renewables.
He won't, of course; as an oil man, he probably can't.
But it's encouraging that so many scientists, politicians and (of late) influential business people have been making it unmistakably clear to White House officials that the US position on global warming and the whole Earth Summit process absolutely stinks.
There's really not much point advocating a ‘New World Order’ if there's no world left in which to establish that order.
By good fortune, the final negotiating session, before the summit itself, takes place in New York in March and April.
American environmentalists are girding their loins in preparation for what is undoubtedly the most important meeting in the whole process.
Otherwise, it will be down to the usual international brinkmanship in Rio itself, and that's no way to run a planet.
News of the Earth
Blowing the hornbills
Of the world's 53 subspecies of Asian hornbills, only nine, in the terminology of a recent conference on the status of  these birds, are ‘stable’.
Twenty-six are ‘vulnerable’, 14 are ‘endangered’ and four are ‘critical’, with ‘a 50 per cent probability of extinction within five years or two generations, whichever is longer.’
Technical status aside, all but two subspecies have declining populations.
The conference — held in Singapore in September and sponsored by the World Conservation Union, the International Council for Bird Preservation and the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums — heard that the number-one culprit was the timber industry.
Almost all Asian hornbills are forest dwellers, and they are simply losing out to the chainsaw.
Thailand's Professor Pilai Poonswad, who for 10 years has been studying four species of forest hornbills, pointed out that the birds nest in large Dipterocarps and that their taste in trees was something they shared with loggers.
As the Dipterocarps disappear, he said, so inevitably will the hornbills.
The zoo curators at the conference had news that was almost as bleak.
With a few exceptions, they said, most hornbills in captivity are not breeding, and many are given little chance to, living as they do without a mate or a nestbox.
Even the institutions that are trying to establish captive-breeding programmes face difficult decisions.
Hornbills are big and demanding birds that need plenty of space, which is something most zoos don't have.
Anyway, the available zoo accommodation for hornbills is dwarfed by the birds' problems in the wild — there are simply too many potential hornbill refugees.
Among the species most in need of attention, the conference heard, is the rhinoceros hornbill, with subspecies in Peninsular Malaya and Sumatra, Borneo and Java.
In the last two islands, it is in serious decline, with only 500 left in all of Java.
Because they are such spectacular birds, they are kept in zoos, but not enough of them and not in one place.
The total zoo population is eight, scattered among several zoos.
The rarest hornbill is almost certainly the Narcondam, which is confined to a 15km 2 island of that name and is being studied by S A Hussain of the Bombay Natural History Society.
He reported that the island, one of the Andaman group in the Bay of Bengal, was unpeopled and undisturbed until 1967, when 16 Indian policemen were stationed there.
At first they suffered great privations — mainly because they didn't have a permanent supply of drinking water — but recently a well has been dug, and today they have houses and solar electricity.
They have cleared land for vegetable patches and introduced exotic weeds, and, that bane of island wildlife, goats.
There are now about 400 of the animals on Narcondam, eating their way through the island's ground vegetation, including the saplings of the trees that Narcondam hornbills nest in.
Hussain has lived on the island, studied the problem and has submitted a hornbill rehabilitation plan to the Indian government.
For some reason, it doesn't advise exterminating the goats, but it does suggest ‘setting up suitably designed nesting tree trunks.’
The government's response, he says, has been ‘positive.’
A lot of other such action plans have been set up: population viability assessments, management recommendations, captive-breeding schemes.
But the rate of loss of forest threatens to outstrip any of this basic work, and practical plans are hampered by the fact that until recently the birds have simply not been very well studied: not much is known about them.
It that's true of a group as conspicuous as hornbills, what does it say about the fate of the great majority of ‘unglamorous’ animals on the planet?
PAUL REDDISH
Norway finally succumbs to Ahab complex
Norway's prime minister, Gro Harlem Brundtland, has appointed a special committee to decide the future of Norwegian whaling and, in particular, whether the country will remain within the International Whaling commission (IWC).
The three-man body includes Professor Lars Walløe, who is head of the government's sea-mammal research programme and is regarded by conservationists as pro-whaling.
Norway imposed a moratorium on commercial whaling in 1987 and in 1991, for the first time, stopped killing whales for scientific purposes.
The committee, which is to report before Christmas, is expected at least to recommend the lifting of the ban on scientific whaling and to permit a target catch of 100 minke whales.
Departure from the IWC and the return to full commercial whaling may even be on the cards, given that the sea-mammal research programme has stated that the minke population can tolerate an overall annual kill of 1,000 animals.
The resumption of any form of whaling would prove an embarrassment to the Norwegian fisheries minister, Oddrunn Pettersen, who is currently lurching from crisis to crisis.
Her international trade negotiations are already hindered by Norway's attitude to whaling and sealing, and she is blamed for poor results.
For example, Norway is currently stockpiling 30,000 tons of ranched salmon that the rest of the world refuses to buy.
The US market might close completely if Norway leaves the IWC.
But sealing may soon be less of a problem for her.
The two sealing vessels that illegally hunted in Greenland waters in 1991, the Polarfangst and the Polarstar (see BBC WILDLIFE, October 1991), have been forced to pay back a large part of their government subsidies — £50,000 and £30,000 respectively.
They are now likely to withdraw from the hunt, in which case, only two ships, the Harmoni and the Melshorn , will be left to kill seals next year.
STEPHEN MILLS
On 14 November 1991, the Norwegian parliamentary committee on whaling declared itself in favour of hunting minkes and called on the government to initiate a campaign to promote Norwegian whaling interests.
The terrible tale of the Taiwan Ten
Stories about the illegal capture and sale of wild animals don't usually have happy endings, and so no wonder there was much celebration when 10 wild-caught orang-utans smuggled into Taiwan and destined for the pet trade were confiscated by Taiwanese officials and sent back to their Indonesian homeland for rehabilitation.
But instead of returning to the trees and swinging happily ever after, the orangs got caught up in web of conservation politics.
After spending nearly a year living in the garage of a house in Jakarta, three are now in a biomedical research laboratory, and seven are caged in a holding facility in a burnt-out forest area in Kalimantan (the Indonesian half of the island of Borneo) where it is proposed that a rehabilitation centre should be built.
No one knows if this is the final chapter or not, but judging by the story so far, anything could happen.
It all began in the summer of 1990, when investigations by various groups, including the International Primate Protection League, led to the confiscation, of the orangs at a port in Taiwan.
Many baby orangs are caught in the forests of Indonesia and taken by ship to Taiwan, where they are sold as pets, shop props and showbiz gimmicks — so many, in fact, that there is said to be a greater density of orangs in Taiwan's capital city, Taipei, than in their own habitat.
The confiscation of the 10 was therefore hailed as a very positive step, and negotiations for their return to Indonesia followed immediately.
Heavily involved in these negotiations were representatives of the US-based Orangutan Foundation, which has branches in Taiwan, Indonesia and the UK, and which was set up by Dr Biruté Galdikas, who has been working with orangs in Kalimantan for more than 20 years.
Everything seemed to be settled when Taiwanese and Indonesian officials agreed that the animals would be sent to the orang-utan rehabilitation centre run by Dr Galdikas at Tanjung Puting in Kalimantan; and in November 1990, they were seen off at the airport by BBC cameras, reporters from around the world and a hundred singing Taiwanese children.
But when the orangs — who became known as the Taiwan Ten — reached Indonesia, the main Indonesian negotiator, Sutisna Wartaputra, director general of Forest Protection and Nature Conservation (PHPA), changed his mind and refused permission for the animals to go to Tanjung Puting.
His reasons are unclear, though he did say that three out of the recently rescued ‘Bangkok Six’ orang-utans (all weak and traumatised babies) had died at the Tanjung Puting centre.
He wanted the Taiwan Ten to go to a commercial safari park until a ‘suitable’ rehabilitation centre could be found.
There are, however, only three established centres, none of which Wartaputra considered suitable.
The arguments dragged on for 11 months, during which time the orangs were looked after by volunteers, many of whom were recent graduates in biology from the National University in Jakarta.
Some of them lived in a rented house, while the Taiwan Ten took over the garage and yard.
Finally, Wartaputra decided to send seven of the orangs to the Bukit Soeharto area of Kalimantan, in Borneo.
Information about the actual place is sparse, but an Orangutan Foundation representative told BBC WILDLIFE that there are no facilities and no expertise there to care for the orangs, and that the surrounding primary forest has been destroyed by fire and so is unsuitable as a release area.
Of the other three orangs, said Wartaputra, two had tested positive to TB and one to hepatitis B, and they should be isolated in a biomedical research laboratory.
Dr Galdikas maintains that the animals are not sick (the test results have subsequently been questioned), and that, anyway, Tanjung Puting has a special isolation area, and that the TB tests are being used as an excuse to keep the animals in the research laboratory.
The orang caretakers asked Wartaputra to honour his agreement and refused to cooperate with the new plans.
The authorities decided to take the orangs by force, and on 31 October 1991, armed soldiers carried out a dawn raid on the house and garage — where they were met by more than a hundred students.
The soldiers forced their way in, but found only one orang-utan — the difficult-to-manage Charlie, whom they took away.
Fourteen students were arrested and questioned.
None knew the whereabouts of the nine orangs, but three were still put in jail for refusing to give information.
Eventually, the nine orangs were taken to the offices of the Ministry of the Environment (which they proceeded to wreck) and handed over in return for the jailed students.
Since then, there has been little news of the orangs, other than that three are still in the research laboratory, and seven are in a cage at Bukit Soeharto.
Says Marcus Phipps, co-ordinator of the Orangutan Foundation's Taiwan office: ‘It's a tragedy that something that began with such joy and expectation has ended so miserably.’
TESS LEMMON
Readers who wish to express their concern for the fate of the Taiwan Ten should write to: His Excellency Teuku Mohamad Hadi Thayed, The Indonesian Embassy, 38 Grosvenor Square, London W1X 9AD.
The laboratory holding three of the Taiwan Ten is believed to be about to acquire another 30 orang-utans, the origin of which is unknown.
Scientists fear Gaia is heading for a breakdown
Whether you believe that the planet Earth is a living, breathing superorganism or that James Lovelock's Gaia is merely a ‘poetic metaphor’ probably doesn't matter.
What does matter is that something seems seriously wrong with Gaia.
If she were a pet dog or cat, you would take her to a vet.
This view was reaffirmed late last year when more than 300 scientists gathered in Rhode Island to document and discuss the increasing occurrence of algal blooms, including toxic red tides, throughout the world's oceans.
On a local or regional scale, such events can pose serious threats to human health — there have been numerous deaths resulting from the consumption of seafood containing algal toxins.
They can also cause big problems for coastal fisheries, aquaculture operations and the tourist industry.
But on a wider scale, such events may be indicative of something much more fundamental.
Some scientists, such as University of Rhode Island's Theodore Smayda, believe they are symptomatic of a ‘global epidemic,’ an ‘early warning of a massive ecological breakdown.’
After all, humans are not the only organisms that have been affected.
Other members of marine ecosystems have also died as a result of red-tide blooms.
A partial list includes several invertebrates, numerous fish species, pelicans and cormorants in Monterey, California, last September; endangered manatees in Florida in 1982; sea otters in Alaska in 1987; humpback whales off Cape Cod in 1987; and, possibly, bottle-nosed dolphins along the eastern seaboard of the United States in 1987 and 1988.
And let's not forget that the 1988 seal plague in the North Sea was also accompanied by a number of ‘exceptional’ algal blooms.
Even the recent deaths of striped dolphins in the Mediterranean, which began in 1990 (see BBC WILDLIFE, October 1990, p701; January 1991, p64; October 1991, p675), were apparently preceded by an algal bloom.
The connection between algal blooms and large-scale mortalities of marine organisms is not always clear but, often, there is another common feature; unseasonably warm temperatures.
This raises the possibility that global warming may be a contributing factor.
And warm temperatures, of course, have also been implicated in the widespread bleaching of corals around the world.
To the above list we can also add other unusual mortalities of fish and turtles along the coast of South America, and of penguins and other birds in New Zealand, widespread ulcerative diseases in coastal fin fish, the increasing occurrence of wasting disease in seagrass communities, cancerous tumours in green turtles from Florida to Australia, and the seemingly worldwide decline of amphibian populations in recent years.
Clearly, the dilemma of ‘multiple mysteries,’ which Sidney Holt addressed in these pages more than three years ago, remains unsolved (see BBC WILDLIFE, October 1988, p554–5).
Only now the list is longer.
At that time, Holt reminded us that in ecology, ‘everything is connected to everything else’ and that ‘the difficult, time-consuming, costly and now urgent task is to find out which…connections are stronger — and why.’
Surely this is where the efforts of the global environmental community must be focused in this last decade — the so-called ‘turn-around’ decade — of the twentieth century.
Until we better understand what is really wrong with Gaia and how to treat her symptoms, any meaningful discussions about future ‘sustainable development’— the current preoccupation — seem not only premature but, quite possibly, moot.
DAVID LAVIGNE
The things people say
‘Most environmental groups are defending economic interests, not nature.
They are being used by multinationals and cartels to prevent us and other Third World nations from cutting into the developed world's profits.’
Gilberto Mestrinho , Governor of Amazonas, Brazil
‘What we are being asked to do now is to sacrifice the development of these areas [of particular value to wildlife]in order to protect the environment.
It is a very high price to pay.’
Vicente Comes , office of the Secretary of State for the Environment, Spain
‘We have been plunging them into boiling water for years and it is ridiculous to say we are being cruel.
The lobster has a tiny brain like our city council and does not feel any pain.’
Fred Brimacombe , lobster seller, Plymouth, on the city council's proposal to stop fishermen killing lobsters by throwing them into boiling water.
‘The last thing we want to do is confuse anyone.
What we weren't trying to say is that we make no contribution to the greenhouse effect…[but]to say that making Andrex from virgin fibre instead of waste causes less carbon dioxide to be released to the atmosphere.’
Mandy Moore , Environmental Affairs Manager, Scott Paper, regarding the controversy over its promotion of the Andrex brand of toilet tissue as being environmentally sound.
‘Foreigners who live in cities and criticise us have a bunny-love approach.
They don't want elephants culled.
I prefer the term ‘managed.’
John Pike , Executive Director of the Zimbabwe National Conservation Trust.
‘It's the pinnacle of hunting…
It's the greatest adventure on the face of the earth.’
John J Jackson, III , member of the Safari Club International, on elephant hunting, and the restrictions on importing into the US elephant trophies, which his organisation has challenged through the courts.
‘We are exploiting our forests to sustain our development efforts without destroying them.’
Thojib N J Suharto , President of Indonesia
‘The majority of people in the countryside, as evidenced by their public support of hunting and all its associated activities, such as point-to-points and pony clubs, believe that…foxhunting, controlled and under proper scrutiny, is the most acceptable method of controlling the fox population.’
‘Country Sports and Conservation: The case for the 1990s’,Shooting News 
They're going wild again in Wyoming
Ever since 1986, when the Wyoming Game and Fish Department took the last black-footed ferret from the wild and placed it in a captive-breeding programme, the intention has been to reintroduce the species to the prairies of Wyoming as soon as enough individuals had been bred.
The project has now taken the population from 18 animals to more than 300 at the end of the 1991 breeding season.
It was decided that, to safeguard the future of the species, a population of at least 200 breeding adults would be kept safely in captivity, while other animals were gambled in an experimental reintroduction.
Originally, the plan was to return them to their last known home, on Pitchfork Ranch near the little town of Meeteetsee, Wyoming.
But an epidemic of sylvatic plague has reduced the population of prairie dogs, on which the ferrets feed, and made the site unsuitable.
Instead, the biologists from Wyoming Game and Fish Department and the US Fish and Wildlife Service chose Shirley Basin just north of Medicine Bow.
It appears to be a rather desolate place with wide windswept prairies ringed by snow-capped hills, but it has plenty of what the ferrets need: prairie dogs.
The 49 ferrets to be reintroduced were all about four months old, which is the age when ferrets disperse in the wild.
They were taken in their little groups in the nestboxes in which they were born, and each box was attached to a cage on the prairie.
The ferrets were allowed to acclimatise in the cages over 10 days, being fed pieces of prairie dog.
This feeding was continued for a period after their release on the tenth day, in case they were unable to hunt.
Most of the animals were radio-collared, and a team of scientists tracked their movements from six tracking stations around the site.
Spotlighting and the study of tracks in the snow were also carried out.
In the wild, 80 per cent of juvenile ferrets die before reaching maturity, and so the scientists expected losses to be high.
Of the 49 released, six have been found dead.
Of these, five were killed by coyotes, which catch ferrets in the open, and one was dug out and killed by a badger.
On the other hand, one was observed killing a prairie dog, and for the others to have survived in the wild for this long, the; y must be killing for themselves.
So far, at least 10 ferrets are definitely known to have survived.
And since this means that at least 20 per cent of the captive-bred animals (with no experience of the wild) have been shown to be able to hunt for themselves, find shelter from the freezing conditions and evade predators for more than a month, Bob Oakleaf of the Wyoming Game and Fish Department considers the release a success.
If at least five animals are still at large next year, he will be even more happy.
And to make sure that the colony has a chance of getting established, the intention is to release a second, larger group of captive-bred animals next autumn.
MILES BARTON
Guyana to be Sarawhacked
A 17,000km 2 logging concession in Guyana's rainforest has been granted to a firm co-owned by a Malaysian company responsible for many human-rights and environmental abuses on its own home ground, in Sarawak.
Environmentalists fear that the arrival in Guyana of Barama Ltd — a partnership between Samling Timbers of Malaysia and Sunkyong Ltd of South Korea — may herald a new era of expansion by companies that can see the approaching end of their domestic lumber supply.
Businessmen from Sunkyong and Samling visited Guyana in March to open negotiations with the government and, on 17 October, signed a 25-year lease on 16,700km 2 of virgin forest — an area 10 times the size of Greater London.
The partnership plans to invest $50 million in new timber-processing and plywood plants in Guyana's North-west and Mazaruni districts.
(And since Samling also has shipping interests, Barama will control the business from the actual felling right through to delivery to the customer.)
The first large-scale logging is scheduled to start by early 1993.
Guyana's government has welcomed the deal.
To Dr Kenneth King, personal adviser to President Desmond Hoyte, it is ‘one of the fruits of the government's Economic Recovery Programme.’
This is part of an effort, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, to rescue the country from its $1.7 billion of debt, and it includes a drive to increase exports (minerals, timber and cash crops, mainly), a 50 per cent devaluation of the currency and an auction of Guyanese natural resources to foreign companies.
Besides the Malaysian-Korean partnership, Venezuelan, Dutch and Brazilian companies have bought logging rights, and mining and petrochemical transnationals are also moving in.
Barama has pledged to ‘work within national laws and ensure than forests and ecosystems are maintained.’
But Samling has already attracted widespread criticism for its operations in Sarawak.
It is one of the largest companies in this Malaysian state, where cut-and-run logging is expected to exhaust the primary rainforest by the end of the decade.
Since 1987, Samling has been in direct, violent conflict with the native people of the Upper Baram and Upper Rajang rivers, in central Sarawak.
Sarawak's indigenous people — the various Dayak groups, including the nomadic, hunting-and-gathering Penan — have for decades fought the logging of their forest home.
Groups from Long Sela'an are still blockading Samling's logging roads, declaring that the company has scared away the game and polluted the rivers.
Many fear that Barama's Guyana operations will be a repeat of those of its parent company in Sarawak.
Simon Counsell of Friends of the Earth (FoE) says, ‘The arrival of this company…bodes ill for Guyana's forests.’
In Guyana's interior, forest-dwelling Indians make up the majority of the population.
The exact boundaries of Barama's concession are not yet known, but it is believed to contain groups of Warrau, Lokono, Karinya and Akawaio Indians.
Survival International, the tribal-rights group, believes that Barama's ‘huge concession will devastate at least four Indian communities, destroying their forests and livelihood.’
Guyana's new Amerindian Peoples' Association has warned that ‘the state of our forests is rapidly changing, as the eyes of those who destroyed these resources elsewhere are now looking to Guyana.’
As things now stand, it will be extremely difficult for the government to control companies such as Barama.
A study by the Canadian International Development Agency has concluded that Guyana's tiny Forestry Service is incapable of supervising the handful of small local loggers.
Timber men doubt the government's ability to ‘ensure our forests are not raped, by policing…the new companies.’
Say FoE, ‘As Malaysia's own rainforests become ever more depleted, the expansion of Malaysian logging companies into other forest areas looks set to increase.’
Already, more than 20 Malaysian companies have moved into Papua New Guinea, whose 350,000km 2 of forest is the largest continuous tract of lowland tropical forest in South-east Asia.
The Malaysians, in the process of razing their own country's rainforests, have become world experts in the quick-timber business; local problems in places such as Sarawak have suddenly expanded into international threats — and any country in the world with any tropical rainforests left is in danger of getting the full, ruthless Sarawak treatment.
DAMIEN LEWIS 
EC EIA row: UK overacts
Dozens more road schemes and factory projects could fall foul of Britain's continuing dispute with the European environment commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, over the operation of ‘environmental impact assessments’.
And, says the lone environmentalist who helped advise ministers on how to implement the European law in Britain, it is all the outcome of a decade of obstruction by British officials.
Tony Long, who sat on a government working party discussing the directive in the mid-1980s while working for the Council for the Protection of Rural England, now runs WWF's Brussels office.
‘My view,’ he says, ‘is that Ripa has done everything correctly.
The row was signalled at the beginning of the year, and when the commissioner went public, it can have been no surprise, whatever ministers said.’
Ripa di Meana wrote to the British Government in October complaining about its failure to apply the EC's Environmental Impact Directive, which requires that all planning proposals that will have a significant impact on the environment must include a formal environmental impact assessment (an EIA).
Britain, he said, had failed on two counts.
It had not obtained assessments for schemes when it should have.
And the Government had ruled that planning applications made before July 1988 (the date when the directive came into operation) did not need EIAs.
The commission's view is that the date applies to decisions on schemes, not the application.
So any scheme approved after that date needs an EIA.
Ripa di Meana's letter attracted wide publicity, mostly concentrating on the individual schemes that he claimed failed the directive, such as a road to the East London River Crossing that will go through the middle of Oxleas Wood, the M3 link over Twyford Down near Winchester, and a £100 million Coca Cola plant in Northampton.
But these are only examples, drawn to the commissioner's attention by environment groups such as Friends of the Earth (FoE).
Say FoE transport campaigner Roger Higman, ‘Dozens more schemes could be hit by the argument over the application of the date alone.’
Government officials fear many more schemes will be held up in protracted dispute with the commissioner at the European Court of Appeal.
But Ripa di Meana's complaint is wider.
He says that almost the entire British planning process could now be in breach of European law.
His October letter says that the amendments made to British law after the directive was agreed by ministers give ‘excessive discretion’ to official bodies to decide when EIAs are required.
Tony Long agrees: ‘The spirit of the directive is that you are meant to catch everything with EIAs.
But if you read it in the way the UK does, you might catch only five or ten projects a year.’
The commissioner quotes the Environmental Assessment (Salmon Farming in Marine Waters) Regulations of 1988, which says that ‘a proposed development shall only be taken to be likely to have significant effects on the environment…where the Crown Estates Commissioners consider that this is the case.’
Ripa di Meana complains that this fails to place ‘a legal duty on the Commissioners to observe the requirements of the directive.’
In mid-December, Britain was due to reply to the letter.
All the indications were that the reply would argue, in tones of hurt pride, that it was all a technical hiccup, Britain had acted in good faith and so on.
There will then be another round of letters, known as ‘reasoned opinions’, after which, if no deal is struck, the matter could have to go to the European Court of Justice.
But a deal may be struck.
The commission could agree to forget about the argument over the date at which the directive applied, so long as Britain removes all the ‘excessive discretion.’
This is hardly the first time that Britain has enraged Brussels by attempting to wriggle out of European environmental legislation.
Another bout of excessive discretion in the 1980s resulted in Britain designating just 27 beaches as having to meet EC water-quality standards — a number raised after negotiation with Brussels to more than 600.
Behind it all is the Whitehall attitude that it knows better than Brussels.
It is, says Tony Long, ‘still the old holier-than-thou approach.’
FRED PEARCE
Yanomami win
After years of acrimonious dispute, the president of Brazil, Fernando Collor de Mello, has announced the demarcation of 94,000km 2 of northern Brazil as the territory of the Yanomami, the largest Indian group in the Amazon rainforest.
The demarcation covers most uses of the forest, but keeps mining rights in the hands of the government.
The presidential decree is a defeat for the Brazilian military, which wanted to maintain control over all lands close to the Venezuelan border, which is regarded as a sensitive security area.
But it is a victory for the environment secretary Jose Lutzenberger, who had threatened to resign over the issue.
The demarcation should allow the Yanomami to preserve their territory, which covers an area greater than Scotland, against encroachment by developers, provided they receive support from government agencies to keep out gangs of gold-miners and loggers in this frequently lawless region.
The demarcation itself can be finally ratified by the president after the land has been physically staked out, a large and time-consuming task for which the Brazilian congress has been asked to provide some 42 million.
The decision to demarcate the land came in mid-November, and followed an angry international outburst, conveyed to Collor by the UN Secretary General Perez de Cuellar, when Collor postponed a decision in October.
FP 
Losing its perch.
The rhinoceros hornbill — which, like most hornbills, prefers the same type of trees that loggers prefer — is having its world literally cut out from under it.
This is one of the species that has ‘a 50 per cent probability of extinction within five years or two generations, whichever is longer.’
BIG FISH BREAKOUT
A survey by the Atlantic Salmon Trust (funded by J&B Rare whiskey) of 16 rivers on the west coast of Scotland has found that 13 contain salmon originally from fish farms, and salmon fishermen report that 40 per cent of their coastal and estuary catches are farm-type fish.
These are not genetically the same as wild salmon, they breed and behave differently, and — the trust fears — they could outcompete and replace the native fish.
And because they have bigger appetites, they could eventually deplete the rivers' resources, leaving them empty of salmon of any description.
Rehab man.
This orang-utan actually made it to rehabilitation centre, but the Taiwan Ten — after a jubilant send-off,— were treated less like freed captives than parole-breakers.
Not one of them got what they were promised.
UNPOPULAR LOGGERS
If anyone is disposed to look for a golden lining in the effects of Typhoon Thelma — which, in November, killed about 7,000 people on the islands of Leyte and Negros in the central Philippines — it might be the resulting national outrage against illegal logging.
The clear-cut hillsides have been blamed for the mud avalanches that caused almost all of the deaths.
Now senators and congressmen have demanded an inquiry, and President Corazón Aquino has promised a crackdown.
Commercial logging is banned in 40 of the country's 73 provinces, and there's a chance now that is will be banned in all of them.
BAT PACT
In London in late November, 11 nations signed the Agreement on the Conservation of Bats in Europe.
Set up under the Bonn Convention on migratory species, the agreement obliges its members — Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the UK — to protect bats in the various ways that bats can be protected: finding out where they are and conserving their habitats, studying them, controlling pesticides and stopping people from killing them.
THE OTHER TROUBLES
Among Northern Ireland's problems are ‘intensive farming practices, pollution, overfishing and poorly regulated rural development,’ says a spokesperson for WWF, which has issued a Green Action Plan for the province.
This suggest that the governance of Ulster is more than just a matter of security and that there are urgent needs for an independent environmental protection agency, subsidies for green farming, and more money in general for the administration of conservation.
Another mysterious symptom.
as if they didn't have enough problems already, green turtles from Florida to Australia have been turning up with horrific cancerous tumours.
Nobody knows why, any more than anyone knows why amphibians are disappearing, dolphins are dying or coral is turning white.
The only constant seems to be global warming.
Prairie-bound.
The possible re-establishment of the black-footed ferret is good news for everyone except prairie dogs.
The penultimate saga of the Entebbe Four (‘Chimpanzees on the run’, October) is that they have been repatriated from Hungary to Uganda, where they are waiting in Entebbe Zoo to move to a semi-wild setting in their native land, courtesy of the Jane Goodall Institute.
BBC WILDLIFE MAGAZINE AWARDS FOR NATURE WRITING
We present the eleventh in a series of essays by winners and runners-up in the 1991 competition.
Bonded
BY CATRIN THOMAS
Paradise.
Past the overgrown lawn, through the decrepit rose arbour and into the Wilderness.
Waist-high grass for Red Indians; fronded seedheads you ripped off into minute feathery posies; from the cobnut to the neglected orchard whose late summer apples were wormy rinds of luscious juice: this was my childhood playground.
My parents were terrible gardeners.
When the arbour collapsed, when the pear tree blew over, they cleared the wreckage and left Nature to it.
Twice yearly they dragged the dining table out like a carnival float, complete with silver cutlery and tasselled umbrellas, for Dinner.
Colonials keeping up a good show, ignoring the riotous jungle around them.
Over the years it became an ecological Salient.
Pale and Interesting,sensitive flowers established Red Alert at the cessation of Fison's Best, and reverted snarlingly back to their true thorny colours, cascading from the flower-beds to strangle out their rivals.
Conversely, flame-coloured harridans that looked as if only Agent Orange could stop them curled up and died of aristocratic pique at the advancing hordes of dandelions.
Cabbages (part of the Wilderness had been a vegetable patch) armed themselves with woody bark; rhubarb threw off weak elastic branches; roses shed superfluous petals and muscled into the potato patch; vegetables, weeds and shrubs increased their ranks or sizes while snowdrifts or perennial flowers transformed the land.
Seedlings flanked every tree.
There were casualties — lettuces and foxgloves died out early — but from a ruined showpiece the garden slowly evolved into a haven of colourful mutation.
Newcomers also flourished: small feral plants unsuitable for floral displays, flowers without names, petals like paper, of faint and impure colours, tinged like the areas between a rainbow's bands.
They came, they went: their rarity made them beautiful.
I became involved with the inhabitants as soon as I was old enough to overturn a leaf.
They looked much larger then.
Woodlice were miniature armadillos; tomato-coloured mites scampered on the walls as if the brick was burning their feet; herds of striped and chequered snails glued up their doorways each autumn; and sluggish, fragile caterpillars, irritatingly, mummified themselves during the one interesting period of their lives.
A  Brobdingnagian vandal, I demolished ants' nests to watch the dramatic ‘Saving of the Eggs’; I also gazed hypnotised at the huge, tropical-coloured spiders that lived in the ivy.
Emerald and white, orange and black, yellow and chocolate brown: they squatted like jewels at the centres of their perfect webs.
When I was nine I tried, unsuccessfully, to stop some boys drowning an earwig.
The embarrassment when it got around school that ‘Kate loves bugs’ was intense.
I never did it again.
And I never took anyone beyond the lawn, because my friends considered gardens boooo-ring!— which they were, in Suburbia.
Generally small and well kept, the more well kept they were the deader they were.
Cultivated flowers set in bad soil.
Trimmed impenetrable bushes.
Silence.
So I animal-watched alone.
There were dramas.
The flight of the red squirrels from the grey.
Two reds — two reds, one grey — four greys.
No reds ever after.
The greys were savage beasts.
They stole the birdfood and embarrassed the cats, screaming imprecations while eluding them with flying leaps.
Light relief?
Pigeons.
Every summer they bloated on the surfeits of the garden and waddled hopelessly about like feathery puffballs, pondering, I thought, on the unlikeliness of launching their fat selves into the laughing air again.
Cornucopia: rabbits, hunched and private, loping slowly about the lawn in the moonlight; a green frog, gleaming and sparkling in the dewy sunlit grass as it wiggled along some compelling migratory path; squirrels — quick flashes of ginger and grey in the treetops, a sudden glimpse of bright beady eyes; a mythical fox — dusky shadow and sinister snowprints.
They all appeared unexpectedly, visually inextricable from their settings, nothing like domestic creatures.
It was a fantastic microcosm, full of humour and savagery.
One bird strutted pompously; another crawled into a corner to die.
One species flourished.
Another did not.
Finally it produced Bond.
Bond was a large, dusty tuffet of moss that calmly hoisted itself into the catbox one icy evening.
Spidery legs, rat eyes, whiffling whiskers: an unearthed hedgehog, part of the general exodus due to building developments nearby.
He was called Bond (James) because he was an undercover agent: he adored sleeping under things — cushions, pillows, piles of old newspapers.
He emerged from the frostbitten earth as mysteriously and magically as the transitory rare flowers; and he continued to move mysteriously — you left him under a coat and he reappeared in a drawer — all that winter.
I remember one particular night, just before we moved away.
The trees were rustling silver in the moonlight and the garden, as always, waved its grass nonchalantly, trying to suggest that nothing was going on.
The ivy, a monstrous growth after 10 years, was ambitiously and foolishly poised to tumble from the walls to the tidy, frigid gardens beyond (clearly, it hadn't seen them).
Some years before, I might have guessed Bond's enigmatic presence in the scene.
As I watched, a white moth fluttered leaf-like from the cobnut to the laurel bush.
Something cooed softly.
There was a sudden flurry in the long grass.
The moth drifted on.
The story was only half told.
I felt frustrated at its curtailment.
I left with no passion for any single plant or creature but for all of Nature — its ruthless innocence, its secretiveness and startling revelations, the changing seasons and sense of time in a whole that was timeless, like the best of childhood.
The two things are inextricably linked for me, for both are over.
The garden, with all its vivacious attendant personalities, has become a vista of flat concrete, perfect for parking cars and marked by yellow lines.
Here and there a rebellious dandelion sprouts.
It seems a shame.
In the context of the world today, it seems a crying shame.
Catrin Thomas
Runner-up for the BBC WILDLIFE Magazine Award for the Most Outstanding Amateur Writer
‘I have been scribbling since infancy, though I've only now buckled down to it.
As a child I kept an unending diary; as a student in Louisiana I wrote some tv news scripts (and damaged the teleprompt during a live transmission, which put an end to that little job); back home I produced beautifully worded advertisements for a local free paper.
More recently, I graduated, won a place in Cosmopolitan 's New Journalists competition and joined a feature-writing agency in London, The Write Stuff: if anyone wants an interview, I'm The Chap for you.
‘I've always found nature hugely entertaining.
I love to anthropomorphise animals, because however patronising it may be, I think it's still the best way of getting people to relate to them.
‘My two current ambitions are to hit the hippy trail in Southeast Asia and to get my first novel published.
I don't know which is most unlikely, but after studying in Louisiana, and spending a ghastly summer and a magical Christmas in New York, I have been savagely bitten by the travel bug, while writing the novel has become a way of life.’
We present the twelfth in a series of essays by winners and runners-up in the 1991 competition.
Thoughtless
BY CAROLYN BRABY
I entered the word-processing package, selected D, to open a document, then chose a name for it, and I was all ready to edit.
My name first — that was the easy part — and then a title.
Ooh, that's a toughie.
I hadn't really thought about what I could write, just dashed eagerly to the word processor, my mind meandering enjoyably about the £200 prize.
But, thinking the process through sensibly, I realised I needed to write an essay before winning the £200, hence I had to find a suitable topic.
A quick glance at the rules for inspiration: ‘…the essayists who can move between the worlds of nature and the arts…
’ Oh dear.
The Quantum Theory or the entire works of Agatha Christie yes, but nature no.
Nature in our garden seems to stretch about as far as our three Indian runner ducks, whose sole interests in life are lettuce, bread and little things which wriggle; and the frogs in the pond who spend summer days sunning themselves on the warm cement slabs surrounding the off-green water.
No doubt there is other nature present in our garden, but…
…a small wingy, leggy item runs across the screen of the VDU, interrupting my thoughts, which are dwelling on the possibilities of a 1,000-word essay on a woodlice-breeding camp.
A quick flick of a plastic ruler lying handily nearby ensures that this particular fly will not run much further.
But a close inspection of the corpse proves me wrong.
I stare, in morbid fascination, at the squashed fly which is adhered to the top right hand corner of the screen.
Although the majority of the fly seems to be no less dead than a dodo, one side of it seems to be the intact creature it had been 30 seconds earlier.
I've never really had the good fortune to watch a fly's last moments on Earth before, and my eyes are just glued to this small splodge of legs and wings which are interrupting the clean, shiny surface of the screen.
Whereas one side of the body is hideously crushed, about 50 per cent of the legs and one wing seem to have life still in them.
The legs are flailing wildly — tiny stretches of insect flesh — no thicker than a hair to my naked eye, but obviously larger than life to this poor, wretched creature, who had the misfortune to interrupt my writing of the BBC WILDLIFE Nature Essay 1991 to (or not to be).
While the fly continues its fight against death, I search for my father's stamp magnifier to examine this tiny drosophila.
I peer through the magnifier at the still struggling insect.
The glass makes this little, obscure fly, who had the cheek to interrupt my wonderful essay, seem suddenly rather less little, and rather less obscure than I'd thought previously.
The smooth, shiny body so neatly divided into sections, giving the impression of a loaf of wholemeal bread, the slices just scored on the surface.
The delicate wings — not quite lacy, but lightly transparent, the veins contrasting sharply with the light emitted by the screen.
But here, my infliction of pain on the insect seems all too clear.
One wing folded neatly under the body, the other, result of the ruler, stretched straight out from the body at an uncomfortable looking angle.
The taut legs standing out from the body at all angles, some hideously broken like twigs thrown carelessly on a bonfire, others still moving feebly.
But, as I watch, even those last legs come to rest.
One last graceful wave and the last leg stops moving: it seems the fly has lost the will to continue its struggle.
Unexpectedly, I feel almost close to tears.
Who knows how long that fly might have lived if there had not been a battered ruler lying to hand.
I look carefully at the dead fly still gracefully adorning the corner of the screen.
It could never be described as beautiful, nor lovely, nor even attractive, yet to me, it seems a metaphor of the undiscovered beauty of dead insects.
I read monthly in my BBC WILDLIFE, with tears in my eyes, of stories of various animal tragedies around the world, quietly cursing my fellow man, who has the injustice to treat animals with such appalling disrespect.
I read of tigers, rattlesnakes and circus animals, all of who have suffered at the hands of the human race, vowing I will never treat an animal in these ways.
But suddenly, the difference between the overwhelming beauty of the tiger and the graceless body of the decaying fly seem no longer.
I stop and think for a moment — shocked by my act of sadism.
What right have I to criticise so strongly ivory traders in China who are merely making a living, while I am sitting here killing unsuspecting animals for no reason at all?
I feel instantly guilty; and then even more guilty — guilty for experiencing guilt at the expense of a dead fly.
‘It's just a fly, there are thousands up thousands more,’ I desperately tell myself.
My conscience feels differently though and makes sure that I'm totally aware of the fact.
Just why did I kill that poor defenceless creature?
I find that I'm questioning my own authority, which makes me think even more.
How many flies in the past, long since disintegrated and forgotten, have met their untimely end at a dexterous flick of my wrist?
I take one last glance at the crushed fly.
From one angle, it could be merely resting, yet from another, the crushed corpse seems to sum up man's relationship with flies perfectly.
The two halves of the fly, two side of a coin, light and dark, beauty and hideousness, life and death…
But enough about the fly, back to my essay.
But, to quote Ted Hughes's ‘The Thought Fox’, the page is printed.
Carolyn Braby
(15 years old at the time of writing) Runner-up for the 1991 BBC WILDLIFE Magazine Award for Young Writers (aged 13–17)
‘I have lived in Dunstable in Bedfordshire, all my life, and I am now studying for A-levels in English, French and Business Studies at Manshead Upper School.
My favourite subject has always been English, and I hope to study this at university.
‘After reading, writing is my favourite activity.
This is the first essay competition I have entered — my writing is usually confined to English essays, long letters to friends and philosophical ramblings in my diary.
‘My main aim when writing my essay ‘Thoughtless’ was to try to convey my exact feelings at that particular moment: to make the reader feel as guilty as I did.
‘When not reading or writing, my main hobby is tap-dancing, and I also enjoy roller-skating and badminton.
My current ambitions are to become a successful writer/author, to dance the lead role of Peggy in 42nd Street , to meet my hero Jonathan Ross and to learn to type with all 10 fingers.’
REVIEWS
Taking the bull by the horns
RHINO by Anna Merz 
Of all the world's great wild mammals, few have suffered so dreadfully this century as the black rhino.
Kenya, one of its main strongholds, could still boast of a 20,000 strong population at the end of the 1960s, but over the next decade, poaching on an unprecedented scale — mainly by Somali bandits armed with AK 47s — had reduced their numbers to a few hundred.
Enter Anna Merz, who came to Kenya with her husband, Karl, to retire in 1976 after an active life in Ghana, working as an honorary warden for the Ghanaian Game Department.
There, for 20 years, she had watched helplessly as that country's wildlife was systematically hunted to extinction.
Now she had arrived in East Africa only to find the same grim process being repeated — but with one significant difference.
In Ghana the forest animals had been killed mostly for food, ‘bush meat’.
But in Kenya the poaching was motivated solely by profit.
Ivory and rhino horn were the prizes — and the carcasses of elephants and rhinos soon littered the game parks in ever-increasing numbers.
At a lecture in Nairobi given by Dr Esmond Bradley Martin, the world's foremost authority on the rhino-horn trade, she heard him spell out in the starkest of terms why the rhino was on the slide.
Most Kenyan horn was going to Sana, in North Yemen, to be carved into status-symbol dagger handles.
Prices were sky high, with rhino horn worth four times as much as ivory, and still rising.
Frustration born out of watching history repeating itself prompted Anna Merz to try to establish a haven for Kenya's beleaguered rhinos.
In 1982 she found the right spot, in the harsh thornbush country of the Laikipiak Maasai, who live on the northern slopes of Mt Kenya.
There, with the help of the Craigs, a family of sympathetic ranchers, and with the blessing of the Kenya Government, she established the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary.
The following year, encircled by 20km of high security fencing with 5,000 volts passing through it to deter animal and human predators, Anna Merz' rhino refuge was ready to receive its first incumbent, a large bull translocated from an area near the Nairobi National Park.
She had waited a long time for this moment.
So she called this first rhino Godot.
Others soon followed: Shaba, Morani, Rongai, Amboni; and in time they successfully mated and produced still more rhinos.
One of them, a calf called Samia, born in February 1985, was abandoned by her mother and had to be bottle-fed by Anna.
But somehow the little orphan survived the ordeal, as she also later survived the farce of being crated up and flown to the Mara game reserve when still only six months old, to be shown to the Pope.
The old, wild Africa in which rhinos like Samia could wander freely for ever is gone for good; but at least she is alive and safe, seemingly unconcerned by the fact that her world has shrunk to 10,000 acres of thornbush inside an electric fence.
The fact that Samia is still there, and that Kenya's rhino population is at last beginning to increase again, is due in no small part to the dedication and determination of Anna Merz — a true heroine of our times in the front line of conservation.
Her story is filled with fascinating accounts of her daily observation, which reveal many extraordinary secrets of rhino behaviour: how they communicate by subtle changes in their breathing patterns, and how amicably they live together most of the time.
If, after years of persecution, these huge, lumbering, myopic creatures are sometimes a mite cantankerous, who can blame them?
Yet Anna Merz learned to love rhinos; and they in turn rewarded her with total trust and affection.
Hers is a heartening, moving and ultimately triumphant story — a little victory won against the tide in the long, heart-breaking battle to save our wilderness world.
BRIAN JACKMAN (Sunday Times Magazine feature writer)
All royalties from this book will go to the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary.
JUST PUBLISHED
All the Bird Songs of Britain and Europe.
Four CDs.
Sittelle label.
£49.95 for the set, £12.99 each (inc p&p).
Sound guide to the songs and calls of 396 breeding and migrant birds of Britain and Western Europe.
Booklet with each CD.
Volume 1: Divers to Birds of Prey; Volume 2: Gamebirds to Sandgrouse; Volume 3: Cuckoos to Hippolais Warblers; Volume 4: Sylvia Warblers to Buntings.
Available from WildSounds, PO Box 309, West Byfleet, Surrey KT14 7YA .
All the Bird Songs of Britain and Europe.
Four cassettes.
Sittelle label.
£31.95 (inc p&p).
Sound guide to the songs and calls of 420 breeding and migrant birds of Britain and Western Europe.
Booklet with each cassette.
Available from the address above.
Beneath the Wide Wide Heaven,
edited by Sara Dunn and Alan Scholefield.
Virago Poetry.
‘Poetry of the environment from antiquity to the present’.
Chemical Deception,
by Marc Lappé.
Sierra Club Books.
‘The toxic threat to health and the environment’.
Available from Sierra Club Store Orders, 730 Polk Street, San Francisco, CA 94109, USA.
End of the Road,
by Wolfgang Zuckermann.
‘The world car crisis and how we can solve it’.
Black and white illustrations and diagrams.
Safari,
by Barbara Radcliffe Rogers.
Includes the history of the safari, methods of travelling, nine classic areas to visit and the animals that can be seen.
Black and white and colour photos.
The Sundarbans, by Rathindranath De.
Guide to the geography, history and natural history of the swamp-forest tiger reserve in West Bengal, India.
Colour photos; map.
Wading Birds, by John P S Mackenzie.
Another edition in the Birds of the World series.
Includes 120 colour photos and information on each of the eight groups.
Water: The international crisis, by Robin Clarke.
Looks at the world's freshwater shortage and examines the possible solutions.
Diagrams and maps.
The Wildlife Year.
Consultant editor: Michael Bright.
Month-by-month guide to the fascinating behaviour of a wide range of different animal species.
Includes more than 790 colour photos.
EVENTS
Wildlife Photographer of the Year 1991 Exhibition.
Winning and commended entries on show until 5 May 1992 at The Natural History Museum, London; tel 071 938 9123.
Photographs from the 1990 competition can be seen from 1 January to 2 February at Swindon Museum and Art Gallery, Bath Road, Swindon; tel. 0793 493188.
Also, until 2 February at the Museum of St Albans, Hatfield Road, St Albans.
Contact: David Curry (0727 56679).
Environment: The vital element.
An exhibition of new educational resources from 21 environmental organisations, including the RSPB and WWF.
Held in conjunction with the Association for Science Education annual meeting.
3–6 January at the University of Sheffield; tel. 0707 271034.
Winter Birdwatch.
5 January.
A day of guided walks throughout the Lee Valley Park, with displays and information on birdwatching at the Countryside Centre, Abbey Farmhouse, Crooked Mile, Waltham Abbey, Essex; tel. 0992 713838.
Coppicing.
Learn the craft of coppicing, and encourage spring flowers to bloom in ancient oak woodland.
12 January at Warren Bottom Copse, Oakley, Nr Basingstoke, Hants.
Contact: David Sharrod (0794 513786).
Why Apples Go Crunch!
And why skin doesn't tear.
A day-school looking at the structure and fabric of plant and animal life, organised by the Oxford University Department for Continuing Education.
25 January at Rewley House, 1 Wellington Square, Oxford.
Contact: the Biology Course Secretary (0865 270391).
Wildlife Gardening.
A one-day workshop on the design and maintenance of a wildlife garden.
25 January at Petersfield School, Cranford Road, Petersfield Hants.
Contact: Petersfield Adult Education Centre (0730 63181).
Practical Conservation for Birds.
A day of building nestboxes and planting trees in preparation for the new breeding season.
Organised for children aged nine and over by the Young Ornithologists' Club.
25 January at Dendron Lodge, Clandeboye, Bangor, Co.
Down, Northern Ireland.
Contact: Alison McCloy (0232 491547).
Dogs: How they behave (and why).
A day school on canine communication, food preferences, the relationship between dogs and people, and behaviour therapy for difficult dogs.
Organised by Oxford University Department for Continuing Education.
15 February at Rewley House, Wellington Square, Oxford.
Contact: the Biology Course Secretary (0865 270391).
European Cetacean Society: Sixth annual conference.
Will focus on the effects of fisheries on cetaceans. 20–22 February at the Hotel Mediterranee, Corso Cavallotti 76, San Remo, Italy.
For further details write to Giuseppe Notarbartolo di Sciara, Tethys Research Institute, Piazza Duca d'Aosta 4, 20124 Milano, Italy; fax: 010 392 2940 1987.
Dolphin Dive-in.
Throughout February and March more than 200 sponsored swims will be taking place across the country in aid of Greenpeace.
For further details contact Samantha Dawes (071 704 8101).
Dream Island
MADAGASCAR: A NATURAL HISTORY by Ken Preston-Mafham 
Any naturalist who has hopes or dreams of visiting Madagascar will want to consult Preston-Mafham's book.
Lavishly illustrated with colour photos, it takes you group by group through the plants and animals of that amazing island, the ‘naturalist's promised land.’
Some 80 per cent of all Madagascar's species are unique to the island-continent, which stretches a thousand miles long, with rainforest, woodland, spiny desert, and rocky massifs jutting out of the plain.
Open at random: a cluster of brilliant green social wasps hang like a lobed fruit on their nest; a Madagascar tree-boa flicks out its cobalt tongue; a black and white ruffed lemur gobbles orange figs; and white sifaka dance over golden sand.
The text identifies almost every species photographed, even obscure invertebrates, and adds a wealth of detail on occurrence and behaviour.
And dipping into the text at random: black and white ruffed lemurs of the eastern rainforest make noises catalogued as roar-shriek, abrupt roar, pulsed squawk, wail, bray, quack, growl, growl-snort, chatter, whine, grunt, huff and mew.
Major vegetation types are described, as are the nature reserves, and the place is given where each photo was taken.
One should be clear what this book is not.
It is not a comprehensive field guide.
The only real field guide is Oliver Langrand's Birds of Madagascar (Yale University Press, 1990).
But for all other groups consult this ‘Natural History’.
It is not a travel guide: the best one is Hilary Bradt's Guide to Madagascar (Bradt Publications, second edition 1990).
But for an illustrated account of nature reserves, consult the ‘Natural History’.
It is not the breathtaking art photography: that is Fran Lanting's Madagascar: A World Apart (Robert Hale, 1991).
It is not the book that you stay up huffing and mewing with laughter over until the middle of the night — that is either Dervla Murphy's Muddling Through in Madagascar (Arrow Books, 1990) or Sir David Attenborough's original Zoo Quest to Madagascar , which richly deserves reprinting.
Finally there are inevitable gaps and some mistakes in the science: to go deeper see dusty tomes or corner an expert.
Preston-Mafham has succeeded instead in his own aim.
He gives us a cornucopia of masterful species portraits and by far the best general reference on natural history.
He will inform and fascinate — and encourage still more people to dream of seeing Madagascar.
ALISON JOLLY (zoologist, Princeton University).
Fauna masquerading as flora in the dry forests of Madagascar.
The ‘tails’ of these Phromnia rosea nymphs are thought to be unpalatable to predators.
Mishak and Malaika call it a day.
One of many touching images from A Cry from the Wild (Macdonald, £13.95), by Lissa Ruben.
Her ‘Tale of two orphans’ focuses on two young African elephants — Ndume and Malaika — who she helped bring up when they were brought to Daphne Sheldrick's sanctuary following the massacre of the rest of their herd by poachers.
The book gives many insights into elephant behaviour, as part of the royalties will go to the David Sheldrick Wildlife Trust.
LISTINGS
BBC 1
Country File:Sundays at 12.30pm; repeated Wednesday afternoons on BBC2.
No programme on 22 December.
The programme on 29 December will be shown at 10.30am.
Countryside magazine series.
The Zebra in Your Stable:Desmond Morris interprets the behaviour of the domesticated horse (see p34).
Wildlife on One:6th,Too Close for Comfort?
The chimpanzees of the Taï Forest (see p14).
13th,Invasion of the Killer Mink:The truth about mink (p44).
20th,Silvia — The Star Tern: Wildlife on One follows an arctic tern on its twenty-second 30,000 kilometre migration.
27th,Flying Foresters:In praise of fruit bats, pollinators of the forest.
Wildlife Gems:Wednesdays at 10.35am (series begins 8th).
A weekly dip into the archives of the BBC Natural History Unit.
Newsround Extra:Fridays at 5pm (series begins 10th).
News stories for younger viewers.
Includes reports on industrial pollution in Romania and the importation of two pandas into Britain.
The Really Wild Roadshow:Presented by Sue Dawson, Terry Nutkins and Chris Packham. 28th, Whipsnade Wild Animal Park.
Animal Sanctuary:Christmas special.
John Craven visits a home for abandoned ‘exotic’ pets.
SCOTLAND
Landward: Farming and environmental issues.
BBC 2
The Natural World:Sundays at 7.15pm. 22 December,Sound of Islands : Wildlife on the Hebridean islands between Harris and North Uist.
19th,Prisoners of the Sun — Fuel rations : Plant power.
The terms and conditions for life are dictated by the ability of plants to create fuel.
26th,Prisoners of the Sun — Tight budgets : Obtaining and spending energy.
Dusk — The Badger:Simon King's Christmas special (see p22).
The Royal Institution Christmas Lectures — Growing up in the universe:Each afternoon from 30 December to 3 January.
Richard Dawkins explores our understanding of evolution and asks who, or what, ultimately benefits from the activities of living things?
Environments (OU, rep): 4th,The Heat is on .
11th,Walk Softly on the Earth .
Horizon:Mondays at 8.10pm; repeated Wednesdays at 5.10pm. 13th,Pest Wars : How safe is the new farming method of introducing new pests to fight the old?
Look Again at Garden Birds (rep): Eric Thompson on bird behaviour.
Old Garden, New Gardener:Fridays at 8.30pm; repeated Tuesdays at 5.30pm (series begins 10th).
31st, includes a look at renovating a wildlife pond.
CHANNEL 4
Secrets of the Mangrove (rep): Marine life among the roots of the mangrove tree.
Naresh Bedi Series:30 December at 5pm,Man-eating Tigers (rep): Why do some tigers turn into man-eaters? 31 December at 5pm,Elephant — Lord of the Jungle (rep): A natural history of Indian elephants.
1st at 5pm,Saving the Tiger (rep): A look at a year in the life of a tigress, and the conservation projects that might aid her survival.
2nd at 5pm,Ganesh, The Elephant God (rep): The role of the elephant in Indian society.
5th at 7pm,Ladakh — The forbidden wilderness:The first major film on the wildlife of this Himalayan country.
Nature Watch (rep): Tuesdays at 8.30pm (series begins 7th).
Wildlife series presented by Julian Pettifer.
Defenders of the Wild:Sundays at 7pm. 12th,The Sting of Jose Truda Palazzo:Poachers and loggers are just two of the groups this Brazilian conservationist has to contend with.
19th,Anna and the Honey Buzzards:Anna Giordan's annual fight to protect the honey buzzard.
26th, Nepal's efforts to protect the Ganges river dolphin, the Indian rhino, the gharial and other endangered species.
A Brief History of Time:Professor Stephen  Hawking's quest to understand the universe.
ITV
Animal Country:Desmond Morris and Sarah Kennedy present the positive side of our relationship with animals.
Voyager — The World of National Geographic:Scottish Television is running two weeks behind.
7th,John Harrison — Explorer:A journey along the uncharted tributary of Brazil's Jari river.
14th,All Aboard Zaire's Amazing Bazaar:Life on Zaire's river boats.
21st (last in series),Antarctic Adventure: Voyager follows Jerome and Sally Poncet on a journey to the polar ice cap.
Owl TV:Wednesdays at 3.55pm (series begins 8th).
Magazine series on wildlife, for younger viewers.
RADIO 4
The Natural History Programme:Fridays at 11.30am; repeated Sundays at 9pm. 20 December, poetry inspired by nature.
No programme on 27 and 29 December.
News and views, presented by Jessica Holm.
Science Now:Saturdays at 4.30pm; repeated Tuesdays at 8pm.
The latest discoveries.
The Mating Game:Mondays at 10am.
Series ends 20.
Lionel Kelleway hosts this natural history ‘role-play’ quiz.
Hunting the Elephant Bird:Madagascar's semi-mythical bird.
How Green is My Salad?
The trials and tribulations of dining out, as experienced by an environmentally conscious broadcaster.
Presented by Fergus Keeling.
Batty Down Under:Australian attitudes towards fruit bats.
RADIO SCOTLAND
In the Country: Michael Scott's report on Scotland's deer population.
Four Lochs: Mondays at 1.30pm (series begins 20th).
Iain Thomson looks at the future of Scotland's lochs.
WORLD SERVICE RADIO
Global Concerns:Environmental magazine series.
Trees:Mondays at 4.35pm; repeated Tuesdays at 7.50am and Wednesdays at 12.35pm (series begins 20th).
What do trees do, and how do they do it?
SCHOOLS PROGRAMMES
BBC 2
Thinkabout Science (age 5 to 7): Mondays at 11.22am; repeated Wednesdays at 10am. 20th,Warning and Hiding .
Hawk's Eye (age 7 to 9): Alternate Tuesdays at 1.40pm. 21st,On the Rivers — The way to the sea.
RADIO 5
Music Workshop (age 9 to 12): Fridays at 10am; repeated Saturdays on Radio 3 FM at 2am.
Fridays at 2.35pm on Radio Cymru (from 24th) and Fridays at 11.15am on Radio Scotland.
17th,Yanomamo — The living trees 
24th,Yanomamo — The monkey's tail 
31st,Yanomamo — The jaguar .
CHANNEL 4
Our World (age 4 to 6): Thursdays at 10.04am; repeated Fridays at 11.22am. 23rd,Looking after Animals .
Please note the schedules for the Christmas period may change after we go to press.
Check transmission details with Radio Times.
The world's most famous arctic tern — record-beating long-distance flyer — is Wildlife on One's star on the 20th.
The elusive snow leopard makes a rare appearance in Ladakh , on the 5th.
The Ganges river dolphin and other endangered species of Nepal feature in Defenders of the Wild on the 26th.
IT'S YOUR TURN
Science in society
Phil Gates made a number of valid points in ‘The gene genie’(November), but there are also some important omissions.
First, historically the links between genetics and commercial concerns have always been close.
The discipline's rise early this century was enabled by government funding, through agricultural concerns.
Second, most scientific disciplines, including molecular biology and genetics are obliged to seek funding for research from industry.
The scientists themselves cannot be held solely or even chiefly to blame.
The long-standing system of allocation of grants and the consequent competition for limited resources has led to the shift to obtaining funds from other sources.
Finally, rather than stereotyping scientists as capitalist Frankensteins, making monsters for commercial gain, a more constructive approach would be to consider how the allocation of resources can be altered to meet the needs of the public majority rather than those of a minority in power.
We cannot unmake the technologies or the knowledge-bases that have been produced, but we can channel them to more effective and worthwhile use.
Who's the greenest of them all?
Your statement that ‘the green parties in Europe — having had most of their policies co-opted by the bigger, slicker parties — are beginning to fade away’(News of the Earth, October) cannot go unchallenged.
Though there have been some disappointments, the Greens in this country and in Europe are very far from extinct, and are consolidating and reforming themselves to be more effective.
It certainly does not help if the national media — and now even BBC WILDLIFE Magazine choose to ignore the party, and the political and economic dimensions of conservation and survival.
In launching their ‘Caring for the Earth’ initiative, WWF, IUCN and UNEP are calling for ‘a strategy for sustainable living.’
They point out that ‘sustainable growth is a contradiction in terms’ This is at the heart of the Green Party's policies, and has not been adopted by any other party that I know of.
Whatever green rhetoric they may occasionally produce, all remain hellbent on expansionist economic policies and damaging trading arrangements such as GATT and the Single European Market.
When other parties start promoting sustainability and the reduction of consumption, then they will be able to claim to have adopted our policies.
Until then, they remain grey, as does the outlook for the world's ecosystems and people.
Reserving a place for rhinos
I thought your readers might like an update on the Javan rhino conservation controversy (‘How about letting them breed by themselves’, July).
In October, more than 100 representatives of international conservation groups and rhino specialists attended a three-day workshop on the conservation of Indonesian rhinos, organised by the Asian Rhino Specialist Group and PHPA (the Indonesian Conservation Department).
Just before the meeting delegates were delighted to hear that PHPA had decided that the main emphasis for both species of Indonesian rhinos (Javan and Sumatran) would be in situ conservation and that there should be no captive-breeding programme for Javan rhinos at this time, a view endorsed by the workshop.
Instead, increased emphasis will be given to strengthening protection and management of Javan rhinos in Ujung Kulon National Park, including increased efforts to monitor the rhino population.
Further study will also be given to the possibility of translocating a few Javan rhinos to other reserves within the species' former range.
Any such translocations will depend on adequate population data to ensure that the removal of rhinos will not endanger the Ujung Kulon population, and also on good protection of the potential receiving sites.
Various reserves in Java and Sumatra were assessed for their suitability, with Way Kambas National Park in southern Sumatra emerging as the most likely candidate.
It was also agreed that the much-criticised programme to capture Sumatran rhinos for captive-breeding in American and Indonesian zoos will stop in November 1992, when the present contract between the Sumatran Rhino Trust and PHPA expires.
This allows the capture of 14 animals — eight (including the seven females allowed) are already in zoos — which means that there will be a population of about 20 animals with which to attempt captive-breeding.
Any further ‘doomed’ Sumatran rhinos captured in isolated blocks of forest will be released in existing protected areas in Sumatra.
WWF delegates were delighted at the emphasis on in situ conservation, since better protection of rhino reserves will help protect hundreds of other rare species.
And as if on cue, reports have just come in of tracks and sightings of live rhinos in two Sumatran reserves — Way Kambas and Berbak Game Reserve in Jambi — where they were believed extinct.
With increased focus on rhinos as ‘flagship’ species, both these and other reserves will benefit from increased funding for conservation.
Figures in the landscape
As one who has shared a platform with Chris Baines and been in audiences when his oratory and enthusiasm for the natural world have captivated those present, I am reluctantly prompted to write to correct his distorted and unfair portrayal of the fee-basis and motivation of landscape architects (The Baines Report, November).
Landscape architects can be paid by the hour, by retainer, lump sum, percentage fee, or a combination of all these methods.
The Landscape Institute publishes no percentage fee scale, and has not done so for many years.
As professionals, committed to securing solutions to their clients' briefs and aware of their social and environmental responsibilities, landscape architects cannot be caricatured as a collection of irresponsible businessmen, intent on driving up clients' budgets to serve their own greedy ends.
In the public sector, in agencies such as the Groundwork trusts, and in the private sector, you will find committed professionals anxious to play their part in the protection, creation and enhancement of wildlife habitats and the landscape framework of both our countryside and our cities.
So please look out for that endangered species — the lesser-paid landscape architect, who is not feathering his own nest but simply trying to occupy a niche in the food chain.
Who's who in Zakynthos
Michael Scott's report on the problems of sea turtles in the Mediterranean (p796, November) failed to mention that the authority on the status and conservation of turtles in Greece is the Sea Turtle Protection Society (STPS).
STPS projects, funded by the EC and WWF, include monitoring of sites, tagging surveys, rescue and rehabilitation of wounded animals, and public awareness campaigns and environmental education throughout Greece.
It is the accuracy of the results of STPS monitoring projects on Zakynthos for the past 10 years which allows Mr Scott's source, Mrs Lily Venizelos, to talk about the situation there like an expert.
The local organisation, ZEMELDICA, which Mrs Venizelos refers to, does not merely include local landowners — it is exclusively composed of them.
The Zakynthos landowners who attacked turtle conservationists (It's Your Turn, May) are precisely those who formed ZEMELDICA in 1990, with the declared aim of getting the STPS out of Zakynthos and developing what remains of Laganas Bay.
The ‘real local enthusiasm’ has not been generated by this organisation: why was there no mention of the petition prepared by the STPS and signed by four of the five communities surrounding Laganas Bay, the Zakynthos hoteliers' association, and the local association of communities?
Also, many Zakynthians work alongside STPS's international corps of volunteers.
While the landowners' organisation is isolated at the local level, the problems of compensation for affected landowners and of management of the protected areas remain, largely due to the reluctance of the government.
Good Book — bad behaviour
I was delighted to read David Helton's biblical approach to his subject.
After all, whatever interpretation of the Bible is considered, it remains an accurate account of human behaviour.
I was sorry to find a significant omission, however.
If we read on to Chapter Six of Genesis, we find God evidently reconsidering the decisions taken in Chapter One, 26–30.
Six, 5–7: ‘And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the Earth…
And the Lord said I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the Earth…
’ This, of course, led to the episode of the Flood, but to judge from Noah's behaviour after the Ark landed, it was not a spectacular success!
Anyway, thank you, David Helton.
Consider the lilies…
I was puzzled by David Helton's statement that the Bible takes no further interest in Nature after the description of the Creation in the book of Genesis (‘Hooray humans’, November).
I admit I am no Bible scholar, but I have read it, and what I have found there doesn't tally with that statement at all.
Here are some texts taken at random.
[Ed: What follows are 15 texts, too much to print here, but including ‘Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise…
’ Proverbs; ‘One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh: but the earth abideth forever.’
— Ecclesiastes; ‘Doth the eagle mount up at the command /And make her nest on high…’— Job; ‘Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.’
Matthew; ‘Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth…
When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?’— Job.]
Much of this, especially the nature poetry, seems to me to be of high literary quality.
(When, as a schoolgirl, I first came across that line about the morning stars singing together, I was thrilled by it.)
Literary opinions differ, of course, but do these poets really strike you as ‘a race of managers, whose mission, at all costs, is to multiply and subdue’?
They strike me as people who take a keen pleasure in the beauty of the natural world, and in the strength, swiftness and cleverness of animals (even those of no use, or downright dangerous, to Man).
David Helton replies: I agree that there's some quite beautiful romantic poetry in the Bible — a tribute to King James's translators as much as anyone — but the statement of mine that you object to actually read: ‘After page one, the Bible is not about raw nature very much.’
I suppose I could have stopped and analysed just how much, but that would have been massively beside the point.
The fact is, the Bible isn't about raw nature very much; it's almost all about human affairs.
You've sent me five handwritten pages of quotations (some of which concern horses — genetically manipulated animals), which in the seven-point-solid type that my Bible is printed in would come to about half a page.
But let's say there's 10 times — no, 20 times — as much as you've sent me: that would still only be 10 pages, and my Bible (Old Testament only) is 833 pages long.
What I work out as 1.2 per cent really isn't very much.
Wildlife in the war zone
We are sure that your readers know that the war against Croatia has intensified to catastrophic proportions.
But they may be unaware of the ravages of the Yugoslav Federal Army against our country's natural heritage.
Of seven national reserves, four are suffering continual damage:
1.
The famous Plitvice Lakes — a national reserve and a UNESCO World Heritage Site — have been in the hands of terrorists for more than a year.
Some of the most valuable parts of the forest have been felled and the timber transported to Siberia.
The travertine barriers which have created the lakes and falls are endangered by the great numbers of tanks and explosions in the area.
2.
Paklenica National Reserve, the only breeding site in Croatia for the griffon vulture, has been bombed with napalm and  phosphorus .
3.
The travertine barriers of the Krka National Reserve have been partly destroyed by direct bombing and a large area of vegetation burned.
4.
A great number of federal nave ships have congregated in the Kornati National Reserve, and we fear that the area's unique geomorphology and marine life may be threatened by mines they have left.
Forests along the Adriatic coast have been deliberately burned and many wetlands including Posavina are endangered by military operations.
The ultimate threat of the federal army is to destroy all the vital supply lines of Croatia, including power plants, oil refineries and chemical industries.
If they do this, ecological catastrophe is inevitable.
Yugoslavia is politically dead and meaningless.
Though poor and militarily weak, Croats have no choice but the fight to the end for their freedom and independence.
International recognition of the Republic of Croatia would enable UN protection.
We appeal to your readers to write to your government, informing them of the catastrophic environmental effects of the war and urging economic and political sanctions against the Serbian aggressors.
Staff of the Institute of Ornithology, Croatian Academy of Arts and Sciences, Zagreb
[This letter was written in early October, and as we go to press in early December, the war is still raging.
— Ed.]
Turtles turning up
The occurrence of leatherback turtles around the British Isles isn't as rare as was once thought (Questions, October).
Indeed, the records would suggest that this turtle is a regular migrant in British and Irish waters.
The well developed thermoregulatory adaptations in this unique animal enable it to survive in the north-eastern Atlantic to as far north as the latitude of the Faeroes, and possibly beyond.
Anyone interested in all occurrences of turtles off South-west England since 1756 should consult Roger Penhallurick's marvellously readable book Turtles off Cornwall, the Isles of Scilly and Devonshire (Dyllansow Pengwalla, 1990).
Any sea turtle sightings, strandings or incidental catches should be reported to The Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, or, for occurrences in Irish waters, to The National Museum of Ireland,(Natural History Division), Kildare Street, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Coming soon
THE WINNING UNDERDOG Coyote's last laugh 
SHARKS I'VE KNOWN Mike deGruy's astounding encounters in the deep 
BANANAS OVER FRUIT BATS
Confessions from Down Under
ELEPHANTS AS PAWNS The great ivory debate — round II 
PRISONERS OF THE SUN Why plants run the world 
THE 1992 AWARDS FOR NATURE WRITING More than £2,000 in cash prizes and lots of kudos .
The February issue is published on Wednesday 29 January 
Tales from the bush
A television producer and a cameraman on a soda island in a soda lake with 30 pairs of bar-headed geese, swarms of mosquitoes and views of mountains, water, ice and the electrified fence between Tadjikistan and China…
Pelham Aldrich-Blake files a report from his element.
The helicopter rose six feet into the air, tilted forward to gain airspeed, and buried its nose-wheel in the ground.
I was on my last of eight trips to the Soviet Union, and I had a growing suspicion that this take-off might soon be my last in more senses than one.
Cameraman Martyn Colbeck, our Russian and Tadjik helpers and I had been filming in the mountains and soda lakes of the eastern Pamirs, a few miles from the Chinese border.
A month earlier, it had taken the helicopter two trips to establish our camp here by Lake Rangkul at 13,000 feet.
Besides all our food, filming and camping equipment, an inflatable boat, two drums of fuel, an outboard motor and two crates of vodka, we had just managed to squeeze a Russian jeep into the helicopter, by deflating the tyres.
We had come to Rangkul to film bar-headed geese for the forthcoming BBC2 series Realms of the Russian Bear .
Bar-heads winter on the plains of northern India.
Every spring, they cross the Himalayas to reach their nesting grounds.
Most nest on soda lakes on the Tibetan plateau, but a few travel on to remote high lakes in the Pamirs and Tien Shan.
These elegant grey and white geese hold a special place in my affections.
Fourteen years ago, when I was being interviewed for a job in the BBC Natural History Unit.
I had suggested that their epic journey through the mountains would make a good subject for a film.
Since then, I had managed to film them on their wintering grounds in India, but now I was seeing them for the first time at the other end of the journey.
Filming in the Soviet Union is full of uncertainties.
Our original plan had been to film on Lake Karakul, 50 miles to the north-west.
Only when we were about to board the helicopter were we told we were going instead to Rangkul.
Rustam, our ornithologist, insisted that this was a much easier place to work, and so I agreed, reluctantly, to the change of plan.
When we launched our boat in Rangkul for the first time and motored towards the islands where the birds were said to nest, it was with considerable relief that we saw there were indeed geese, and they were on eggs.
We arrived just as the first eggs were hatching.
Martyn and I spent the next 10 days camping on the largest of the islands, sharing it with 30 pairs of geese.
The island was a flat, blistering white expanse of soda some 400 yards across.
At night, it froze.
For an hour each morning, conditions were almost civilized.
The still waters of the lake reflected the surrounding mountains — precipitous towers of limestone to the south, barren rounded hills in incredible shades of rust, pink, yellow and grey to the north.
Eastwards towards the sunrise, the ice-hung peaks of Mustagh Ata and Kongur over in Sinkiang hunched on the skyline.
Geese circled around and honked melodiously.
The only sour note was the electrified fence that marked the forbidden border zone.
As the sun rose higher, millions of midges emerged.
They got everywhere, into eyes, hair, tents, cups of tea, camera lenses.
They didn't bite, but they were mingled with ferocious mosquitoes, which did.
Then the wind got up, and coated everything with an invasive layer of caustic soda.
If we were lucky, there were a few minutes in the evening when the wind dropped, the dust storm subsided, and we could brave the mosquitoes and wash the corrosive dust from our bodies.
But not in the lake; the lake water itself was caustic, and all our water had to be brought over from the mainland.
At night it froze again.
When we had finished with the geese, we moved onshore to film marmots, and also another mountain rodent, the pika.
During this time, our camp was visited by the secretary of the local Communist party, who seemed to suspect us of being illegal collectors of mumiya, semi-fossilised pika droppings thought to have medicinal properties.
Wildlife in the Soviet Union is exploited in all manner of ways.
Everything large or furry has been shot and eaten or skinned, or if it hasn't been, it runs away while you're still a long way off, which makes it rather difficult to film.
Towards the end of our trip, we did make it to Karakul, a day's journey be jeep, to film a rare Central Asian gull, the brownheaded gull.
The land around the lake is dry, stony desert, and you can take a four-wheel-drive vehicle almost anywhere, at least until you run out of fuel.
That was where the vodka came in.
I had been worried about the vodka.
Sergei, our interpreter, had been known to get so hopelessly inebriate as to be incapable of speech, let alone translation.
Nevertheless, most of the bottles remained miraculously intact, and during a visit to the local border guards, each bottle was translated into 10 litres of petrol.
When the helicopter came to collect us, the crew said they would take everything in one journey rather than the expected two.
We shoehorned in the jeep, and the rest of our baggage, supposedly lightened by the lack of fuel and food.
But in the thin air of the mountains, the load was almost too much.
Finally, though, we staggered into the air.
All became clear when the jeep was unloaded at the other end.
Inside it, we found, yes, a large sack of fossilised pike droppings…
Next month, Guy Duke reports from Pakistan's North-west Frontier: ‘Tourists should not come here alone!’ screamed the guide book.’
Soda water.
Producer Pelham Aldrich-Blake prepares to push off across caustic Lake Rangkul in the Pamir mountains.
The water was fine, as long as you didn't drink it or let it touch your skin.