

Face & Edge News
Turner helps classroom training
A new woodturning system specifically developed for schools is on test in Scottish schools.
It is the product of work by Mick O'Donnell, who has researched the methods of classroom turning tutorials in Scotland and Australia.
The system acknowledges the limited training teachers receive in woodturning and the short time that each pupil will spend on the lathe in the academic year.
It is hoped to expend the capabilities of pupils at the lathe and therefore extend their design potential, which is an important part of the curriculum.
The system, which is being tested in the Highland Region under the management of the local TVEI (Technical and Vocational Education Initiative) co-ordinator, consists of special and standard tools with a modified grind.
Safe and simple chucks make the range of products wider, and a grinding system allows pupils to sharpen their own tools.
An accompanying booklet gives advice on timber selection, and how timber can be harvested locally at minimal cost.
There is also a guidebook of projects.
The test of the system coincides with the announcement that the second conference for woodturning instructors' will be held in Sweden from 28–31 May 1992.
This will be conducted in English, and Mick O'Donnell will be principal instructor.
The conference will be following up the training programmes discussed at the Brough 90 meeting as well as looking at new proposals for courses and other aspects of woodturning training.
The conference, at the Saterglantan School for Rural and Traditional Crafts, is limited to 15 instructors.
Details are available from Anders Mattsson, Saterglantan Hemslojdens Gard, 790 30 Insjon, Sweden.
The National Association of Woodturners of New Zealand held their first instructors' conference in September 1991, and are planning a second such event in Christchurch in spring 1992.
For details contact Allan Wybrow, 113 Eden Street, Oamaru, New Zealand.
Mick O'Donnell is considering an instructors' conference in the UK during 1992.
Anyone interested in that idea, or in the turning systems for schools can contact him at The Croft, Brough, Thurso, Caithness, Scotland KW14 8YE,(0847) 85605.
 Women's workshop
Tutors and students at Bristol Women's Workshop, in Totterdown, are celebrating the victory of Siu-ming Hart in the City and Guilds Furniture Craft awards for 1991.
Two years ago Siu-ming left her job as a solicitor in Bath to work for the women's workshop and train as a cabinetmaker at Brunel Technical College, on block release.
In 1991 the City and Guilds top award in carpentry also went to a woman, who had also started her career at Bristol Women's Workshop.
‘It's about time people started to realise that women are already achieving the highest standards in all aspects of craft skills,’ said Sui-ming.
‘Women are under-represented in traditional craft industries due to lack of real training and support for girls at school leaving age, compounded by the hostility of an all-too-often chauvinist workplace.
It is not due to lack of ability.
Our cultural future
The Labour Party have published the first of a series of papers showing their commitment to the craft industry.
Crafts: Our Cultural Future sets out the party's plans to further links between craftspeople and industry and also increase public awareness of the crafts.
The paper looks at the role of local authorities, and ways of stimulating demand for craft products as well as maintaining historic buildings.
Labour also hope to be able to enhance the trade of craft within Europe and are studying the Crafts Council.
If elected this year, the party intends to increase the funding to the Crafts Council, but on the condition that the council works with regional authorities to improve retail outlets and also widens its database, and co-ordinates with the Arts and Design councils.
Labour notes that the introduction of CDT into schools has been adversely affected by the shortage of teachers and the influence of having to balance the three elements of the subject.
They intend to improve CDT teacher training, and increase the number of craft workers in residence at schools.
Personal versions of the  recipients of Lyn Muir's shelf people have become the fashionable gifts, especially in the USA.
Lyn uses softwood off-cuts from her  husband's carpentry workshop for the raw materials, her standard range of figures are modelled on visitors to Cornwall where she lives; old photographs are an alternative inspiration.
Lyn Muir sells her shelf people through galleries in Cornwall, and the Queen's Gallery at Buckingham Palace.
This mid-Victorian cottage was recently demolished; Cromwell Reclamation were able to rescue the decorative features, including the woodwork.
Cromwell Reclamation, the Benson Hall, Station Road, Buntingford, Herts, SG9 9HT. (0763) 71127
The Timber Trade Federation are encouraging students on Buckinghamshire College's BSc (Hons) Forest Products Technology course, by awarding an annual bursary of £500.00.
Hoe Hickmott of the TTF presented to the cheque to James Gibson to assist in his technical research project (left).
Phillip Hussey a course leader at the Bucks College designed the furniture for the reception area of the councils responsible for the funding of higher education (below).
The furniture was made by ex-student Adrian Jacobs.
DIARY
We at Woodworker make every effort for accuracy, but suggest you check by phone before starting your journey.
Framing opinions
English Heritage have introduced a campaign to save traditional window designs from replacement with modern alternatives.
The campaign has a programme of exhibitions and conferences arranged for 1992, and Lord Montagu of Beaulieu wrote a foreword for their special supplement in 1991.
In it he discusses the decline of the appearance of historic towns, looking at the ‘unwittingly misguided home improvements’ of their residents and replacement windows and doors in particular as ‘agents of erosion.’
English Heritage believes that up to four million historic windows and doors are at risk from unnecessary and unsuitable replacement.
They estimate that 140,000 were lost in 1991.
They are now trying to break down consumer perceptions that new  windows?should be installed to reduce noise and heat loss, and for easier maintenance and greater security.
The supplement goes on to look at the law covering the conservation of protected buildings and areas, reporting on incentives like the Town Scheme grant, which can provide 40 per cent grants for repair and restoration work from combined funding between local authorities and English Heritage.
The 12-page booklet also highlights the strange  anomaly that VAT is exempted for home ‘improvements’, but repairs are taxed.
This encourages change.
Saying that the Framing Opinions campaign has only just begun, English Heritage chief executive, Jennifer Page concludes that authorities and voluntary groups from national to local level must be prepared to offer help and advice to anyone wanting to alter a building.
As stated in the supplement, the heritage erosion is due to ignorance, and not wanton destruction.
Peugeot winners
PEUGEOT cordless drills are obviously an attractive prize as our  wordsearch competition (WW/Nov.91/p.1143 ) brought a pile of correct answers into the Woodworker office.
The missing  word was, of course,cordless , and the winners of the seven Peugeot 63CP2E cordless drills/screwdrivers are:.
Congratulations to the winners, commiserations to other entrants and thanks to Peugeot for sponsoring the competition.
Building a village
ECOLOGICAL Development, an organisation set up to promote environmentally-friendly housing, are looking for anyone with a desire to build their own home in a ‘Green Village’.
Six self-build plots on a 2.5 acre site are for sale in the Lincolnshire village of Corby Glen, near Grantham.
The organisation hopes to power the village via a wind turbine.
For details about the hamlet or public meeting contact Norman Bedlington, Ecological Development, 30 Lloyd Baker Street, London WC1X 9AB,(071) 837 6308.
Student sit-in
Students at the London college of Furniture joined other polytechnic undergraduates in a sit-in, that stopped lectures at the college for a week in December.
With the workshops locked up, furniture students were unable to do any woodwork and some were angry that their academic colleagues still had the facilities of the library available.
The sit-in, which forced lecturers to stay at home, was a protest at the lack of support for student accommodation and the pressure on the polytechnic system.
It was resolved when the provost took out an injunction on the students, and now some will be coming before the courts.
This comes at a time when staff contracts are changing.
Some further education teachers are concerned that their workshop time may not be recognised, and such supervision may become voluntary and receive no credit in new contracts.
Students may find lecturers less enthusiastic about giving up time for workshop advice.
CONSERVING MATTERS
Forests are your business was the arousing title of the 1991 seminar organised in December by the WWF writes Zachary Taylor.
Since the first timber trade conference of this kind was set up, a year ago, nearly 50 million acres of tropical forest have disappeared from Mother Earth's bountiful face.
And benevolent though she may be, by now she must be saying ‘enough is enough’.
This massive loss of forest is by no means due entirely to the timber industry, there being other contributory factors such as conversion of land for urbanisation, agriculture, and increase in domestic animals associated with human populations.
Nevertheless there is every reason to believe that some control applied at various stages of industrial exploitation could benefit the trade on a global scale.
Fine, in principal, but not all the members of the vast timber trade are convinced, and what is more, the question of who foots the bill, is a genuine one.
Some 150 delegates from many countries received reports, views, and arguments from a wide assortment of representatives from concerned bodies.
Confronting the participants on both sides of the lectern, were the somewhat fundamental problems of, for example, agreeing on the definition of ‘sustainable’ when applied to forest stewardship.
As to how inspection and certification might be exercised to ensure regulated management from logger to retailer, very little is as yet formulated.
Countdown 1995
Be sure, every one of us is involved with this issue, whether we like it or not, and WWF, are aiming at control and responsible administration of the world's timber supplies by 1995.
A tall order, but possible, given the will to make it succeed by all those involved.
How about you, do you care about the source of your timber, and if so, are you prepared to pay a little more now, to ensure that it will be there in the future?
Face & Edge Products
Luna's Four Legged Friend is a small folding bench, with steel underframe and legs and a replaceable MDF top.
It folds flat for storage, standing 540mm (21¼in) in use; the top is 700x170mm.
A recent development is a fast action vice or saddle clamp that drops into holes in the top.
Prices are £23.50 + VAT for the bench, £7.50 + VAT for the saddle clamp.
Luna Tools & Machinery Ltd, Presley Way, Crownhill, Milton Keynes, MK8 0HB. (0908) 262262.
Users of routers and spindle moulders find toggle clamps useful for holding work in place in jigs and templates, as they're compact and powerful.
Herbst toggle clamps are now available from Welwyn Tool Co.
Ltd, 4 South Mundells, Welwyn Garden City, Herts, AL7 1EH. (0707) 331111.
New Kity planer thicknesser
The Kity 639 planer thicknesser has a 400mm (15¾in) width capacity and a maximum capacity of 230mm (9in) through the thicknesser.
This larger capacity machine is aimed at professional workshops; though if you frequently use wide boards the extra capacity will be handy.
The standard three knife block can be replaced with a Tersa block that uses helical disposable knives if desired.
The cast iron surfacing tables are 1630mm long, and it is powered by a 4hp three phase motor.
Details from RMS, 6 Acorn Park, Charlestown, Shipley, West Yorkshire, BD17 7SW. (0274) 597826.
Cutting letter box slots in doors is a job most of us have to do once or twice in a decade.
But there are professionals for whom this is a daily task, for them Trend have made an adjustable letter box template.
Adjustable from 210x46mm up to 310x82mm, it is designed for use with routers with a ½ in collet and a 30mm guide bush, and is priced at £57.80 + VAT, Trend Machinery & Cutting Tools Ltd, Unit N, Penfold Works, Imperial Way, Watford, WD2 4YF.
The Bosch GWB 7.2VE cordless angle drill makes work in confined spaces easier.
The price is £169.00 + VAT.
Bosch have also introduced a 12 minute battery charger for all their cordless tools up to 12 volts.
Robert Bosch Ltd, PO Box 98 Broadwater Park, North Orbital Road, Denham, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB9 5HJ. (0895) 834466
In brief Multico have taken on the British marketing rights for the Delta range of machinery.
Delta are a well established leading brand in the USA; it will be interesting to see how they do in this country.
We've seen a couple of their machines briefly, as they passed through the office on their way for testing, they look like competent machines.
Details of the Delta range from Multico Ltd, Brighton Road, Salfords, Redhill, Surrey, RH1 5ER. (0293) 820623.
Makita have launched a 15 minute battery charger for their cordless tools, in line with their competitors.
The new charger can be used on the older style of batteries as well as the newer 9100 red 9.6 volt batteries.
Like most of the new fast chargers the Makita 15 minute charger uses a microprocessor to measure and monitor the level of charge in each battery, so it can be used on the range of Makita batteries 7.2 or 9.6 volt.
Unlike other fast chargers it has an alarm bell that rings when the battery is charged.
As usual you have to pay for convenience, but the price of the Makita DC9015 15-minute charger is £98.00 + VAT.
Details from Makita Electric (UK) Ltd, 8 Finway, Dallow Road, Luton, Bedfordshire, LU1 1TR. (0582) 455777.
Liberon Waxes have moved.
They are now in a purpose built combined office and factory with room to expand.
Liberon are very positive about the future and are set to expand their range of wood finishing products.
The new address is Liberon Waxes Ltd, Mountfield Industrial Estate, Learoyd Road, New Romney, Kent, TN28 8XU. (0679) 67555.
Not to be outdone by the other divisions of Record Holdings, Record Power have brought out a new full colour catalogue.
The extensive range of machinery and accessories includes a range of workbenches and power tool stands, portable mortising machines, whetstone grinders, sawbench, pillar drill and router table.
Free copies from Record Power Ltd, Parkway Works, Sheffield S9 3BL. (0742) 449066, 434370, 756385.
SIDE TABLES
Scratching the Surface
For working ebony on his pair of side tables,Richard Williams found that plane irons go blunt, but scrapers and scratchstocks produce a fine finish.
These tables were the happy result of that dreaded request…
‘Could you make something, anything, for my gallery’ No brief, no specific function, just, well, anything.
In the end, all I had to go on was the gallery itself.
It is a relatively small basement room, so a large imposing piece was out of the question.
I thought I'd go for minimalism and delicacy.
The gallery is largely stocked with Eastern and Oriental decorative objects and furniture, so it wasn't difficult to establish the style of the piece.
Equally the use of ebony seemed a good choice; I'd been looking for an excuse to make something in ebony for ages, anyway!
By this time I had a pretty firm image of the tables in my mind.
It happens like that with me; I'm not tremendously good at filling pages of sketchbooks with ‘design development’.
It all goes on in my head and I usually find that my first sketch depicts the piece I end up with.
My sketchbook is really filled with constructional details, jotted down before they are forgotten.
A working prototype for the tables had many advantages.
Firstly the leg shape is tricky to achieve, and to have shaped a pair of legs in mahogany before I touched the ebony was good practice.
Secondly, such small, delicate tables are difficult to visualise in terms of proportion, and so the prototype enabled me to get it right again, before touching the precious ebony.
And, of course, I ended up with three tables instead of two!
The ebony itself is extremely difficult to find these days, and I ended up buying 10 turning blanks, 30x2x2in; each just enough to get a leg out of!
A word of advice if you are planning to work in solid ebony, stock up on dust masks!
The dust is highly irritating and even stings the skin, but a small price, for such a beautiful timber.
As for working the ebony, it blunts tools very rapidly and it is really best to use scrapers and stockscrapers when performing shaping operations, as they keep their edge and give a superb shiny finish, leaving little cleaning up but for a rub-over with 400 grit paper.
Constructionally, I didn't make the tables easy for myself, but the detailing seems to have been worth the extra time spent.
For example, the side and back rails are made up to give a ‘mitred’ effect, which adds a lot of work, but also adds a lot of interest.
The tops of the tables are constructed with lippings of solid ebony, tongued onto MDF faced with 3mm sawcut veneer.
I used little corner blocks to create the corner effect, and each of these is tongue and grooved on for strength.
The drawers were traditionally constructed using olivewood, which seemed to have a similar grain pattern to the ebony, but in negative.
However, like most beautiful timbers it was horrible to work, being very soft and crumbly.
As I mentioned, the ebony has a greasy nature, so after cleaning up and before polishing, I ‘washed’ the tables with thinners to prevent bad adhesion of the lacquer.
The tops are MDF with 3mm sawcut ebony veneer, and solid lippings, moulded with scratchstocks and scrapers
Richard experimented on a mahogany prototype for the mitred rails
LETTERS
Woodworker
By now most readers will know that I will have left Woodworker as you read this, and indeed by now the editor's chair supports the capable frame of Zach Taylor.
I wish him well, and know that he will do everything to continue and  enhance the magazine's success.
He is, himself, a passionate woodworker, and I am sure he will want fellow woodworkers to feel happy to approach him with problems, hints or just bits of chat.
Looking back, I think it is probably that constant contact with our community of wood lovers that has been the highlight of my time at Woodworker.
It has been a rewarding few years.
When I left journalism college to come to Woodworker , few of my colleagues could understand why I should want to  join such a specialist magazine.
Sometimes I have wondered myself, but have made so many friends and learnt so much that I can never regret the decision.
Publishing is a gradual process.
Despite the frenetic battle with deadlines, individual events are of less import than one would imagine.
It is the sum of many articles and many issues that gives a magazine character and measures success or failure.
There are, however moments that do stand out.
Betty Norbury's British Craftsmanship in Wood exhibition and book are a lasting memory.
I can still recall the amazement of finding such a wealth of talent on show.
I'm not sure it has had dynamic effects in the woodworking economy, but it is hard to forget, and I have relished getting to know many of the featured woodworkers.
I've also enjoyed watching furniture students progress with mixed success from college to those ranks of recognised craftspeople.
Particular articles come to mind.
My report on the Fine Wood Project in Western Australia was one of the most stimulating, as was the day out at John Makepeace's Hooke Park College.
I can dimly recall the challenges of testing a router photograph, and using it to create the November 1989 cover, while the picture of Mark Wilkinson's treehouse made the February 1990 cover one of my favourites, especially as the references to Czechoslovakia and East Germany coincided with the break up of the Eastern Bloc.
It was great to be able to report the following month, that the treehouse survived the terrible storms early that year.
There are many people who I'd like to thank for their support and help, and for those I am not able to contact personally, I must take this opportunity to say thanks.
I've been trying to work out which issue of Woodworker — while editor — I thought was best, and as none come directly to mind, I'd have to say it is this one.
I hope you enjoy it.
Lonesome stein
Whilst browsing through one of the local Christmas fairs, I came across a stein, made of pottery.
I holds just under a pint, and with a rather handy little lid.
When I got home with it, I gave it a wash, and tried it out almost immediately.
I had some woodwork to finish off indoors and after I'd glued up I had some light sanding to do.
But it wasn't until the sawdust started flying that I remembered, my drink!
It was then I realised how  handy that little lid is.
I've worked with a number of carpenters and joiners and come tea-break, we've all sat there with our nice hot cup of tea/coffee and that gradual layer of dust on top.
A lid's the key.
Cartoon accident
In your December issue (page 1330), you had a cartoon about an accident waiting to happen.
You could have saved the cartoonist's fee by using the picture of the long-haired gentleman on page 1223.
Daniel Thwaites could find himself in HSE trouble for allowing unsafe practices in his competition — the gentleman should have been told to wear a hairnet.
Occasional reader, Argyll 
Balancing trick
Congratulations, I have just finished reading the December 1991 issue and must say it is your best yet!
At last we have achieved a really ‘balanced’ magazine.
A letter from David Thomas, London quoting the feelings of, I would say, the vast majority of readers, and on the same page 1230, a sensible letter from Peter Rowe, decrying the ‘woffle’ of the ‘experts’.
And how nice to see two letters from Irish woodworkers, Nick Harding Smith of Co.
Cork and Sam Quigg of Belfast proving that the Irish can be as alert and constructive as the rest of Britain.
Full marks for the article by Michael Burley on the Trend ellipse jig — this is the type of article most woodworkers are interested in — new innovative ideas and system, something to stimulate interest and get the mind moving.
Thanks again for a better magazine.
Odds and ends
I have been taking Woodworker now for some 10 years and have at last been inspired to write a letter replying to that of David Thomas in the December issue.
Unlike him I have always found the little odds and ends Sellotaped to the front cover both interesting and useful.
Some like the Sandvik Sandplate have introduced me to products that I might not have otherwise tried.
Even the useless dowelling with a bit of tin can on the end might come in handy one day!.
Please carry on with the cover gifts.
Cost of chairs
As a hobby woodworker advancing (slightly) in years it is nice at the end of the day to relax in a really comfortable chair.
My wife has been looking at some furniture catalogues and tells me we would need about £1000 per chair.
Looking through Woodworker I have to say that many of the chairs are anything but comfortable!
Could you get together with a supplier of high class (quality) foam and give us a design which is ergonomically good, visually pleasing, fairly simple to construct, adjustable, and something I can go to sleep in.
Splitting nail
I was amused by J. Lipton's letter in the November issue, in which he says that having driven a nail in the wood, if it splits, he knows he should have used a screw.
The answer, of course, is to drill a hole, but it is not always possible to find a drill to suit the nails you are using.
Old Bill Lambert had a simple solution.
He would hammer the point of the nail flat on a metal block, file it to an arrow shape, then cutting off the head, would use this as a drill.
‘You've got to use your loaf boy,’ he would say.
Signs of the times
Your leader commentary ‘Sign of The Times’(WW/Dec.91/p.1230 ) referring to the lack of entries in the furniture competition poses some interesting comments.
Possibly because of their comparative youth the organisers have completely failed to understand the revolution which has taken place in the cabinetmaking trade during the last 50–60 years.
In my apprenticeship days (I am now 82) much of the work in the smaller workshops was made entirely by hand from deep sawing of heavy timber to cutting out dovetails and sticking mouldings.
We were craftsmen and the modern tradesman is at best semi- skilled by the old standards and entirely dependent on the superb machinery now available for the finish, influencing the design.
I exhibited at the exhibition for several years but abandoned this when it became clear that I could not compete with the accuracy of the machine-made product.
I would suggest that a section of the furniture competition be restricted to 100 per cent hand-made exhibits and without regard to the age of the competitor.
While it is perhaps speculation I would anticipate that few of the younger generation would be capable of competing.
Liming oak
A comment on the article by Charles Cliffe on liming oak (WW/Dec.91/p.1246 ) may be of interest.
In the 30's fashionable furniture with a limed oak finish would have the oak converted to a silvery-grey finish before the grain was filled.
I believe that ammonia solution was used to produce this colour but am by no means sure about it.
Perhaps your readers have the answer.
Skittle table
Re the letter from Hugh Gostick in the December Woodworker concerning plans for a skittle table.
The article he refers to is in Practical Woodworking July 1976 p280.
I made one many years ago and found it worked very well.
About one year ago I had a clear-out and consigned it to the bin so I cannot help with the actual item but I still have copy of the magazine if it is needed.
Full instructions and illustrations were published in Woodworker November 1953 (Vol. 57 No. 720).
If anyone would like a photocopy could they please write to Woodworker sending an s.a.e. and a cheque for £1.00 made out to Argus Specialist Publications.
Table skittles
I read with interest a letter in the December edition of Woodworker from Hugh Gostick of Stockport.
He was interested in building a table skittle game and requesting information on the game and the availability of plans to build one.
The game of tables skittles, or to use its traditional name ‘Devil Among the Tailors’, is a pub game which originated in London in 1783.
How it got its name is not a documented fact, but it is believed to have come about when the tailors of London congregated at the Haymarket Theatre to protest about a play called The Tailors: A Tragedy For Warm Weather.
The tailors thought the play was insulting to their trade, and as a result of their enthusiastic protests, a riot broke out.
The association between the game and the tailors could be related to the way in which the tailors were knocked down as the riot was controlled.
An expression still in use today ‘going down like nine pins’ probably relates to the 1783 tailors and the nine pins used in this game.
The above information along with detailed plans, rules of the game and building instructions for table skittles and 20 other interesting and original projects, can be found in my second book ‘Making Wooden Toys For All Ages ’ which is published by David & Charles, Brunel House, Newton Abbot, Devon.
Skittle table, as shown in a 1934 Woodworker (right) and Ralph Sinnott's design, which will feature in a future issue (top)
Ellipse jig2
I was interested in the Trend ellipse jig (WW/Dec.91-p.1227) as I have made similar devices.
This type of jig has limitations; it cannot make an ellipse, any part of which is covered by the jig.
This keeps the major/minor axis ratio to a theoretical maximum of 2:1.
On an ellipse of the proportions of about 2.5:1 the slider on the minor axis would move through the line of the ellipse.
After the trend ellipse jig test (WW/Dec.91/p.1227 ) readers might be interested in an illustration (above) from Woodworker, May 1934 p. 171.
Butler's tray
Len Dennis, in his article about a butler's tray (WW/Dec.91/p.1284 ) writes ‘There will be some deviation…where they (the two cylinder arcs) meet, and this must be smoothed out.’
Readers wishing to make a similar tray should note that it is not possible to assign values arbitrarily to the sides of the rectangle and ‘rise’ of both flaps and expect the resulting outline to be a smooth one.
However, a smooth curve can be obtained if the two arcs have a common tangent, which means that their centres must both lie on one of the axes of the figure.
Having chosen the height of the rise for the larger flap, the radius (and hence the position of the centre) of its arc can be determined by the method described by Len.
If a radius is drawn from this centre through the corner of the rectangle, the centre of the arc for the smaller flap is fixed automatically at the point of intersection of the radius and the major axis.
Accepting Len's dimensions for the basic rectangle (23.5 x 17.75in) and the rise (4in) of the larger flap, a little mathematics reveals that the smaller flap should have a radius of 11.20in (not 11.85in), giving a rise of 4.37in.
Conversely, if the rise of the smaller flap is fixed at 4in, the radius of the larger flap should be 17.74in (not 19.25in), giving a rise of 4.45in.
Either of these revised sets of dimensions will give perfect blending between the two arcs at each corner of the central rectangle.
It should be noted, however, that this method does not produce a true ellipse, which is defined as the locus of a point constrained to move so that the sum of its distance from two fixed points is constant.
It is ironic that if Len had stuck to his nails and string — however crude that method sounds — he would have got a perfect ellipse!
Please send correspondence for the letters pages to ‘Letters to the Editor’, Woodworker, Argus House, Boundary Way, Hemel Hempstead HP2 7ST.
Mark if NOT for publication.
We welcome any comment, and offer a right of reply, but do not necessarily endorse published letters.
We reserve the right to edit for brevity and clarity, while keeping the individual tone intact.
We hope these pages act as an open forum for debate.
CORDLESS TOOLS
CORDLESS REVOLUTION
In the first part of this investigation of cordless power tools Jeremy Broun examines their rise in popularity and some of the recent developments.
Cordless power-tools are doing for woodworkers what Fast Food did for the High Street over a decade ago.
In a word it's called convenience.
The convenience of picking up a power-tool without having to plug it in has brought a new freedom to woodworkers.
It could be that the cordless power-tool is turning a full circle, representing the original hand-tools without the sweat; you simply pick it up off the bench and use it, or pack it away in your toolbag and take it to wherever the task has to be done, and do it.
It's as easy at that!
It is modern technology all wrapped up without the cable to trip over, and the restriction of power point locations.
I cannot help but marvel over the miracle of cordless technology when perched 40ft high, drilling through roof rafters with a cordless tool, not having to worry about tripping over the cable or whether it's going to rain.
Not only are cordless tools more convenient but the low voltage is safer than mains operated ones and they are quieter in operation.
For the more down to earth woodworker it is interesting that often the cordless drill is picked up in preference to the mains powered one for many tasks.
In large scale industry (such as the Automotive Industry) the use of cordless tools has been steadily increasing in recent years so it is by no means novel technology.
The convenience and effectiveness of cordless tools is reflected in their meteoric rise in popularity.
Black & Decker have revealed that in 1989, about 20 per cent of all their portable power drills sold in Britain were cordless.
By 1990 the cordless drill's market share had risen to 27 per cent.
But looking only at professional power drill sales, cordless drills are accounting for 50 per cent of the market.
I have sampled a range of cordless tools, chosen mostly at random from the manufacturers' catalogues, broadly representing the  market spectrum.
Adding to these the few cordless tools I already possess, and one or two tools ‘hot off the manufacturing press’ I shall endeavour to introduce the technology and give a broad appraisal of the tools.
This should serve as a useful background for readers intending to buy relatively expensive tools.
Cordless tools tend to be more expensive than their mains powered counterparts, but if looked after should last for several years, even on the original battery.
The technology has certainly come of age and whereas battery powered tools can never compete in power with mains operated ones, their increasing sales have made them the fastest developing aspect of woodworking technology today.
The early cordless tools were drills with heavy integrated batteries, with slow overnight (trickle) charging facilities; perhaps 16 hours or so.
When the batteries were spent (after, perhaps 250 re-charges) the entire drill had to be thrown away.
Today cordless tools represent virtually the whole range, drills, screwdrivers, jigsaws, glue guns, sanders, grinders etc…
The batteries are generally clip-on (although on some DIY models they are still integral) and therefore replaceable, allowing spares to be carried and inter-changeability with other tools by the same manufacturer.
The heart of the cordless power-tool is the battery, in particular the charger and this is where much development is focused.
At this point I feel bound to say that the nickel-cadmium re-chargeable batteries are not environment friendly, and when you buy a cordless product it is your responsibility to dispose of it carefully when it is fully spent.
This may mean returning it to the dealer or manufacturer, but certainly not incinerating it or throwing it out with other household waste that ends up in a shallow landfill.
This is environmentally catastrophic.
Cadmium is a heavy metal and it is known to attack the central nervous system.
There are millions of these batteries now littering the environment with the potential of the contents leaking into the water table.
Perhaps soon there will be battery banks as there are bottle banks.
Already some manufacturers are offering incentives for safe return of batteries, so that they can recycle or dispose of them safely.
Cordless tools use multiples of a standard 1.2 volt nickel-cadmium battery cell, ie. 2.4, 3.6, 4.8, 7.2, 9.6, 12 and 24 volts.
Taking the drill for instance, the voltage can range tenfold from 2.4 to 24 volts.
Obviously the latter is much more powerful, but it could be self-defeating, lugging a heavy duty drill with its power pack up a ladder when a smaller drill is more convenient, quite apart from the cost.
In most cases a 9.6 volt or 12 volt drill will be powerful enough for serious woodworking, such as repeated drilling and screwdriving operations without rapid discharge of the battery.
If you have a particular task in mind it may be that a 2.4 volt drill will perform quite adequately, although as a general rule the lower voltage drills are best suited to small diameter pilot drilling and countersinking.
Heavy duty drills can drill bigger holes and more of them!
It really is a case of horses for courses, and is further complicated by the duration of some woodworking operations, such as power sanding.
Sanders are operated for much larger periods than drills.
Drills are generally subjected to harder work, with variables such as the nature and density of the material; from soft deal to hard oak, even metal and concrete.
Manufacturers give useful (or arguably useless!) statistics regarding the holes a cordless drill is capable of drilling, but no performance figures relating to the function of other cordless tools is available.
I think it is fair to say that in practical terms you are likely to get substantial life out of the tool before the original battery is spent, perhaps several years.
The average DIY drill is used for a matter of minutes per year.
Of course professional use is significantly more, but even than the actual period of continuous operation is deceptively low.
It is very difficult to weigh up economy with convenience.
Apart from the voltage of the battery, the re-charge time is an important feature of the cordless tool and this is down to the chargers.
Charge times currently range from about 12 hours to 5 minutes.
DIY cordless chargers can take around three hours, whereas the one hour charge rate has become the professional standard.
Fast chargers and coffee break chargers reduce this to 15 minutes or a top up charge for 5 minutes.
To my simple mind, ‘boost’ charging a car's lead-acid battery, to get the car started, tends to pickle the battery, reducing its life.
Today's PAG-ACS fast-charger  technology involves intelligent and pulse-charging micro-chip controlled sensing and monitoring devices, which sense the amount of charge left in the battery, prevent heat build up (the main enemy to battery longevity), and detect lazy cells, thus maintaining balanced charging.
All this costs and the pulse or superfast charger is considerably more expensive than the standard three and one hour chargers.
Carrying spare batteries could be a cheaper option to fast charging and all chargers rely on a power point anyway.
However, one of the claims for the new intelligent pulse-chargers is that they extend battery life by as much as three times.
So the choice is between the very high initial cost of a fast charger and a couple of batteries, or a cheaper slower charger and several batteries which will have to be replaced earlier.
An important feature of re-chargeable batteries is their memory and the need to properly ‘cycle’ the battery, draining it thoroughly before recharging.
It is common practice to put a battery on charge when it still has some life in it.
The charger tops up the charge, but subsequently charges only to that top-up percentage, for example 90 per cent of 90 per cent.
This frequently accounts for an  apparent lack of appetite of the power-tool.
It can be cured by occasionally totally draining and fully charging the battery a couple of times (cycling).
I prefer to drain batteries then allow them to cool down before recharging.
This greatly enhances their life when using standard chargers.
If the tool has be lying idle for some months it is likely the charge has partially drained, so it is a good idea to regularly use these tools.
The smart or intelligent chargers tend to take over the user's responsibility, detecting the amount of charge needed and eliminating any memory problems, but as stated previously, they are many time more expensive than the standard chargers.
It is important to read the manufacturer's manual regarding the charging of batteries and their general care.
A much overlooked aspect of power-tool performance is efficiency — the difference between rated input and output wattage.
Manufacturers tend to state only the input wattage especially on mains powered tools, but it is the power at the cutting edge that counts.
As compactness is an important design feature of cordless tools the all round efficiency of the tool is crucial, and that is why I tend to perceive cordless tools as being very much state of the art.
The motors are compact and powerful, some using rare earth magnets.
The gearbox may incorporate planetary gears, which are also compact and efficient.
The castings are lightweight and tough, made of glass reinforced polycarbonate plastic.
The all-metal geared chuck is quickly being superseded by the keyless chuck.
I cannot believe this minor revolution has actually come about in response to the frustration of woodworkers worldwide who lose the chuck key in the sawdust on the workshop floor!
Certainly the keyless chuck is a joy to use, so quick and easy; the jaws can be spun open to change from a small pilot drill to a larger drill.
In the next issue I shall be giving my findings on the diverse range of cordless power-tools sampled, with a few performance statistics, including a simple drill test.
In the meantime, put your batteries on charge!
Jeremy Broun is a designer, and the author of several books, including the recently published Electric Woodworking.
Cordless power: the freedom to roam
Lower voltage drills are best suited to pilot drilling and acting as light screwdrivers
Superfast chargers may be more expensive but they are now sophisticated, using pulse technology for balanced charging
Most power-tools now have a cordless version, with manufacturers jumping on the convenience bandwagon (far left).
Detachable batteries have further enhanced the versatility of these tools
Not only have batteries and chargers become the focus of power-tool research and development, but smaller and more efficient motors are having to be produced
Even the old chuck key is being made redundant, with the emergence from the workshop sawdust of the keyless chuck.
This is now an increasingly prevalent feature of cordless drills and further enhances their convenience and portability
QUESTION BOX
Woodblock floor
Q
I should be very grateful for your advice regarding the construction of a block floor in my dining room and kitchen.
1.
I propose to use a fairly dark hardwood, or even stained oak depending on the cost.
2.
I intend to cut the blocks myself and ‘true’ each one; each one to be 8×2×1in, with a lip on each bottom edge to form a key to the mastic.
3.
I would be grateful if you can recommend a mastic solution to stick down the blocks.
4.
As the floor is to be  laid in the kitchen area, would you please recommend a floor finish which will be waterproof and can be safely wiped over with a mop.
A
The species chosen should be resistant to abrasion — moderately dense dark hardwoods like danta, jarrah or teak would be satisfactory, in addition to the stained oak.
If the blocks are cut from quarter-sawn timber durability will be improved over that of plain sawn timber.
The size suggested is satisfactory although if the width were increased to say 65 or 75mm the machining and subsequent laying work would be reduced.
A lip is not needed on the underside to form a key to the adhesive; however, tonguing and grooving on the edges will help to locate the blocks during laying, maintain an even surface and reduce the possibility of loosening of individual blocks.
There should be at least 9mm thickness above the tongue.
The blocks should be conditioned to their in-situ moisture content, say 9–11%, before being machined and laid.
Wood blocks can be laid in hot-application bitumen.
More suitable for d-i-y use are the cold-applied bituminous emulsions — examples of suppliers are: Colas Building Products — Chester (0244) 674774, Evode — Stafford (0785) 57755.
FEB (GB)— 061–794 7411.
The sub-floor must be smooth, level and dry — any damp-proof membrane must be effective, as using a bitumen emulsion does not ensure damp resistance and any dampness would cause expansion of the conditioned wood blocks.
An unfilled movement gap of 10–12mm should be provided at the perimeter of the floor, under the skirting.
A variety of suitable finishes are available.
‘Bourne Seal’ is one that is widely used.
One-part urethanes offer improved abrasion resistance and are commonly available in builders' merchants/d-i-y stores — examples are ‘Furniglas’ and ‘Ronseal Hardglaze’.
Two-part finishes offer even better abrasion resistance but can have application and re-application problems.
Care should be taken to adequately ventilate the rooms and follow the manufacturer's instructions when applying the seal.
To reduce wear of the initial seal a wax polish or surface dressing may need to be applied.
In the kitchen where there is a risk of water ingress between the block joints care should be taken to maintain the surface seal to avoid water penetration and subsequent expansion problems.
Any wood block floor will eventually need some maintenance by being sanded down and resealed.
This should be done before any localised wear in the finish eg. in doorways, becomes excessive.
For further reading see:
British Standards BS1187 ‘Wood blocks for floors’, and BS8201 ‘Code of Practice for flooring of timber, timber products and wood based panel products’— these should be available through the local library.
TRADA Wood Information Wood Information Sheet 2/3:14 ‘Seals for timber floors’— available from TRADA, Stocking Lane, Hughenden Valley, High Wycombe, Bucks HP14 4ND.
Tel:024024 3091.
Andrew Gage 
Cross-grain cut
Q
How were the cross-grain mouldings on antique walnut furniture originally cut?
Moulding planes have much too steep a blade angle and I have never seen any special low angle ones.
What is the best present-day method for the deep concave trunk mouldings of a longcase clock (2in, 50mm, radius)?
A
Although Mr Robey poses two questions, the answers are, nevertheless similar.
Of course a spindle moulder can be set up to produce this type of moulding for long runs, but in the restoration of old furniture there is little call for such a machine.
When it is necessary for us to replace cross-grain cornice mouldings we have found that there is no satisfactory alternative to the time-tested, original method, i.e. saw-cutting and then finishing with large radius carving gouges and plenty of sanding.
This is how they were originally cut and was, of course, very time consuming — but labour was very cheap two hundred years ago!
Quite a lot of time (and wood) can be saved by careful preparation of the stock.
If the cross-grained walnut, or other suitable wood, is cut and glued to the pine backing, then the task of passing it over a circular saw is greatly simplified.
A number of passes are then made with the saw set at different heights — it is well worth-while doing a dummy run on some scrap material of similar size.
If the saw-cuts have been kept fairly close together, the waste is soon removed with a large gouge and finished by sanding — a piece of round stock approximating to the diameter of the profile and wrapped with sandpaper makes this job much easier.
A method similar to that described above is still probably the most suitable for producing concave trunk mouldings for long-case clocks mentioned in Mr Robey's second question although they may not be so easily manipulated over the saw bench, particularly if they are stop-ended as the ends may present problems.
David Ellis of Restorations Unlimited 
Shrinking doors
Q
My house faces southwest and over the years and especially in the last recent abnormally hot summers, the panels in the front door have undergone considerable shrinkage.
Past owners have filled the gaps with various kinds of fillers, but the result is unsatisfactory and of course the filler itself falls out rather easily.
The door is not of standard size (it is 82x40x1⅜in) and I would now like to have a replacement made.
Could you please advise me as to the most suitable type of wood for this?
As the house is of the Georgian period, I was thinking of oak as a possibility, but I would be most grateful if you could let me know what other types of wood are suitable, either hardwood or softwood, including some of the foreign hardwoods that are now available.
A
The choice of wood depends, to some extent, on whether you wish to have the new door painted or finished with a decorative stain.
If it is to be painted there is no advantage in using a hardwood and many of these are unsuitable for painting.
In such a case it is suggested that you have a door made in either Douglas fir or hemlock and specify that the timber should be in accordance with Class I of BS 1186 ‘Timber for and workmanship in joinery’: Part I specification for timber.
If you wish to have the door stain-finished you could again specify Douglas fir, or you could consider dark red meranti, which is a hardwood commonly used for clear-finished external joinery.
All of these timbers should be preservative-treated in accordance with BS 5589 ‘Code for preservation of timber’(by vacuum impregnation or dipping the machined sections prior to assembly for at least three minutes) unless your door is well protected from the weather.
If you really want a high quality door I would suggest that you select Brazilian mahogany.
This timber is both decorative and durable and is regularly used for high-quality work.
Oak is not really an ideal timber for external joinery since it can suffer from surface checking and splitting if it is exposed to the sun and the rain.
Two further thoughts:
The thickness quoted for the door is rather thin especially relative to its size — 45mm (1¾in) is preferable.
You might consider moving the stops to allow for a thicker door, or if this is impractical, using a thicker door and rebating the edges to the existing thickness so that it fits the frame.
Don't use a varnish finish unless the door is very well protected by a porch and you are prepared for regular and frequent maintenance to keep it looking good.
RENOVATION
Global Awareness
Theatrical producer, Sam Wanamaker talks to Nick Gibbs about the campaign to reconstruct Shakespeare's Globe Theatre and how woodworkers can get involved in the project.
‘It is certainly a polygon, and our historians, experts and researchers have come to the conclusion that it has 24 sides and is 100ft in diameter.’
So says theatrical director Sam Wanamaker of Shakespeare's Globe Theatre, which he is now trying to reconstruct on the south side of the Thames in London.
The theatre is known to have been built in 1599, and closed by 1642, but if records are to be believed today's rebuilding hardly matches the efficiency of 17th century construction workers.
For in 1613 The Globe was ‘burnt to the ground’, to be back in action the following year.
But then the 20th century Globe is only part of an ambitious project to create a complex dedicated to Shakespeare's England and contemporary craftsmanship.
For Sam Wanamaker aims to make this an opportunity to furnish the International Globe Centre with work by British craftspeople, while recreating the theatre using 17th century techniques.
As a result there'll be lots of work for woodworkers, and a pressing need for wood.
Already the British Woodcarvers Association have instigated a touring exhibition, Shakespeare's England, to raise valuable funds for The Globe, starting at the Woodworker Show at Sandown Park in September.
The original Globe was heavily carved, and Sam Wanamaker wants to incorporate interpretations, including busts of benefactors, into the new theatre.
While the rest of the complex will be brick built, the Globe is to be a timber-framed construction, with oak laths wrapped in a plaster of lime, straw and animal dung.
Sam Wanamaker enthuses that they now have permission to thatch the roof of the gallery and thrust stage.
‘We want to make it as faithful to the original as possible, with the information we have got.
Only then can we recreate the nature of the place and transform our understanding of Shakespeare's plays.
‘The Globe's going to be a hand-crafted object, using techniques of the period, and the materials, including thatch.’
The theme of craft runs around the complex, and already the architect Theo Crosby has a list of potential craftspeople who may want to participate in furnishing the centre with anything from furniture to ironwork and stained glass.
‘We want it to be like walking into a craft exhibition,’ says Sam Wanamaker.
‘Everything unique.’
For the moment The Globe's most obvious requirements are money and timber.
The next stage in the project is to build a ceiling for a Piazza and museum space, which will become the floor of the theatre.
Then the timber frame construction can start.
Already 24 structural posts have been donated by 24 nations, but the need is for green oak, with 250 trees required (preferably no less than 17in in girth, and 12ft straight and long).
The plan is for the theatre to open in 1993 with the first season of Shakespeare plays.
Time is running out.
So anyone who can offer timber — should contact The Shakespeare Globe Trust, Bear Gardens, Bankside, London SE1 9EE, 071 928 7710.
SHOWPIECE TURNING
The second of our reviews of the 1991 Woodworker Show covers the turning competitions that included an ornamental turning section this time
This ‘Greek water jug’ in African padauk (Petrocarpus soyauxii ) is by James Mortimer
John Adron's ‘Layer boxes’ are based on Japanese inro, the smaller oval one is in snakewood (Piratinera guianensis ) the larger one is lignum vitae (Guaiacum officinale )
Stephen Cooper got a gold medal for his  pomander in padauk (right), and a silver medal for his kitchen scales (below) made in ovangkol (Guibourtia ehie)
A gold medal went to Andrew Clayton for these napkin rings (above) in African blackwood (Dalbergia melanoxylon ).
Owen Proctor won a silver medal for his ‘Fruit stand (right) using yew and beech for the section inside the inverted turning
This urn in padauk is one of a pair that won the gold medal for David Lucas in the hand copy turning competition
Jon Ambrose turned and routed the decoration in this vase in grass tree root (Xanthorrhaea spp.)
Robert Fletcher used over 300 separate lathe settings to make the patterns on his gold medal winning sewing box, he used a mix of cocobolo (Dalbergia retusa ) yew and Indian rosewood (Dalbergia latifolia )
A gold medal was awarded to James Mortimer for his pair of ebony candlesticks with left and right-hand twists (left).
Michael Morley calls this group of lidded goblets in laburnum and boxwood (below)‘Elevation’, as ‘the bowl rises successively on the stems’
CHAIR-MAKING
COPY WRITING
Anthony Buxton explains how to make replica chairs, and complete a set, looking at the use of templates and bevels.
A lot of excellent furniture-makers that I know have an unreasonable fear of chair-making; for some reason or other even the strong go limp at the thought of all those angles and curves.
This is a pity, as in my experience there is nothing as satisfying to make as a chair.
It makes demands of your skills, it will get plenty of use, it can make a handsome addition to any room and as soon as you sit down you will know whether you have made a good job.
Making replicas of existing chairs is generally done to extend sets of antique chairs, but it can also prove a very useful introduction to chair-making techniques.
Often, to have a solid example in front of you is less daunting than a drawing.
In addition, for any reader who has a small workshop with a minimum of machinery here is an area of work where you need not feel at a disadvantage.
The old chair-makers had no machinery, and they produced some pretty impressive results.
As to which chair to which to start, a more rectangular, less curved style will be easier, and you can progress in due course to more ornate and complicated styles.
If your particular bent is for turning, go for Windsor chairs, or some other country chair.
You might want to add to a set of chairs that you already possess, or make up a matching chair to one at home.
Alternatively, the odd antique chair can come reasonably cheap at auctions or antique fairs.
The timber will usually be dictated by the original, but it is up to you to make your own choice, if you wish.
Only where an exact copy is required is it important to have an exact match for timber.
Remember also that the upholstered seat of a chair is nearly always made of beech; other timbers will not hold the upholstery tacks so well.
As I have already mentioned, nearly all of the work can be carried out by hand; useful hand-tools include a coping saw, spokeshave (for curved work) scraper and sliding bevel, callipers to work out the thickness of curved sections, and a pair of sash cramps.
Band cramps may do, but will not, in my experience, give quite the same pull to a joint.
Useful machines are an electric drill, a small router to make mortises and mouldings, and a small bandsaw.
To show the general principles involved I will describe the different stages in the making of the copy of the chair illustrated, a  Chippendale style fruitwood armchair.
The first step is to make up the templates of all the shaped parts of the chair.
For this some hardboard of stiff card is necessary.
Where a shape is through one plane only (the piece is flat or tapers regularly along its length in the other plane as do the back splats in this chair) only one template is needed.
Shaping through both planes means two templates, one for each plane, as in the back legs.
When tracing off the templates it is possible to mark off the position of joints at the same time, for example where the seat rail joins in the back leg.
This comes in useful when the time comes to mark the position of the mortises.
Other information, such as the varying thickness through a tapering length can also be recorded on the template.
It is also very useful to make up a full-scale plan of the seat of the chair, to mark in the positions of the mortises and tenons, especially as, the original being glued up, it is not possible to see exactly how the original joints went together.
Where the seat rails taper from top to bottom, as in the back of this chair, it is important to note on the plan whether the section is through the top or the bottom of the seat rail.
With the templates prepared, and the length of the seat rails marked onto the plan it is now possible to make up a cutting list.
An allowance must be made where a section is shaped or curved for the extra material needed, and pieces which finish with a taper should be cut out initially ‘in the square’.
The shaping is generally done after assembly.
Similarly, turned components joined into the chair can be assembled in the square and turned later on.
Like this they are often easier to handle in the vice or on the bench.
The exception to this rule is any country chair where the turning is actually part of the joint, as in the Windsor chair.
I nearly always start to make the chair at the back seat rail, for the simple reason that it is usually, but not always, the component that has right-angled joints, even when every other part of the chair is angled or curved.
In this particular chair, as the back legs are set to tilt inwards towards the bottom, the shoulders will be angled from top to bottom of the rail.
This angle can be easily read off the original using a sliding bevel and transferred to the new rail.
The stretcher across the back of the chair will similarly have angled shoulders, but not necessarily at the same angle as the seat rail, as the back legs may taper away towards the bottom; indeed they generally do.
These kinds of variations can seem very confusing, which is why I advocate taking the job slowly, one section at a time.
Some variations can be very small, and yet important.
On the other hand, I have seen some country- made chairs where the ‘rule of thumb’ definitely took precedence over the ruler, and no two angles seem to be the  same.
These rustic errors can be corrected at the stage of making up the templates and the seat plan.
When the back seat rail and stretcher are in place we can move on to the curved lower rail in the back.
Where there are complicated angles in the shoulders I generally find that the most straightforward method is to mark off directly from the parts to which the rail is to be jointed.
The back is assembled and the piece of timber cut out to make the rail is laid ‘in the square’ over the two back uprights by hand, with a mortiser or router, the tenons cut and the piece fitted into place.
The rail piece is then cut to the correct curve, using the template prepared from the original.
Next, the top rail.
This is left oversized, the tenons cut on the ends of the back uprights and the positions for the mortises marked off by laying the rail piece over the tenons.
When the top rail has been fitted onto the tenons the profile of the tops of the uprights is traced onto the top rail, which can then, like the lower back rail, be cut to the correct curb using the template previously prepared from the original.
To complete the back of the chair it only remains to insert the three vertical splats, once again marking the shoulders off from the upper and lower back rail.
The seat of the chair is a straightforward mortise and tenon construction apart from two considerations.
Firstly the side rail joints are set out at an angle as the seat increases in width towards the front.
On a mortiser it is possible to tilt the piece to be mortised at an angle; the same angled mortise can be produced by drilling out with a drill bit, and then cleaning up with a chisel.
The correct angle at which to set the drill is achieved by lining up with a sliding bevel set on the bench beside the drill.
Secondly, in this chair where the back legs are at an angle to the front, compensation has to be made on the back mortise, otherwise the whole seat frame will end up on the skew.
This means tilting the rear mortise to line up with the front leg, which will mean in turn that the side rail will not line up exactly with the back leg.
The face of the rail has to be planed down until it lines up flush with both front and back legs.
These complications are a bit daunting at first, but a bit of careful thought, and progress step by step, will make all clear!
With all the seat rails inserted and the chair assembled the stretchers can be marked off and jointed into the legs.
I used the same method of laying the stretchers over the legs in the correct position and marking off the shoulders as in the back rails.
The rear side stretcher joint in particular is tricky, odd angled in both planes.
As with the side seat rails the mortises are cut at an angle into the legs.
It only remains to mark off and slot the central stretcher between the two side stretchers, and the chair, minus the arms, is now complete.
In this chair, it was convenient to carry out the shaping and moulding of the parts before fitting the arms.
This was because the post (vertical portion) and arm (horizontal portion) both locate over moulded and shaped sections.
In other chairs the arm is integral to the front and back legs, and must be fitted at an earlier stage.
Often it is easier to shape and mould the individual pieces before the whole is glued up, but sometimes, where the mouldings run across joints, it is better to glue up, or at least assemble the part first in order to get a neat run of the moulding over the joint.
But glue up as little as possible at this stage for ease of working; ie. the back rather than the whole chair.
You may be lucky and find a router bit to reproduce the original moulded sections; more likely you will have to resort to the scratch-stock.
This useful and incredibly simple little tool consists of a strip of metal — a bit of old bandsaw blade is ideal — in which the negative of the moulding is filed, pinched between two L-shaped pieces of wood.
Using the leg of the L as a fence, the blade is scraped along the grain of wood, producing the required moulding.
Rounded shapes require spokeshaves, rasps and abrasive paper, and an accurate profile can be obtained by making a hardboard template from the original.
And now finally the arms.
The chair must be cramped up, if not glued up, for accurate positioning.
The arm, oversized and still in square section is located on the back upright, and held by a capped screw from behind.
The best approach to this difficult joint is to make an initial shallow cut in the end of the arm and feed it up in the correct position to the back.
Then taking a pencil, trace out onto the arm the correct line of the front and side faces of the joint direct from the back.
The post is fitted over the moulded side seat rail, roughly cut to profile (from a template) and a tenon formed at the top.
The arm and post are then lined up and the mortise marked off on the arm from the post.
The arm is still oversized and can be trimmed down to join neatly onto the post.
The final shaping of the whole assembly was actually carried out in this case after the two were glued together, before final fixing to the chair.
The upholstered seat is formed over a separate beechwood frame.
If an accurate copy of an antique finish is required a certain amount of trial (and error) may be necessary.
Use a proprietary bleach to lighten the wood, bichromate of potash or ammonia to darken hardwoods.
Oil stains are more readily available and easier to use than water stains, which will raise the grain, or spirit stains which can fade.
French polish or varnish, cut back with a fine grade of wirewool and wax, will give a good finish, and a dark tinted wax worked well into the corners will add a bit of instant age.
A few knocks and a bit of household dust will complete the process over the years to come.
And if you have once demonstrated you skill at copying chairs, you can get on with meeting all the requests you will surely have from family and friends.
Marking the arm (below left) and stretcher joints (top) and detail of the central stretcher joint (above)
Assembling the back frame
Making a template of the back curve (above) and checking sections of the back (below)
FURNITURE-MAKING
Balancing style
Philip Koomen , who is a visiting lecturer on the Furniture Design and Craftsmanship course at Bucks College as well as full-time furniture-maker, talks about the produce of his workshop
The workshop produces a wide range of one-off furniture and interiors ranging from specialised pieces such as collectors' cabinets or jewellery boxes through to complete ranges of furniture for dining rooms and studies.
Sustaining a viable business and maintaining interest and enthusiasm over 16 years of designing and making furniture does, however, require a multi-faceted approach.
Developing one's own ideas and creating an identifiable style underlies the work we do, but this approach only becomes really focused when producing speculative pieces.
Most of the work is bespoke design and making where a client has definite requirements; the brief may be very specific or it may be quite open.
Whatever the requirements, there is a consultative process through which the exact needs are defined and agreement as to the design established.
The two approaches of speculative and commissioned work are not as polarised as one might think.
In reality one feeds the other; the store of ideas filter through to the bespoke work while the insights gained by designing work for specific needs provide an overview of market needs.
A picture evolves over many many years, as a result of finding an area of interest, eg. desks, and persevering with it.
Now markets have opened up as a result of making desks; we now design and produce complete study and library schemes, designed to fit.
Sometimes a project of this kind will involve working alongside an architect and interior designer.
The individualistic approach is an essential element in maintaining vitality and enthusiasm for the ‘process’, while the bespoke work provides the discipline 
Speculative design
On a short term basis speculative work is a gamble as it is always difficult to sell.
There is always a danger that it becomes a thinly veiled therapeutic exercise.
I think it has an important function in providing a clear statement of a furniture-maker's design philosophy.
Clients many never actually buy or order something based on your own designs, however, they will relate to or identify with the intrinsic qualities that your designs and workmanship represent.
The dining table and chairs are all in black walnut.
The client wanted furniture that had a classical feel but was not reproduction.
We found a Georgian chair that was attractive and restrained, and the end product was a contemporary interpretation.
The table echoes the X-pattern of the chair back (the photo shows the table extended, therefore the pattern is broken).
Chair work of this kind involves a lot of compound shaping to make the chair really comfortable and supportive and five a refined appearance.
Compound curves can either be produced with a spokeshave or, in our case, on the spindle moulder with the help of a lot of jigs.
The back feet and diagonal members have these compound curves, produced by making jig templates that are secured on both sides of the component and guided by corresponding bearing that sit on top and below the cutter block.
The shape created means that the component is working off the bearings rather than the table.
The chairs take about 28 hours each (when producing a batch) and the table about 120 hours.
Study in Canadian rock maple and American black walnut consisting of a pair of bookcases, filing cabinet, desk, chair and coffee table.
(Slide show desk, chair and one book case).
The brief was to provide a comprehensive range of study furniture that was contemporary in style, and harmonised with the room space.
The desk has tiered drawers for easy access.
The size and internal divisions accommodate A4 and A5 paper and documents.
The base drawers on either side are full-size filing drawers.
The bookcases house hi-fi and 900 CDs.
Time spent was 1200 man hours (including desk of 248 hrs)
Furniture like this involves straightforward cabinet work as most of the pieces were about 8ft high the proportions had to be correct, while the combination of the dark and light woods also helped to relieve the massiveness of the piece.
The oak table (7x3ft) and chairs are another attempt to  create simple forms, this time geometric, that explore the interrelationship of shapes in a dynamic way.
The table was a specific response to a limited supply of 3in English oak that has been purchased without any clear purpose.
Designing a piece of furniture from limited stock can be an effective way of generating new ideas.
This was an offshoot of an idea that has still to surface.
I like to design things that can be made simply but create a dynamic relationship when the elemental parts are put together.
The shapes are created on the spindle using one template.
The table takes 70 hours to make.
This table was conceived and made within one week to meet an exhibition deadline.
The chair is deliberately minimal and is essentially designed around the body to give good lumbar support and spinal relief.
The piece also involves using the potential of the spindle moulder to create solid shapes.
The recent acquisition of a Tersa cutterblock with a 100mm cutting edge should increase the scope of shaping on the spindle.
The reduced diameter of 85mm of the new block creates the opportunity to produce a greater variety of shapes.
The chairs were designed to complement the table and represent one set of variations on a chair design that I have been experimenting with for years.
I think it is often worthwhile to stick with a basic idea and develop it in as many ways as possible.
Furniture design at craft level is an evolutionary process involving a constant refining of ideas.
Producing furniture that is to be used and enjoyed for decades requires a corresponding attention to detail.
SELF APPRAISAL
SEEKING PERFECTION
Perfection is in the eye of the beholder, but Paul Clarke reckons that it doesn't help if the beholder who made the piece is over critical of the workmanship.
Are you happy with the quality of craftsmanship in your latest woodworking project?
Were you happy with your previous project, or the ones before that?
The chances are that the answer is no.
Sadly most woodworkers are very critical of their own work; sometimes to the extent that a half-finished project is abandoned, because some part of it just won't come right.
Now there is nothing wrong with self criticism, after all we are all striving to improve our craft.
The problem is that the criticism is misdirected, leading to frustration and disillusionment.
There are reasons why woodworkers are likely to suffer self criticism.
They are very closely involved with each component of their work.
Every slip of the chisel, every bit of torn grain or bruised edge is experienced and remembered.
It shines out like a beacon in the finished job despite all efforts to disguise it,(efforts which only seem to make the fault worse).
Even faults which are uncovered in the wood itself, like gum ducts or discoloured patches, are a cause of annoyance which will ultimately lead to dissatisfaction with the finished article.
Even when the project is completed there is still the finish to apply, with its attendant risks of streaky grain and sagging runs in the varnish, french polish or lacquer.
All in all there are so many pitfalls to avoid that it's a wonder that woodwork has ever advanced beyond the hollowed out log.
But if all the above problems apply to you why is it, you may wonder, that they don't afflict anyone else?
After all Woodworker is filled every month with pictures of other people's work which looks perfectly all right, each a masterpiece in its own right.
Well now the awful truth can be revealed, other people's work is not perfect.
It probably carries as many faults as your own — maybe more!
If you were to examine the work you may not find any faults, or perhaps just a few minor ones which ‘don't really matter’.
Here then is a hint of what is going wrong.
Faults in your own work are glaringly obvious because you know so much about them, but other people's faults are not considered to be important.
When you show the results of your labour to a friend or relative they do not make a minute examination of every component.
What they see is the general form and outline of the object, and if this is attractive then your work is acclaimed.
It is for this reason that good balanced design is every bit as important as meticulous craftsmanship.
Other woodworkers will of course make a more detailed examination; if only to discover the methods of construction.
However they will understand the difficulties of using such an unpredictable material as wood, and make due allowance for minor defects.
Now you may think that this is an article promoting poor workmanship, it is not.
What I am advocating is balanced view of your own work and a more sensible approach to its shortcomings.
If you are to finish any piece of woodwork you must learn to live with faults and find ways to disguise them.
Don't be afraid to make good use of filler and stain to patch up the odd failure.
Place damaged parts in places where they are not obvious (if this is possible).
Remember that any type of gloss finish will accentuate surface blemishes (maybe this is why oiled finishes are so popular).
Of course you can only take this covering-up operation so far and it is sometimes prudent to remake a part.
The old adage ‘measure twice and cut once’ can sometimes save time here.
The idea is to constantly bear in mind the principle of balance, if you can patch up faults as you go along then you will finish the job in hand.
When it is finished show it to someone for comment; the results can be surprising.
Don't try to be apologetic by saying that the turning on one of the legs isn't quite right, let the viewer decide themselves.
Instead of pointing out the errors you may be told that it is very good but have been better in a darker wood!
To complete any craft project you must exercise tempered self criticism, correct large mistakes by all means but maintain progress and see the job through in a reasonable time.
Take note of people's comments, and especially note what features they think are important.
Above all remember that good craftsmanship is a combination of quality with reasonable speed, because the more you make the better you will get.
After a while you will begin to see that perfection is like the fairy tale castle, you keep moving towards it, but it's always out of reach.
If you take this approach you will find that your work improves; what in the past seemed difficult is now easier to achieve.
Every project you undertake will be better than the last and before long you will be able to say: ‘Well, that's not too bad but I'm sure that the next job will be perfect.’
‘If only I could do that!’
Visitors marvelling at the perfection of work at the Woodworker Show.
But is it error free?
The Craft of CABINETMAKING
The Gentle Craft of Failure
This month David Savage discusses the importance of mistakes within the workshop, and looks at a finish he would otherwise not now use if it hadn't been for a disaster
All right, I am going to be brave and am going to talk about failure.
We all fail sometimes, failure is a part of learning.
Failure is also an essential part of creativity for if one is working on the creative edge one should be constantly risking failure.
Yet there is another failure which we less readily admit to.
That is technical failure, something that has gone wrong, a monumental cock-up.
If these articles are to be useful then I think it is important that experienced practitioners, such as myself, should share a monumental cock-up as readily as the creative triumphs.
Perhaps I am being unnecessarily cynical but it seems that too much of a designer maker's time is spent on public relations and maintaining the image and there is less willingness to share the things learned from technical and creative nightmares.
So in this merry mood of self flagellation I shall tell you the story of one monumental cock-up that taught me two very important lessons.
The first important lesson was about sub- contract work.
I have learned never to do this again and the second concerns the use of a lacquer as a finish for fine furniture which I hope never to use again.
The story is that of a table that went wrong.
Way back at the start of this year I planned into the workshop schedule an exhibition piece.
This was to be a dining table in burr American walnut.
I decided to make a development of a circular pedestal table that we made for a client last year.
The table was to complement a new chair that was being prototyped in the workshop at the same time.
It would serve us as an exhibition piece in our own gallery and in exhibitions for the coming year or two.
I brought some very beautiful burr American walnut veneer, four enormous leaves for the top and another four for the underside, which was extravagance beyond words, for this was to be an exhibition piece.
We knew how to make this table.
Graeme Scott had sorted out all the jigs much earlier in the year.
In fact we had made three other variations on the theme before we came to making this piece so there was really no excuse for getting it wrong, but we did.
The problem was it wasn't made in my workshop, it was made somewhere else.
What happened was that a big boardroom job that was quietly occupying us and running nicely to schedule suddenly went critical when our friendly architect informed us that the Secretary of State was opening the building four weeks earlier than scheduled and it would be very nice to have the furniture there.
The answer to such situations is to always say ‘Yes, sir, of course we can do it,’ and then put the telephone down, swear loudly and sit down and work how you are going to do it.
The how in this case necessitated sub-contracting the exhibition table.
The idea of sub-contracting an exhibition piece now fills me with abject horror.
At the time it didn't seem such a problem.
I intended to sub-contract it to one of my former students, a very, very skilful young man who had been with us on a fee-paying course for one year and then gone off and worked in a local workshop for another 18 months.
The table itself wasn't that complicated and was well within the technical capacities of the person concerned.
But it just didn't go right.
I don't think it was helped by the craftsman working in a freezing cold workshop.
In retrospect it seems obvious to say that the laying of burr veneers onto any substrate is temperature sensitive but that is being wise after the event.
The poor guy who made it did everything right except get those burr veneers properly adhered to the ground.
When you have got blisters that only show after the finish is applied it really is a nightmare.
We didn't just have one or two but several, all over the place.
They used to pop up in the morning when it was a bit cooler and damper and then flatten out in the afternoon when the temperature got up.
He cut into some, re-laid them and refinished only for  others to appear after that.
The only solution I had was to pay for the guy, bring the piece into my own workshop and re-do the top completely.
This was an expensive learning experience but one I gladly share with you.
The other interesting thing about this table was the finish.
The table had been sent out to be sprayed lacquered.
We don't have a spray shop here and we have had mixed success with using a local spray finisher.
The finish on this table was particularly unhappy.
Not that there was anything wrong with it, it was just unhappy.
Now I get very touchy about finishing because it is so very important from the client's point of view.
For, when one experiences a piece of furniture for the first time, it is usually through those top two or three microns of surface coating.
The touch of the finger tip corroborates what the eye beholds.
If the eye tells you wood and the touch tells you plastic then something is wrong somewhere.
This table felt like plastic.
But then much of contemporary furniture these days feels like plastic.
It wasn't really anything I could be certain about.
However, now we have remade that table top and re-finished it in a different way I am much more certain about what had, until now, been an instinctive feeling.
When we got the exhibition table back and decided to refinish the top entirely I had the problem of finding four more burr  walnut veneers.
Luckily Crispins of Curtain Road in London, my main veneer supplier, still had four leaves from the same bundle that I had purchased the original set from.
This was very lucky and one of the two strokes of luck we had on the whole job.
The task of recovering this piece from disaster fell to David Woodward who promptly rented time on a thicknessing sander owned in another workshop locally and sanded the original veneers off.
He then replaced it with beautifully quartered burr black walnut veneers and then routed in new lippings to frame the burrs.
As this was going on we decided to inlay a wide applewood string around the circumference of the table as that seemed to frame the burrs most satisfactorily.
The colour of apple also blended very beautifully with the lighter tones of the burr black walnut.
Then we came to refinishing.
The pedestal and the underside of the table were rubbed down.
The lacquer was carefully cut back and a burnished finish applied.
This was adequate for secondary surfaces but the primary surface of the table top had to be treated very differently.
Now I know there is a view that french polish is old fashioned, it not tough enough for everyday use and is not relevant to contemporary furniture.
After the experience of working on this table I would say that this is absolute rot.
French polish involves the use of a material called shellac.
This, in traditional form, is a treacly brown colour and lends a definite antique air to what you are polishing.
For contemporary furniture this would be inappropriate.
What was needed here was a transparent finish, and it is possible to achieve that with clear shellac.
Now I have used transparent shellac for many jobs in the past.
It has lent itself admirably to the finishing of chairs, cabinets and desks — pieces where a very sensitive finish is required.
But I have always shied away from using it on tables, perhaps feeling that a table should be capable of taking a certain amount of abuse.
There is certainly a good argument that in some situations shellac would not be an adequately strong finish, but in this case we had a fine table with a burr walnut surface which should be treated with a certain amount of care and respect in general use.
So we went for a shellac finish.
What amazed me as the finish grew was the colour.
The lacquered table, using the same veneers, had been slightly disappointing in colour.
The lacquered table, using the same veneers, had been slightly disappointing in colour.
The browns had a grey tinge to them and the richness of the burr did not seem to properly come out.
It was exciting, it was beautiful, but somehow it didn't seem to be all there.
With the shellac the colour was all there and more.
There was a depth now present in the shellac finish table top that was not present when the same table had been lacquered.
I doubt if I would ever have been quite to aware of this had we not gone through this disaster.
Here we had the same table, with the veneers from the same bundle, finished in two totally different ways.
The only conclusion I can draw is that the two-pack AC lacquer that was used on the first table was something that I will not use again on dark timber if I want to bring out the full colour of the wood.
The final bit of luck we had on this job was while we were refinishing this table.
We have in the workshop a gentleman called Tim Hodgkinson.
Tim is doing a one-year cabinetmaking course with me and paying a princely sum for the pleasure of doing it.
He is an immensely gifted young man who in the first six months of his course has made more high quality pieces of furniture than any student we have had here before.
At times Tim's speed and intelligence is quite breathtaking and I sure that with a couple of years experience he will become a very fine craftsman.
The thing about Tim is that he came to us with a experience of a polishing shop so he was very well placed to help us improve our spiriting-out technique that is so necessary on a fine shellac finish.
You may think it is a rum thing that a chap like Tim should pay an arm and a leg to come here for a year and then teach us a thing or two but then I am perfectly happy to admit that we don't know everything.
The furniture-making craft is so wide and it covers so many disciplines that it is impossible to have in-depth knowledge of all these disciplines all the time.
Polishing is a good example.
In the so called‘good old days’, when furniture-making was centred on Shoreditch, there would have been a polisher down the road.
His name would probably have been ‘Shiney’ or ‘Stainey’and he would have had an apron that was so stiff with shellac that it stood up on its own.
Nowadays we are so scattered about the country that it is very unlikely that any of us would have a Stainey just around the corner who could be relied upon to put up a first class polish.
So polishing becomes yet another thing that the furniture-maker has to know how to do.
It is a horrifying thought because a good, well trained polisher would have served a seven year apprenticeship and we contemporary furniture-makers cannot pretend to get near that knowledge and experience.
However, we should know of certain techniques that are appropriate to the kind of furniture we make.
This workshop is very good at oiling furniture.
I love oil finish.
It allows the texture and the feel of the wood to come through.
But oil is only suitable for some pieces.
We have been very good at burnished shellac finish and we can now add a brighter spirited-off shellac finish to enhance our fine pieces of blonde furniture.
Sadly, there will always be a customer who will want a bomb-proof surface.
They don't deserve fine furniture but, of course, when asked to do this I will say ‘Of course , as you wish, sir’.
I will then hang up the telephone swear loudly and search out those long unused tins of AC lacquer.
David Savage Furniture Makers, 21 Westcombe, Bideford, Devon EX39 3JQ.
SHOPTALK
Stan Thomas explains, we shouldn't allow for shrinkage all around, and reveals that marking and mortise gauges are left-handed.
We all know of course,writes Stan Thomas that solid timber table-tops should be fixed to the rails by means of ‘buttons’ or shrinkage plates, to allow for shrinkage.
But the common tendency is to put buttons all the way round, which is not correct.
The end-grain centre line of the top — for an inch or so — should be screwed and glued,(pocket screw) for with buttons right round, the top is able to ‘float’ upon the sub-frame, and shrinkage could take place all from one side, which would ultimately bring the top off-centre to the table.
A centre fixing anchors the top, so that shrinkage now takes place equally in from each side.
This also applies to door panels.
Use a dot of glue on the end-grain, on the centre line; for the groove at one side might be tighter than its opposite number, and shrinkage will again occur all from one side if the panel isn't centre- anchored.
The same is true for solid-timber drawer buttons.
Slot screw fixing at the back of course; but if the front isn't glued into its groove, who is to say that the back isn't going to remain static, while the front shrinks out of its groove?
I've seen this happen on many old piece of furniture.
To illustrate the point further, some bridges are fixed at one end, but rest upon rollers at the opposite end, to allow for expansion.
Imagine the situation if both ends of the bridge rested upon rollers, or ‘buttons right around’!
IT IS NOT generally known nowadays, that the marking gauge — and mortise gauge — is traditionally a left-handed tool.
We were even made, in school woodwork, to use the gauge in the left hand, but we were not told why.
The gauge is a difficult enough tool for a boy to use in his right hand, let alone the left!
Well, we are going back now to the days of the hand joiner's shop, when mouldings were scribed (not routered!) and tenons cut with the rip saw.
Let us consider the simple planing to dimensions, of a piece of timber.
The face, or ‘best’, side was planed true, and ‘best edge’ squared off this.
The timber is now lying upon the bench, against the stop; the face side is uppermost, and the face edge is towards us, as it should be.
How then can we gauge this timber to width with our right hand?
No self-respecting joiner would turn the timber around, and have the back of the material towards him, instead of the face.
Slide the timber to the opposite end of the bench, so that with face towards him, he can gauge right-hand?
But now we haven't the stop to prevent our timber sliding as we try to gauge it.
Also, we have our back to the vice, which was considered bad practice.
If you had your back to the vice, you were doing something wrong!
This might seem pedantic nowadays, but in my apprenticeship days, left-hand gauging was a religion!
CARVING HISTORY
WHO CARVED THE BENCH END?
Bill Andrews investigates the creators of carved bench ends in West Country churches, and a group of carvers recreating those pictures of the past
There is very little known abut the carvers of medieval bench ends but it is thought that most of them were ordinary local craftsmen, and so there would have been no reason to record this fact.
However, sometimes there is reference in ancient church records showing payment for the purchase of woods, which would relate to the materials used for the benches and their ends.
There is a bench end at Broomfield church in Somerset where the carver has carved his name ‘Simon Werman’.
Many of the wood carving subjects were taken from book illustrations, particularly after the invention of printing, when books illustrated with woodcuts found quite a large circulation.
One such book illustration was used for Joshua and Caleb carrying a large bunch of grapes between them; to be found at Milverton in Somerset.
At Charlton Mackerell, also in Somerset, there is a bench end showing a demon as the principal subject.
At the bottom left-hand corner of the carving are a bell, book and flower.
Doubtless the carver mistook a lighted candle for a flower on the illustration he was copying.
Bench ends at Braunton show a number of inverted initials which leads one to suppose that the carver was illiterate and was working from drawings which were being read upside down.
The work of individual carvers can to some extent be identified by the style and edge mouldings of the bench ends.
These characteristics very considerably, but similar patterns can be found in several different churches and one can be fairly confident they came from the same workshop.
Simon Werman's work, at Broomfield, can be most easily identified by his edge mouldings, where they all carry a uniform design of a continuous running stem pattern that has a leaf crossing it at regular intervals.
His work also shows an individual style in the shape of his leaf patterns which are very pointed with only slightly curved sides and a central spine.
It has been suggested that he also used birds as his trademark and a carving at Trull in Somerset shows a large ‘W’ supported by two birds thought to be woodpecker; a medieval pun?
The quality of work is of a very high standard and shows the great pride that these ancient carvers took in their craft.
The carvers were unlikely to be directly connected with the building of the church or the carpenters employed but would have been commissioned separately to provide these embellishments.
Where left to their own devices as to choice of subject, and bearing in mind the possibility of their being illiterate, they took subjects that were pagan in origin such as The Green Man which is a growth and fertility symbol.
This was used quite commonly and can be seen in many West Country churches.
The tools used were most likely to have been produced by the village blacksmith and would have included saws, chisels, special shaped gouges, templates for mouldings and various sized drills and scrapers.
As mentioned there are few records to name the originators of many of the finest carvings of the 16th century, but approximately 400 years after Simon Werman left his name or initials on his work, 15 men and women of the village of Halse near Taunton decided on a unique and practical way of assisting with the restoration of the village church of St James.
They formed a woodcarving group and set about carving bench ends.
Like their forebears, they chose subjects to illustrate the many facets of village life.
The results are pleasing to both hand and eye and seem to be a satisfying way of leaving something of lasting beauty and worth to posterity.
I wonder what aspects of life in 1990s would grace a similar project today?
Simon Werman's carving at Broomfield (above), and Joshua and Caleb at Milverton (below).
At Charlton Mackerell (right) the carver must have mistaken a lighted candle for a flower in the bottom corner, when copying from a book
DESIGNING ROUND THEORY
John Moran explains how theoretical mathematics and practical woodturning combine to produce a thing of beauty.
Many turners appreciate pleasing curves but like me, don't possess the ‘eye’ or the skill to create them on a lathe.
Templates can provide an answer.
Templates are traditionally used to produce sets of identical articles, but can  equally be used to create elegant, but elusive, one-offs.
It is also much easier, quicker and cheaper to experiment with shapes on the drawing board rather than on the lathe.
I am an electronics engineer by training and enjoy the purity of mathematics as a hobby, alongside woodturning and anything practical and creative.
After the usual spate of clocks, lamps, bowls and ‘anything round’ during my learning period, I settled down to specialise in bowls.
They have a particular appeal, I'm not sure why — perhaps it's because I can remember making one at school.
Having reached a certain level of proficiency, I decided to experiment with mathematical curves for my bowl designs, combining my interest in mathematics and the belief that the best solutions are often associated with simplicity.
I was intrigued by the notion of combining the simplicity of the classic curves derived from conic sections with the complexity of wood.
Conic section are curves…‘produced by the intersection of a plane and right circular cone.
Depending on the angle of the plane relative to the axis of the cone, the intersection is a circle, an ellipse, a hyperbola, or a parabola,’ to quote the New Encyclopaedia Britannica.
If the plane is perpendicular to the axis of the cone, a circle results; if it is tilted slightly, an ellipse; if it is parallel to the axis, a hyperbola; if it is parallel to one of the surfaces of the cone, a parabola (Fig.1).
The beauty of these curves, for me, derives from the simplicity of their construction.
Chuck, say, a 150mm cube of wood and turn to a cone.
Then, using a bandsaw because of its narrow kerf, chop a piece off.
You now have one of the curves mentioned above — which one depends on your angle of cut.
It is worth carrying out this simple exercise to disprove the common fallacy that the shape derived from chopping off the top of the cone at an angle is egg shaped (the assumption is that the end closest to the base of the cone has a larger radius because the cone is larger there), in fact both ends have the same radius, it's an ellipse — try it.
The Conics are just the beginning of the story of beautiful curves that are useful in the design of turned wood.
An excellent book on the subject,A Book Of Curves is by E H Lockwood.
Quite early on I discovered that a perfectly spherical surface for the inside of a bowl reflects the light well, the whole surface seems to light up evenly.
Using this phenomenon I evolved a design that appeals to my sense of aesthetics, based on simple sections of a hollow sphere, and shows off the grain of the wood to best advantage.
An additional criteria used in the design was to produce a heavy feel, something that I associate with quality.
The basic design is quite simple.
Sketches and models were made to determine the ideal range of ratios for the diameter/thickness (D/T) and diameter/rim width (D/R).
A good working set of ratios is between 7:1 and 10:1 for both D/T and D/R.
With ratios below 7:1, the result is rather dumpy, greater than 10:1 is tending towards a platter.
The heavy feel is produced by the thickened rim.
I know that there is nothing particularly original about this design, Ray Key's book,Woodturning and Design has a close approximation (minus the rim), as does Richard Raffan's book Turned Bowl Design (again minus the rim).
My contribution is using perfectly spherical surfaces, adding the rim but retaining the outside spherical surface.
I've also provided the equation for quickly producing the template.
Now for the maths.
Please don't switch off at the mention of maths, if you can use a  calculator, you an do this.
The problem is for a given blank diameter and thickness, what are the radii of the spherical surfaces of the inside and outside of the bowl?
Fig 2 shows the problem sketched out using a much smaller D/T ratio than 7:1 to keep the drawing clear; the theory works for any ratio greater than 2:1.
The diagram is a cross section of the bowl blank with the desired circular arc superimposed.
From this we can derive a right angled triangle, ABC, whose sides are determined by the thickness and diameter of the blank and radius of the circle we want to find.
A bit of school maths solves the problem.
In fact, the solution is available by the use of nothing more complex than Pythagoras's theorem (the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides).
The variable we want is the radius of the circle R .
We know the diameter of the blank D and its thickness T .
After writing down the initial equation, we need to rearrange things to get R by itself and defined in terms of what we know —D and T .
Invoking Pythagoras applied to the right angled triangle we have:—
For those of you interested in such things, when the ratio of the diameter to thickness equals 7.46:1, the radius of the circle is equal to the diameter of the blank.
The effect of this is that you don't have to bother calculating anything — if you use 1in thick material, 7½in diameter.
Of course this works for other dimensions too; it's the D/T radio that's important.
To illustrate the theory I used a piece of English walnut 430mm diameter by 50mm thick.
This piece of ‘The Storm’ timber was felled in Hull and has been air drying ever since, I hope I have done it justice.
Subtracting 3mm from the thickness for the foot recess leaves D=430mm and T=47mm, a D/T ratio of just over 9.5:1.
This is towards the top of the range and gives a cross between a platter and a bowl.
A 7:1 ratio gives both a pleasing shape and sufficient depth to be useful as a fruit bowl.
Plugging these values into the equation gives a radius R of 515mm.
If the wall thickness is 5mm then the inside radius is 510mm.
I chose a rim width of 45mm.
A few more practicalities — I use an expanding collet chuck and use either 2in or 3½in jaws for this sort of work.
I decided to use the 3½in collet, which fixed the outside diameter of the foot at around 120mm.
I produced a full size drawing on cartridge graph paper and cut out templates for both inner and outer surfaces.
Compasses capable of drawing arcs of this size are rare, so I used a thin strip of 7x1mm mahogany I had left over from some modelling, it's available at most model shops and is excellent stuff, if a trifle expensive.
Small holes were drilled at the appropriate places, to accept the pin of a large thumb-tack and the sleeve of my mechanical pencil.
The rest is straight-forward faceplate turning.
The blank had a 100mm wide slice of sap wood that was more pronounced on one face.
I selected this as the top side and mounted a 3½in faceplate ring to fit my collet chuck on it.
The first operation on the lathe is to mark the inside and outside diameters of the foot, then cut in to the correct depths, measured from the template, using a parting tool.
The 3mm collet recess is undercut slightly, the bottom finished dead flat.
The appropriate template was then used to produce the outside profile.
I favour a 1in roughing gouge for this operation, kept well sharpened and with the bevel rubbing it is safe, fast and very little sanding is required: you also have about four times the cutting edge available compared to a half inch bowl gouge, more time between re-grinds.
The final act before sanding and polishing is to undercut the outside of the foot.
When sanding take care not to round the sharp edges.
With the faceplate removed, the piece reversed, refitted onto the collet the inside is turned and finished to the template.
It is essential that the inside surface is smooth and flowing, any ripples are exaggerated by the reflections from the spherical surface.
Again, the 1in roughing gouge does most of the work, followed by the half inch bowl gouge for the inside edge of the rim.
To remove any trace of ripples I use a freshly sharpened 2in wide, shallow curved scraper for the final skim.
Again do not round over the sharp edges when sanding.
I removed the completed bowl at this stage and finished with three coats of Danish oil, the first two applied within a half an hour of each other, the final coat applied the next morning and allowed to dry until the evening.
Each coat is liberally applied, allowed to soak in for five minutes and then carefully mopped dry — on no account leave liquid oil on the surface to dry.
A final polish with Briwax and there we have it — a product of theory and practice and, hopefully, a thing of beauty.
A final mathematical note — only 11.5% of the original blank remained, the rest was expensive shavings.
Templates made from full size drawings (top left).
The foot and the recess for the chuck are turned before shaping the bowl (above).
Checking the shape against the template (top right).
The outside turned with a 1in roughing gouge (right)
A 2in wide shallow curved scraper used to remove ripples left by the gouges (right).
A steel rule keeps the templates flat as the inside shape is checked (above)
Fig. 1 Conic sections
Fig. 2 The theory Fig.
3 Bowl cross-section
THE SLICE IS RIGHT
Walter Last has spent some time developing a system for cutting the compound angles on the segments for his turning
Segmentation is not an innovation in woodturning, and has been known for some time.
Various methods have been published previously, usually with a difference in the method used and a challenge to try the new approach.
This method is just such another challenge.
It is the result of experiments with ideas that come to me from time to time, and developments into another way of segmenting to produce a slightly different result.
The problem with making deep segmented turnings from flat stock is that the joints are at compound angles.
You could make complicated calculations, but an alternative is to set the blade for cutting the segments flat, but to hold the plank at the desired angle as you cut.
For this I use a fairly simple jig and accurate setting of the saw.
The type of material used for this project is up to the whims of the individual, and may run from a soft cedar to the more expensive hardwoods, or a combination of woods, depending on the grain pattern and colour contrasts desired.
This method of segmenting, however, can produce a finished article using the cheapest of materials.
The design can vary from a flat saucer, to various shapes of bowls and lamps, using planks available from any timber yard.
Planks ¾in thick are recommended for use on projects up to 10in diameter, but larger work will require wood 1in thick or greater.
Normally my stock is 3 in. wide but the maximum depends on the capacity of the saw and the angles.
A patterned effect on the finished product is achieved by turning each segment so that the grain runs in the opposite direction to its neighbouring segments.
In every case the most critical part of the whole process is the accuracy of the segment cuts made in the beginning.
For a 12 section bowl each segment must be cut with the blade angled to exactly 15°.
A trial and adjustment session with your saw will be necessary to arrive at the setting of exactly 15°.
Before proceeding with segment cutting, a check of your saw settings can be made by cutting twelve segments in scrap material.
When these are assembled they should form a flat plate or circle with no gaps or spaces between each segment, and an even circumference.
Remember when cutting the stock material that it must be turned over after each cut to obtain the correct angles on each segment.
Once the correct setting is obtained, a file mark or paint slash on the control wheel, with a corresponding mark opposite on the saw frame, will permit a return to this setting quickly with a minimum of wasted time.
Although any number of segments may be used in forming the circle by varying the degree of the cut, I use 12 for the following reasons: using a lesser number creates sharper angles between segments and more material has to be turned off to obtain a smooth rounded surface.
This results in much thinner material at the joints and greater possibility of separation of the glue due to less surface contact.
Using a greater number of segments will create more surfaces to glue and a greater difficulty in assembling the segments to form the ring.
The use of any number other than 12 segments will also require the calculation of new cutting angles for the segments to form the circle.
As I use a three-jaw chuck, if the number is not divisible by three, the assembled segments will be difficult to grip.
To obtain uniform segments I use a cutting jig to hold the plank at the desired angle.
With the saw blade set at 15° the jig locates in the mitre fence slots of the saw table, sliding back and forth over the blade.
An adjustable stop on the back of the jig keeps all the segments the same size.
Working with squared parallel sided stock means that the fence in the bottom of the jig keeps the plank at the correct secondary angle.
Before cutting the segments a line is drawn on one face, to make assembly easier.
When putting the ring together I alternate the segments marked face up then plain face up to create a balanced pattern.
The banding clamps and three-jaw chuck I have, are home made.
The banding clamp was constructed using standard metal package banding tape 1¼in wide with metal blocks welded on and threaded (see band clamp in  Hands On WW/Oct.91/p.1060 ).
In use the banding clamp is adjusted before gluing to a diameter slightly larger than that of the assembled segments.
I use water resistant PVA adhesive, as end-grain gluing is involved and you want to get the best bond possible.
Ordinary PVA will work, but I have had best success with the water resistant.
If your bench top or surface used in the gluing process requires protection, a sheet of melamine on a thin backing to prevent curling, or polythene can be placed under the work being glued.
This will facilitate the removal of surplus glue or spills.
A stop-gap method could be the use of a sheet of waxed paper under the work before gluing.
After the glue has been applied to both edges of each segment and they are assembled, the banding clamp is dropped down over the assembly and tightened until the joints close up tightly.
Some pressure must also be applied to the top of the assembly to keep them from lifting apart.
I use an old 10in saw blade, pressed down by a clamping device.
A drill press could be used, pressure applied then locked in position.
While the adhesive in the clamped assembly sets a circle of material is cut from the same thickness of stock, slightly larger in diameter than the opening in the bottom of the segment ring just assembled.
This circle is glued to a metal faceplate using a hot melt glue.
Not having a glue gun I put small bits of hot melt glue in a ring around the face plate and heat them with a heat lamp until the glue melts and a bond with the circle of wood can be made.
When set, the segment ring is removed from the clamp and mounted in the three-jaw chuck.
The jaws are independent so the ring has to be centred carefully to permit turning with the removal of the least amount of material.
The bottom opening of the segment ring is cut to 45° to accept the bottom panel.
The bottom panel, mounted on the faceplate is turned to fit the prepared opening in the segment ring, then glued in place without removing the faceplate.
Once the bottom has set, the work is again mounted on the lathe, on the faceplate still attached to the bottom.
At this point a number of options are available, using the same technique, a ring of vertical segments can be assembled to give the work depth.
Match up with the inside edges (the vertical ring having a slighter smaller outside diameter to compensate).
Stagger the segments so that the joints of one ring do not meet the joints of the second ring segments.
Another option is to create a second segment ring similar to the first and reverse it, or it can be attached to a vertical ring if depth is desired.
This assembly creates a basket effect with a small opening at the top.
The final finishing through the small opening will challenge you skill, using the tools to complete the interior turning.
A further finishing touch can be made with the flat plate used to test the saw setting angles, turned to form a lid.
Of course, the top opening of the bowl will have to be turned to suit the lid.
A lidded box made from two rings of segments (above) the lid from a flat circle of pieces.
An angled ring gluing (below) the strap clamp working with downward pressure from the press.
Setting the segment cutting jig (above).
Hot-melt glue on the faceplate under the heat lamp (left).
Two angled rings clamped together on the lathe (below).
Re-softening hot-melt glue with the heatlamp, to remove the faceplate from the bowl (below).
Fig. 1.
Compound angle jig Fig. 2.
Assembling segmented rings.
Fig. 3.
Independent jaw chuck All dimensions in inches
AMBROSIA IN ELY
Terry Porter visited John Ambrose in his workshop in Ely to discover some of the secrets of his success
John Ambrose should be well known to visitors to recent Woodworker Shows, as he has won rather a lot of medals in the turning competitions.
Not content to remain secreted in his workshop he is founder and president of the Ely Guild of Woodturners, and he was one of the demonstrators at last year's seminar of the Association of Woodturners of Great Britain.
John's work is  characterised by its clean design and accuracy.
He has probably spent as much time developing his tools as he has turning wood.
John has devised a system of tooling for turning nests of bowls, which he presented at the Loughborough seminar and has been taken up and will be marketed in the near future.
More recently he has produced a series of pieces decorated with routed fluting, such as the box he entered in the national box competition and a citrus fruit squeezer with a range of ribbed heads.
For the routed turnings John uses a large old Dominion pattern maker's lathe, and a large three-jaw chuck.
The lathe has been modified and now has an indexing system with a range of divisions with 16, 32 or 60 stops.
A router is fixed to the cross-slide of the lathe for some operations, other jigs are used for spherical work.
To demonstrate his methods John turned a sphere, then decorated it with routed fluting.
First a boxwood blank was turned to a cylinder.
The pattern maker's lathe made fast work of this, the cutter mounted on the cross-slide and wound down the length of the wood.
Then the sphere turning jig is mounted on a pivot clamped between the bed bars.
The pivot is positioned directly below the centre of the sphere, and once cutting the sphere has started then  neither blank nor pivot should be repositioned.
The sphere cutting jig is pretty simple, consisting of a steel bar with the tool post mounted on it.
The end of the bar drops over the pivot, and the cutting tool is advanced as the sphere is shaped.
The tools for both turning the cylinder and the sphere are similar to metal turning tools, with cutting tips brazed onto square bars.
The operation does involve some hand turning.
The shoulder on the waste restricts access to the headstock side of the sphere, but this is cleared out of the way with a gouge, using the sphere cutting tool as a rest.
For cutting fluting on the sphere neither blank nor pivot are moved, but the cutting jig is replaced with a routing jig.
The router John uses is in fact a Makita laminate trimmer, which has long collar so is easily mounted in the jig.
It is not a very powerful machine, but the cutting of fluting does not require excessive horsepower.
To eliminate any chance of the lathe being turned on during routing the router is plugged into the socket which the lathe normally uses.
The number of flutes cut on a shape is dependent on its diameter and the width of the cutter, and the number of indexing plates available.
John uses a V-groove cutter, so the width of the flute is variable to a certain degree, dependent on the depth of cut.
With the diameter of the sphere measured all you have to do is return to your school days to do a bit of geometry involving pi (πD), which will give you the circumference.
This is then divided by whichever of the indexing numbers you have to give the width of the flutes.
Before cutting the flutes John added a refinement by moving the pivot very slightly.
This meant that the flutes were full width at the base of the sphere, but taper down on the top.
If the centre point of the router cutter is coaxial with the workpiece the flutes will finish on the same spot on the top of the sphere.
If however the cutter is slightly off the axis, which is in fact most likely, the result is a swirl effect on the top.
Cutting the flutes is a longer process than making the sphere, each flute is cut then the work rotated by hand to the next stop, and the next flute cut.
And the whole fluting process may have to be repeated to refine the design.
For decorations like fluting close grained hardwoods must be used, like box or pear, to avoid breakout and fluffy edges.
Parallel fluting on the side of a cylinder is relatively simple when you have a lathe with a cross-slide and an indexing arrangement, like John's.
But even then patience and accuracy is required.
John Ambrose has been turning for many years, delighting competition judges and spectators with his originality and precision.
Though he could have stuck with any one of his developments and made a reputation, he is always looking for some new challenge on the lathe.
Boxwood holds the details well on the jewel box (above and above left) and a citrus squeezer with different sized heads (left)
Ball turning jig in action (top) a router then cuts the flutes (above).
The finished fluted ball exercise (below)
John Ambrose has adapted the cross slide on his lathe and added an indexing head for cutting flutes with a router (above right)
NEWS
THE NEWS MAGAZINE OF THE WOODWORKER FELLOWSHIP
Don't be shy!
Let us have your news, stories and small ads
Dear Member,
As you will see from the contents of this issue of your newspaper, we have an attractive schedule of events for the immediate period with some sensible offers.
Members' news items are relatively scarce, so please don't be shy, we have space for your own special story of what, how and why…
Remember the W.F.N. is pleased to advertise your ‘smalls’, for sale, or wanted, and it is a free service to members.
Any member with the inclination to organise a group, please contact Beverly Laughlin to arrange contacts within their area.
Those with special techniques or a particular knowledge of equipment, tools, materials, etc., are also invited to inform us for inclusion on our list of contributors/demonstrators.
You will probably already know that I have taken over Nick Gibbs as editor of Woodworker magazine.
This means among other things, that the ties between the magazine and the Fellowship will be reinforced with the assurance of collaborative potency for the future.
Watch out for a ‘members only’ competition event coming soon!
Membership is climbing steadily, but there is always room for more, so please encourage your craftsman friends to join you.
There is safety in numbers folks….
Please keep in touch.
Yours sincerely,
ZACHARY TAYLOR Co-ordinator 
‘a bit of a window’
Fellowship member Bob Taylor tells how a project for his local church turned into a spare time job.
SEE PAGE 2
Courses and queries
CHARLES CLIFFE needs little introduction having been known to you for his splendid writing and demonstrations.
Some members however, may not know that he runs courses at his workshop at Bexley Heath and as a Fellowship member has generously offered a discount to any members attending one of his polishing courses.
Please contact Charles Cliffe directly quoting your membership number at .
ONE OF the most highly respected members of the Woodworker Fellowship, STAN THOMAS, in his usual warm hearted, and caring way has offered to respond to  members' queries concerning aspects of cabinet making and joinery.
Contact Stan by telephone or letter at   and maybe with prior warning you may be invited to drop in to chat to him personally.
•Remember to quote your membership number in all communications.
APRON ANTICS
NOT everybody uses the woodworking apron for their original intention, as we learn from some members, and some complain that the pockets become filled with chippings if used for woodturning.
This is not really improved if worn backwards or upside down but try it inside out!
Of course, your neighbours won't see the Woodworker Fellowship logo so you will need to acquire an additional cloth badge to show off your membership.
For those who get involved with up-front lathe work, how about a smock as a New Years gift?
The Woodworker Fellowship is delighted to offer three sizes — 42″, 44″,— 46″ at £16, £17, and £18 respectively inclusive of postage and packing which offers several pounds discount on the retail price.
Use the order form on the back page.
JOIN THE FELLOWSHIP TODAY!
DETAILS ON BACK PAGE
CHURCH WARDEN'S CHALLENGE
Fellowship member Bob Taylor (not related to the Coordinator) entered into a project of some restoration at his local church.
His wife Glenda told us about it, and together we bullied him into writing this report.
‘My wife and I have lived in Fenny Drayton for a number of years, it is a small village on the Leics/Warks border about half a mile from the main A5 trunk road.
The village consists of about 200 or so houses, a pub, a Post Office cum general shop and a small but lovely medieval church.
Having set the scene, it was about 2 years ago whilst I was being taken for a walk through the village by our springer dog, that I happened to meet up with the Church Warden who, after passing the time of day suddenly said ‘Ah Bob, you do a bit of woodwork, don't you?
Well do you think that you could make a ‘bit of a window’ for the Church?’
I said that I thought it would be alright and made arrangements to meet him again at the church on the following Saturday afternoon to discuss details.
‘What we have in mind’ he said ‘is some panelling to cover the raised floor of the bell tower and some windows about that to give visual contact between the bell ringers and the vicar.’
The idea being to make the bottom of the bell tower into a small vestry.
‘However’ he added after describing the ‘bit of a window’at a later date they would like to add panels down each side and a pair of doors to complete the vestry.
(I thought to myself ‘Quite right…much later…!) all to match existing panels and moulding in the church.
Confidence
Having replied Yes with much confidence in his initial request I did not think I could take two steps to the rear, so I hastened to add that the job would take me some considerable time as ti would be my spare-time/spare-time job, consoled myself with the thought that it was the first time that I had made anything to be used in a church, so it would be a challenge.
The warden pointed out that time was not of the essence as it has taken since 1977 to strengthen the bell tower and rehang the bells, all carried out by villagers, needless to say I did not visualise the same time cycle for my part of the job.
On walking back home from the church, I found myself thinking very deeply about what I had let myself in for, but foremost what my wife would say, I seem to recall something like ‘I suppose that's my lace bobbins even further down the work sheet.’
After deciding that oak would be best for the job, it was then to work, carefully measuring the arch and getting it all drawn up to scale.
The drawing, along with various sketches of joints and fixings was sent to the church architects whose only alteration was to square up the curved top member to line up with the bottom panels.
I started by making a plywood template of the arch, the top of the pillars being the baseline of the template, the radius to be fitted and assembled in the arch.
The curved members were made up from 2 pieces of 5x2 in. sawn roughly to shape and joined by double mortice and tenon, as was used at the top to join the curved members and the centre glazing bar.
the loose tenons at the top were laminated to give maximum strength.
After gluing, the  curved members were cut to shape on the band saw then finished with the spokeshave.
True radius
The inside curve was worked as a true radius, with the outside following the shape on the template.
The next stage was to make the bottom frame which would contain the fielded panels.
I started with the bottom rail as this would also have to be rebated on the bottom face to accommodate doors and top fixing for side panels.
Mitred housings with  mortice and tenon joints were used.
To cut the housing I had a tungsten carbide cutter  ground to 90 degrees inclusive, because as purchased it was not cutting exactly at 45 degrees.
I was then able to use this in my Elu96 router along with templates I had made to cut the mitres on both rails and uprights  (the router seems to be the most important part of my kit these days).
The mortice  joints were cut with the router using a template which located in the housing, I then assembled the bottom frame dry using home-made cramps.
This assembly was then put into the curved members which were clamped in place on the templates in order to mark position of joints on curved members.
As can be seen from the photographs the housing joints between the top rail and curved members are not 45 degrees so these had to be cut by hand and not routered, this also applied to the tops of the glazing bars.
Having cut these joints I was then able to assemble the curved members onto the bottom frame and check the fit on the template which hopefully would leave a 1mm gap all round.
It was!
I then marked out and cut the joints for the glazing bars.
The two right hand and two left hand glazing bars, where they joined the curved members were cut with mortice joints, then loose tenons glued into the top of glazing bars at right angles to housing to remove problem of short grain on tenons.
The most awkward joints were where the glazing bars met the curved members, any-way, after cutting about fifty joints in all, rebates for glass, slots for fielded panels, mouldings on corners and moulded glazing fillets the time had come for a complete dry assembly of the members.
I thought I might have problems here, because the inside mitre on the four outer glazing bars created a slight undercut for assembling the curved outer members in the horizontal plane, but I found that by locating the curved members on the bottom rail first, then swinging the tops in on a slight curve, they just clicked into place nicely.
Problems
While cutting rebates and slots, two problems occurred on the curved members, firstly the glazing rebate because of the weight and length of curved members and the limited table size of my router, I decided to take the router to the wood and not the wood to the router but then realised I would be machining away the surface I wanted to guide the router on i.e the inside face which is the true radius.
It was at this point I decided to modify the router fence with two aluminium blocks which allowed me to work off that face but beneath the area I wanted to machine away.
During this operation the housing joints were filled in flush with soft wood blocks to make an uninterrupted inside curve.
The slot for the fielded panel at the bottom of the curved members, needed a template which rested on the wood at each end of the slot to which I glued and screwed a 50 x 50 batten, the slot being routered to the correct depth in the middle and slightly oversize at each end.
Assembly check
The next move was to check the assembly on the template, all seemed to be correct, just a short walk to the church, then try the dry assembly in situ.
I must admit as we walked through the churchyard, my wife and eldest granddaughter came along to help, I felt a little apprehensive, but there was not need, fortunately it fitted perfectly.
From that point on it was downhill all the way, fitting and fielding panels, gluing the assembly, treating with wood preservative, umpteen coats of wax polish.
It was finally fixed in place and glazed just in time for a christening and the first flower festival to be held for a while.
The church did look really beautiful, and the flower arrangements were first class.’
The windows in the bell tower.
A fitting end to Bob's project
A pair of ‘kneelers’ for the church project
Stage two — the side panels and doors — are as yet in the ‘thinking mode’.
Watch this space!
Fellowship Travel Offer
Join our '92 tour of Sweden
We are arranging a tour of Sweden for later in 1992 and the provisional itinerary will be as follows:
DAY 1
Travel to Stockholm by Air Travel to Aby (close to Norrkoping) and visit TORS HANMARE AB, who manufacture AGDOR axes.
Overnight in Aby.
DAY 2
Travel by train to Vaxjo and visit the Sjobergs factory at Stockyaryd.
Sjobergs manufacture traditional carpenter's work benches and furniture components.
Overnight in  Stockyaryd .
DAY 3
Visit a forestry site and timber mill in Myresjo and house building factory.
This could be done in one area.
Travel by train to Orebo.
Stay overnight.
DAY 4
Visit Tormek at Lindesberg, the wet grinding and sharpening system for all types of woodworkers.
Travel by overnight train to Mattmat which is on the same latitude as Iceland and Alaska.
DAY 5
Visit Nobex who manufacture Mitre Saws.
Take plane back to Stockholm with afternoon city tour including a visit to the incredible Wasa Museum.
This is woodworking on a grand scale.
Return flight back to U.K. or optional extra day in Stockholm, for sightseeing or a visit to a local woodworking group.
This tour is being arranged in collaboration with BriMarc Associates together with Woodworker Fellowship.
Will those members interested in participating please contact Co-Ordinator Zachary Taylor as soon as possible.
Fellowship Book Offer
Making Dining Furniture
Vic Taylor
The book offer for this issue is a collection of original designs of dining furniture, traditional and modern.
Each project is fully described and illustrated, with a cutting list included.
36 different projects include, Jacobean, Lancashire and Heppelwhite pieces.
For beginners and experts.
A hard-backed, well illustrated book of 144 pages.
Retain price at £15.95 which Woodworker Fellowship is offering to its members at £10.50 including post & packing!
How's that for a saving?
Your letters
Write to:
Dear Zachary,
It was a pleasure to meet and be enrolled by you at the W/W Show and I'm glad that the Fellowship is going to be just that.
Chaps like me taking to other chaps like me.
At the show I was disappointed by the few craftsmen apparent and felt that the show was overly commercial and really the domain of the equipment seller, indeed the price for the floor space and stands etc. would almost guarantee this.
I hope that if in the future the Fellowship organizes a show, the overriding principle will be that woodworker can meet with woodworker and see work examples and demonstrations that will inspire and stimulate the imagination of us all.
I would still want to be able to see and buy items of equipment, not to do so would be an opportunity wasted, but I can to my machinery stocklist to see most of what I saw at the show.
To say again I applaud the principles of the Fellowship and believe it will only benefit us woodworkers who often feel alone and rather estranged sometimes, and to say on a personal level that our conversation with you at the show remains the most memorable point of the whole affair to my wife and I. 
Dear Zachary,
Congratulations on your efforts to revive what was the Guild of Woodworkers.
I enjoyed the courses with Charles Cliffe, and Roy Sutton and hope your efforts will provide future memorable courses.
One thing withe Guild, was some small, very useful peel off stickers which could be used on letters, envelopes or on the work produced.
I also still have the old Guild car stickers in my car.
Best wishes with your endeavours.
Boddy beautiful
John Boddy's Fine Wood & Tool Store Ltd, is equated with extensive stock, good service, and sound advice.
Sometime in March (date to be agreed) there will be a Woodworker Fellowship visit for a day which will provide another opportunity to meet and discuss individual problems and projects.
John Boddy's is located at Boroughbridge, North Yorks.
This will be a mid-week event, please make contact with the coordinator if you wish to join in, quoting your membership number with your request.
TRADITIONAL CRAFTS
TRUSTING THE WOODLANDS
Trish Walters visits the Greenwood Trust in the Shropshire woods, to find traditional crafts and modern manufacture using woodland resources
Shropshire's Ironbridge Gorge contains around 1,000 acres of natural woodland, comprising ash, hazel, oak, hornbeam and cherry, and by the early 1980's, like many other woodlands throughout the country, it had become badly neglected.
When Telford Development Corporation began to coppice the woodland for conservation purposes, a group of countryside wardens, foresters and a lecturer in 3D-design got together and decided that something should be done with the waste timber.
And as a result of this meeting, the Greenwood Trust was founded and its brief was to encourage the effective management of the woodlands and to develop products which would make use of home-produced timber.
That was seven years ago.
I went to see Development Officer Gerwyn Lewis to hear about their latest venture, but first we talked about some of the woodland traditions.
How, I wondered, had the woodlands become so neglected in the first place?
It seems that the tradition of working in the woodlands in this country went into decline after the First World War, when most of the skilled labour did not return.
At the same time, the onset of mechanisation meant that many of the hand skills had become redundant.
Up to then, the woodland was considered to be the precious part of the countryside, and was often fenced off to stop people getting in.
It was a valuable resource, and a very busy place, where you would find the like of charcoal burners and thatchers, basket-makers, besom squires, and chair bodgers.
The Greenwood Trust now manages the woodlands of the Ironbridge Gorge, using the particular of coppicing with standards.
Gerwyn explains, ‘You take a block of woodland, and leaving the occasional tree known as a standard, traditionally used for building timber, you cut the rest down to ground level and remove all the waste timber completely.
Eventually, from the root system, you get a huge resurgence of young timber.’
At one time, this tradition was widespread throughout the country, and was the accepted way of managing the woodlands.
In order to make use of the wood, the trust has revived some of the old woodland skills in an innovative way.
The trust is based at the restored railway station at Coalbrookdale, and on the site they have constructed a traditional cruck-framed barn, in which they hold a series of leisure courses on traditional crafts.
Four years ago, there were four courses, which Gerwyn ran single handedly.
This summer, the brochure offers 17 courses which cover a diversity of traditional crafts, from coracle making to pole-lathe turning, and charcoal burning to chair bodging, each with their own specialist tutor.
‘In providing these courses,’ Gerwyn tells me, ‘you're making it dynamic.
You can go to museums and see the work of old craftsmen, but when they die, that's it.
We say, right we can put this skill into young hands.
For instance, there are now 20 or 30 people locally who know how to make a coracle, so the tradition won't die.’
And versatility is important.
‘I think essentially, previous generations had more than one skill under their belts, and they were able to change from one skill to another and go with the seasons.
Nowadays, we've become very restricted and very specialised in our skills.’
It is difficult to generalise about the kind of people who come on the courses, but they all arrive with serious intent.
People who come on a timber frame construction course, for instance, will come along because they want to use the technique, perhaps for an extension to their home.
And since the courses are all practical, everybody leaves with something, whether it be a coracle, a willow basket or a carved bowl.
If you wanted to find one word which would characterise the work of the trust, you would probably say it is traditional, but Gerwyn's latest venture is decidedly progressive.
The trust has been fundraising to build a modern workshop alongside the cruck-framed barn.
This workshop will be dedicated to making modern products from the woodlands, and while materials for its construction will be traditional, the building techniques will be modern.
It is hoped that work will begin on it later this year.
Design by Dr Ibrahim Alkhattat, the workshop will be built from small diameter larch poles contained in steel shoes and held down with a tension wire.
‘It will be a modern space, with modern machines for developing modern crafts,’ explains Gerwyn.
The immediate plans are to use this workshop as a centre in which to train craftworkers.
Typically, one of the products could be Shaker boxes, using green unseasoned timber cut into very thin pieces.
They are quite quick to make.
‘We are just building this up at the moment,’ Gerwyn explains, ‘so we sell locally to shops.
We're expanding the range, so there's bags of variation there.
We're doing the oval shaped box, as well as little round ones which can be used for flower decorations, and boxes with handles.
‘I know it sounds modest,’ he concedes, ‘but what we need is to do one thing well.
It's only too easy to say, oh yes, we can make chairs…we can make kitchens and three-piece suites…grand pianos, anything you like, but what we have to do is to pick out one thing that we think is a winner and actually do that properly.’
It was religious communities such as the Shakers who developed automation in manufacturing.
‘They are responsible for a lot of the machine tools that we have now,’ Gerwyn says, ‘and they developed them because they didn't believe in wasted labour.
They thought that to do things by hand when a machine was available was waste of human resource, and so they put a lot of their energy into products that could be made by batch production.
We've inherited this tradition of good simple products made by machine, and I feel that this is a good philosophy for the Greenwood Trust to work on.’
We are living in a world of dwindling timber resources, and Gerwyn believes that we are going to have to turn back to using what's around us.
‘It's bringing the woodlands back into production that's important,’ he says.
‘It's generating the right kind of timbers, and then making the right kind of products from it.’
Rounding courses
A recent one-week course run by the Greenwood Trust at Ironbridge left some outstanding impressions with those taking part,writes Perter Anstey.
The course focussed on the making of stick chairs, using the traditional rounder planes reintroduced by the late Fred Lambert and described by Bob Wearing in Woodworker for February 1988.
It was run be Peter Hindle, who now makes the planes, and was remarkable for its practical ‘hands on’ approach, which called for concentrated effort, some students working up to 8pm at night!
The group was a cosmopolitan crowd, including a retired orthopaedic surgeon, a catering manager, and an ex-policeman, as well as a housewife with almost no previous experience of woodworking.
All succeeded in completing a basic chair structure within five days — one person even made two.
What was most impressive was the quality of the teaching and the suitability of the rounder planes for beginners, who quickly find that, using a simple mechanical turning head to rotate the work, they can produce high quality results with a minimum of supervision.
The planes therefore seem to have a real application to the teaching of woodwork in schools — always assuming the survival of a traditional craft approach under today's educational policies.
The traditional cruck-framed barn at the centre of the Greenwood Trust's traditional crafts
Students on a timber framing course surrounded by coracles and pole lathes and overlooked by modern architecture
WINDSOR CHAIR
HANDING IT TO WINDSOR
The selection of Windsor chairs at the Chair Museum in High Wycombe provided inspiration for Jonathan Chappell's lath-back version, which, he explains, can be made using only a lathe, bandsaw and hand-tools
Windsor chairs have been produced in the Chilterns for well over 200 years in an enormous variety of types: double bows, smoker's bows, lath backs and scroll backs to name but a few.
They all had a solid elm seat, turned or occasionally cabriole legs and employed steam bent, shaped and turned components in their construction.
Almost any native hardwood was used (with often more than one type in a chair).
Yew provides us with some of the best examples, and anybody interested in the traditional construction techniques might like to visit the Chair Museum in High Wycombe.
The fact that they were produced in large numbers as piece parts without machinery makes this an ideal project for a woodworker with limited equipment, who is looking for a challenge.
You will need access to a lathe, bandsaw and planer thicknesser for this particular chair, though the latter is optional.
There is no steam bending involved.
When I visited the museum, I looked at all of the chairs and was given permission to handle and try them for comfort.
I found this lath back by far the most comfortable and remarkable, its size being ideal for my build.
The original was made in 1890, by the owner, while working in a High Wycombe factory.
It was the custom at that time that when a worker married he was allowed to make himself a chair in the company's time; this was called a ‘marriage chair’.
The seat is elm and the other parts are made of various fruit woods; mine is of cherry.
My timber all came from local sources: by pure chance one timber yard had recently acquired an elm butt and I purchased the first board (a huge log sawn into 2in boards — the real stuff).
I decided that the best course of action was to do my turning first, followed by the seat, then the shaped components and finally jointing and assembly.
I had done some turning before and with help and advice I soon felt quite competent turning out my arm stumps, legs and stretcher rails.
Do the arm stumps first as they are the smallest pieces.
This means there is less vibration on the lathe and they are the least wasteful if, as I did, you have to throw the first couple away.
When turning the ends to be jointed, it is worth having a piece of scrap wood on hand with the appropriate holes bored into it to check for a snug fit.
I  used 22mm for legs and 16mm for all the others.
Once complete, the turnings can be wrapped up and put away.
Remember, some timbers such as yew and cherry darken across a freshly cut surface with the passing of time.
If a natural finish is preferred, this may cause problems if further adjustments or cleaning up are needed at the assembly stage.
My seat went through a large 16in thicknesser, but if you do not have access to one, don't worry.
By the time it has been adzed out, you will only have a small edge to clean up as well as the underside.
Many old chairs have rough sawn undersides to their seats.
These were the irregular marks of a pit saw and, to me, are a feature showing the hard work which went into them, reminding us of how lucky we are to have modern machinery.
For may chair, it was unacceptable to leave the regular tooth marks of a wide bandsaw.
If you have to join your seat out of more than one piece, remember to keep the loose tongue or biscuits near to one edge so as not to cut through them when adzing.
The grain in this seat runs from front to back.
Bandsaw out the seat leaving a couple of ‘ears’ to screw it to the floor or a baseboard.
These will be removed later and the outside spokeshaved and scraped to a good finish.
When adzing, wear sturdy footwear (preferably boots to cover your ankles) and thick trousers.
The adze is a heavy tool and can do a lot of damage.
The technique is to stand across the seat and swing the adze backwards and forwards between your legs removing a shaving every time, without digging into the wood and stopping the tool.
Work within your marks, leave a small lump in the middle at  the front and go as deep as you feel is necessary.
You will find that your own backside is a good point of reference.
After adzing, a finer finish is achieved on the bench using a travisher; a tool similar to a spokeshave with the blade rounded along its length.
Finally scrape and sand to finish.
If these tools are not available, a large carving gouge may be used or any other technique which you feel happy with (has anybody tried an Arbortech Woodcarver?).
Rout or spokeshave the 45° angle on the underside and put the seat to one side until the shaped parts are ready.
Thickness and bandsaw the back and arms, only rounding the fronts of the laths at this stage.
It is best to joint the arms and the uprights before any rounding off takes place.
The top rail is a little more complicated.
The curve of the top rail is masked out on a 4in board and the bandsaw table is then tilted so that the depth of cut is 135mm.
This provides the compound curve necessary so that the rail curves around the back and upwards at the same time.
It also has the effect of raising the back edge so as to hide the joints at the bottom and provide a start for the graceful curve down from the top edge.
The ends can be shaped and the whole thing cleaned up, but leave the top edge until the jointing is complete.
The items I joined first were the stretcher rails using a 16mm spade bit in a power drill (a brace and bit works equally well) with the help of a friend across the bench giving me a line up against a sliding bevel.
Feel free to use a pillar drill if you prefer but this method worked perfectly well on my chair.
Once the legs were jointed I turned the leg and stretcher assembly upside down on to the bottom of the seat and from this I could mark the centres to be drilled and set the bevels to repeat the process.
All of these holes are blind.
The mortises for the back components should be cut on the bench with the underframe removed.
The side uprights have joints going through the seat and are to be wedged later.
Again use a sliding bevel to check that the angles are correct and carefully scribe in the shoulders by hand.
The mortises for the laths are cut slightly undersize with a round front edge so that a slight taper is planed on the laths for a good wedge fit.
The top rail is joined to the uprights by dovetail housings and to cut the mortises for the laths I found that it was best to hold the rail in the vice with blocks to pack it out and then to cut down vertically.
The rail is then placed on the uprights.
The laths can be marked and cut to length and then fitted as before.
The mortise and tenon joints of the arms into the back can be marked out more conventionally with a mortise gauge working off the inside surfaces.
The main feature of this joint is the recessed shoulder to avoid the feather edge that would inevitably occur at the top of the arm.
Once satisfied with your jointing, the arm stumps can be fitted, front first, then the back.
The front goes straight through the seat to be wedged, and is dowelled through the arm.
This provides the strength for the chair to be lifted by its arms.
The parts can now be shaped up, the final cleaning up around the joint areas to be done after gluing.
The underframe, legs and seat are all glued together in one operation.
Once the stretcher rails are together, loosely locate them in the back legs and drive the legs home into the seat and the rails into the legs.
Finally, the front legs can be eased into position, the seat and rails and the whole lot driven home.
If your joints are good, no cramping is necessary but I did put a couple of webbing cramps on my chair just to be on the safe side.
Leave this overnight before doing any further work.
Before assembling the back, it is best to level the feet to avoid any undue stress on any particular leg.
Assembly of the back is also carried out in one operation.
Firstly, the side pieces are wedged in place, then the laths, top rail and arms, wedging and dowelling where appropriate.
Hey presto!
One chair.
Windsor chairs were finished in a variety of ways from paint to no finish at all.
Because mine was a reproduction, I tried to reproduce the finish using a cellulose-based NGR stain and stipple.
Stipple is a black messy stuff that is used to simulate the years of dirt and grime that can build up in all those little nooks and crannies.
It is liberally applied and the surplus wiped off with a rag and left to dry.
I then gave my chair a french polish finish with a touch of red stain in the polish to give a rich red/brown appearance.
If you would like to be more ambitious with your finish, try the methods described in the ‘Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture and Furniture’by J C Loudon, first published in 1833: ‘These chairs are painted but more frequently stained with dilute sulphuric acid and logwood; or by repeatedly washing them over with alum water, which has some tartar in it; they should afterwards be washed over several times with an extract of Brazil wood.
The colour given will be a sort of red, not unlike that of mahogany; and by afterwards oiling the chair and rubbing it well, and for a long time, with woollen cloths, the veins and shading of elm will be rendered conspicuous.
Quicklime slaked in urine and laid on the wood while hot, will also stain it a red colour; and this is said to be the general practice with Windsor chair manufacturers in the neighbourhood of London’.
If you survive the quicklime and urine, you will have chair to be proud of, that will give pleasure for years to come.
The crest rail to upright joint (below) and turned leg (bottom).
Wear boots and heavy trousers for adzing (right)
Fig.1 Elevations and plan of Windsor chair All dimensions in millimetres Side view Front view
RECLAIMED TIMBER
TIMBER NOT TREES
The destruction of old furniture and structural timber is as horrendous a thought to many woodworkers as the burning of the rainforests.
John Revell reports on how to salvage timber, and finds a selection of sources
We hear so much talk these days about green issues.
Quite rightly, the environment is of great concern and we all have to make our own contribution to its survival no matter how small.
So instead of automatically going to the timber yard and buying new timber, how about looking around at potential sources of second-hand timber and giving the poor old environment a helping hand?
For a start, there is always the ubiquitous skip.
In my opinion, a skip should be regarded as an open invitation to selective plundering.
If it's a private job, then it's only common courtesy to have a word with the owners of the house and ask if they mind you helping yourself to an old door, or whatever.
They're sure to give the go-ahead, otherwise they wouldn't have chucked it out in the first place.
And in any case, the more that people take out, the more can be put in.
But all the same, it is more neighbourly to ask first.
Most builders are conscious of the value of old fireplaces, bricks, chimney pots and doors that are in reasonably good condition.
But they seem to be curiously indifferent to timber in the shape of components.
Wrecked doors, for example can yield good timber for rails and stiles, even if the panels are useless.
The reverse also applies.
Timber used on building sites for construction purposes such as shuttering and formers is usually discarded — often just burnt.
It's likely to be poor quality but selectively ripped up, it can often be utilised for carcasing or backing.
At the worst it can be used for making a cold frame or compost bin.
Demolition sites used to be wonderful sources of all manner of material.
These days you have to be lucky.
If you're that dedicated, you'll know what to look for, but don't expect to find oak panelling or a Grindling Gibbons carving.
Like an old master in the attic, their value is quickly recognised these days.
But before borrowing a hard hat and having a rake around, be sure to ask the foreman's permission.
Offer to pay for anything that takes your fancy.
And remember, legal experts could argue endlessly and at great expense about ownership and what constitutes ‘Larceny’.
So the rule is never take without asking.
Council rubbish tips are also very interesting.
They can be useful sources of old furniture, usually chipboard based but quite handy for shelves or backing.
However, it has to be said that local authorities on the whole frown on totting and many ban it outright so caution is advised.
Over the last 20 years, many churches have become redundant.
The Victorians used nothing but the finest timber in their churches and it's absolutely first class for recycling.
The backs of pews were generally panelled which makes them super for panelling a whole room if you can get the quantity, given a bit of designing skill and reworking.
Some were even made of pitch pine.
Usually, these are sold in bulk to a dealer who can handle large quantities but it is worth trying to do a deal on smaller quantities if you can get in on the ground floor, so to speak.
Keep an eye on the local press and as soon as you hear of a church closing, make an approach to the vicar as soon as possible.
Also, there are churches whose old fashioned pews have been ditched in favour of an open plan arrangement to go with their swinging guitars and electronic keyboards.
So again, go and have a word with Father Patrick as soon as you hear of plans to update.
As many of the older shops close down, it is often possible to buy old-fashioned shop fittings.
Few are suitable for use as furniture and so prices are often quite cheap.
They can be a useful source of good oak or mahogany.
Watch out for closing down sales.
Go and make an offer for any fittings you like the look of.
There is no shortage of demolition contractors offering second-hand materials for sale.
To keep the cost of transport down, you need to find a local company.
Look in Yellow Pages under ‘Demolition’.
This category includes dealers who buy and sell salvaged materials.
Provided you are careful to extract all the nails and cut around woodworm and any other defects, reclaimed floorboards can provide excellent timber for pine furniture.
At as little as 10p a foot run ex site, it's worth a bit of work.
When cleaned up, they are still a full ¾in; joists as much as 8in deep and 2½in wide.
Very meaty!
One specialist in this field, Solopark near Pampisford just off the M11 in Cambridgeshire, claims to be the country's major centre for reclaimed building materials and period architectural items.
Spread over four acres or so.
Solopark is a delight for the salvage buff.
Steptoe never had it so good.
Every type of brick, tile and chimney pot can be found along with wrought iron gates, lead covered domes, window frames.
On the timber side, an enormous selection of old doors ranging from the 17th century to Art Deco is available.
A veritable graveyard of old beams charts the history of the timber framed houses in England like a parish register.
Woodworm and beetle infestation makes much of it unsuitable for structural work but treated and cleaned up with an adze to give it the right period look, much of it could be put to good decorative effect.
Salvaged church timbers, even complete roof trusses are much in evidence.
To demonstrate its suitability for recycling, there are many examples of seats, settles and fireplaces made from reclaimed timber also on sale.
Truly an Aladdin's cave.
Grandiose redevelopment programmes of redundant docks around the country have resulted in the demolition of numerous old warehouses.
Many of these were built before the use of RSJs and have therefore yielded substantial quantities of high grade structural timber such as pitch pine; possibly even some of the old Archangel white.
Due to its size, it can only be handled and converted by merchants with large enough bandsaws.
But they advertise in Woodworker and offer a complete cutting service to your specification so send them your cutting list and get a quote.
Many towns have their salesrooms and weekly auctions.
Prices are generally too high for any quality furniture that might be suitable for reworking.
It's mostly chipboard based, but I did buy an old 60s wardrobe quite cheaply which I cut up to make a computer work station.
Fortunately, the interior was lined with a good quality mahogany veneer so I was able to reverse it and seal and polish it.
What is often worthwhile is the odd bundle of mouldings and carvings salvaged from an old building which is auctioned off in a single lot.
In our local saleroom only last week, I saw a length of egg and dart moulding about 5ft long done up in a lot with some ogee moulding.
If I could have thought of a use for it at the time, I would have stayed and bid.
And while you're raking around keep an eye out for old tools.
I picked up a Record vice in good working order — the 52½ model with quick release — for £18, a mere quarter of today's price.
You might be surprised at what finds its way into the auction rooms as the old generation of carpenters and joiners die off.
An important tip here is if you see a nice piece of period architecture or carving which you fancy and buy, get it home and design around it.
Make a feature of it, don't just stick it into a piece of furniture and hope it will look right.
There is one final source that's worth a mention.
Hands up those who can remember when teachers had proper desks.
A friend of mine recently found a beauty that became redundant and unloved when a local school closed down.
It has drawers on one side and a cupboard on the other with a couple of those shelves that pull out for putting your mug of coffee on.
She wanted it to use as a desk and gave £5 for it.
The top is all scratched and ink stained.
Genuinely distressed — almost an antique — a bit of living educational history.
She is a writer and loves it just as it is.
What a bargain!
But the point is that it's solid oak.
As good quality seasoned oak, it's worth a fortune to a cabinetmaker.
So watch out for schools closing down or local government offices refurbishing.
They love chucking out the old to buy new and will almost pay people to take it away.
And finally, one great advantage of all old timber — it is fully seasoned and will never move again.
It seems to me that the only waste is not to recycle it.
•Pew Corner (WW/April 91/p.376)have a selection of timber sections from churches.
They can be contacted at The Old Dairy Workshop, Trelawny, 108 Binscombe Lane, Godalming, Surrey,(0484) 426485.
ROCKING HORSES
CARVING DOWN THE MANE LINE
Anthony Dew,of the Rocking Horse Shop, introduces the first principles of making rocking horses by carving the head
The fully carved Victorian style of rocking horse has been a favourite child's plaything for generations.
Genuine old rocking horses of real quality are increasingly hard to find and are likely to be very expensive, as are the products of some of the very fine contemporary rocking horse makers who work in various parts of the country.
The answer, for the doting parent or grandparent who is also a woodworking enthusiast, is of course to make one yourself.
Making a ‘real’, fully carved rocking horse is a fascinating challenge and some may think a rather formidable one.
But our experience has shown that given a modest toolkit and a few carving gouges, persistence and enthusiasm for the project, almost anyone can achieve a highly satisfactory result.
However, one aspect of the making that does tend to give prospective rocking horse makers the most apprehension is the carving of the head.
It is in the carving of the head that the expression and character of the horse is defined, and the rest of the making will seem quite straightforward by comparison.
Choose a close-grained timber that is knot-free and relatively easy to carve.
Jelutong is ideal (though perhaps a little too soft for some tastes), as it basswood.
Many traditional rocking horse carvers used pine, particularly yellow pine, and sycamore, lime or mahogany can be used successfully.
I have seen rocking horses carved from much harder timbers such as elm and oak, but be aware that the carving will be hard work if you choose one of those.
We are going to attempt the head and neck parts for a medium-sized rocking horse (fig. 1).
The shapes for the head and neck are bandsawn from 2¾in-thick timber.
Note that at the back of the head an allowance of approx. ½in has been left, and this is bevelled with a smoothing plane so that when viewed from above the head will lie at an angle to the neck.
All the best rocking horses have heads which look to the left or right, and this angling is well worth the small extra trouble since it does give the finished horse a little more ‘life’.
The head is glued and dowel pegged to the neck, using the cramping noggin on the neck and the waste piece cut from the front of the head to facilitate positioning the cramps.
You will need one or two sliding friction cramps or a small sash cramp for this.
The two ear and eye pieces are cut from ½in-thick timber and are glued on as shown at either side.
These give the extra thickness needed for the flare of the ears, the eyebrows and the cheekbone.
When the glue has dried the carving can commence.
I recommend four gouges (No.30, ⅜in.
spoon gouge is also useful for hollowing out the nostrils etc…
) And you will need a coping saw and some abrasive paper.
Before cutting into the wood make a few pencil guidelines, to indicate the position of the cheeks, nostrils etc…(fig.2), and a centreline (which will help you to keep the symmetry) and the shapes of the ears.
The dashed lines on the neck in fig.2 show the positions for the neck muscle blocks, but neither these nor the small triangular piece at the base of the neck are fitted until after the head has been carved and fitted to the body.
Cut away the waste wood around the ears with the coping saw, and use the 1in shallow gouge to further shape them and the nostrils so that they angle back at each side.
Always cut well on the waste side of your pencilled guidelines, you can always cut a bit more off  if need be, but it is more problematic to have to try to glue bits back on if you have overcut.
On the other hand a common fault with beginners is the tendency to carve too little away, to be too tentative.
It is not necessary to use a mallet when carving the head, though your tools should be kept good and sharp.
Work steadily, cutting small amounts off each side in turn to keep the symmetry.
Use a paring action with the gouge, pushing the cutting edge across the wood with your thumb and slicing pieces off.
If the cutting edge digs in then stop immediately and cut from the other direction, or there  may be danger of a piece splitting away.
You will see where the corner between the top of the nostril and the eyebrow is rounded over and the cuts are made both from the nostril up and from the eyebrow down, forming a gradual taper down towards the mouth in the process.
With the head on its side make a series of cuts straight in with the corner chisel along the curve of the cheek, and cut away the waste on the neck side of the line.
The ‘cheekbone’, which runs down from just behind the eye, is cut back so that it will finish up barely in proud of the surface.
Below the cheek the head tapers down and is rounded off for the lower jaw; the mouth finishes up about 2¼in wide.
Cut the teeth with the corner chisel.
If you are confident in the carving you can also carve in a tongue.
Hollow out the nostrils with the ½in gouge.
The ears must be hollowed out and round shallow recesses cut, in which the glass eyes will later be set with woodfiller.
Sand the head smooth with 120 and then 180 grit paper.
Note the way the nostrils and eyebrows project, and the shape of the ears.
The dapple grey is course the traditional and most popular finish for a rocking horse, but other painted finishes are also used; plain black or white, palomino, piebald etc…
Natural wood finish, stained, lacquered or varnished and polished can be most impressive.
Bear in mind however, that if you opt for a natural wood finish your mistakes will all be seen!
Carving a wooden rocking horse is a most satisfying project, though you may well encounter frustrations on the way and times when you think it will never come right, but it will, eventually.
As one of my old art lecturers used to say ‘Work through the point of despair and it will come out right’.
Even if disaster strikes, as it seemed to for one student of mine who dropped her nearly completed head on the concrete floor and an ear snapped off, don't let it worry you unduly.
We simply glued the broken ear back in place and she carried on to a successful conclusion.
Look forward to the time when you rocking horse is all finished and you will be able to stand back and watch your children or grandchildren happily riding this beautiful heirloom that you have created, and you will be able to say with pride and satisfaction, ‘I made that.’
A wide range of full-size plans for several different sizes and styles of rocking horse, a video and a book on ‘Making Rocking Horses’,and a huge range of accessories (glass eyes, manes and tails, stirrups, bridles and saddles etc…) for rocking horse makers are available from The Rocking Horse Shop, Holme upon Spalding Moor, York, YO4 4AB.
Just send two 1st class stamps for illustrated catalogue and price list.
Finished head and rounding above the nostrils (above).
Note taper down to mouth
Cutting back the cheek lines (above) is best down with the head tilted on its side
Rough shaping of the ears with a coping saw (below left) and the complete horse (below)
Fig.1 Head and neck parts
Fig. 2 Carved head and neck
Nose job: carving out the nostrils with a ½in gouge
WORKSHOP
Bob Wearing's WORKSHOP
As students, immediately after the war, we found tool production very limited and not always of high quality.
Quite basic tools were in short supply.
The less common had been discontinued.
This meant that we were obliged to make quite a number of our tools.
The two described here were of that period and were most likely to have been inspired by our invisible mentor, Charles Hayward, the then editor of The Woodworker.
The mitre template has since come back onto the market, but at prices like £18-£20 and considering the relatively small amount of work in which it is employed, some readers will no doubt feel that they could spend that money more profitably, so will want to make their own.
The stopped chamfer template has not to my knowledge been marketed, readers who want one will just have to make their own.
It is often said that the ‘old men’ did everything the hard way and in the past such templates tended to be cut from the solid.
These templates, as can be seen, are built up.
Almost any hardwood can be used, but I consider actual hardness to be more important than the particular species.
I used very dry elm.
If underseasoned wood is used, shrinkage will naturally take place and this will reduce the mitre angle to less that 45°.
First, produce sufficient material to thickness which will make either one or both templates.
Cut into lengths a little longer than the finished size then glue together.
Two things must be carefully watched.
All traces of glue must be removed from the inside corner, and the corner angle must be checked to an accurate 90°.
When dry the assemblies can now be gauged exactly and planed to width.
Mark out the details of the angled surfaces with a knife and gauge, taking great care.
Use either the 45° facility of a combination square or stand the workpiece on a truly flat surface and use a 45° set square.
I am suspicious of the accuracy of a pre-set sliding bevel.
Saw off the waste close to the lines, then finish the outside angles by planing, and the inside angle by careful paring with a very sharp chisel, which must be wider than the thickness of the material.
The outside ends may be finished on a disc sander.
If this is done carefully, the ends of the stopped chamfer template could be used as a useful small square.
In use always choose a wide chisel making sure that it sits truly flat on the face of the template.
The slightest raising of the handle will cause a cut in the template.
Cramp the template to the workpiece.
Well made, these templates will outlast their maker.
Fig.1 Mitre template All dimensions in inches
Fig.2 Stopped chamfer template
Fig.3 Stopped chamfer
MARKETING
THE UNITED STATES
While woodworkers lament the difficulties of selling wooden products in Britain,Edward Hopkins reports on an initiative from the USA where producers have created their own gallery
The biggest problem that most woodworkers face is nothing to do with trees.
It is selling.
Creative people are often not business minded, and they do not even want to acquire such skills as self-promotion and image-projection, let alone scrabble about with the nitty-gritty of lucre.
This is why so many businesses fail and, almost worse, why so many linger on with the craftsman under-rewarded and never developing his full potential.
The Northwest Gallery of Fine Woodworking in the heart of Seattle (Washington, USA), has addressed his problem head on and, by the look of its showroom, has solved it.
The first round goes to the woodworkers.
The range of work is enormous.
The perfectly functional stands alongside the purely artistic, the geometric by scoops of windswept contours.
Some designs are subtle refinements, others strong statements.
Prices are from five to five-thousand dollars.
There is one clarion constant.
Quality.
The quality of line and construction and finish is simply first-class.
The second round goes to the organisation because this is not just another shop.
Ten years ago a small group of woodworkers formed a co-operative, modelled on a  halibut fishery in Alaska.
The early days of duty-rotas and frequent meetings were pretty chaotic.
Then came a change.
The manager, Teri Roose, tells me of Cheryl Peterson's professional management skills:
‘Cheryl has been involved with the gallery almost from the beginning.
She started as the first hired staff person.
She was a friend of several of the members and the one who convinced them that they needed to hire professional sales staff.
I really think that's what has made the business stay, and go as far as it has.
A lot of co-ops fold because they're trying to run it themselves as well as putting out the products.’
There are now 34 owner-members each with one share and one vote, paying a membership fee for the first six years.
They meet quarterly and elect directors who meet monthly.
Cheryl Peterson oversees the whole operation.
The gallery charges 25 per cent commission on sales, and 15 per cent on referred commissions,(with higher rates for the work of non-members) but although the showroom is successful, Cheryl Peterson is not greedy.
‘We're not trying to make any money.
That's what makes it work.
We want to pay the bills and keep going, but only a minimal percentage goes to the gallery operation out of each sale.
The idea is for the business to go directly back to the woodworker.’
Teri Roose aims to stock at least one piece from each of the 34 members, more from most, and a changing exhibition in the front of the shop for just one.
Floor space is always a problem and the gallery has spawned another showroom in Issaquah, 10 miles east of Seattle.
Now the co-op has closed its ranks and refuses to expand.
The perceived value of fine work by established makers is rising: one piece remains on exhibition although sold — it has been bought as an investment.
I ask her if the members are making a living.
‘That's a good question!
I think now most are.
A lot of them also have spouses with very good careers and that makes a big difference.
Most of them aren't doing cabinetry (joinery) any more — a lot of them started out that way.
Some still are, just because they enjoy it.’
For none of the members is this their only source of income.
Some exhibit elsewhere, work to other commissions or produce high-quality joinery.
Some have been trained, others are self-taught.
Some now teach.
A few work part-time or have even slipped into retirement but remain members out of goodwill.
It is their business and they will so what they can to make it succeed.
The third and clinching round in the drive to sharpen the point of sale, goes to the staff.
In a city where courtesy and friendliness are disarmingly natural, they offer even more.
Most have degrees in art and are either artists or historians.
‘We all have a great love of what's going on down here — which also helps.’
I suggest to Teri that should have a share.
She laughs.
‘Well I do in a sense.
The gallery is very important to everybody involved in it.
If I'm not making money at my own artwork, then I can help somebody make it from theirs.’
She smiles as she meets the first customers of the day.
Goodwill and professionalism seem to come to her easily.
•Northwest Gallery of Fine Woodworking, 202 First Avenue Seattle, Washington 98401 USA,(Tel. 206 625 0542).
Drawer detail from Richard Wrangle's desk in walnut (above).
Ed Steckmest's Gallery Rocker in maple graces the front window of the gallery (left).
Colorado panorama is a marquetry picture by Lynne Buss (below).
One of Vaughn Burlingham's seabirds is made from buckeye burr (Aesculus octandra ) and osage orange (Maclura pomifera)the other is in Californian redwood burr (Sequoia  sempervirens )and maple.
LAMINATING
RUNNING ROUND
Dave Preece introduces a technique for laminating that he first used when shaping the curved runners on a sled
You can build a dog sled, can't you?
It was more a statement than a question.
I'm not sure how the connection was made, in that I build canoes (wooden canoes-wood — dog sled?), but a week or so later I had a set of plans.
Then there was a Siberian Husky Club training weekend.
And an arrangement to build a sled for the race held in Aviemore each year.
I did look at the plans, and a book on sled dog training, and promptly forgot the whole thing until reminded two or three weeks before the promised delivery date.
So, out came the plans, very sketchy, but a start.
A day trip to buy 1½in ash, and half a day in a neighbour's workshop machining left me with a large number of very small sections, and another project underway.
Building the form takes two sheets of 18mm Sterling board and about half a day.
Runners, handlebar and brush bow need to be laminated or steam bent.
Bending the runners is simple enough using a development of a technique, which I first came across in the book ‘Bark Canoes and Skin Boats of North America’(Adney & Chapelle, unfortunately long out of print), used by American Indians to form the stem pieces on birch bark canoes.
A saw cut in the end of each 1½ × ¾in ash runner has the effect of reducing the thickness of each piece to be bent, in effect allowing a laminated curve attached to a solid straight runner.
This does, however, reduce the thickness of the finished runner by the thickness of the saw cut (or cuts), a possible disadvantage overcome by using the gap-filling potential or epoxy resin mixed with a filler.
The only real problem with this way of bending is that if one of the ‘laminations’ does break you lose the whole piece rather than just the one lamination!
So, careful bending, then clamping to the form overnight to give the finished runners.
This seems a useful technique for any situation where a straight piece of wood ends in a curve, since it maintains the visual integrity of the piece and is considerably easier than laminating a number of separate strips (which I always find slide out of line while being clamped).
The handlebar and brush bow presented greater problems.
Starting with three 1½ × ¼in strips of ash for each I intended to steam the strips, clamp to the forms for a few days, and then glue and reclamp.
Unfortunately, not having the propane burner I have previously used to generate steam I was not able to heat the box well enough.
After five hours with paraffin primus, and still no steam, I gave up.
An Add-A-Plane jig and planer I normally use to thickness ¼in strips for canoe building provided the answer.
Reducing the brush bow strips to just less than  in allows then to be bent without steam, and using dry wood allows the use of epoxy rather than Cascamite, retaining adequate strength despite the thinner strips.
Strips for the handlebar unfortunately have to be thinner, just under ⅛in, because of the tighter radius bends.
Although the strength would be adequate, the thinner section makes the handlebar uncomfortable to hold.
A few additional strips around the top edge allow a strip of cedar to improve the looks, and shaping to improve comfort.
While the handlebar, brush bow and runners are setting, attention turns to the rest of the framework.
Front and rear stanchions are mortised into false runners and connected by crosspieces.
Nothing unusual or difficult here, except for the angled mortises for the front stanchions (and later for the handlebar) and the lashed joints.
In use the sled comes under considerable stress.
It has apparently been found that rigid bolted or glued joints will break in use.
This is overcome by cutting a slightly ‘loose’ joint and lashing with nylon cord.
In the cross-piece this is achieved by lashing through a hole in the cross member and around the outside of the stanchion.
In the stanchions the lashing is a figure of eight through a hole in the stanchion and two eye bolts fixed into the false runners.
Judging the tension in the runners is difficult for someone who doesn't drive a sled, and the lashings are probably best left easily untied for a final adjustment by the user.
The ‘expert’ opinions of my first sled varied between those who thought that the joints and lashings were too loose, and those who thought them too tight!
The final fitting of the brush bow, handlebar and basket is straightforward, the only final difficulty being the ⅝ × ⅝in ash stringer on each side of the basket, which needs to be steamed.
I did these with an old Hoover pipe and a kettle!
The last two jobs are arguably the most important, the finish on the runners to make the sled slide, and the brake to make it stop.
The runners are commonly shod with a plastic material such as P-Tex (used in ski bases).
Not having access to small quantities of such materials (they come in 8x4ft sheets) I resorted to a coating of epoxy containing a graphite powder, which gives a hard, slippery, scratch resistant finish.
The brake is simply a length of ¾ × 2½in oak tied under the sled, with a steel ‘claw’, and elastic shock cord to hold it up off the ground.
The final finish was my ‘favourite’ for outside use; ‘Deks Olje No. 1’, a proprietary marine oil which gives a pleasant, easily maintained matt finish, with excellent protection (for a gloss finish ‘Deks Olje No. 2’can be applied over the oil).
So how was my first sled?
Generally it was well received by those in the ‘know’.
Several modifications have been suggested, but unfortunately there was no snow for the Aviemore race so I've yet to see it in action.
I do however have orders for two more with slight modifications.
That must be a good start!
Fast working enthusiasts might complete a sled in time to enter the trans-Pyrenean dog-sled race on 25 January 1992.
Over 300 miles of gruelling mountain routes should test a sled thoroughly.
Handlebar and brush bow sterling board formers (left)
Fig.1 Sled side elevation
Fig.2 Runner points
The former for the runners needs to be built up to 72mm thick
Fig.3 Formwork
Lashing of mortise and tenons produces a combination of strength and flexibility
HANDS ON
in association with STANLEY
Modified Workmate
I wished to work on some panels too wide to be held in my Workmate, which has a maximum opening of about 10½in.
The solution was to fit bars, one extending to 18in and the other to 22in.
They are held on by recessed bolts and wing-nuts, and are easily removed.
By fitting one central bar, three-point cramping is possible, catering for irregular shapes, while still providing adequate support.
Quick chamfers
I recently needed to mark off lots of chamfers, and found this a tedious job with a combination square on the end-grain.
A rummage in the scrap box revealed an odd plastic corner plate.
A simple adaption using a machine bolt lets me mark many chamfers, on different dimensions.
Stationary sanding
Woodturners often need to power sand a stationary item.
Stopping such a piece from rotating can be difficult, especially with both hands on the drill.
It must be remembered that the work often has to be moved by hand.
I now use a wooden wedge between the chuck and the bed bars, held at the back by an elastic band so that you can rotate in one direction but not the other.
Sizing dowelling
The time honoured method of knocking dowelling through a sizing plate to produce a smaller diameter can result in a shredded mess unless a number of reducing holes are used.
There is, however, a simpler method.
I use a piece of ⅛in mild steel plate, with each hole countersunk to half depth.
I then make about nine teeth around the edge, with a three-square needle file.
The dowel is gripped in a drill, and run at low speed, with a little pressure.
The finish is much better, and more material can be removed.
STANLEY TOOLS are offering £100 worth of Stanley and Rabone tools as shown below for the winner of our Hands On competition for readers' tips.
We hope that woodworkers of all types will send in their wheezes, as readers are always asking for more tips.
We also award a Stanley tool worth £15 to runners-up who have their ideas published.
To enter type (if you can) your tip and send it with clearly annotated drawings, and name, address and telephone number to;.
This selection of winning tools includes a 20in Short cut saw for each runner up.
These professional quality hand saws have an aggressive tooth formation which allows them to cut efficiently and smoothly on both forward and reverse strokes.
The ‘needle’ like teeth of this fast cut tooth formation have a third cutting angle at the tip, which, combined with variable set, allows swifter yet more accurate cutting.
Short Cut saws also benefit from wide hardwood handles for comfort and maximum cutting control.
Two additional lengths are also available in the range in 15in and 24in sizes, as well as a file for resharpening.
Stanley do not necessarily endorse the tips on these pages.
WINNER
Neat lid stay
SMALL LID stays for small boxes are difficult to find.
I devised this one for a sewing box with a 50mm deep lid.
Two holes 8mm diameter are drilled, in the ends of the box and the lid, about 35mm from the line of the hinge pins.
The hole in the box end is about 100mm deep.
A 90mm length of bicycle brake cable inner, complete with end nipple, acts as the lid stay.
The nipple is held in the lid hole with a brass pin.
The lid hole can then be filled; I used car body filler, as it doesn't show much on completion, but a close colour match to the wood might be preferred.
The other end of the wire is passed through a hole in the brass plate and soldered into the end of a short piece of brass rod.
The plate is let in to the edge of the box over the other hole, and screwed in place.
The wire is guided down the hole as the lid closes so it doesn't obstruct anything inside the box; lift out trays can be fitted flush to the top of the box.
Storing Woodworker 
An easy way to keep your Woodworkers on the bookshelves, without looking out of place is to make a box for each year.
This makes pinpointing the one you want much quicker.
Made from hardwood and softwood they cost about £1.25 each to make, and take no time to construct.
While recommending this tip for storing your favourite magazine, we feel commercially obliged to bring to everyone's notice the binders which Woodworker sells for £6.95.
They too look good on the shelves, though are not made of wood.
WW
TOOLMAKING
FORGING AHEAD
Don Weber explains how to make a box bellows, which is essential for any home toolmaking.
In conversation with Lloyd Walters he describes how to produce charcoal
Sometimes the woodworker must step over the boundaries of his craft into the workings of other craftsmen.
As tool users, we must not only sharpen and reshape our tools, but sometimes make special ones for particular projects.
I got into blacksmithing for lack of traditional tools and hardware for the pole lathes I build.
Without explaining blacksmithing in any great detail (there are many fine books on the subject), the following will demonstrate how to make a simple box bellows and a woodframed forge which need only be lined with firebrick or clay.
They are the basic implements needed to make or reshape your specialised tools.
My box bellows is a hybrid cross of very old Japanese and Chinese bellows designs.
It can easily be assembled in a day or two.
The ancient artisan, with his innate ingenuity, would design and build a simple forge by digging a trench in the ground with a piston bellows to create the draft for his charcoal fire.
Not only was metal shaped in this fire, but even the smelting of fine high carbon steel for sword blades was accomplished on the simple arrangement.
The box bellows is a simple device which can be constructed by anyone with rudimentary carpentry skills.
It is a rectangular box about 36in long, 12in wide and 18–24in high.
The inside of the bellows is a chamber divided by a partition to create an air intake chamber and a manifold which equalises the air pressure.
By the use of one-way valves, air pressure can be built up in each chamber in turn by moving the piston back and forth.
ON each push and pull stroke, air is drawn into the piston chambers through flapper valves in the ends of the box.
Forced into the manifold through another set of valves, the air, now under pressure, is equalised and directed to the forge through a tube called a tuyère.
The volume and speed of airflow, and the resulting temperature of the coals, can be precisely controlled by the rate of pumping.
The piston itself is a rectangular hardwood board 15½ × 8 × ¾in, which moves back and forth in the first chamber, pushed (or pulled) by two ½in rods which extend through one end of the bellows and are joined on the outside by a handle.
To attach the wooden rods to the piston, drill ½in holes to a depth of ⅜in into the piston head in line with the push rods.
Drill a small hole the rest of the way through the piston and countersink the opposite side to accept brass screws to attach the piston to the push rods.
In this way, the piston can be disassembled, along with the rest of the box, for transport.
A  in slot can be cut around the edge of the piston head to accommodate a gasket.
I made my gasket by inserting a core of ¼in thick leather into the slot, with a soft leather cover to act as a seal.
The Japanese used animal fur (raccoon, usually), while the Chinese used feathers or several folds of soft paper for the seal.
Sheepskin or even fake fur will work as long as a tight seal is made between the piston and the walls of the chamber.
It is important that the piston moves smoothly back and forth, so great care should be taken to smooth and even varnish the inside of the box so no air can leak past the piston head.
The box I built was basically a crate with a dividing wall and a piston inside.
I used ⅜in plywood and pine board ripped into 3in widths to frame up the box.
Solid boards would do as well but would make a much heavier bellows.
The plywood is cut first.
Two pieces 11¼ × 16⅜in for the ends, two pieces 16⅜ × 33⅝in for the sides and two pieces 10½ × 33½in for the top and bottom.
These panels are framed up with the 1×3in pine, which is glued and screwed to the rougher face of the plywood so that the smoother A face is on the inside.
The framing on the two end panels is made flush all the way around.
On the side panels, the framing overlaps by 1⅛in so the sides can be sealed over the end panels.
The top and bottom are framed up with the pine overlapping 1⅛in all the way around so these panels can cap the sides and ends of the bellows box.
I cut 2½ × 2in rectangular holes in the end pieces for the air intake, framing them up with the waste from ripping the 1x3in.
The ½in dowels are inserted  into this framing to create a grill to keep the mice out of what makes an inviting nesting box.
A pair of ½in holes drilled in one end of the box accommodate the push rods completes the basic box.
The ½in plywood partition is cut to 33⅝ × 15½in to set into the box 2in from the manifold side and 8in from the piston side.
Thin strips of pine ½ × ½in are nailed and glued into the end panels for battens.
The 1½in valve holes are centred 4in above the bottom of the partition on both ends.
The flapper valves are next.
They are made of  in pieces of redwood or pine.
Soft leather is glued to one face to act as a seal and a  in hole is drilled through the top centre, making it slightly oval with a rattail file.
A ⅜in dowel is set in the ends and the partition over the vent hole and a small brass screw holds a leather washer on to the post to act as a stop.
I used soft leather for hinges, gluing the leather to the flapper valve and nailing the top of the leather to the box and partition.
This allows the flapper valve to open and close with the air pressure.
As the piston is pushed the near side opens and the air pressure closes the back flap.
The far flapper valve in the manifold partition opens, allowing air to pass into the manifold, which presses the front manifold valve closed, allowing the air to pass out through the tuyère into the forge.
The tuyère is a hardwood block in a pyramid shape with a 1in hole drilled in its middle to accept the blow pipe.
This block is dovetailed into the pine framing of the sides so it can be slipped off for disassembly.
I used 1⅛in pipe for the blow pipe.
If there is concern about heat backing up the blow pipe, put a bit of clay between the tuyère and blow pipe as a gasket.
The blow pipe extends from the bellows through the firebrick wall of the forge to the bottom of the fire.
My forge is raised on a table at a height (approximately 30in) comfortable for most Western blacksmiths.
The Japanese prefer to work at ground level.
A stout table is made of rough planking approximately 32in square.
The sides are raised about 8in to contain the fire pit (or trough).
The bottom surface of the enclosure is lined with tin and a 1in-thick layer of fine sand spread over the tin into which the fire brick is set.
A notch is set in the face of the rails and back so long stock can be placed across the full length of the fire.
Because there is no ash pit or fire pot, the ashes can be raked out the front of the forge to clear the fire.
On a shelf to the right (or left, whichever you prefer — simply switch the ends of the bellows if you prefer a left-handed operation) sits the box bellows.
The side walls of the fire brick can be moved in or out  as needed by the type of work proposed, with 10–12in sufficient for most tool work.
Angle iron can be used to cap the side rails for additional protection and a hood could be suspended over the fire to draw off the smoke if desired.
If fire brick is not available to the forge builder, old red brick will do.
Older brick, with its higher sand content, will hold up better in the heat.
If no brick is available, a clay lined tale would suffice.
The idea is to set to work without great expense and elaborate machinery, or under primitive conditions.
Making charcoal in a 55 gallon drum
A conversation with Lloyd Walters recorded at the first annual meeting of the Association of Pole-lathe Turners, September 1990.
‘You find you a 40 gallon drum, chop the top out with a hammer and cold chisel, turn it over and make four big holes with the pointed end of a pickaxe.
Turn it back again and set on three bricks.
Fill it up with small pieces of wood, the drier the better, hardwood about the size of your fist.
Smash it with a sledge hammer; you don't need to cut it, just break it.
Pallet wood will do if it's the right sort of wood.
Branch wood or anything small.’
‘When you've got it full up to the top, splash a bit of Paraffin on the top and put the match to it.
If it doesn't burn, splash a bit more Paraffin on.
There's no one way that's right; whatever works is right.’
‘When it's really flaming away and it's the wood burning and not the Paraffin, then you put the lid back on loose, It may be that you've over-filled, which is fine.
Once you've put the lid on you get smoke coming out all around the edges, well, actually, it's steam you know.
The heat is being kept in by the lid and you get smoke coming all the way around.
It doesn't have to be a close fit, initially you want a very loose fitting so there's a draught.
So once again you feel that it is getting hot.’
‘Then knock the lid down so that the rough edges are holding the lid in place, so to speak, and leave it again for a bit.
Maybe 10 minutes, something like that, it doesn't matter very much.
When you are sure the thing is hot, tip it over.
If it's too hot, use gloves or push it over with a spade and lift the other end up so now the holes that were in the bottom are now on top and there is smoke coming out of them.
The lid stopped it all from falling out when you tipped it over and the air is getting in around the cracks in the lid.
Again you make sure it's lifted up so there is a draft.
It may take  anywhere from two to five or six hours, depending on the wood and the wind and what you had for breakfast and things like that.
When the smoke really thins out, thin blue smoke, rap on it, give the whole tin a shake and it'll suddenly burst into thick smoke for a few minutes and it may do that again for a second time.
Then as it dies down again, seal it all up, stuff mud over the holes and sand or mud or earth all the way around the bottom, so there's no air getting in.
Make sure there's no little pin holes in the rusty tin someplace; cover them up with mud.’
‘If you've done all that during the day, leave it overnight, open it up the next morning and it should be cold.
If it isn't cold you didn't seal it (well enough).
If started early in the morning, it's ready at night.’
What about weight?
‘The wood going into a 40 gallon barrel, it's been about a hundredweight of wood.
I've gotten 20 to 25 or even 30 pounds of charcoal out, but you can't count on that, but of course if you're more serious you can.’
If you had a preference for wood, what would you choose?
‘There are so many kinds of charcoal, for so many different uses, for heating.
The very hottest burning charcoal wood is alder; oak is very good, birch is very good, chestnut and sweet chestnut.
Yes! some woods produce little heat and a lot of ash.’
THE FORESTRY Commission have recently produced a report, instigated by Timber Growers UK, which says that charcoal production could be a viable business.
The survey explains that pulp and mining demands for low-quality hardwoods has recessed leaving the resources for charcoal burning, especially using low grade timber from East Anglia.
Quality clean British made charcoal, specially graded for box bellows forges is available from the Green Wood Partnership, for £6.40 per 8 kilo sack.
Green wood advise this should last you for three days forging, so phone them on 071 249 5848.
This box bellows is a hybrid of Japanese and Chinese designs
The component parts (left) and the bellows next to the forge (below)
Fig.1 Bellows and forge
Fig.2 Box bellows details
The inside of the box bellows (left) and a forge
TIMBER TALK
CEYLON SATINWOOD
Chloroxylon swietenia
Family: Rutaceae
Bill Lincoln recalls the Golden Age of Satinwood
Where it grows
This is a small to medium sized tree which reaches its best development in Sri Lanka, but also occurs in central and southern India.
It is also known as East Indian satinwood (USA, UK); burutu (Sri Lanka); and bhera, behra or mutirai (India).
It grows to 14–15m (45–50ft) tall and a diameter of about 0.03m (1ft) or more, with a cylindrical bole up to around 3m (10ft).
Appearance
There is very little distinction between the sapwood colour and the heartwood, which is a beautiful golden yellow.
The inner heartwood matures into a slightly darker golden brown.
The grain is narrowly interlocked, sometimes wavy or variegated, producing roe or narrow ribbon striped figure on quartered surfaces.
It is often broken striped, or with ‘bee's wing cross mottled’ figure.
Gum rings can develop thin dark veins on flat-sawn surfaces.
The wood is lustrous and fragrant; the texture is fine and very even.
Properties
The average weight is about 980kg/m 3 (61 lb/ft 3 ) seasoned.
The wood should be allowed to air dry slowly to avoid a tendency to surface cracking and distortion, but it kiln dries well with little degrade and is stable in service.
This very heavy, dense wood has high bending and crushing strengths, medium stiffness and low shock resistance, but strength is of little importance for the end-uses of this timber.
It is fairly difficulty to work with machinery and has a moderate blunting effect on cutting edges.
Nailing requires pre-boring.
It is a difficult wood to glue, but it takes stain and polishes to an excellent finish when filled.
The wood is durable, and extremely resistant to preservative treatment.
Uses
Ever since the ‘Golden Age of Satinwood’ this timber has been highly valued and in great demand for luxury cabinets, fine furniture making and interior joinery.
It is excellent for turnery, for the backs and handles of hair-brushes, and is also used for jute bobbins.
It appears widely in panelling in office, shop and bank fittings, and also in the manufacture of traditional inlay motifs, lines and bandings.
Selected logs are sliced to produce extremely attractive decorative veneers with a range of ribbon striped or mottled surface figure.
Timber Talk is an extract from ‘The Encyclopedia of Wood’published by Facts on File.
NEXT MONTH
ON SALE 21 FEBRUARY
March
With spring approaching woodworkers will be contemplating an end to their winter's hibernation.
So what better time to consider you sleeping facilities, and make a new bed, following GUY DALTON'S experiences and design.
For those who want to dedicate the summer months to one project, look no further than ANDREW MAINES' tambour desk, with essential information on the making of the tambour and its ingenious mechanism.
Hopefully the spring weather will bring out the wildlife, but if not JUDITH NICHOLL'S carving of an avocet is worth trying, while there will also be projects and techniques for turners, with a test of the new miniature CARBATEC lathe.
Following our theme this month of reproduction PETER GUYETT starts a series of articles next month on the laws covering furniture designs, reporting on copyright, registration and patents.
JEREMY BROUN will continue his review of cordless tools, and we will be testing the very latest BLACK & DECKER drills.
The March issue of Woodworker will also see the introduction of a new regular column inviting readers to come up with ideas for using offcuts.
All this and the regular selection of hints, tips, advice, news, comment and competitions in Britain's best-selling woodwork