

THE INFINITE VARIETY
It is not difficult to discover an unknown animal.
Spend a day in the tropical forest of South America, turning over logs, looking beneath bark, sifting through the moist litter of leaves, followed by an evening shining a mercury lamp on a white screen, and one way and another you will collect hundreds of different kinds of small creatures.
Moths, caterpillars, spiders, long-nosed bugs, luminous beetles, harmless butterflies disguised as wasps, wasps shaped like ants, sticks that walk, leaves that open wings and fly — the variety will be enormous and one of these creatures will almost certainly be undescribed by science.
The difficulty will be to find specialists who know enough about the groups concerned to be able to single out the new one.
No one can say just how many species of animals there are in these greenhouse-humid dimly lit jungles.
They contain the richest and the most varied assemblage of animal and plant life to be found anywhere on earth.
Not only are there many major categories of creatures — monkeys, rodents, spiders, hummingbirds, butterflies — but most of those types exist in many different forms.
There are over forty different species of parrot, over seventy different monkeys, three hundred hummingbirds and tens of thousands of butterflies.
If you are not careful, you can even be bitten by a hundred different kinds of mosquito.
In 1832 a young Englishman, Charles Darwin, twenty-four years old and naturalist on HMS Beagle, a brig sent by the Admiralty in London on a surveying voyage round the world, came to such a forest outside Rio de Janeiro.
In one day, in one small area, he collected sixty-eight different species of small beetle.
That there should be such a variety of species of one kind of creature astounded him.
He had not been searching specially for them so that, as he wrote in his journal, "It is sufficient to disturb the composure of an entomologist's mind to look forward to the future dimensions of a complete catalogue" .
The conventional view of his time was that all species were immutable and that each had been individually and separately created by God.
Darwin was far from being an atheist — he had, after all, taken a degree in divinity in Cambridge — but he was deeply puzzled by this enormous multiplicity of forms.
During the next three years, the Beagle sailed down the east coast of South America, rounded Cape Horn and came north again up the coast of Chile.
The expedition then sailed out into the Pacific until, 600 miles from the mainland, they came to the lonely archipelago of the Galapagos.
Here Darwin's questions about the creation of species recurred, for in these islands he found fresh variety.
He was fascinated to discover that the Galapagos animals bore a general resemblance to those he had seen on the mainland, but differed from them in detail.
There were cormorants, black, long-necked diving birds like those that fly low along Brazilian rivers, but here in the Galapagos, their wings were so small and with such stunted feathers that they had lost the power of flight.
There were iguanas, large lizards with a crest of scales along their backs.
Those on the continent climbed trees and ate leaves.
Here on the islands, where there was little vegetation, one species fed on seaweed and clung to rocks among the surging waves with unusually long and powerful claws.
There were tortoises, very similar to the mainland forms except that these were many times bigger, giants that a man could ride.
The English Vice-Governor of the Galapagos told Darwin that even within the archipelago, there was variety: the tortoises on each island were slightly different, so that it was possible to tell which island they came from.
Those that lived on relatively well watered islands where there was ground vegetation to be cropped, had a gently curving front edge to their shells just above the neck.
But those that came from arid islands and had to crane their necks in order to reach branches of cactus or leaves of trees, had much longer necks and a high peak to the front of their shells that enabled them to stretch their necks almost vertically upwards.
The suspicion grew in Darwin's mind that species were not fixed for ever.
Perhaps one could change into another.
Maybe, thousands of years ago, birds and reptiles from continental South America had reached the Galapagos, ferried on the rafts of vegetation that float down the rivers and out to sea.
Once there, they had changed, as generation succeeded generation, to suit their new homes until they became their present species.
The differences between them and their mainland cousins were only small, but if such changes had taken place, was it not possible that over many millions of years, the cumulative effects on a dynasty of animals could be so great that they could bring about major transformations?
Maybe fish had developed muscular fins and crawled on to land to become amphibians; maybe amphibians in their turn had developed water-tight skins and become reptiles; maybe, even, some ape-like creatures had stood upright and become the ancestors of man.
In truth the idea was not a wholly new one.
Many others before Darwin had suggested that all life on earth was interrelated.
Darwin's revolutionary insight was to perceive the mechanism that brought these changes about.
By doing so he replaced a philosophical speculation with a detailed description of a process, supported by an abundance of evidence, that could be tested and verified; and the reality of evolution could no longer be denied.
Put briefly, his argument was this.
All individuals of the same species are not identical.
In one clutch of eggs from, for example, a giant tortoise, there will be some  hatchlings which, because of their genetic constitution, will develop longer necks than others.
In times of drought they will be able to reach leaves and so survive.
Their brothers and sisters, with shorter necks, will starve and die.
So those best fitted to their surroundings will be selected and be able to transmit their characteristics to their offspring.
After a great number of generations, tortoises on the arid islands will have longer necks than those on the watered islands.
And so one species will have given rise to another.
This concept did not become clear in Darwin's mind until long after he had left the Galapagos.
For twenty-five years he painstakingly amassed evidence to support it.
Not until 1859, when he was forty-eight years old, did he publish it and even then he was driven to do so only because another younger naturalist, Alfred Wallace, working in Southeast Asia, had formulated the same idea.
He called the book in which he set out his theory in detail, The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life.
Since that time, the theory of natural selection has been debated and tested, refined, qualified and elaborated.
Later discoveries about genetics, molecular biology, population dynamics and behaviour have given it new dimensions.
It remains the key to our understanding of the natural world and it enables us to recognise that life has a long and continuous history during which organisms, both plant and animal, have changed, generation by generation, as they colonised all parts of the world.
The direct, if fragmentary, evidence for this history lies in the archives of the earth, the sedimentary rocks.
The vast majority of animals leave no trace of their existence after their passing.
Their flesh decays, their shells and their bones become scattered and turn to powder.
But very occasionally, one or two individuals out of a population of many thousands have a different fate.
A reptile becomes stuck in a swamp and dies.
Its body rots but its bones settle into the mud.
Dead vegetation drifts to the bottom and covers them.
As the centuries pass and more vegetation accumulates, the deposit turns to peat.
Changes in sea level may cause the swamp to be flooded and layers of sand to be deposited on top of the peat.
Over great periods of time, the peat is compressed and turned to coal.
The reptile's bones still remain within it.
The great pressure of the overlying sediments and the mineral-rich solutions that circulate through them cause chemical changes in the calcium phosphate of the bones.
Eventually they are turned to stone, but they retain not only the outward shape that they had in life, albeit sometimes distorted, but on occasion even their detailed cellular structure is preserved so that you can look at sections of them through the microscope and plot the shape of the blood vessels and the nerves that once surrounded them.
The most suitable places for fossilisation are in seas and lakes where sedimentary deposits like sandstones and limestones are slowly accumulating.
On land, where for the most part rocks are not built up by deposition but broken down by erosion, deposits, such as sand dunes, are only very rarely created and preserved.
In consequence, the only land-living creatures likely to be fossilised are those that happen to fall into water.
Since this is exceptional fate for most of them, we are never likely to know from fossil  evidence anything approaching the complete range of land creatures that has existed in the past.
Water-living animals, such as fish, molluscs, sea urchins and corals, are much more promising candidates for preservation.
Even so, very few of these perished in the exact physical and chemical conditions necessary for fossilisation.
Of those that did, only a tiny proportion happen to lie in the rocks that outcrop on the surface of the ground today; and of these few, most will be eroded away and destroyed before they are discovered by fossil hunters.
The astonishment is that, in the face of these adverse odds, the fossils that have been collected are so numerous and the record they provide so detailed and coherent.
How can we date them?
Since the discovery of radioactivity scientists have realised that rocks have a geological clock within them.
Several chemical elements decay with age, producing radioactivity in the process.
Potassium turns into argon, uranium into lead, rubidium into strontium.
The rate at which this happens can be estimated.
So if the proportion of the secondary element to the primary one in a rock is measured, the time at which the original mineral was formed can be calculated.
Since there are several such pairs of elements decaying at different speeds, it is possible to make cross-checks.
This technique, which requires extremely sophisticated methods of analysis, will always remain the province of the specialist.
But anyone can date many rocks in a relative way by simple logic and by doing so put into order the major events of fossil history.
If rocks lie in layers, and are not grossly disturbed, then the lower layer must be older than the upper.
So we can follow the history of life through the strata and trace the lineages of animals back to their beginnings by going deeper and deeper into the earth's crust.
The deepest cleft that exists in the earth's surface is the Grand Canyon in the western United States.
The rocks through which the Colorado River has cut its way still lie roughly horizontally, layer upon layer, red, brown and yellow, sometimes pink in early light, sometimes blue in the shadowed distance.
The land is so dry that only isolated juniper trees and low scrub freckle the surface of the cliffs and the rock strata, some soft, some hard, are clear and stark.
Most of them are sandstones or limestones that were laid down at the bottom of the shallow seas that once covered this part of North America.
When they are examined closely, breaks in the succession can be detected.
These represent times when the land rose, the seas drained away and the sea bed became dry so that the deposits that had accumulated on it were eroded away.
Subsequently, the land sank again, seas flooded back and deposition restarted.
In spite of these gaps, the broad lines of the fossil story remain clear.
A mule will carry you in an easy day's ride from the rim to the very bottom of the Canyon.
The first rocks you pass are already some zoo million years old.
There are no remains of mammals or birds in them, but there are traces of reptiles.
Close by the side of the trail, you can see a line of tracks crossing the face of a sandstone boulder.
They were made by a small four-footed creature, almost certainly a lizard-like reptile, running across a beach.
Other rocks at the same level elsewhere, contain impressions of fern leaves and the wings of insects.
Halfway down the Canyon, you come to 400-million-year-old limestones.
There are no reptiles to be found here, but there are the bones of strange armoured fish.
An hour or so later — and a hundred million years earlier — the rocks contain no sign of backboned animals of any kind.
There are a few shells and worms that have left behind a tracery of trails in what was the muddy sea floor.
Three-quarters of the way down, you are still descending through layers of limestone, but now there is no sign of life whatever.
By the late afternoon, you ride at last into the lower gorge where the Colorado River runs green between high rock walls.
You are now a vertical mile below the rim and the rocks have been dated to the immense age of 2000 million years.
Here you might hope to find evidence for the very beginnings of life.
But there are no organic remains of any kind.
The dark fine-grained rocks lie not in horizontal layers like all those above, but are twisted and buckled and riven with veins of pink granite.
Are signs of life absent because these rocks and the limestones directly above are so extremely ancient that all such traces have been crushed from them?
Could it be that the first creatures to leave any sign of their existence were as complex as worms and molluscs?
For many years these questions puzzled geologists.
All over the world, rocks of this antiquity were carefully searched for organic remains.
One or two odd shapes were found, but most authorities dismissed these as patterns produced by the physical processes of rock formation that had nothing whatever to do with living organisms.
Then during the 19505, the searchers began to use high-powered microscopes on some particularly enigmatic rocks.
A thousand miles northeast of the Grand Canyon, ancient rocks of about the same age as those beside the Colorado River outcrop on the shores of Lake Superior.
Some of them contain seams of a fine-grained flint-like substance called chert.
This was well known during the last century because the pioneers used it in their flintlock guns.
Here and there, it contains strange white concentric rings a metre or so across.
Were these merely eddies in the mud on the bottom of the primeval seas or could they have been formed by living organisms?
No one could be sure and the shapes were given the non-committal name of stromatolite, a word derived from Greek meaning no more than "stony carpet" .
But when researchers cut sections of these rings, ground them down into slices so thin that they were translucent and examined them through the microscope, they found, preserved in the chert, the shapes of simple organisms, each no more than one or two hundredths of a millimetre across.
Some resembled filaments of algae; others, while they were unmistakably organic, had no parallels with living organisms; and some looked to be identical with the simplest form of life existing today, bacteria.
It seemed almost impossible to many people that such tiny things as micro-organisms could have been fossilised at all.
That relics of them should have survived for such a vast period of time seemed even more difficult to believe.
The solution of silica which had saturated the dead organisms and solidified into chert was clearly as fine-grained and durable a preservative as exists.
The discovery of the fossils in the Gunflint Chert stimulated further searches not only in North America but all over the world and other micro-fossils were found in cherts in Africa and Australia.
Some of these, astonishingly, pre-dated the Gunflint specimens by a thousand million years.
But if we want to consider how life arose, we have to look back a further thousand million years beyond even the earliest micro-fossils, to a time when the earth was completely lifeless and still cooling after its birth.
The planet then was radically different in almost every way from the one we live on today.
The clouds of water vapour that had surrounded it had condensed to form seas, but they were still hot.
We are not sure how the land masses lay, but they certainly bore no resemblance in either form or distribution to modern continents.
Volcanoes were abundant, spewing ash and lava.
The atmosphere was very thin and consisted of swirling clouds of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, ammonia and methane.
There was little or no oxygen.
This mixture allowed ultraviolet rays from the sun to bathe the earth's surface with an intensity that would be lethal to modern animal life.
Electrical storms raged in the clouds, bombarding the land and the sea with lightning.
Laboratory experiments were made in the 1950s to discover what might happen to these particular chemical constituents under such conditions.
Such gases, mixed with water vapour, were subjected to electrical discharge and ultraviolet light.
After only a week of this treatment complex molecules were found to have formed in the mixture, including sugars, nucleic acids and amino acids, the building blocks of proteins.
There seems no doubt that molecules such as these could have formed in the seas of the earth at the very beginning of its history.
As the millions of years passed, the concentrations of these substances increased and the molecules began to interact with one another to form even more complex compounds.
It may even be that some ingredients were added from outer space, brought by meteorites.
Eventually, among a great variety of substances, there appeared one that was to be crucial for the further development of life.
It is called deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA for short.
Its structure endows it with two key properties.
First, it can act as a blueprint for the manufacture of amino acids; and second, it has the capacity to replicate itself.
With this substance, molecules had reached the threshold of something quite new, for these two characteristics of DNA are also those of living organisms such as bacteria.
And bacteria, besides being the simplest form of life we know, are also among the oldest fossils we have discovered.
The ability of DNA to replicate itself is a consequence of its unique structure.
It is shaped like two intertwined helices.
During cell division, these unzip, splitting the molecule along its length into two separate helices.
Each then acts as a template to which other simpler molecules become attached until each has once more become a double helix.
The simple molecules from which the DNA is mainly built are of only four kinds, but they are grouped in trios and arranged in a particular and significant order on the immensely long DNA molecule.
This order specifies how the twenty or so different amino acids are arranged in a protein, how much is to be made, and when.
A length of DNA bearing the information for an unbroken sequence of manufacture is called a gene.
Occasionally, the DNA copying process involved in reproduction may go wrong.
A  + mistake may be made at a single point or a length of DNA may become temporarily dislocated and be reinserted in the wrong place.
The copy is then imperfect and the proteins it will create may be entirely different.
When this occurred in the first organisms on earth, evolution began, for such mistakes in copying are the source of variations from which natural selection can produce evolutionary change.
And we know from micro-fossils that there were already several distinct forms of bacteria-like organisms as long ago as 3000 million years.
Such vast periods of time baffle the imagination, but we can form some idea of the relative duration of the major phases of the history of life if we compare the entire span, from these first beginnings until today, with one year.
Since we are unlikely yet to have discovered the oldest fossils of all, we can reckon that life started well before 3000 million years ago and as a rough guide, it will serve to let one day represent ten million years.
On such a calendar, the Gunflint fossils of algae-like organisms, which seemed so extremely ancient when they were first discovered, are seen to be quite latecomers in the history of life, not appearing until the second week of August.
In the Grand Canyon, the oldest worm trails were burrowed through the mud in the second week of November and the first fish appeared in the limestone seas a week later.
The little lizard will have scuttled across the beach during the middle of December and man did not appear until the evening of 31 December.
But we must return to January.
The bacteria fed initially on the various carbon compounds that had taken so many millions of years to accumulate in the primordial seas.
But as they flourished, so this food must have become scarcer.
Any bacterium that could tap a different source of food would obviously be very successful and eventually some did.
Instead of taking ready-made food from their surroundings, they began to manufacture their own within their cell walls, drawing the necessary energy from the sun.
This process is called photosynthesis.
One of the ingredients it requires is hydrogen, a gas that is produced in great quantities during volcanic eruptions.
Conditions very similar to those in which the early photosynthesising bacteria lived can be found today in such volcanic areas as Yellowstone in Wyoming.
Here a great mass of molten rock, lying only a few thousand feet down in the earth's crust, heats the rocks on the surface.
In places, the ground water is well above boiling point.
It flows up channels through the rocks under decreasing pressure until suddenly it flashes into steam and water spouts high into the air as a geyser.
Elsewhere, the water wells up into steaming pools.
As it trickles away and cools, the salts it gathered from the rocks on its way up, together with those derived from the molten mass far below, are deposited to form rimmed and buttressed basins, surrounded by tiers of terraces.
In these scalding mineral-laden waters, bacteria flourish.
Some grow into matted filaments and curds, others into thick leathery sheets.
Many are brilliantly coloured, their intensity of hue varying during the year as the colonies wax and wane.
The names given to these pools give a hint of the variety of the bacteria and the splendour of the effects they produce Emerald Pool, Sulphur Cauldron, Beryl Spring, Firehole Falls, Morning Glory Pool and — a particularly rich one with several species of bacteria — Artists' Paintpots.
When you wander through this amazing landscape, you can smell sulphuretted hydrogen, the unmistakable stench of rotting eggs, produced by the reaction of ground water with the molten rock far beneath.
This is the source from which many of the bacteria here obtain their hydrogen and as long as bacteria were dependent upon volcanic action for it, they could not spread widely.
But other forms eventually arose which were able to extract hydrogen from a very much more widespread source — water.
This development was to have a profound effect on all life to come, for if hydrogen is removed from water, the element that remains is oxygen.
The organisms that did this are a little more complex in structure than bacteria.
They used to be called blue-green algae because they appeared to be close relatives of the green algae that are common in ponds, but now that their very primitive character is recognised, they are referred to as cyanophytes or simply, blue-greens.
The chemical agent which they contain, making it possible for them to use water in the photosynthetic process, is chlorophyll, which is also possessed by true algae and the higher plants.
Blue-greens are found wherever there is constant moisture.
You can often see mats of them, beaded with silver bubbles of oxygen, blanketing the bottoms of ponds.
In Shark Bay, on the northwest coast of tropical Australia, they have developed in a particularly spectacular and significant form.
Hamelin Pool, one small arm of this vast inlet, has its entrance blocked by a sand bar covered with eel grass.
The flow of water in and out of the Pool is so greatly impeded that evaporation under the grilling sun has made the waters very salty indeed.
As a result, marine creatures such as molluscs which would normally feed on blue-greens and keep them in check, cannot survive.
The blue-greens, therefore, flourish uncropped just as they did when they were the most advanced form of life anywhere in the world.
They secrete lime, forming stony cushions near the shores of the Pool and teetering columns at greater depths.
Here is the explanation of those mysterious shapes seen in section in the Gunflint Chert.
The blue-green pillars of Hamelin Pool are living stromatolites and the groups of them standing on the sun-dappled sea-floor are as close as we may ever get to a scene from the world of two thousand million years ago.
The arrival of the blue-greens marked a point of no return in the history of life.
The oxygen they produced accumulated over the millennia to form the kind of oxygen-rich atmosphere that we know today.
Our lives, and those of all other animals, depend on it.
We need it not only to breathe but to protect us.
Oxygen in the atmosphere forms a screen, the ozone layer, which cuts off most of the ultraviolet rays of the sun.
These were the very rays which provided energy to synthesise amino acids and sugars in the primordial oceans, so the arrival of the blue-greens ruled out the possibility that life on earth could ever begin in the same way again.
Life remained at this stage of development for a vast period.
Eventually however, a further huge jump was made.
Exactly how it happened we still do not known for sure but you can find examples of the kind of organisms it produced in almost any patch of fresh water.
A drop from a pond, viewed through a microscope, swarms with tiny organisms, some spinning, some crawling, some whizzing across the field of vision like rockets.
As a group they are called the Protozoa.
They are all single cells, yet within their cell walls they contain much more complex structures than any bacterium possesses.
One central packet, the nucleus, is full of DNA.
This appears to be the organising force of the cell.
Elongated bodies, the mitochondria, provide energy by burning oxygen in much the same way as many bacteria do.
Many cells have a thrashing tail attached to them and this resembles a filamentous bacterium called a spirochaete.
Some protistans also contain chloroplasts, packets of chlorophyll which, like blue-greens, use the energy of sunlight to assemble complex molecules as food for the cell.
Each of these tiny organisms thus appears to be a committee of simpler ones.
Some researchers believe that this is exactly what they are.
It may be that one cell which habitually fed by flowing round other particles, took some bacteria and blue-greens within it and these, instead of being digested, survived to collaborate in a communal life of hitherto unparalleled intimacy.
However it took place, micro-fossils indicate that cells of this complexity first appeared about 1200 million years ago — say early September in the year of life.
Protozoans reproduce by splitting into two, as bacteria do, but their internal design is much more complex and their division, not surprisingly, is an elaborate business.
Most of the separate structures, the members of the committee, themselves split.
Indeed, the mitochondria and chloroplasts, each with their own DNA, often do so independently of the division of the main cell.
The DNA within the nucleus replicates in a particularly complex manner which ensures that all its genes are copied and that each daughter cell receives a complete duplicate set.
There are, however, several other methods of reproduction practised by various protozoans on occasions.
The details vary.
The essential feature of all the techniques is that a shuffling of genes is involved.
In some cases this takes place when two cells join up and exchange genes before breaking apart and then undergoing cell division some time later.
In other cases, cells normally contain two complete sets of genes which, after shuffling, divide to make new cells with only one set.
These cells are of two types — a large comparatively immobile one, and a smaller active one, driven by a flagellum.
The first is called an egg and the second a sperm — for this is the dawning of sexuality.
When the two types unite in a new amalgamated cell the genes are once again in two sets but in new combinations with genes from not just one parent but two.
This may well be a unique combination which will produce a slightly different organism with new characteristics.
Since sexuality increased the possibilities of genetic variation, it also greatly accelerated the rate at which evolution could proceed as organisms encountered new environments.
There are about 10,000 species of protozoans.
Some are covered by a mat of flailing threads or cilia, which with a co-ordinated beat drive the creature through the water.
Others, including the amoeba, move by bulging out fingers from the main body and then flowing into them.
Many of those that live in the sea secrete shells with the most elaborate structure of silica or lime.
These are among the most exquisite objects that the microscope-borne explorer will ever encounter.
Some resemble minuscule snail shells, some ornate vases and bottles.
The most delicate of all are of shining translucent silica, concentric spheres transfixed by needles, gothic helmets, rococo belfries and spiked space capsules.
The inhabitants of these shells extend long threads through pores with which they trap particles of food.
Other protistans feed in a different way, photosynthesising with the aid of their packets of chlorophyll.
These can be regarded as plants; the remainder of the group, which feed on them, as animals.
The distinction between the two at this level, however, does not have as much meaning as such labelling might suggest, for there are many species that can use both methods of feeding at different times.
Some protistans are just large enough to see with the naked eye.
With a little practice, the creeping grey speck of jelly which is an amoeba can be picked out in a drop of pond water.
But there is a limit to the growth of a single-celled creature, for as size increases, the chemical processes inside the cell become difficult and inefficient.
Size, however, can be achieved in a different way — by grouping cells together in an organised colony.
One species that has done this is Volvox, a hollow sphere, almost the size of a pinhead, constructed from a large number of cells, each with a flagellum.
The striking thing about these units is that they are virtually the same as other single cells that swim by themselves and have separate existences.
The constituent cells of Volvox, however, are coordinated, for all the flagella around the sphere beat in an organised way and drive the tiny ball in a particular direction.
This kind of coordination between constituent cells in a colony was taken a stage further, probably between 800 to 1000 million years ago — some time in October in our calendar — when sponges appeared.
Sponges can grow to a very considerable size.
Some species form soft shapeless lumps on the sea floor two metres or so across.
Their surfaces are covered with tiny pores through which water is drawn into the body by flagella, and then expelled through larger vents.
The sponge feeds by filtering particles from this stream of water passing through its body.
The colonial bonds between its constituents are very loose.
Individual cells may crawl about over the surface of the sponge like amoebae.
If two sponges are growing close to one another, they may, as they grow, come into contact and eventually merge into one huge organism.
If a sponge is forced through a fine gauze sieve so that it is broken down into separate cells, these will eventually reorganise themselves into a sponge, each kind of cell finding its appropriate place within the body.
Most remarkable of all, if you take two sponges and treat them both in this extreme way and then mix cells from the two, they will reconstitute themselves into a single mixed-parentage entity.
Some sponges produce a soft flexible substance around their cells which supports the whole organism.
This, when the cells themselves have been killed by boiling and washed away, is what we use in our baths.
Other sponges secrete tiny needles, called spicules, either of lime or silica, which mesh together to form a scaffold in which the cells are set.
How one cell orientates itself and produces its spicule so that it fits perfectly into the overall design is totally unknown.
When you look at a complex sponge skeleton such as that made of silica spicules which is known as Venus' Flower Basket, the imagination is baffled.
How could quasi-independent microscopic cells collaborate to  secrete a million glassy splinters and construct such an intricate and beautiful lattice?
We do not know.
But even though sponges can produce such miraculous complexities as this, they can hardly be counted as properly integrated multicellular animals.
They have no nervous system, no muscle fibres.
The simplest creatures to possess these physical characteristics are the jellyfish and their relatives.
A typical jellyfish is a saucer fringed with stinging tentacles.
This form is called a medusa after the unfortunate woman in a Greek myth who was loved by the god of the sea and as a result had her hair changed by a jealous goddess into snakes.
Jellyfish are constructed from two layers of cells.
The jelly which separates them gives the organism a degree of rigidity needed to withstand the buffeting of the sea.
They are quite complex creatures.
Their cells, unlike those of the sponge, are incapable of independent survival.
Some are modified to transmit electric impulses and are linked into a network which amounts to a primitive nervous system; others are able to contract in length and so can be considered as simple muscles.
There are also stinging cells with coiled threads inside them, the unique possessions of the jellyfish tribe.
When food or an enemy comes near, the cell discharges the thread which is armed with spines like a miniature harpoon and often loaded with poison.
It is these cells in the tentacles that will sting you if you unluckily brush against a jellyfish when swimming.
Jellyfish reproduce by releasing eggs and sperm into the sea.
The fertilised egg does not develop into another jellyfish directly but becomes a free-swimming creature quite different from its parents.
It eventually settles down on the bottom of the sea and grows into a tiny flower-like organism called a polyp.
In some species, this sprouts, through branching twigs, into other polyps.
They filter-feed with the aid of tiny beating cilia.
Eventually, the polyps bud in a different way and produce miniature medusae which detach themselves and wriggle away to take up the swimming life once more.
This alternation of form between generations has allowed all kinds of variations within the group.
The true jellyfish spend most of their time as free-floating medusae with only the minimum period fixed to the rocks.
Others, like the sea anemones, do the reverse.
For all their adult lives they are solitary polyps, glued to the rock, their tentacles waving in the water ready to trap prey that may touch them.
Yet a third kind are colonies of polyps but ones that have, confusingly, given up their attachment to the sea bottom and sail free like medusae.
The Portuguese Man O'War is one of these.
Chains of polyps dangle from a float filled with gas.
Each chain has a specialised function.
One kind produces reproductive cells; another absorbs sustenance from captured prey; another, heavily armed with particularly virulent stinging cells, trails behind the colony for up to fifty metres, paralysing fish that blunder into it.
It seems an obvious assumption that these relatively simple organisms appeared very early in the history of life, but for a long time there was no proof that they actually did so.
Such hard evidence could only come from the rocks.
Even if micro-organisms can be preserved in chert, it is difficult to believe that a creature as large but as fragile and insubstantial as a jellyfish could retain its shape long enough to be fossilised.
But in the 1940s some geologists noticed very odd shapes in the ancient Ediacara Sandstones of  the Flinders Ranges in southern Australia.
These rocks, now thought to be about 650 million years old, were believed to be completely unfossiliferous.
Judging from the size of the sand grains of which they are composed and the ripple marks on the surface of their bedding planes, they had once formed a sandy beach.
Very occasionally, flower-like impressions were detected on them, some the size of a buttercup, some as big as a rose.
Could these be the marks left by jellyfish stranded on the beach, baked in the sun and then covered by a wash of fine sand by the next tide?
Eventually enough of these shapes were collected and studied for it to be undeniable that this is just what they must be.
At least sixteen different species have now been recognised.
Some were floating medusae.
Some appear to have had gas bladders like the Portuguese Man O'War.
Among the most spectacular of these extraordinary fossils are colonial forms that lived fixed to the sea floor and which lie in the dusty brown sandstone like long feathers.
The barbs can be seen to be separate branches lined with polyps.
They must have been washed up on this ancient beach after being torn from their moorings, perhaps by a storm.
Several of them have a vague impression of a coin-like disc near the base.
At first this was interpreted as a separate medusa-like form, but it appears in a number of specimens in just such a position and some now think that it may have been a holdfast.
You do not have to go far to find a living parallel for these organisms.
Closely similar creatures called sea pens grow in the sea within a hundred miles of the Flinders Ranges.
Sea pens were given their names when people wrote with quills and very apt it must have seemed, for not only are they shaped like feathers but their skeleton is flexible and horny.
They grow sticking up vertically on sandy sea floors, some only a few centimetres long, some half as tall as a man.
At night they are particularly spectacular for they glow with a bright purple luminescence and if you touch them, ghostly waves of light pulsate along their slowly writhing arms.
Sea pens are also called soft corals.
Stony corals, their relatives, often grow alongside them and they too are colonial creatures.
Their history is not as ancient as that of the sea pens — none have been found on the Ediacara beaches — but once they had appeared, they flourished in immense numbers.
An organism that produces a skeleton of stone and lives in an environment where deposits of ooze and sand are being laid down, is an ideal subject for fossilisation.
Huge thicknesses of limestone in many parts of the world consist almost entirely of coral remains and they provide a detailed chronicle of the development of the group.
The coral polyps secrete their skeletons from their bases.
Each is connected with its neighbours by strands that extend laterally.
As the colony develops, new polyps form, often on these connecting sections and their skeletons grow over and stifle earlier polyps.
So the limestone the colony builds is riddled with tiny cells where polyps once lived.
The living ones form only a thin layer on the surface.
Each species of coral has its own pattern of budding and so erects its own characteristic monument.
Corals are very demanding in their environmental requirements.
Water that is muddy or fresh will kill them.
Nor will they grow at depths beyond the reach of sunlight  for they are dependent upon single-celled algae that grow within their bodies.
The algae photosynthesise food for themselves and in the process absorb carbon dioxide from the water.
This assists the corals in the building of their skeletons, and releases oxygen which helps the corals respire.
The first time you dive on a coral reef is an experience never to be forgotten.
The sensation of moving freely in three dimensions in the clear sunlit water that corals favour is, in itself, a bewitching and other-worldly one.
But there is nothing on land that can prepare you for the profusion of shapes and colours of the corals themselves.
There are domes, branches and fans, antlers delicately tipped with blue, organ pipes that are blood red.
Some seem flower-like yet when you touch them they have the incongruous scratch of stone.
Often different coral species grow beside one another, mingled with sea pens arching above and beds of anemones that wave long tentacles in the current.
Sometimes you swim over great meadows that consist entirely of one kind of coral; sometimes in deeper water, you discover a coral tower hung with fans and sponges that extends beyond your sight into depths of darkest blue.
But if you swim only during the day, you will hardly ever see the organisms that have created this astounding scene.
At night, with a torch in your hand, you will find the coral transformed.
The sharp outlines of the colonies are now misted with opalescence.
Millions of tiny polyps have emerged from their limestone cells to stretch out their minuscule arms and grope for food.
Coral polyps are each only a few millimetres across but working together in colonies, they have produced the greatest animal constructions the world had seen before man began his labours.
The Great Barrier Reef, running parallel to the eastern coast of Australia for over a thousand miles can be seen from the moon.
So if some 500 million years ago, an astronaut, from some other planet passed near the earth, he could easily have noticed in the blue seas, a few new and mysterious turquoise shapes; and from them he might have guessed that life on earth had really started.
BUILDING BODIES
The Great Barrier Reef swarms with life.
The tides surging through the coral heads charge the water with oxygen and the tropical sun warms it and fills it with light.
All the main kinds of sea animals seem to flourish here.
Phosphorescent purple eyes peer out from beneath shells; black sea urchins swivel their spines as they slowly perambulate on needle tip; starfish of an intense blue spangle the sand; and patterned rosettes unfurl from holes in the smooth surface of coral.
Dive down through the pellucid water and turn a boulder.
A flat ribbon, striped yellow and scarlet, dances gracefully away and an emerald green brittle star careers over the sand on writhing catherine-wheel arms to find a new hiding place.
The variety at first seems bewildering, but leaving aside primitive creatures like jellyfish and corals which we have already discussed, and the much more advanced backboned fish, nearly all can be allocated to one of three main types: shelled animals, like clams, cowries and sea snails; radially symmetrical creatures like starfish and sea urchins; and elongated animals with segmented bodies varying from wriggling bristle worms to shrimps and lobsters.
The principles on which these three kinds of bodies are built are so fundamentally different that it is difficult to believe that they can be related to one another except right at the very roots of the evolutionary tree.
The fossil record bears this out.
All three groups, being sea-dwellers, have left behind abundant remains and the details of their separate dynastic fortunes can be traced through the rocks for hundreds of millions of years.
The walls of the Grand Canyon show that animals without backbones, invertebrates, came into existence long before the vertebrates such as fish.
But just below the layer of gently folded limestones that contains the earliest of the invertebrate fossils, the strata change radically.
Here the rocks are highly contorted.
They had once formed mountains.
These were eroded and eventually covered with the sea that deposited the limestone now lying above them.
The episode occupied many millions of years and during all that time there were no deposits.
As a consequence, this junction in the rocks represents a huge gap in the record.
To trace the invertebrate lines back to their origins, we must find another site where rocks were not only deposited continuously throughout this critical period, but have survived in a relatively undistorted condition.
Such places are few, but one lies in the Atlas Mountains of Morocco.
The bare hills behind Agadir in the west are built of blue limestones so hard that they ring under the fossil-hunter's hammer.
The beds of rock are slightly tilted but otherwise undistorted by earth movements.
On the crest of the passes, the rocks yield fossils.
They are not very many, but if you look hard enough you can collect quite a range of species.
All fossils found anywhere in the world in rocks of this age can be placed in one or other of those three main groups we identified on the reef.
There are tiny shells, the size of your little finger nail, called brachiopods; radially symmetrical organisms looking like stalked flowers called crinoids; and trilobites, segmented creatures that resemble woodlice.
The limestones at the top of the Moroccan succession are about 560 million years old.
Beneath them lie more layers extending downwards for thousands of feet, seemingly unchanged in character.
In them, surely, must be evidence about the origins of those three great invertebrate groups.
But it is not so.
As you clamber down the mountainside over the strata, the fossils suddenly disappear.
The limestone seems to be exactly the same as that at the head of the pass, so the seas in which it was laid down must surely have been very similar to those that produced fossiliferous rocks.
There are no signs of a revolutionary change in physical conditions.
It is simply that at one time the ooze covering the sea floor contained shells of animals — and before that did not.
This abrupt beginning to the fossil record is not just a Moroccan phenomenon, though you can see it here more vividly than in most places.
It occurs in almost all the rocks of this age throughout the world.
The micro-fossils from the cherts of Lake Superior and South Africa show that life had started long, long before.
In the theoretical year of life, shelled fossils do not appear until early November.
So the bulk of life's history is undocumented in the rocks.
Only at this late date, about 600 million years ago, did several separate groups of organisms begin to leave records of any abundance by secreting shells.
Why this sudden change should have come about we do not know.
Perhaps before this time the seas were not at the right temperature or did not have the chemical composition to favour the deposition of the lime from which most marine shells and skeletons are constructed.
Whatever the reason we have to look elsewhere for evidence of the origins of the invertebrates.
We can find some living clues back on the reef.
Fluttering over the coral heads, hiding in the crevices or clinging to the underside of rocks, are flat leaf-shaped worms.
Like jellyfish, they have only one opening to their gut through which they both take in food and eject waste.
They have no gills and breathe directly through their skin.
Their underside is covered with cilia which by beating enable them to glide slowly over surfaces.
Their front end has a mouth below and a few light-sensitive spots above so that the animal can be said to have the beginnings of a head.
The flatworm is the simplest creature to show signs of such a thing.
The eye-spots, to be of any use, must be linked to muscles so that the animal can react to what it senses.
In flatworms all that exists is a simple network of nerve fibres.
There are a few thickenings in some of them, but these can hardly be described as brains.
Yet  the flatworms have surprising powers.
One fresh-water species, for example, can learn.
Individuals have been trained to find their way through a simple maze, selecting white-painted passages and avoiding dark-painted ones by being given slight electric shocks when they made a wrong decision.
Even more surprisingly, that memory has been shown to reside in a substance, tor if a worm that has learned the maze is killed and its flesh fed to another worm, the new one will run the maze correctly without training.
Today there are some 3000 species of flatworm in the world.
Most are tiny and water-living.
You can find freshwater ones in most streams simply by dropping in a piece of raw meat or liver.
If the underwater vegetation is thick, flatworms are likely to glide out in dozens and settle on the bait.
Some species manage to live on land in humid tropical forests, undulating on mucus that they secrete from their undersides.
One of these grows to a length of about 60 centimetres.
Other flatworms have taken to the parasitic life and live unseen within the bodies of other animals, including man's, and in astronomic numbers.
The liver flukes still retain the typical flatworm form.
Tapeworms are also members of the group, though they look very different for after burying their heads in the walls of their host's gut, they bud off egg-bearing sections from their tail end.
These segments remain attached while they mature, eventually forming a chain that may be as much as 10 metres long.
The whole creature, as a result, looks as though it is divided into segments, but in fact these separate living packets of eggs are quite different from the permanent internal compartments of a truly segmented creature like an earthworm.
Flatworms are very simple creatures.
Members of one free-swimming group lack a gut altogether and look very like the tiny free-swimming coral organisms before they settle down to a sedentary life.
So there is little difficulty in believing those researchers who conclude from a study of the detailed structure of both adult and larva that the flatworms are descended from simpler organisms like corals and jellyfish.
In the period when these first marine invertebrates were evolving, between 600 and 1000 million years ago, erosion of the continents was producing great expanses of mud and sand on the sea bed around the continental margins.
This environment must have contained abundant food in the form of organic detritus falling from the waters above.
It also offered concealment and protection for any creature that lived within it.
The flatworm shape, however, is not suited to burrowing.
A tubular form is much more effective and eventually worms with such a shape appeared.
Some became active burrowers, tunnelling through the mud in search of food particles.
Others lived half-buried with their mouthparts above the sediment.
Cilia around their mouths created a current of water and from it they filtered their food.
Some of these creatures lived in a protective tube.
In time, the shape of the top of this was modified into a collar with slits in it.
This improved the flow of water over the tentacles.
Further modification and mineralisation eventually produced two flat protective shells.
These were the first brachiopods.
One of them, named Lingulella, gave rise to a line of descendants that still live today, virtually unchanged; they are what are often called living fossils.
Examples of such immensely long-lived species occur several times in the history of life.
A creature appears and spreads widely.
As time passes, conditions in parts of its range alter and some of its descendants evolve into slightly different forms enabling them to survive more efficiently in their new circumstances.
But in a few places conditions remain unaltered and they suit the original design to perfection.
No variants appear which exploit this environment more effectively.
So the ancient species, encountering no change, makes no change and plods on across the millennia, generation after generation, an ultra-conservative.
The descendants of Lingulella, slightly larger and called Lingula, are found today in, among other places, the coastal waters of Japan, burrowing in the sand and mud of estuaries.
In form they look like long worms with two small horny shells at one end.
The body, however, is quite complicated.
It has a digestive tract that ends in an anus and a group of tentacles around the mouth, enclosed within the two shell valves.
These tentacles are covered with beating cilia which create water currents.
As food particles are swept by, they are caught by the tentacles and passed by them down to the mouth.
In this process, the tentacles serve another and important function, for the water brings with it dissolved oxygen which Lingula needs in order to respire.
The tentacles absorb it and so, in effect, they become gills.
The valves enclosing the tentacles not only give protection to these soft delicate structures, but concentrate the water into a steady stream so that it flows more effectively over them.
The brachiopods elaborated this design considerably over the next hundred million years or so.
Some became larger with heavy lime shells.
The tentacles inside grew so big they required the support of a delicate spiral of lime.
Many species developed a hole at the hinge end of one of the valves through which the worm-like stalk emerged to fasten the animal into the mud.
This gave the shell the look of an inverted Roman oil lamp, with the stalk as the wick, and so the group as a whole gained the name of lamp-shells.
The brachiopods are by no means the only shelled worms whose fossils are found in these ancient rocks.
Another kind developed in which the elaborated worm did not attach itself to the sea floor but continued to crawl about and secreted a small conical tent of shell under which it could huddle when in danger.
This was the ancestor of the most successful group of all these shelled worms, the molluscs, and it too has a living representative, a tiny organism called Neopilina, which was dredged up in 1952 from the depths of the Pacific.
Today there are about 60,000 different species of molluscs.
The lower part of the molluscan body is called the foot.
Its owners move themselves about by protruding it from the shell and rippling its undersurface.
Many species carry a small disc of shell on the side of it which, when the foot is retracted, forms a close-fitting lid to the entrance.
The upper surface of the body is formed by a thin sheet that cloaks the internal organs and is appropriately called the mantle.
In a cavity between it and the central part of the body, most species have gills which are continually bathed by a current of oxygen-bearing water, sucked in at one end of the cavity and expelled at the other.
The shell is secreted by the upper surface of the mantle.
One whole group of molluscs  have single shells.
The limpet, like Neopilina, produces shell at an equal rate right round the circumference of the mantle and so builds a simple pyramid.
In other species, the front of the mantle secretes faster than the rear and creates a shell in a flat spiral, like a watch spring.
In yet others, maximum production comes from one side so that the shell develops a twist and becomes a turret.
The cowrie concentrates its secretion along the sides of the mantle, forming a shell like a loosely clenched fist.
From the slit along the bottom, it protrudes not only its foot but two sections of its mantle which extend over each flank of the shell and meet at the top.
These lay down the marvellously patterned and polished surface characteristic of cowries.
The single-shelled molluscs feed not with tentacles within the shell like the brachiopods but with a radula, a ribbon-shaped tongue, covered with rasping teeth.
Some use it to scrape algae from the rocks.
Whelks have developed a radula on a stalk which they can extend beyond the shell and use to bore into the shells of other molluscs.
Through the holes they have drilled, they poke the tip of the radula and suck out the flesh of the victim.
Cone shells also have a stalked radula but have modified it into a kind of gun.
They slyly extend it towards their prey — a worm or even a fish — and then discharge a tiny glassy harpoon from the end.
While the tethered victim struggles they inject a poison so virulent that it kills a fish instantly and can even be lethal to a man.
They then haul the prey back to the shell and slowly engulf it.
For active hunting, a heavy shell must be something of a handicap and some carnivorous molluscs have taken to a faster if riskier life by doing without it altogether and reverting to the life-style of their flatworm-like ancestors.
These are the sea slugs and they are among the most beautiful and highly coloured of all invertebrates in the sea.
Their long soft bodies are covered on the upper side with waving tentacles of the most delicate colours, banded, striped and patterned in many shades.
Though they lack a shell, they are not entirely defenceless, for some have acquired secondhand weapons.
These species float near the surface of the water on their feathery extended tentacles and hunt jellyfish.
As the sea slug slowly eats its way into its drifting helpless prey, the stinging cells of the victim are taken into its gut, complete and unsprung.
Eventually they migrate within the sea slug's tissues and are concentrated in the tentacles on its back.
There they give just the same protection to their new owners as they did to the jellyfish that developed them.
Other molluscs, like mussels and clams, have shells divided into two valves.
These creatures are much less mobile.
The foot is reduced to a protrusion that they use to pull themselves down into the sand.
For the most part, they are filter-feeders, lying with valves agape, sucking water in through one end of the mantle cavity and squirting it out through a tubular siphon at the other.
Since they do not need to move, great size is of no disadvantage.
Giant clams on the reef may grow to be a metre long; they lie embedded in the coral, their mantles fully exposed, a zigzag of brilliant green flesh spotted with black, which pulsates gently as water is pumped through it.
They can certainly be quite big enough for a diver to put his foot into, but he would have to be very incautious indeed to get trapped.
Powerful though the clam's muscles are, it cannot slam its valves  shut, only heave them slowly together, so it gives plenty of notice of its intentions.
What is more, even when the valves of a really large specimen are fully closed, they only meet at the spikes on the edge.
The gaps between them are so big that if you plunge your arm through into the mantle, the clam is quite unable to grip it — though the experiment is a little less unnerving if it is tried first with a post.
Some filter-feeders like the scallops do manage to travel: they clap their valves together convulsively and so make curving leaps, but by and large adult bivalves live rather static lives and the spreading of the species into distant parts of the sea bed is carried out by the young.
The molluscan egg develops into a larva, a minuscule animated globule striped with a band of cilia, which is swept far and wide by ocean currents before, after several weeks, it changes its shape, grows a shell and settles down.
The drifting phase of its life puts it at the mercy of all kinds of hungry animals, from other stationary filter-feeders to fish, so in order that its species shall survive, a mollusc must produce great numbers of eggs.
And indeed it does.
One individual may discharge as many as 400 million.
One branch of the molluscs, very early in the group's history, found a way of becoming highly mobile and yet retaining the protection of a large and heavy shell — they developed gas-filled flotation tanks.
The first such creature appeared about 550 million years ago.
Its flat-coiled shell was not completely filled with flesh as is that of a snail, but had a hinder end walled off to form a gas chamber.
As the animal grew, new chambers were added to provide sufficient buoyancy for the increasing weight.
This creature was the nautilus and we can get an accurate idea of how it and its family lived for one species was destined, like Lingula and Neopilina, to become a living fossil.
The species that survives today, the pearly nautilus, grows to about 20 centimetres across.
A tube runs from the back of the body chamber into the flotation tanks at the rear so that the animal can flood them and adjust its buoyancy to float at whatever level it wishes.
The nautilus feeds not only on carrion but on living creatures such as crabs.
It moves by jet-propulsion, squirting water through a siphon in a variation of the current-creating technique developed by its filter-feeding relatives.
It searches for its prey with the help of small stalked eyes and tentacles that are sensitive to taste.
Its molluscan foot has become divided into some ninety long grasping tentacles with which it grapples with its prey.
In the centre of them it has a horny beak, shaped like that of a parrot, capable of delivering a shell-cracking lethal bite.
After some 140 million years of development, the nautiluses gave rise to a variant group with many more flotation chambers to each shell, the ammonites.
These became enormously successful.
In some rocks their shells lie so thickly that they form solid bands.
Those of some species grew as big as lorry wheels.
When you find one of these giants embedded in the honey-coloured limestones of central England or the hard blue rocks of Dorset, you might think that such immense creatures could do little but lumber massively along the sea bed.
But where erosion has removed the outer shell, the elegant curving walls of the flotation chambers that are revealed remind you that these creatures may well have been virtually weightless in water.
Several species have what  looks to be a cut-water on the keel of the shell and may even have sailed like galleons across the surface of the prehistoric oceans.
About one hundred million years ago, for reasons that we do not understand, the ammonite dynasty began to dwindle.
Many species died out.
Other lines gave rise to forms in which the shells were loosely coiled or almost straight.
One group took the same path as the sea slugs did in more recent times and lost their shells altogether.
Eventually all the shelled forms except the pearly nautilus disappeared.
But the shell-less ones survived and they became the most sophisticated and intelligent of all the molluscs, the squids and octopus.
The relics of the squid's ancestral shell can be found deep within it.
This is the flat leaf of powdery chalk, the cuttle bone, that is often washed up on the seashore.
The octopus has no trace of a shell within the flesh of its body, but one species, the argonaut, secretes from one of its arms a marvellous paper-thin version shaped very like a nautilus shell but without chambers, which it uses not as a home for itself but as a delicate floating chalice in which to lay its eggs.
The squid has many fewer tentacles than the nautilus — only ten — and the octopus, as its name makes obvious, has only eight.
Of the two creatures, the squids are much the more mobile and have lateral fins running along their flanks which undulate and so propel the animal through the water.
Both creatures can, like the nautilus, use jet propulsion on occasion.
Their eyes are very elaborate.
In some ways they are even better than our own, for a squid can distinguish polarised light which we cannot do and their retinas have a finer structure which means, almost certainly, that they can distinguish finer detail than we can.
To deal with the signals produced by these sense organs they have considerable brains and very quick reactions.
Squids grow to an immense size.
In 1954 one was washed ashore in Norway that measured 9 metres from the end of its body to the tip of its outstretched tentacles and weighed about a ton.
Even this was not the largest.
In 1933, in New Zealand, one was recorded that was 21 metres long with eyes 40 centimetres across, the largest known eyes in the whole animal kingdom.
Even now we are unlikely to have discovered the biggest that exists.
Squids are so intelligent and swift-moving that they must find little difficulty in avoiding man's clumsy deep-sea dredges.
Sperm whales frequently dive to search for squid and they are much more agile than any of our hunting devices.
Some return to the surface with scars on their snouts which suggest that they have been battling with creatures possessing suckers 13 centimetres across, and squid beaks even bigger than that of the Norwegian giant have been found in their stomachs.
So it is by no means impossible that the kraken and the other legendary sea monsters that are said to be able to rise from the deep and wrap ships in their tentacles, really exist.
Even those of which we have evidence are very daunting creatures — and the most surprising descendants to have sprung from the simple little shells that first appeared 600 million years ago.
But what of the second great category, the one represented in ancient rocks by the flower-like crinoids?
As these are traced upwards through the rocks, they become more elaborate and their structure becomes clearer.
Each has a central body, the calyx, rising from a stem like the seed-head of a poppy.
From this sprout five arms which, in some species, branch repeatedly.
The surface of the calyx is made up of closely-fitting lime plates, the stems and branches of bead-like discs of the same material.
Lying in the rocks, the stems look like broken necklaces, their individual beads sometimes scattered, sometimes still in loose snaking columns as though their thread had only just snapped.
Occasionally gigantic specimens are found with stems 20 metres long.
These creatures, like the ammonites, have had their day, but a few species known as sea lilies still survive in the ocean depths.
They show that the lime plates, in life, are embedded just under the skin.
This gives their surface a curious prickly feel.
In related families, the skin has spines and needles attached to it so the creatures are known as echinoderms, "spiny skins" .
The basic architectural module on which the echinoderm body is built has a fivefold symmetry.
The plates on the calyx are pentagons, five arms extend from it, and all the internal organs are in groups of five.
Their bodies work by a unique exploitation of hydrostatic principles.
Feet, each a thin tube ending in a sucker and kept firm by the pressure of water within, wave and curl in rows along the arms.
The water for this system circulates quite separately from that in the body cavity.
It is drawn through a pore into a channel surrounding the mouth and circulated throughout the body and into the myriads of tube feet.
When a drifting particle of food touches an arm, tube feet fasten on to it and pass it on from one to another until it reaches the gutter that runs down the upper surface of the arm to the mouth at the centre.
Though stalked sea lilies were the most abundant crinoid in fossil times, the commonest forms today are the stalkless feather stars.
Instead of stalks, they have a cluster of curling roots with which they attach themselves to coral or rocks.
In places on the Barrier Reef, they swarm in huge numbers, covering the floor of the tidal pools with a tufted coarse carpet of brown.
The fivefold symmetry and the hydrostatically operated tube feet are such distinctive characters that they make members of the group very easy to recognise.
The starfish and their more sprightly cousins, the brittle stars, both possess them.
These creatures appear to be crinoids that have neither stalk nor rootlets and are lying in an inverted position with their mouths on the ground and their five arms outstretched.
Sea urchins are obviously related.
They seem to have curled their arms up from the mouth as five ribs and then connected them by more plates to form a sphere.
The sausage-like sea cucumbers that sprawl on sandy patches in the reef are also echinoderms, which lie neither face-up nor face-down, but on their sides.
At one end is an opening called the anus, though the term is not completely appropriate for the animal uses it not only for excretion but for breathing as well, sucking water gently in and out over tubules just inside the body.
The mouth at the other end is surrounded by tube feet that have become enlarged into short tentacles.
These fumble about in the  sand or mud, particles adhere to them and the sea cucumber slowly curls them back into its mouth to suck them clean with its fleshy lips.
If you pick up a sea cucumber, do so with care, for they have an extravagant way of defending themselves.
They simply extrude their internal organs.
A slow but unstoppable flood of sticky tubules pours out of the anus, fastening your fingers together in an adhesive tangle of threads.
When an inquisitive fish or crab provokes them to such action, it finds itself struggling in a mesh of filaments while the sea cucumber slowly inches itself away on the tube feet that protrude from its underside.
Over the next few weeks it will slowly grow itself a new set of entrails.
The echinoderms may seem, from a human point of view, to be a blind alley of no particular importance.
Were we to suppose that life was purposive, that everything was part of a planned progression due to culminate in the appearance of man or some other creature that might rival him in dominating the world, then the echinoderms could be dismissed as of no consequence.
But such trends are clearer in the minds of men than they are in the rocks.
The echinoderms appeared early in the history of life.
Their hydrostatic mechanisms proved a serviceable and effective basis for building a variety of bodies, but not susceptible in the end to spectacular development.
In the areas that suit them, they are still highly successful.
A starfish on the reef can crawl across a clam, fasten its tube feet on either side of its gape and slowly wrench the valves apart to feed on the flesh within.
The crown-of-thorns starfish occasionally proliferates to plague proportions and devastates great areas of coral.
Crinoids are brought up in trawls from the deep sea several thousand at a time.
If it is improbable that any further major developments will come from this stock, it is also unlikely, on the evidence of the last six hundred million years, that the group will disappear as long as life remains possible at all in the seas of the world.
The third category of creatures on the reef contains those with segmented bodies.
In this instance, we do have fossil evidence of even earlier forms than the trilobites found in the Moroccan hills.
The Ediacaran deposits in Australia which contain the remains of jellyfish and sea pens also preserve impressions of segmented worms.
One species has a crescent-shaped head and up to forty segments, fringed on either side by leg-like projections.
It looks extraordinarily like the bristle worms that abound on the reef.
The grooves encircling the bodies of these living creatures correspond to walls that divide the interior into separate compartments.
Each of these is equipped with its own set of organs — on either side, leg-like projections sometimes equipped with bristles and another pair of feathery appendages through which oxygen is absorbed; and within the body wall, a pair of tubes opening to the exterior from which waste is secreted.
A gut, a large blood vessel and a nerve cord run from front to end through all the segments, linking and co-ordinating them.
Even the exceptionally ancient remains of Ediacara offer no clue about the connection between the segmented worms and the other early groups.
However, there is one further category of evidence to be looked at — the larvae.
The segmented worms have  spherical larvae with a belt of cilia round their middles and a long tuft on top.
These are almost identical to those of some molluscs, a strong indication that the two groups sprang from common stock.
The echinoderms, on the other hand, have a larva that is quite different, with a twist to its structure and winding bands of cilia around it.
This group must have separated from the ancestral flatworms at a very early stage indeed, long before the split between the molluscs and the segmented worms.
Segmentation may have developed as a way of enabling worms to increase their efficiency as burrowers in mud.
A line of separate limbs down each side is clearly a very effective structure for this purpose and it could have been acquired by repeating the simple body unit to form a chain.
The change must have taken place long before Ediacaran times for when those rocks were deposited the fundamental invertebrate divisions were already established.
The Ediacaran fossils, however, provide only a brief isolated glimpse of the progress of the invertebrates.
Thereafter their history remains virtually invisible for a hundred million years.
Only after this vast span do we reach the period, 600 million years ago, represented by the Moroccan deposits and others throughout the world.
By that time many organisms had, as we have seen, developed shells.
One exceptional fossil site close to this age exists which provides far more detailed information about the bodies of animals than can come from mere shells.
In the Rocky Mountains of British Columbia, the Burgess Pass crosses a ridge between two high snowy peaks.
Close to its crest lies an outcrop of particularly fine shales and in these some of the most perfectly preserved fossils in the world have been discovered.
The shales were laid down about 530 million years ago in a basin of the sea floor at a depth of about 150 metres.
It must have been sheltered by a submarine ridge, for there were no currents to disturb the fine sediments on the floor or to bring in oxygenated water from nearer the surface.
Few animals lived in these dark stagnant waters.
There are no signs of tracks or burrows.
Once in a while, however, mud from the ridge above slipped down in a turbid cloud, carrying with it all kinds of small creatures and dumped them there.
Since there was neither oxygen to fuel the processes of decay nor any scavenging animals to feed on the bodies and destroy them, the tiny carcasses remained complete as the settling mud particles slowly entombed them.
Eventually the entire deposit became consolidated into shale.
Earth movements elevated and folded great areas of these marine deposits during the building of the Rocky Mountains.
Many parts of them were distorted and crushed until most traces of life in them were obliterated.
But miraculously, this one small patch survived virtually undamaged.
The range of creatures it contains is far wider than that found in rocks of a similar age at any other site.
There are the jellyfish that Ediacara would lead us to expect.
There are echinoderms, brachiopods, primitive molluscs, and half a dozen species of segmented worms — further representatives of the lineage that stretches from the beaches of Ediacara to the Barrier Reef of today.
There are also several creatures which, while they seem to be related to the segmented worms, are rather more complex in structure and quite unlike any other animals that we know, living or fossil.
One had fifteen segments, a trunk in front of its mouth and five eyes, including one  pointing upwards.
Another, named rather despairingly by the scientist who first examined it Hallucigenia, had seven pairs of limbs beneath and seven tentacles waving above, each of which ended, apparently, with a mouth.
They seem to be experiments in animal design that did not work efficiently enough to survive in the competition that became more and more intense as time passed and animal life proliferated.
The great variety of creatures in the Burgess Shales is a reminder of how incomplete our knowledge is of all fossil faunas.
The ancient seas had many more kinds of animals in them than we can ever know.
In this one site, conditions allowed a uniquely large proportion to be preserved, but even this is only a hint of what must have existed.
The Burgess Shales also contain superbly preserved examples of trilobites like those in the Moroccan limestones.
The body armour of these creatures was constructed partly of lime and partly of a horny substance called chitin.
But it was not expandable and as the creature grew, it had to shed its shell regularly.
Many of the trilobite fossils found commonly elsewhere in the world are these empty suits of armour.
Sometimes they occur in great drifts, sorted by sea currents, as shells often are on beaches today.
The underwater avalanches in the Burgess Shales Basin, however, swept down living trilobites and buried them.
Mud particles filtered into the animal's bodies and preserved the finest details of their anatomy.
Here we can see the paired jointed legs that are attached to each body segment, the feathery gill on a stalk alongside each leg, two feelers at the front of the head, the gut running the entire length of the body, even the muscle fibres along the back which enabled the animal to roll itself up into a ball.
Trilobites were the first creatures on earth to develop high-definition eyes.
They are mosaics, a cluster of separate components, each with its own lens of crystalline calcite orientated in the precise position in which it transmits light most efficiently.
One eye may contain 15,000 elements, providing images that together constitute an almost hemispherical field of view.
Late in the dynasty, some species developed an even more sophisticated kind of eye and one that has never been paralleled by any other animal.
Here the components are fewer but larger.
Their lenses are much thicker and it is thought that these species lived where there was little light and needed thick lenses to collect and concentrate what light there was.
However, the optical properties of a simple calcite lens in contact with water are such that it transmits light in a diffused way and cannot bring it to a sharply focused point.
To do this, a two-part lens is needed which has a waved surface at the junction between its two elements.
And this is exactly what these trilobites have developed.
The lower element of the double lens was formed by chitin and the surface between the two conforms to a mathematical principle that man discovered only three hundred years ago when trying to correct the spherical aberration of lenses in his telescopes.
As the trilobites spread through the seas of the world, they diversified into a great number of species.
Most seem to have lived on the sea floor, champing their way through mud.
Some colonised the deep seas where there was little light and lost their eyes altogether.
Others, to judge from the shape of their limbs, may well have paddled about, legs uppermost, scanning the sea floor below with their large eyes.
In due course, as creatures of many kinds and varying ancestries came to live on the bottom of the seas, the trilobites lost their supremacy.
Two hundred and fifty million years ago, their dynasty came to an end.
One relation alone survives, the horseshoe crab.
Measuring 30 centimetres or so across, it is many times bigger than the largest known trilobite and its armour no longer shows any signs of segmentation.
Instead, it forms a huge domed shield on the front of which are two bean-shaped compound eyes.
A roughly rectangular plate, hinged to the back of the shield, carries a sharp spike of a tail.
But beneath its shell, the segmented character of the horseshoe crab is clear.
It has several pairs of jointed legs with pincers on the end and behind these, plate-like gills, large and flat like the leaves of a book.
Horseshoe crabs are seldom seen, for they live at considerable depths, some in Southeast Asian waters, others in the seas along the North Atlantic coast of America.
Every spring, they migrate towards the coast.
Then on three successive nights, when the moon is full and the tides are high, hundreds of thousands emerge from the sea.
The females, their huge shells glinting in the moonlight, drag smaller males behind them.
Sometimes, in their anxiety to reach a female, four or five males cling to one another and form a chain.
As she reaches the edge of the water, the female half-buries herself in the sand.
There she sheds her eggs and the males release sperm.
For mile after mile along the dark beaches, the living tide of horseshoe crabs is so thick that they form a continuous strip, like a causeway of giant cobbles.
The breakers sometimes overturn them and they lie in the sand, with their legs waving, their stiff tails slowly swivelling, in an effort to lever themselves back.
Many fail and are abandoned by the receding tide to die as thousands more swim in the shallows, pressing forward to take their turn.
This scene must have been enacted every spring for several hundred million years.
When it began, the land was without life of any kind and on such beaches the eggs were safe from sea-dwelling marauders.
Perhaps this is why the horseshoe crabs developed the habit.
Today beaches are not quite so safe, for hordes of gulls and small wading birds congregate to share the prodigal feast.
But many of the fertilised eggs remain buried deep among the sand grains where they will stay for a month until, once more, high water reaches this part of the beach, stirring the sand, releasing the larvae to swim freely in the sea.
And at this stage, the relationship of the horseshoe crab with the trilobites becomes evident, for in these little immature creatures which have not yet developed the all-enclosing armour of the adults, the segments are clearly visible even from the top.
Indeed, they are often referred to as "trilobite larvae" .
Although the trilobites were so successful, they were by no means the only armoured creatures to develop from the segmented worms.
Another group, the crustaceans, appeared at just about the same time.
They differed in the seemingly trivial but nonetheless diagnostic character of having not one but two pairs of antennae on their heads.
They survived the millions of years of trilobite dominance and eventually, when the trilobite dynasty came to an end, it was they who took over.
Today there are about 35,000 species of crustacean — four times as many as there are of birds.
Most prowl among the rocks and reefs — crabs, shrimps, prawns and lobsters.
Some take up a static  life — the barnacles; others swim in vast shoals — the krill which forms the food of whales.
The external skeleton is highly versatile; it serves the tiny water flea as well as it does the giant Japanese spider crab that measures over three metres from claw to claw.
Each species modifies the shape of its many paired legs for particular purposes.
Those at the front may become pincers or claws; those in the middle, paddles, walking legs or tweezers.
Some have feathery branches, gills through which oxygen is absorbed from the water.
Others develop attachments so that they can carry eggs.
The limbs, which are tubular and jointed, are operated by internal muscles.
These extend from the end of one section, along its length, to a prong from the next section which.
projects across the joint.
When the muscle contracts between these two attachment points; the limb hinges.
Such joints can only move in one plane, but crustaceans deal with that limitation by grouping two or three on a limb, sometimes close together, each working in a different plane so that the end of the limb can move in a complete circle.
The external shell gives the crustaceans the problem it gave the trilobites.
It will not expand and since it completely encloses their bodies, the only way they can grow is to shed it periodically.
As the time for the moult approaches, the animal absorbs much of the calcium carbonate from its shell into its blood.
It secretes a new, soft wrinkled skin beneath the shell.
The outgrown armour splits and the animal pulls itself out, leaving it more or less complete, like a translucent ghost of its former self.
Now its skin is soft and it must hide, but it grows fast and swells its body by absorbing water and stretching out the wrinkles of its new carapace.
Gradually this hardens and the animal can again venture into a hostile world.
The hermit crab partly avoids this complicated and hazardous process by having a shell-less hinder part and protecting it with a discarded mollusc shell, switching into a new one in a minute or so whenever it has the need.
The external skeleton has one incidental quality which has had momentous results.
Mechanically, it works almost as well on land as it does in water, so that providing a creature can find a way of breathing, there is little to prevent it walking straight out of the sea and up the beach.
Many crustaceans, indeed, have done so — sand shrimps and beach hoppers stay quite close to the sea; pill bugs and penny sows have colonised moist ground throughout the land.
The most spectacular of all these land-living crustaceans is the robber crab.
It is so big that it can embrace the trunk of a palm tree between its outstretched legs.
It climbs the palm with ease and once in the crest, cuts down with its gigantic pincers the young coconuts on which it feeds.
At the back of its main carapace, at the junction with the first segment of its abdomen, there is an opening to an air chamber, lined with moist puckered skin, through which the crab absorbs oxygen.
It returns to the sea to lay its eggs, but otherwise it is entirely at home on land.
Other descendants of the marine invertebrates have also left the water.
Among the molluscs, there are the snails and shell-less slugs, but these emerged fairly recently in the group's history.
The first to make the move to land were descendants of the segmented worms.
Some 400 million years ago, they found ways of surviving out of water and made such a success of life in their new surroundings that they ultimately gave rise to the most numerous and diverse group of all land animals, the insects.
THE FIRST FORESTS
There are few more barren places on earth than the plains surrounding a volcano in the aftermath of its eruption.
Black tides of lava lie spilt over its flanks like slag from a furnace.
Their momentum has gone but they still creak and boulders still tumble as the flow settles.
Steam hisses between the blocks of lava, caking the mouths of the vents with yellow sulphur.
Pools of liquid mud, grey, yellow or blue, boiled by the subsiding heat from far below, bubble creamily.
Otherwise all is still.
No bush grows to give shelter from the scouring wind; no speck of green relieves the black surface of the empty ash plains.
This desolate landscape has been that of much of the earth for the greater part of its history.
The first volcanoes to appear on the surface of the cooling planet erupted on a far greater scale than any that we know today, building entire mountain ranges of lava and ash.
Over the millennia, the wind and rain destroyed them.
Their rocks weathered and turned to clay and mud.
Streams transported the debris, particle by particle, and strewed it over the sea floor beyond the margins of the land.
As the deposits accumulated, they compacted into shales and sandstone.
The continents were not stationary, but drifted slowly over the earth's surface, driven by the convection currents moving deep in the earth's mantle.
When they collided, the sedimentary deposits around them were squeezed and rucked up to form new mountain ranges.
As the geological cycles repeated themselves for some three thousand million years, as the volcanoes exploded and spent themselves, life in the sea burgeoned into many forms; but the land still remained barren.
Some marine algae, no doubt, managed to live on the edges of the seas, rimming the beaches and boulders with green, but they could not have spread far beyond the splash zone, for they would have dried out and died.
Then about 420 million years ago, some forms developed a waxy covering, a cuticle, which warded off desiccation.
Even this, however, did not totally emancipate them from water.
They could not leave it because their reproductive processes depended on it.
Algae reproduce themselves in two ways — by straightforward asexual division and by the sexual method, of such importance to the progress of evolution, in which the sex cells will only develop if they meet each other and fuse in pairs.
To make these journeys and achieve these meetings, they need water.
This problem still besets the most primitive land plants living today — the moist skins known as liverworts, and the filaments covered with green scales, the mosses.
They practise these two methods of reproduction, sexual and asexual, in alternate generations.
The familiar green moss is the generation which produces the sex cells.
Each large egg remains attached to the stem at the top, while the smaller microscopic sperms are released into water and wriggle their way to fertilise it.
The egg then germinates while still attached to the parent plant and produces the next asexual generation — a thin stem with, at its tip, a hollow capsule.
In this, great numbers of grain-like spores are produced.
When the atmosphere becomes dry, the capsule wall expands until it suddenly snaps apart, throwing the spores into the air to be distributed by the wind.
Those that land on a suitably moist site then develop into new plants.
Moss filaments have no rigidity.
Some kinds achieve a modest height by packing closely together in cushions and so giving one another support, but their soft, permeable, water-filled cells do not provide enough strength to enable individual stems to stand upright.
Plants like these are very likely to have been among the earliest forms to colonise the moist margins of the land, but so far no fossil relics of undoubted mosses have been discovered from this early period.
The first land plants we know, dating from over 400 million years ago, are simple leafless branching strands which occur as filaments of carbon in the rocks of central Wales and in some cherts in Scotland.
Like moss, they had no roots, but when their stems are carefully prepared and examined under the microscope, they are seen to contain structures that no moss possesses — long, thick-walled cells for conducting water up the stem.
These structures gave them strength and enabled them to stand several centimetres tall.
That may not sound very imposing, but it represented a major advance.
Such plants, together with primitive mosses and liverworts, formed green tangled carpets, miniature forests that spread inland from the edges of estuaries and rivers, and into these the first animal colonists crept from the sea.
They were segmented creatures, ancestors of today's millipedes, pre-adapted by their chitinous armour to movement on land.
At first they doubtless kept close to the edge of the water, but wherever there was moss there was both moisture and vegetable debris and spores to eat.
With the land to themselves, these pioneering creatures flourished.
Their name millipede, "thousand legs" , is something of an over-statement.
No species alive today has many more than two hundred legs and some have as few as eight.
Nevertheless, the first ones grew to magnificent dimensions.
One of them was two metres long and must have had a devastating effect on the plants as it browsed its way through the wet green bogs.
It was, after all, as long as a cow.
The external skeleton inherited from their water-living forebears, needed few modifications for life on land, but the millipedes did have to acquire a different method of breathing.
The feathery gill attached to a stalk alongside the leg that had served their aquatic relatives, the-crustaceans, would not work in air.
In its place, the millipedes developed a system of breathing tubes, the tracheae.
Each tube begins at an opening on the flank of the shell and then branches internally into a fine network that  leads ultimately to all the organs and tissues of the body, the tips even entering individual cells and delivering gaseous oxygen to them.
Reproduction out of water posed problems for the millipedes.
Their marine ancestors had relied, like the algae, on water to enable their sperm to reach their eggs.
On land the solution was an obvious one — male and female, being well able to move about, must meet and transfer the sperm directly from one to the other.
This is exactly what millipedes do.
Both sexes produce their reproductive cells in glands close to the base of the second pair of legs.
When the male meets the female in the mating season, the two intertwine.
The male reaches forward with his seventh leg, collects a bundle of sperm from his sex gland and then clambers alongside the female until it is alongside her sexual pouch and she is able to take it in.
The process looks rather laborious but at least it is not dangerous.
Millipedes are entirely vegetarian.
Fiercer invertebrates which came to the moss jungles to prey on this grazing population, could not indulge in such trusting relationships.
Three groups of these predatory creatures still survive today — centipedes, scorpions and spiders.
Like their prey, they are members of the segmented group of animals, though the degree to which they have retained divisions in their bodies varies considerably.
The centipedes are as clearly and extensively segmented as the millipedes.
The scorpions show divisions only in their long tails; and most spiders have completely lost all signs of segmentation, only a few Southeast Asian species having clearly recognisable relics of their segmented past.
The scorpions resemble creatures, now long extinct, called sea scorpions that at this period terrorised the oceans.
Some grew to a length of two metres and were armed with immense pincers with which they seized smaller creatures.
The land scorpions were not direct descendants, but belonged to the same broad group and certainly shared the same savage habits.
The scorpions that live today have not only fearsome-looking claws but a large poison gland with a sharp curving sting drooping from the end of a thin tail.
Their copulations cannot be the somewhat hit-and-miss gropings practised by the millipedes.
Approaching such an aggressive and powerful creature is a dangerous enterprise even if the move is made by another individual of the same species and its intentions are purely sexual.
There is a real risk of it being regarded not as a mate but a meal.
So scorpion mating demands, for the first time among the animals that have appeared so far in this history, the ritualised safeguards and placations of courtship.
The male scorpion approaches the female with great wariness.
Suddenly he grabs her pincers with his.
Thus linked, with her weapons neutralised, the pair begin to dance.
Backwards and forwards they move with their tails held upright, sometimes even intertwined.
After some time, their shuffling steps have cleared the dancing ground of much of its debris.
The male then extrudes a packet of sperm from the genital opening beneath his thorax and deposits it on the ground.
Still grasping the female by the claws, he jerks and heaves her forward until her sexual opening, also on her underside, is brought directly above the sperm packet.
She takes it up, the partners disengage and go  their separate ways.
The eggs eventually hatch inside the mother's pouch, the young crawl out and clamber up on to her back.
There they stay for about a fortnight until they have completed their first moult and can fend for themselves.
Spiders, too, must be extremely cautious in their courtship.
Matters are made even more hazardous for the male because he is nearly always smaller than the female.
And he prepares for his encounter with his mate long before he meets her.
He spins a tiny triangle of silk a few millimetres in length and deposits a drop of sperm on to it from the gland that lies underneath his body.
He then sucks it into the hollow first joint of a special limb, the pedipalp, rather in the same way as one fills a fountain pen.
Now he is ready.
The courtships of spiders are beguilingly various and ingenious.
Jumping spiders and wolf spiders hunt primarily by sight and have excellent eyes.
The courting male, consequently, relies on visual signals to make the female aware of his presence and his purpose.
His pedipalps are brightly coloured and patterned and as soon as he sights a female, he begins to signal with them in a kind of manic semaphore.
Nocturnal spiders, on the other hand, depend largely on an extremely delicate sense of touch to find their prey.
When they meet one another, they gingerly caress each other 's long legs and only after a great deal of hesitation do they come to closer quarters.
Web-making spiders are sensitive to the vibrations on their silken threads that tell them when a victim has blundered into the web.
So when the male of such a species approaches a female hanging, large and menacing, on her web, or lurking hidden beside it, he signals to her by twanging the threads at one side in a special and meaningful way which he trusts the female will recognise.
Other species put their faith in bribery.
The male catches an insect and carefully parcels it up in silk.
Holding this in front of him, he cautiously approaches the female and presents it to her.
While she is occupied in examining the gift, he quickly scuttles over her and ties her to the ground with bonds of silk before he risks an embrace.
All these techniques lead to the same conclusion.
The male, having survived every danger, thrusts his pedipalp into the female's genital opening, squirts out the sperm and then hastily retreats.
It has to be recorded that in spite of all his precautions he sometimes fails to make his getaway in time and the female eats him after all.
But in terms of the success of the species as a whole, that individual disaster is of limited consequence: he lost his life after, not before, he had completed his purpose.
While the early segmented animals were perfecting their adaptations for living on land and away from moisture, the plants were also changing.
Neither the mosses nor the other early forms had true roots.
Their upright stems sprang from a horizontal one of a similar character lying along the ground or just below it.
This construction served well enough in moist surroundings, but in many parts of the world the only permanent water supply lies below the ground.
To tap that requires roots that probe deep between the particles of the soil and can absorb the film of water that clings to them in all except the most arid environments.
Three groups of plants appeared that possessed such structures and all three have descendants that have survived without much change — clubmosses  which resemble mosses but have stiffer stems; horsetails which grow in waste patches and ditches and have stems encircled at intervals with rings of needle-like leaves; and ferns.
All three have within their stems strong woody vessels to transport the water absorbed by their roots.
The rigidity thus provided enables them to grow to considerable heights and this introduced a new kind of competition between plants.
All green plants depend on light to power the chemical processes by which they synthesise their body substances from simple elements.
Height is therefore of the greatest value.
If a plant does not grow tall, it risks being overshadowed by its neighbours and condemned to shade where, starved of light, it may die.
So these early groups used the newly-acquired strength of their stems to grow very tall and become trees.
The club-mosses and horsetails were still, for the most part, swamp-dwellers and there they stood in dense ranks, 30 metres tall, some with woody trunks two metres in diameter.
The compacted remains of their stems and leaves today form coal.
The great thicknesses of the seams are impressive evidence of the abundance and persistence of the early forests.
Other species of both these groups also grew farther inland and there mingled with ferns.
These had developed true leaves, large spreading structures with which to collect as much light as possible.
They grew tall with curving trunks, like the tree ferns that still thrive in tropical rain forests.
The height of these first forests must have caused considerable problems for the animal inhabitants.
Once, there had been a superabundance of leaves and spores close to the ground.
Now the soaring trunks had raised this source of food high in the sky, creating a dense canopy that cut out much of the light.
The floor of these forests was, at best, only sparsely vegetated and great areas may have been entirely without any living leaves.
Some of the multi-legged vegetarians found their fodder by clambering up the trunks.
There may have been another factor that induced these creatures to leave the ground.
About this time, animals of a completely new kind joined the invertebrates on the land.
They had backbones and four legs and wet skins.
They were the first amphibians and they too were carnivorous.
A description of their origins and fate will have to wait until we have followed the development of the invertebrates to its climax, but their presence at this stage must be mentioned if the scene in these first jungles is not to be misrepresented.
Some of the new-style invertebrate families still survive — the bristletails and springtails.
Although they are little known and infrequently seen, they are enormously abundant.
There is hardly a spadeful of soil anywhere in the world that does not contain some of them.
Most are only a few millimetres long.
Only one is commonly noticed, the silverfish that glides smoothly across cellar floors or is occasionally discovered making a meal of the dried glue in the bindings of books.
Its body is clearly segmented but it has very many fewer divisions than the millipede.
It has a well-defined head with compound eyes and antennae; a thorax bearing three pairs of legs, the result of fusing together three segments; and a segmented abdomen which, while it no longer has limbs on each segment, retains little stumps as signs that it once possessed them.
Three thin  filaments trail from its tail.
It breathes like the millipedes by means of tracheae and it reproduces in a manner reminiscent of those early land invertebrates, the scorpions.
The male silverfish deposits a bundle of sperm on the ground and then, one way or another, he entices the female to walk over it.
When that happens, she is stimulated to take it up into her own sexual pouch.
There are several thousand different species within this group.
They all have six legs and tripartite bodies and these characters clearly make them members of that great and varied group of land invertebrates, the insects.
But they vary considerably in their anatomy and, as is often the case when considering the simpler members of a group, it is sometimes difficult to decide whether a characteristic represents a truly primitive survival or is secondarily reduced to suit a particular way of life.
The silverfish, for example, has compound eyes but others in the group are blind.
All lack wings.
Some even lack tracheae and breathe through their chitinous skeleton which is particularly thin and permeable.
Is this because they never had them or because they have lost them?
Many such debatable questions raised by the anatomy of these creatures still await universally agreed answers.
The primitive insects must have found some of their food by climbing the trunks of the early tree ferns and horsetails.
The ascent was doubtless relatively easy.
The climb down, involving long detours over the upward pointing leaf-bases, may have been very much more laborious and time-consuming.
Whether or not the prevalence of such obstacles had anything to do with the next developments, we cannot be sure.
It is certain, however, that some of these primitive insects did develop a much swifter and less laborious method of getting down.
They flew.
We have no direct evidence of how they achieved flight but the living silverfish provides a clue.
On the back of its thorax it has two flap-like sideways extensions of the chitinous shell that look as though they might be the rudiments of wings.
The early wings may not have served initially for flight.
Insects, like all animals, are greatly affected by body temperature.
The warmer they are, the quicker the energy-producing chemical reactions of their body can proceed and the more active they can be.
If their blood were to be circulated through thin flaps extending laterally from the back they could certainly warm themselves very effectively and quickly in the sunshine.
If, furthermore, these flaps had muscles at their base they could be tilted to face squarely to the sun's rays.
Insect wings do originate as flaps on the back and they do, initially, have blood flowing in their veins, so such a theory seems very plausible.
However this may be, insects with wings appeared some three hundred million years ago.
The earliest so far discovered are dragonflies.
There were several species, most were about the size of those living today but with the dragonflies as with millipedes and other groups that have pioneered a new environment, the absence of competition allowed some early forms to develop to an enormous size, and dragonflies eventually appeared with a wingspan of 70 centimetres, the largest insects ever to exist.
When the air became more thickly populated, such extravagant forms disappeared.
Dragonflies have two pairs of wings which have simple joints to them: they can only  move up and down and cannot be folded back.
Even so, they are highly accomplished flyers, shooting over the surface of a pond in a blur of gauzy wings at up to 30 kph.
At such speeds, they need accurate sense organs if they are to avoid damaging collisions.
A tuft of hair on the front of the body helps them to check that their motion through the air is straight, but their primary navigational guidance comes from huge mosaic eyes on either side of the head, which provide superbly accurate and detailed vision.
Because of this dependence on sight, the dragonflies cannot be active at night.
They are daytime hunters, flying with their six legs crooked in front of them to form a tiny basket in which they catch smaller insects.
That fact alone makes it clear that they must have been preceded into the air by other vegetarian forms which, judging from the primitive nature of their anatomy, were probably cockroaches, grasshoppers, locusts and crickets.
The presence of these large populations of insects, whirring and buzzing through the air of the ancient forests, was eventually to play an extremely important part in a revolution that was taking place among the plants.
The early trees, like their predecessors, the mosses, existed in two alternating forms, a sexual generation and an asexual one.
Their greater height posed no problem for spore dispersal: if anything, it was a help since up in the tree tops, spores were more easily caught by the wind and carried away.
The distribution of sex cells, however, was a different matter.
Hitherto, it had been achieved by the male cells swimming through water, a process which demanded that the sexual generation be small and close to the ground.
That of ferns, club-mosses and horsetails still is.
The spores of these plants develop into a thin filmy plant called the thallus which looks not unlike a liverwort and releases its sex cells from its underside where there is permanent moisture.
After its eggs have been fertilised, they grow into a tall plant like the previous spore-producing generation.
On the ground, the thallus is clearly vulnerable.
It is easily cropped by animals; if it dries out it dies; and the very success of the asexual generation with their arching fronds cuts it off from life-giving light.
Many advantages would follow if it too could grow tall, but this would require a new technique for getting the male cell to the female.
There were two mechanisms available — the ancient, rather hazardous and capricious method that distributed spores, the wind; and the newly arrived messenger service, the flying insects, which were now regularly moving from tree to tree, feeding on the leaves and the spores.
Plants took advantage of both mechanisms.
About 350 million years ago, some appeared in which the sexual generation no longer grew flat on the ground, but up in the crowns of the trees.
One group among these plants, the cycads, survives today and shows the development at a particularly dramatic stage.
Cycads look superficially like ferns, with long coarse feathery fronds.
Some individuals produce tiny spores of the ancient type that can be distributed by the wind.
Others develop much larger ones.
These are not blown away but remain attached to the parent.
There they develop the equivalent of the thallus, a special kind of conical structure within which there eventually appear eggs.
When a wind-blown spore — which now can be called pollen — lands on an egg-bearing cone, it germinates, not into a filmy thallus for which there is now no need, but into a long tube which burrows its way down into the female cone.
The process takes several months but eventually, when the tube is complete, a sperm cell is produced from the remains of the pollen grain.
It is a majestic ciliated sphere, the largest known sperm of any organism, plant or animal, so big that a single one is visible to the naked eye.
Slowly it makes its way down the tube.
When it reaches the bottom, it enters a small drop of water that has been secreted by the surrounding tissues of the cone.
There it swims, slowly spinning, driven by its cilia, as it re-enacts in miniature the journeys made through the primordial seas by the sperm cells of its algal ancestors.
Only after several days does it fuse with the egg and so complete the long process of fertilisation.
Another group of plants adopting a similar strategy to the cycads arose at about the same time.
These were the conifers — pines, larches, cedars, firs and their relations.
They too rely on the wind to distribute their pollen.
Unlike the cycads, they produce both pollen and egg-bearing cones on the same tree.
The process of fertilisation in a pine takes even longer.
The pollen tube requires a whole year to grow down and reach the egg, but once there, it contacts the egg cell directly and the male cell, after descending the tube, does not tarry in a drop of water but fuses directly with the egg.
The conifers have at last eliminated water as a transport medium for their sexual processes.
They have also developed one further refinement.
The fertilised egg remains in the cone for one more year.
Rich food supplies are laid down within its cells and waterproof coats are wrapped round it.
Eventually more than two years after fertilisation started, the cone dries and becomes woody.
Its segments open, and out drop the fertilised fully-provisioned eggs — seeds — which if necessary can wait for years before moisture penetrates them and stimulates them to spring to life.
By any standards, the conifers are a great success.
Today, they constitute about a third of the forests of the world.
The biggest living organism of any kind is a conifer, the giant redwood of California, which grows to 100 metres in height.
Another conifer, the bristle-cone pine which grows in the dry mountains of the southwestern United States, has one of the longest life-spans of any individual organism.
The age of trees can easily be calculated if they grow in an environment where there are distinct seasons.
In summer, when there is plenty of sunshine and moisture, they grow quickly and produce large wood cells; in winter when growth is slow, the wood is much more dense.
This produces annual rings in the trunk.
Counting those in the bristle-cone pine establishes that some of these gnarled and twisted trees germinated over five thousand years ago at a time when man in the Middle East was just beginning to invent writing, and have remained alive throughout the entire duration of civilisation.
Conifers protect their trunks from mechanical damage and insect attack with a special gummy substance, resin.
When it first flows from a wound it is runny but the more liquid part of it, turpentine, quickly evaporates leaving a sticky lump which seals the wound very effectively.
It also, incidentally, acts as a trap.
Any insect touching it  becomes inextricably stuck and very often buried within it as more resin flows around it.
Such lumps have proved to be the most perfect fossilising medium of all.
They survive as pieces of amber which contain in their translucent golden depths the ancient insects.
When the amber is carefully sectioned, it is possible, through the microscope, to see mouthparts, scales and hairs with as much clarity as if the insect had become entangled in the resin only the day before.
Scientists have even been able to distinguish tiny parasitic insects, mites, clinging to the legs of the bigger ones.
The oldest pieces of amber we have date from a hundred million years ago, a very long time after the conifers and the flying insects first appeared, but they contain a huge range of creatures, including representatives of all the major insect groups that we know today.
Each has already developed its own characteristic way of exploiting that major insect invention, flight.
The dragonflies beat their two wings synchronously, but this makes for very considerable physiological complexities.
Their wings do not normally come into contact, but even so there are problems when the dragonfly executes sharp turns.
Then the fore and hind wings, bending under the additional stress of the turn, beat against one another making an audible rattle that you can easily hear as you sit watching them make their circuits over a pond.
The later insect groups seem to have found that flight was more efficiently achieved with just one pair of flapping membranes.
Bees and wasps hitch their fore and hind wings together with hooks to make, in effect, a single surface.
Butterfly wings overlap.
Hawkmoths, which are among the swiftest insect flyers capable of speeds of 50 kph, have reduced their hind wings very considerably in size and latched them on to the long narrow fore-wings with a curved bristle.
Beetles use their fore-wings for a different purpose altogether.
These creatures are the heavy armoured tanks of the insect world and they spend a great deal of their time on the ground, barging their way through the vegetable litter, scrabbling in the soil or gnawing into wood.
Such activities could easily damage delicate wings.
The beetles protect theirs by turning the front pair into stiff thick covers which fit neatly over the top of the abdomen.
The wings are stowed neatly beneath, carefully and ingeniously folded.
The wing veins have sprung joints in them.
When the wing covers are lifted, the joints unlock and the wings spring open.
As the beetle lumbers into the air, the stiff wing covers are usually held out to the side, a posture that inevitably hampers efficient flight.
Flower beetles, however, have managed to deal with this problem.
They have notches at the sides of the wing covers near the hinges so that the covers can be replaced over the abdomen leaving the wings extended and beating.
The most accomplished aeronauts of all are the flies.
They use only their fore-wings for flight.
The hind wings are reduced to tiny knobs.
All flies possess these little structures but they are particularly noticeable in the crane flies, the daddy-long-legs, in which the knobs are placed on the ends of stalks so that they look like the heads of drumsticks.
When the fly is in the air, these organs which are jointed to the thorax in the same way as wings, oscillate up and down a hundred or more times a second.
They act  partly as stabilisers, like gyroscopes, and partly as sense organs presumably telling the fly of the attitude of its body in the air and the direction in which it is moving.
Information about its speed comes from its antennae which vibrate as the air flows over them.
Flies are capable of beating their wings at speeds up to an astonishing 1000 beats a second.
Some flies no longer use muscles directly attached to the bases of the wings.
Instead they vibrate the whole thorax, a cylinder constructed of strong pliable chitin, making it click in and out like a bulging metal tin.
The thorax is coupled to the wings by an ingenious structure at the wing base, and its contractions causes them to beat up and down.
The insects were the first creatures to colonise the air and for a hundred million years it was theirs alone.
But their lives were not without hazards.
Their ancient adversaries, the spiders, never developed wings, but they did not allow their insect prey to escape totally.
They set traps of silk across the flyways between the branches and so continued to take toll of the insect population.
Plants now began to turn the flying skills of the insects to their own advantage.
Their reliance on the wind for the distribution of their reproductive cells was always haphazard and expensive in biological terms.
Spores do not require fertilisation and they will develop wherever they fall, provided the ground is sufficiently moist and fertile.
Even so, the vast majority of them, from such a plant as a fern, fail to find the, right conditions and die.
The chances of survival of a wind-blown pollen grain are very much smaller still for their requirements are even more precise and restricted.
They can only develop and become effective if they happen to land on a female cone.
So the pine tree has to produce pollen in gigantic quantities.
A single small male cone produces several million grains and if you tap one in spring, they fall out in such numbers that they form a golden cloud.
A whole pine forest produces so much pollen that ponds become covered with curds of it — and all of it wasted.
Insects represented a much more efficient transport system.
If properly encouraged, they could carry the small amount of pollen necessary for fertilisation and place it on the exact spot in the female flower where it was required.
This courier service could be most economically operated if both pollen and egg were placed close together on the plant.
The insects would then be able to make both deliveries and collections in the same call.
And so developed the flower.
The earliest and simplest of these marvellous devices so far discovered were those produced by the magnolias.
They appeared about a hundred million years ago.
The eggs are clustered in the centre, each protected by a green coat with a receptive spike on the top called a stigma, on which the pollen must be placed if the eggs are to be fertilised.
Grouped around the eggs are many stamens producing pollen.
In order to bring these organs to the notice of the insects, the whole structure is surrounded by brightly coloured modified leaves, the petals.
Beetles had fed on the pollen of cycads and they were among the first to transfer their attentions to the early flowers like those of magnolias and waterlilies.
As they moved  from one to another, they collected meals of pollen and paid for them by becoming covered in excess pollen which they involuntarily delivered to the next flower they visited.
One danger of having both eggs and pollen in the same structure is that the plant may pollinate itself and so anticipate and prevent cross-fertilisation, the very purpose of all these complexities.
This possibility is avoided in the magnolia, as in many plants, by having eggs and pollen that develop at different times.
Magnolia stigmas will accept pollen as soon as the flower opens.
Its own stamens, however, do not produce their pollen until later by which time its eggs will have been cross-fertilised by exploring insects.
The appearance of the flowers transformed the face of the world.
The green forest now flared with colour as the plants advertised the delights and rewards they had on offer.
The first flowers were open to all that cared to alight on them.
No specialised organs were required in order to reach the centre of the magnolia flower or the water lily, no particular skill was needed to gather the pollen from the loaded stamens.
Such blooms attracted several kinds of insects — bees as well as beetles.
But a variety of visitors is not an unmitigated advantage for they themselves are also likely to call upon several kinds of unspecialised flowers.
Pollen of one species deposited in flowers of another is pollen wasted.
So throughout the evolution of the flowering plant, there has been a tendency for particular flowers and particular insects to develop together, each catering specifically for the other's requirements and tastes.
Right from the times of the giant horsetails and ferns, insects had been accustomed to visiting the tops of trees to gather spores as food.
Pollen was an almost identical diet and it still remains a most important prize.
Bees collect it in great baskets on their thighs and take it back to their hives for immediate consumption or for turning into pollen bread which is an essential food for their developing young.
Some plants, among them species of myrtle, produce two kinds of pollen, one that fertilises their flowers, and another of a particularly tasty kind that is designed only to be eaten.
Other flowers developed a completely new bribe, nectar.
The only purpose of this sweet liquid is to please insects so greatly that they become addicted to it and devote all possible time during the flowering season to collecting it.
With this they recruited a whole new regiment of messengers, particularly bees, flies and butterflies.
These prizes of pollen and nectar have to be advertised.
The bright colours of flowers make them conspicuous from considerable distances.
As the insect approaches, it is provided with markings on the petals which indicate the exact placing of the rewards they seek.
Some flowers intensify their colours towards the centre or introduce another shade altogether — forget-me-nots, hollyhocks, bindweed.
Others are marked with lines and spots like an airfield to show the insect where to land and in which direction to taxi — foxgloves, violets, rhododendrons.
There are more of these signals than we may realise.
Many insects can perceive colours of the spectrum that are invisible to us.
If we photograph what seem to be plain flowers with film that is sensitive to ultraviolet light, we can see many more such markings on the petals.
Scent is also a major lure.
In most cases, the perfumes that insects find attractive, such as lavender, roses, and honeysuckle, please us as well.
But this is not always the case.
Flies feast on rotting flesh.
Flowers that enlist them as pollinators must cater for their tastes and produce a similar smell and often do so with an accuracy and pungency far beyond the endurance of the human nose.
The maggot-bearing stapelia from southern Africa not only reeks dreadfully of carrion but reinforces its appeal to flies by producing flowers with wrinkled brown petals covered with hairs that look like the decaying skin of a dead animal.
To complete the illusion, the plant generates heat to mimic the warmth produced by corruption.
The whole effect is so convincing that flies not only visit flower after flower, transporting the stapelia's pollen, but even complete the activity for which they visit real carrion — laying their eggs on the flower just as they do in a carcass.
When these hatch, the maggots find that they are not provided with a meal of rotting meat but only an inedible petal.
They die from starvation, but the stapelia has been fertilised.
Perhaps the most bizarre imitations of all are those of some orchids that attract insects by sexual impersonation.
One produces a flower that closely resembles the form of a female wasp complete with eyes, antennae and wings and even gives off the odour of a female wasp in mating condition.
Male wasps, deceived, attempt to copulate with it.
As they do so, they deposit a load of pollen within the orchid flower and immediately afterwards receive a fresh batch to carry to the next false female.
Sometimes insects are disinclined to collect pollen, preferring nectar, or will pack it away in places from which it is not easily dislodged.
Then the flowers have to have devices to force their pollen on the insect.
Some blooms have become obstacle courses during which their visitors are pummelled by stamens and bombarded with pollen before they are able to leave.
Broom flowers are so constructed that as the insect lands, the stamens, packed under tension inside a sealed capsule of petals, shoot out and strike the underside of the bee, covering its furry abdomen with pollen.
The bucket orchid from Central America drugs its visitors.
Bees clamber into its throat and sip a nectar so intoxicating that after they have taken only a little they begin to stagger about.
The surface of the flower is particularly slippery.
The bees lose their foothold and are shot into a small bucket of liquid.
The only way out of this is up a spout.
As the inebriated insect totters up, it has to wriggle beneath an overhanging rod which showers it with pollen.
Sometimes plant and insect become totally dependent one upon the other.
The yucca grows in Central America.
It has a rosette of spear-shaped leaves from the centre of which rises a mast bearing cream-coloured flowers.
These attract a small moth with a specially curved proboscis that enables it to gather pollen from the yucca stamens.
It moulds the pollen into a ball and then carries it off to another yucca flower.
First it goes to the bottom of the flower, pierces the base of the ovary with its ovipositor and lays several eggs on some of the ovules that lie within.
Then it climbs back up to the top of the stigma rising from the ovary and rams the pollen ball into the top.
The plant has now been fertilised and in due course, all the ovules in the chamber at the base will swell  into seeds.
Those that carry the moth's eggs will grow particularly large and be eaten by the young caterpillars.
The rest will propagate the yucca.
If the moth were to become extinct, the yuccas would never set seed.
If the yuccas disappeared, the moth's caterpillars could not develop.
Each is inextricably in the debt of the other.
One further debt is clear.
Flowers, exquisitely perfumed and graced with a multitude of colours and shapes, bloomed long before man appeared on the earth.
They evolved in order to appeal not to him but to insects.
Had butterflies been colour-blind and bees without a delicate sense of smell, man would have been denied some of the greatest delights that the natural world has to offer.
THE SWARMING HORDES
By any standards, the insect body must be reckoned the most successful of all the solutions to the problems of living on the surface of the earth.
Insects swarm in deserts as well as forests; they swim below water and crawl in deep caves in perpetual darkness.
They fly over the high peaks of the Himalayas and exist in surprising numbers on the permanent ice caps of the Poles.
One fly makes its home in pools of crude oil welling up from the ground; another lives in steaming hot volcanic springs.
Some deliberately seek high concentrations of brine and others regularly withstand being frozen solid.
They excavate homes for themselves in the skins of animals and burrow long winding tunnels within the thickness of a leaf.
The number of individual insects in the world seems beyond any computation, but someone has made the attempt and concluded that at any one time, there must be something of the order of one thousand million thousand million.
Put another way, for every human being alive, there are about a million insects — and together these insects would weigh about twelve times as much as he does.
There are thought to be about three times as many species of insect as of all other kinds of animal put together.
So far, man has described and named about 700,000 of them and there are certainly three or four times as many still unnamed, awaiting the attentions of anyone who has the time, patience and knowledge to sit down and make a systematic review of them.
Yet all these different forms are variations of one basic anatomical pattern: a body divided into three distinct parts — a head bearing the mouth and most of the sense organs; a thorax filled almost entirely with muscles to operate the three pairs of legs beneath and, usually, one or two pairs of wings above; and an abdomen carrying the organs needed for digestion and reproduction.
All three sections are enclosed within an external skeleton made, primarily, of chitin.
This brown fibrous material was first developed over 550 million years ago by the early segmented creatures, the trilobites and crustaceans.
Chemically, it is similar to cellulose and in its pure form it is flexible and permeable.
The insects, however, cover it with a protein called sclerotin that makes  it become very hard.
This produces the heavy inflexible armour of the beetles, and mouthparts sharp and tough enough to gnaw through timber and even cut metals like copper and silver.
The chitinous external skeleton seems to be particularly responsive to the demands of evolution.
Its surface can be sculpted without affecting the anatomy beneath.
Its proportions can be varied to take on new shapes.
Thus the chewing mouthparts possessed by the early cockroach-like insects have been turned by their descendants into siphons and stilettos, saws, chisels, and probes that when unreeled are as long as the whole body.
Legs have become elongated into catapults that can propel an insect two hundred times its own body length, broad oars to row, it through water or thin hair-tipped stilts with a wide stride that enables their owners to walk on the surface of pools.
Many limbs carry special tools moulded from the chitin — pouches for holding pollen, combs for cleaning a compound eye, spikes to act as grappling irons and notches with which to fiddle a song.
An external skeleton, however, is also an unexpandable prison.
The trilobites in the ancient seas escaped its restrictions by moulting.
That is still the insects' solution.
The process may sound wasteful, but they conduct it with great economy.
A new chitinous shell, much folded and compressed, forms beneath the old one.
A layer of liquid separates the two and this absorbs the chitin from the old skeleton, leaving the hard sclerotinised parts connected by the thinnest of tissues.
The chitin-rich liquid is then absorbed through the still permeable new skeleton back into the insect's body.
The old plates split apart, usually along a line running down the back, and the insect hauls itself out.
As it does so, its liberated body begins to swell, filling out the folds in the new skin.
In a short time, the chitin hardens and becomes strengthened by new deposits of sclerotin.
Primitive insects like the bristletails and the springtails do not change their shape very much as they grow.
They merely moult as they increase in size.
Even after they have begun to breed they may continue to moult.
The ancient winged insects — cockroaches, cicadas, crickets and dragonflies — also grow in a similar way, their early forms closely resembling the adults except that they lack wings.
These will only appear after the final moult, except in damsel flies which take two moults, one very soon after the other, to bring their wings to perfection.
Even when these insects adopt a very different existence for the first part of their lives, they do not change their form very radically.
The larvae of the cicadas that sit shrilling on trees spend their lives below ground sucking sap from roots.
Larval dragonflies hunt on the bottom of ponds, grabbing worms and other small creatures with long protrusible mouth-parts.
Yet in both the image of the adult is discernible.
More advanced insects, however, undergo such wholesale changes that there is no possible way of linking the larva to the adult except by watching the creature make the change.
Maggots turn into flies, grubs into beetles, and caterpillars into butterflies.
The job of a grub, a maggot or a caterpillar is simply to eat.
Its body is dedicated to this one purpose.
Since it will not breed in this form, it has no sexual equipment; since it  has no cause to attract a mate, it needs no mechanisms to send out call-signals whether by sight, smell or sound, nor any sense organs to receive such messages; and as its parents have gone to considerable trouble to ensure that when it hatches it is surrounded by the great quantities of the particular food it requires, it needs no wings.
Its one essential tool is a pair of efficient jaws.
Behind these it requires little more than a bag.
In order that this may swell easily to accommodate its rapidly accumulating tissues, this simple body is not burdened with a heavy sclerotised skeleton but enclosed in a thin and to some degree stretchable cuticle.
When this can expand no further, it splits and is rolled off, like a nylon stocking from a leg.
With no shell and thus no firm base on which to attach a muscle and nothing rigid to serve as a lever, these larvae are indifferent movers.
They cannot hop, skip or jump.
Indeed, they can barely manage even to run, for they have only soft ballooning tubes to serve as stumpy legs.
These however are quite efficient enough to move the eating machines that are their owners from one mouthful to another.
The lack of shell leaves the larvae unprotected.
This is of little consequence to grubs and maggots, for they hold their interminable feasts out of sight of the rest of the world, gobbling their way around the heart of an apple or gnawing tunnels in wood, shielded by what they are eating.
But caterpillars, most of which banquet out in the open, must look to their defences.
They are unexcelled as camouflage artists.
Those of geometer moths are coloured and patterned to look like twigs and when they hold themselves with one end in the air at exactly the same angle to a stem as other twigs springing from it, they are virtually impossible to detect.
A swallowtail caterpillar, sitting on a leaf, is certainly conspicuous, being green with irregular flecks of white, but it is seldom noticed for it looks like a bird dropping.
If disguises are penetrated, many caterpillars have a second line of defence.
The pussmoth caterpillar browses head-down on leaves.
Its body colour is exactly that of its food plant, but if an intruder shakes the branch and alarms it, the caterpillar suddenly lifts its head from its meal, exposing a scarlet face.
Simultaneously it protrudes a pair of blood-red filaments from its tail and squirts formic acid.
Another moth caterpillar in South America can be even more alarming.
It has a large round mark on either side of its head and when agitated, weaves its front end from side to side, making itself look unnervingly like a wide-eyed snake.
Some caterpillars have made themselves unpleasant to eat.
They are covered with poisonous hairs or have within their bodies a particularly acrid-tasting substance.
It pays these creatures to be very conspicuous indeed.
The hairy ones are mustachioed and bewhiskered in the most flamboyant way, the unpleasant-tasting ones have skins brilliantly coloured in reds, yellows, blacks and purples — all warnings to potential hunters that these morsels, for one reason or another, are not worth eating.
There are also some that are actually innocuous but are seldom eaten for they have taken a rather complicated gamble by copying the colours of poisonous caterpillars to delude aggressors into giving them as wide a berth as the creatures they mimic.
Many insects spend nearly all their lives as such larvae, growing bigger and building  up their stores of food.
Beetle grubs may spend seven years boring through wood and extracting nutriment from that most indigestible of materials, cellulose.
Caterpillars munch for months, packing away their favourite leaves before the season finishes.
But sooner or later, they all reach their full size and the end of the allotted span of their larval lives.
Now comes the first of two highly dramatic transformations.
It is a change some make in private.
Only the larvae of insects have silk glands.
They have used them already to build communal tents, to extrude life-lines guiding them over plants, or ropes to let themselves down from one twig to another.
Now, however, many spin silk to conceal themselves from the world.
The silk moth caterpillar surrounds itself with a fuzzy bundle of threads, the moon moth constructs a cocoon with a silvery metallic sheen, the ermine moth builds an elegant casket of lacy net.
Many butterfly larvae produce no covering at all.
They simply spin a silken sling to attach themselves to a twig.
As soon as they are settled, they discard their caterpillar costumes.
Their skin splits and rolls down revealing a smooth, brown hard-shelled object, the pupa.
The only movement it makes is an occasional twitch of its pointed tip.
It has spiracles along its side through which it can breathe, but it neither feeds nor excretes.
Its life seems to have been suspended.
Internally however, the most profound changes are taking place.
The entire body of the larva is being dismembered and reassembled.
When the larva first began to develop from the egg, its cells were segregated into two groups.
Some stopped dividing after a few hours and remained generalised in form and in dense clusters.
The rest continued to build the body of the caterpillar.
After it hatched and had begun to feed, its body cells divided no more.
Instead they simply enlarged until, by the time that the caterpillar was full grown, they were vastly distended and many thousand times bigger than their original size.
All this time, the other cell clusters remained tiny and inactive.
But now, inside the pupa, their moment has come.
The giant cells of the caterpillar's body die and the dormant cell clusters suddenly begin to divide rapidly, nourishing themselves on the soup of the disintegrated caterpillar body.
The insect, in effect, is eating itself.
Slowly it builds a new body of a completely different form.
Its shadowy features can be seen on the outside of the brown pupa, like the anatomy of a mummy, vague beneath its wrappings.
Indeed, the name "pupa" derives from a Latin word meaning a doll, for at this stage the insect within seems to be wrapped in swaddling clothes.
The actual emergence usually takes place under cover of darkness.
A butterfly pupa, hanging from a twig, begins to shake.
A head with two huge eyes and antennae pressed over its back pushes through the pupa at one end.
Legs come free and begin clawing frantically in the air.
Slowly and laboriously, with frequent pauses to gather strength, the insect hauls itself out.
The thorax emerges and there on its back are two flat crumpled objects, its wings, wrinkled like the kernel of a walnut.
The insect jerks itself free and hangs on the empty pupa case, its body trembling.
With convulsive shudders, it begins to pump blood into a network of veins within the baggy wings.
Slowly they expand.
The blurred pattern on the outside of the wings enlarges and becomes focused.
Blotches swell into miraculously detailed eye-spots.
Within half an hour the wings are fully distended so that the two sides of the bag meet flat against one another enclosing the veins between them.
The veins themselves are still soft.
If the tip of one of them were damaged now, it would drip blood.
But gradually the blood is drawn back into the body and the veins harden into rigid struts that will give the wing its strength.
All this time, the wings have been held together like the leaves of a book.
Now, as they dry and become rigid, the insect slowly moves them apart to show the world for the first time the unblemished perfection of its shimmering colours and awaits the dawn of its first day.
The insect can now spend the calories that it so assiduously collected and stored when it was a larva.
For the adult, feeding is of secondary importance.
Mayflies and some moths do not even have mouthparts.
Others sip nectar during their brief lives to renew their energies and to provide sustenance for egg production, but none need to feed in order to build their bodies; their growth has come to an end.
The urgency of their lives now is to find a mate.
Butterflies do so by displaying their wings, the marvellous intricate patterns of which are statements of identity so that individuals may recognise those with whom mating can be fertile.
Unlike their larvae, butterflies have excellent compound eyes — the male usually has even bigger ones than the female, for it is he that does the searching.
Since their eyesight is sensitive to parts of the spectrum that are invisible to us, butterflies' wings, like flowers, have even more complex patterns than our ultraviolet-blind eyes can see.
Colours and designs created by tiny scales, overlapping like tiles on a roof, come from pigments, or the effects of microscopic structures which split the light falling on them and reflect back only a part of it.
Drop a spot of highly volatile liquid on such a wing and the colours disappear as the liquid occludes the physical structure, only to reappear as it evaporates and the light is splintered once more.
These dazzling wings, iridescent and downy, trailing pennants and variegated with transparent windows, veined, fringed and spotted with the loveliest of colours, are the most elaborate visual summons in the whole insect world.
Other insects use other media and produce equally complex and powerful signals.
The cicadas, crickets and grasshoppers rely on sound.
Most insects are deaf, so these groups have had to develop not only voices but ears.
Cicadas have circular eardrums on either side of the thorax.
Grasshoppers listen with their legs.
They have two slits on the first pair of thighs which lead to deep pockets.
The common wall between these forms a membrane which is the equivalent of an eardrum.
The angle at which sound strikes the slits greatly affects the strength in which it reaches the drum, so the grasshopper, by waving its legs in the air, can discover the direction from which a call is coming.
Some grasshoppers produce their whirring trills by sawing the notched edge of their hind legs against a prominent strengthened vein of the wing.
Cicadas, the loudest of insect singers, have a much more complicated apparatus.
Their abdomen contains two chambers, one on each side.
The inner wall of each chamber is stiff and when it is  moved in or out, it makes a click, as the lid of a tin may do.
In the abdomen behind there is a muscle which can pull the wall back and forth up to 600 times a second.
The noise this produces is greatly amplified for most of the abdomen behind the vibrating plate is also hollow and two large rectangular sections of the abdominal wall are stiffened to form resonators.
These are covered by flaps projecting from the lower edge of the thorax that can be opened or closed so as to increase or dampen the sound like shutters on an organ.
Each species produces its own characteristic call.
Some sound like a mechanical saw hitting a nail, some like a knife being ground on a wheel or fat dropping on an overheated plate.
So loud are these calls that a single insect can be heard half a kilometre away and a chorus of them can set a whole forest ringing and echoing.
There is much more detail in these penetrating songs than our ears can detect.
We cannot hear a break between sounds of less than one tenth of a second.
Cicadas are able to distinguish intervals of one hundredth of a second.
When they sing, they vary the frequency of individual clicks from, for example, two hundred a second to five hundred a second and do so in a regular rhythmic way.
By such changes and rhythms, which are totally inaudible to us, an individual can identify the call of its own species; a male can avoid the territory of another singing male and a female fly towards it.
Mosquitoes also use sound as a mating call, but they produce and receive it in a way that is all their own.
The female, beating her wings as fast as 500 times a second creates the high-pitched hum that is so unsettling as you lie in camp trying to go to sleep without a mosquito net.
The male is able to detect this sound with an eardrum at the base of his antennae, which vibrate in sympathy with this one frequency, and so fly towards her.
Other insects attract their mates by exploiting the third of the senses, smell.
The females of some moths produce an odour that the males can detect with large feathery antennae.
So sensitive are these organs and so characteristic and powerful is the scent, that a female has been known to summon a male from eleven kilometres away.
At such a distance there must be as little as one molecule of scent in a cubic yard of air, yet it is sufficient to cause the male to fly in pursuit of its source.
He needs both antennae to do this.
With only one, he cannot establish direction, but with two he can judge on which side the scent is stronger and so fly steadily towards it.
A female emperor moth, in a cage in a wood, transmitting a perfume undetectable to our nostrils, has attracted over a hundred huge males from the surrounding countryside within three hours.
So, by sight, sound and smell, the adult insects attract their mates.
Male grasps female sometimes only briefly, sometimes for several hours.
The couple may even fly through the air awkwardly, in tandem.
Then the female lays her fertilised eggs and provisions them.
Butterflies seek out the one plant whose leaves provide the only food their caterpillars will eat; beetles bury pellets of dung and lay their eggs within them; flies feverishly deposit their eggs within carrion; and solitary wasps catch spiders, paralyse them with a sting and stack them around their eggs so that the young larvae will have fresh meat awaiting them.
The female ichneumon wasp has an ovipositor like a dagger with which she drills a hole in wood at the exact point where she has detected a  beetle grub lying beneath.
She pierces it and deposits an egg in its soft body.
Her larva when it hatches will eat the grub alive.
And so the whole process of egg-larva-pupa-adult begins once more.
The insect body has produced an almost infinite variety of forms.
In one characteristic only does there seem to be a limitation — size.
The largest living insects today are not longer than about 30 centimetres — the wingspan of exceptional specimens of the atlas moth, and the length of the largest of the stick insects.
The biggest of beetles, the hercules, reaches the same sort of size and weighs as much as 100 grams.
But that is only the size of a mouse.
Why are there not beetles as big as badgers and moths as large as hawks?
The restricting factor is their breathing technique.
Like their close relatives, the early millipedes, the insects rely on tracheae, the system of tubes opening to the outside by a line of spiracles along the flank and running to every part of the body.
They work by gaseous diffusion.
Oxygen in the air that fills the tracheae is absorbed through the wall at the extremities.
Similarly carbon dioxide is expelled from the tissues and diffuses away.
The system works excellently over short distances but as the length of the tube increases, so it becomes more and more inefficient.
Some insects are able to improve the circulation of air by inflating and deflating their abdomens with a muscular pumping action.
The tiny tracheae, which are strengthened with rings in their walls, do not flatten but shorten and expand like concertinas.
A few insects have tracheae that swell into thin-walled balloons which are depressed and expanded as the abdomen pumps up and down.
But even with all these refinements the system becomes ineffective above a certain size; the gigantic cockroaches and murderous man-hunting wasps of nightmares are physiological impossibilities.
But the insects have, in another way, transcended even the limitation of scale.
All over the tropics stand termite hills.
In some parts they are grouped in swarms hundreds strong, as thick as herds of grazing antelope.
The comparison is not entirely fanciful.
A single hill contains a colony of several million insects.
They are not just creatures that have elected to live together in one communal dwelling, like human beings in some gigantic tower block.
For one thing they are all one family, the offspring of a single pair of adults.
For another, all of them are incomplete creatures, incapable of independent life.
The workers, scurrying along the tracks through the undergrowth, are blind and sterile.
The soldiers that stand guard beside the entrances to the colonies and rush to defend any breach in the walls, are armed with jaws so huge that they can no longer gather food for themselves and have to be fed by the workers.
At the centre of the colony lies the queen.
She is imprisoned within massive earthen walls from which she can never escape for her body is far too big to get through the passages that lead to it.
Her abdomen is swollen into a white heaving sausage, I 2 centimetres long, from which she produces eggs at the almost unbelievable rate of 30,000 a day.
She too would die if she were unattended.
Teams of workers deliver food to her at one end and collect eggs from the other.
The only sexually active male, the wasp-sized king, stays alongside her and he too is fed by the workers.
The link that binds all these individuals together into one co-ordinated super-organism  is a highly effective system of communication.
Soldier termites sound an alarm by beating their large hard heads on passage walls.
Workers, having a new source of food, leave a scent trail which their blind fellows can easily follow.
But the most pervasive and important mechanism is based on chemical substances called pheromones.
This circulates instructions throughout the colony with great speed.
All the members of the colony continually exchange food and saliva with one another.
Workers pass it from mouth to mouth or gather one another 's excrement in order to reprocess the partially digested food and extract the last particle of nutriment from it.
They in turn feed both the larvae and the soldiers.
They also attend the queen lying in her chamber, constantly licking her rippling flanks and collecting drops of liquid from her anus.
In the course of this they gather the pheromones that she produces and circulate them quickly throughout the colony.
The young larvae, hatching from the queen's eggs are potentially of both sexes, but the queen's pheromones with which they are fed by the workers inhibit their development and they remain sterile, wingless and blind.
The soldiers too produce a pheromone, contributing to the mix of chemical messages circulating in the colony and in a similar way preventing the development of any of the larvae into soldiers.
But pheromones only remain effective for a short period.
If the number of soldiers in the colony falls, then so does the amount of soldier-pheromone in circulation.
The queen not only produces pheromones but is fed them, so she receives all this information.
Whether she responds to it by producing special kinds of eggs destined to be soldiers or whether the workers treat the existing larvae in a special way is not certain.
It probably varies in any case from species to species, but in such a situation, more soldiers are certainly reared until the correct proportion is restored.
The queen will also, on occasion, change the nature of her pheromone excretion so that the development of the larvae is no longer suppressed and they become sexually mature.
Then the dark corridors of the colony are filled with rustling hordes of young winged adults.
In some species, the workers open special slits in the sides of the mound and build take-off ramps in front of them.
These exits are guarded by the soldiers.
Then, just after the beginning of the rains, the soldiers stand aside and flying termites pour out of the clefts and swirl into the sky like smoke.
The occasion is a bonanza for the animals of the bush.
Frogs and reptiles gather beside the exits snapping at the insects as they flock out on to the ramps.
As the exodus proceeds, the sky becomes filled with birds wheeling back and forth.
The termites seldom go far.
They come down on to the ground and immediately their wings break off close to the thorax.
They have served their function.
Now male chases female across the ground in determined processionary dances.
Those few that escape being eaten form pairs and go off together to find a nest site in a crevice in the ground or a crack in a tree.
There they construct a small royal cell.
Within it, they copulate and lay eggs.
The first larvae to hatch have to be fed by their parents, but once they are big enough to forage for food and build walls of mud, the royal couple devote themselves entirely to the production of eggs and the colony is founded.
Termites are closely related to those ancient insects, the cockroaches.
Like them, their bodies do not have a waist and the young larvae are markedly similar to the adult winged form.
They grow by a series of moults but never pass through a pupal stage or undergo transformation.
Like cockroaches too, the termites feed almost entirely on vegetable matter.
There are some two thousand different species of them.
Twigs, leaves and grass are standard fare.
Some specialise in eating timber, boring away inside posts and logs until they become hollow shells that collapse at the touch of a finger.
Termites construct some of the greatest of all insect buildings.
A termite fortress, walled, buttressed and castellated, may contain ten tons of mud and stand three or four times as tall as a man.
Several million inhabitants, busily running their errands within, can cause overheating and produce a foul oxygen-poor atmosphere so ventilation is of the greatest importance.
Around the margins of the hill, the termites construct tall, thin-walled chimneys which stand out from the sides like ribs.
No insects live inside these huge smooth-walled ducts.
Their only function is ventilation.
As the sun warms their walls, the air inside becomes hotter than that in the centre of the nest.
It rises, drawing exhausted air from the central galleries and the deeper parts of the hill, creating a circulation.
The thin, external walls of the chimneys are porous and so oxygen from the outside atmosphere diffuses in.
The air, thus refreshed, rises to the top of the nest and then circulates back down other passageways.
In very hot weather, the workers descend tunnels that go deep into the ground to the water table.
Each returns carrying a crop full of water with which it wets the walls of the main part of the nest.
The heat evaporates the water and this also lowers the temperature.
By such devices, the worker termites manage to keep a very even temperature inside the nest.
In Australia, the compass termites build castles in the shape of huge flat chisel blades, always with their long axis pointing north and south.
Such a shape exposes the minimum possible area to the ferocious midday sun but catches the maximum of the feebler rays in the early morning and evening when, especially in the cold season, the termites are grateful for warmth.
In West Africa and other areas where there is heavy rain, the colonies build nests like mushrooms with flat roofs which shed the water.
Termitologists have made great advances in working out how the pheromone communication system controls and coordinates a colony's activities, but no one has yet explained how the millions of blind workers, each carrying a tiny pellet of mud, manage to construct between them such ingeniously designed, efficient and large-scale buildings.
One other group of insects has taken to the colonial life on a scale that is comparable to the termites; those with narrow waists, two pairs of transparent wings and powerful stings, the wasps, bees and ants.
Wasps still show the stages by which colonialism may have developed.
Some hunting wasps live entirely solitary lives.
The female, after mating, builds her own mud cells, lays an egg in each, provides it with a collection of paralysed spiders for food and then abandons it.
In other species, she stays beside the nest and when the young hatch, brings food to them day after day.
In yet others, the females build their individual nests close to one another but, after a few weeks, some  abandon their own constructions and join others in building theirs.
Eventually, one female becomes dominant and lays all the eggs while the others concentrate on building cells and collecting food for her.
The honeybees have taken this basic arrangement and elaborated it to an extreme degree so that they live in colonies of many thousands.
The single queen stays on the comb, laying eggs in the cells that have been built by the workers to receive them.
Once again, the community, like that of the termites, is bound together by a system of chemical messages, the pheromones, perpetually circulating within the hive, which inform all the inhabitants of the state of the population and of the absence or presence of the queen.
But bees have other ways of communicating between one another.
Flying through the air to find food, they cannot leave scent trails behind them for other members of the colony as earth-bound termites do.
Instead, they dance.
When a worker bee arrives back in the hive after visiting a newly opened honey-laden flower, it performs a special dance on the landing platform in front of the entrance to the colony.
First it scurries round in a circle, then it bisects it, emphasising the importance of this last movement by waggling its abdomen and making a particularly excited kind of buzzing.
Its track points directly to the source of food.
Workers observing it and about to leave on their own foraging, immediately fly off in the direction indicated.
Then the dancer goes into the hive to dance again.
The farther it goes from the entrance before it dances, the farther away is the flower that it has discovered.
The combs of the nest, in both wild and domestic colonies, are vertical so now the waggle-steps cannot point directly to the food source.
Instead they refer to the sun.
If the bee crosses the circle vertically, then the target is in line with the sun.
If it is, say, sod to the right, then the dance will be 20 degrees to the right of the vertical.
The workers surrounding the dancer watch it closely, remember the message and fly away to find the flower.
When they return with the honey, they too will perform a dance so that, in a very short time, most of the worker force in the hive is actively gathering honey from the new source.
The most complex and highly evolved forms of colonialism in the insect world are those created by the relations of the wasps and bees, the ants.
Some live within plants, stimulating the tissues of their hosts to provide them with custom-built homes by growing special galls, hollow stems or thorns with swollen bases.
The leaf-cutting ants of South America build vast underground nests and set off from them, day and night, in long columns to demolish trees, removing every shoot, leaf and stem, section by tiny section and transporting them all back to their underground chambers.
They do not eat this material but chew it up to form a compost on which they cultivate a fungus.
The tiny white fruiting bodies of this provide them with their food.
Tree ants in Southeast Asia construct nests by sewing leaves together.
A party of workers haul two leaf edges together, gripping one with their jaws and the other with their feet.
Other workers on the inside begin the work of sewing them together.
No adult insect can produce silk, so these ants bring young larvae to the site, holding them between their jaws and giving them little squeezes so that the larvae will produce their silk.
The builders then move  these living tubes of glue back and forth across the leaf junction until the two edges are joined by a silken fabric.
In Australia, the honeypot ants collect nectar and force-feed it to workers of a special caste until their abdomens are distended to the size of peas and their skins stretched so thin that they are quite transparent.
The workers then hang them up by their forelegs in underground galleries, like living storage jars.
Most ants, however, are carnivorous.
Many prey upon termites, raiding the great mounds and doing battle with the soldiers.
If they win, they devour the defenceless workers and larvae.
Others, in one of the most astounding forms of social behaviour, make slaves of a different kind of ant.
They raid the nest, collect the pupae and carry them back to their own colony.
When these hatch, the young ants serve their captors, collecting food and feeding it to them, for the slave-makers have such large jaws that they cannot feed themselves.
The most terrifying ants of all are those that make no nest but wander through the countryside seeking prey.
In South America they are known as army ants, in Africa as drivers.
They march in columns so long they may take several hours to pass one spot.
At the head, the soldiers fan out to forage.
Behind comes a column of workers, scurrying along a dozen or so abreast, many of them carrying larvae.
Where the column crosses an exposed area its flanks are guarded by soldiers, armed with huge jaws and totally blind.
They stand in rows, stiffly craning themselves upwards, jaws apart, ready to bite anything that interferes with them.
When the hunters at the head of the column discover prey, they swarm all over it, cutting it apart.
Grasshoppers, scorpions, lizards, young birds in their nests, anything that cannot get out of the way is attacked.
Anyone in West Africa who takes it upon himself to tether an animal or restrict its movement, must pay regard to the possibility of an attack by one of these armies.
I once made a large collection of snakes there.
We had Gaboon vipers, puff adders, spitting cobras as well as harmless species like tree snakes and pythons.
We kept them in a mud-walled hut and posted a guard to keep watch, armed with a can of paraffin.
Only that, poured on the ground and set alight, will deflect a raid by the ants.
In spite of all precautions, one afternoon a column got into the hut through a hole in the wall at the back.
By the time we had discovered what had happened, the ants were attacking the entire collection, swarming over the snakes within their gauze-covered boxes.
Infuriated by the painful bites, the snakes were striking dementedly and uselessly at their tiny attackers.
Every one had to be taken out and held down while we picked off the ants that were sinking their jaws between the scales.
In spite of all we could do, several snakes died as a result of the ant bites.
Army ants march and forage for weeks, day after day.
The larvae produce pheromones and these, circulating within the army, stimulate it to keep on the move.
Eventually, the larvae begin to pupate and no longer exude their chemical messages.
Then the army bivouacs.
There may be as many as 150,000 individuals and they cluster in a vast ball between the roots of a tree or beneath an overhanging stone.
Clinging to one another, they make a living nest from their bodies, complete with passageways along which the queen moves and chambers where the pupae are deposited.
The  queen's ovaries now begin to develop and she swells greatly.
After about a week, she begins to lay.
During the next few days, she may produce 25,000 eggs.
They hatch very quickly and at the same time a new generation of workers and soldiers emerge from the stored pupae.
These now begin to secrete their characteristic pheromone and once more the army, with its ranks swollen by these new recruits, is stimulated to march off to war.
If the super-organism created by a colony of termites can be compared to an antelope, then the disciplined aggressive columns of the army ants must be reckoned to be the insect equivalent of a beast of prey.
Hungry for food, relentless in pursuit of it and capable of killing most creatures that cannot run from them, they terrorise the bush.
The small size of their individual members is of no consequence.
Thousands can be lost without seriously affecting the vigour and power of the army.
In these columns, the insects have created a super-organism that is among the most powerful, feared and long-lived of all the animals in the forest.
The insects colonised the land before the vertebrates and they still exploit every organism on it.
There is no known species of plant that is not attacked in one way or another by them.
In some parts of Africa, they regularly claim three-quarters of all the crops grown by man.
Even in the United States where farmers have the most sophisticated means of protecting their crops, insects claim over ten per cent of them.
The boll weevil infests cotton fields and millionaires go bankrupt.
The Colorado beetle spreads over a potato crop and a human population starves.
Not only do insects rob man of his food, but they suck his blood, bury themselves in his skin and infect him with all kinds of serious diseases.
He, in retaliation, has launched against them the most concentrated onslaughts that he has been able to devise.
He attacks them with flame-throwers.
He bombards male insects with radioactive particles to sterilise them and then releases them in huge numbers, so condemning generations of females to infertility.
He synthesises new chemical poisons of the most lethal kind and sprays the countryside wholesale.
And yet, in spite of all his efforts and ingenuity, of huge expenditures of labour and money, he has so far failed to exterminate a single insect species.
THE CONQUEST OF THE WATERS
Among the sea anemones sticking limply to the rocks exposed at low tide, there are, almost everywhere in the world, rather different lumps of jelly.
Anemones tend to dribble a little water from their centres if you press them.
Tread on one of these others and a jet of water squirts up your leg.
These shapeless lumps are called, in consequence and not unreasonably, sea squirts.
Underwater, the difference between them and the anemones is easy to see.
The anemone has a flower-like cluster of tentacles around a single central opening; the sea squirt has no tentacles and two openings connected to each other by a U-shaped tube.
The whole structure is surrounded by a thick coat of jelly.
Underwater and dilated, this dull bag becomes beautiful.
One European species is nearly transparent, with trembling circlets of hazy blue around each opening and thin rings of muscle strengthening the inner tube so that the creature looks like the most delicate bubble of Venetian glass.
The jacket of jelly of other species is opaque and coloured pink or gold.
Some grow in clusters like grapes; some are larger, more elongated and solitary.
They are all filter-feeders, drawing water in through one opening, passing it through a bag with slits in its wall, and then discharging it back into the sea through the other tube.
Food particles, sticking to the wall of the bag, are swept down to its bottom by cilia and into a little gut which leads out of the bottom of the bag and curves round to join the exhalant tube.
It is a simple structure and an unobtrusive life.
But these creatures have the most sophisticated relatives.
Their most ancient forebears were connections of the echinoderms, but their cousins, much more unexpectedly, became the ancestors of the first of the backboned animals, the vertebrates.
The evidence for this conclusion is hard indeed to discover in the adult sea squirt, but more visible in its larva.
This looks like a tiny tadpole.
The globular front part contains the U-shaped tube and the beginnings of the gut.
It swims by wriggling its tail which is stiffened by a thin rod, running from the tip to the middle of the body.
This, at least, is some suggestion of a backbone, but the  larva does not keep it for very long.
After a few days, the little creature glues its nose on a rock, loses its tail and settles down to a life of sedentary filtration.
The sea squirt larva is not the only filter-feeder with such a significant rod in its back.
Another somewhat larger sliver of flesh, the lancelet, also has one.
This creature, shaped like a slim leaf about 6 centimetres long, lives half-buried in the sand of the sea floor.
Its front end projects above the surface and carries a little coronet of tentacles around the opening through which it sucks in water.
It, too, has a very simple body.
There is nothing that could reasonably be called a head; merely a small light-sensitive spot; no heart, only a number of pulsating arteries; no fins or limbs, only a slight dilation at the hind end like the flight feathers of an arrow.
Even so, in this simple organism you can see the first hint of a fish.
The flexible rod in its back which runs the entire length of its body carries transverse bands of muscles.
When the creature contracts them rhythmically, a series of waves runs down its body.
These push water backwards and in consequence the lancelet moves forward.
It swims.
When assessing family connections, the anatomy of a larva is obviously as valid a piece of evidence as that of the adult.
Indeed, it is usually even more significant, for animals have the remarkable tendency to repeat during their individual development the stages through which their ancestors passed during evolutionary history.
Larval termites look like those most primitive of insects, the bristletails; larval horseshoe crabs are visibly segmented and so reveal a similarity with the trilobites difficult to perceive in the adult; the free-swimming molluscan larva looks very like that of the segmented worms and thus suggests a link between the two groups.
So it is not unreasonable to regard the similarity between the lancelet and the larval sea squirt as evidence of a relationship.
But which form was ancestral?
Was it a creature like a sea squirt which gave rise to the more mobile lancelet-like form by producing descendants that abandoned the stationary condition and reproduced during the hitherto larval stage?
Or was the lancelet-shape the more ancient pattern from which animals like sea squirts developed by sticking their heads to rocks, losing their muscles and retreating into as undemanding a life-style as the seas can provide?
For many years, the first proposition was believed to be the case.
Today comparative studies of the whole sea squirt group, which is large and varied, have led to the belief that the second possibility is the correct one.
And now, very recently indeed, confirmation has come from that remarkable treasury of early fossils, the Burgess Shalesin the Canadian Rockies.
There, lying among trilobites, brachiopods and bristle worms, in the mud of the seas of 550 million years ago that had yet to see a finned or backboned swimmer, has been found the impression of a creature very similar indeed to the living lancelet.
Another larva provides evidence for the next step in vertebrate history.
The rivers of Europe and America contain animals that look like the lancelet, though they are somewhat larger, up to 20 centimetres long.
They, too, live in holes in the mud and filter-feed.
They are jawless, blind and without fins except for a fringe around the tail.
For many years they were thought to be adult creatures, given a special name, ammocoete, and classified as obvious relatives of the lancelet.
Then it was discovered that they are only the larvae of a very well known animal.
They eventually leave their holes, develop true eyes and long rippling fins along the back, grow to the size of an eel and turn into lampreys.
You might be excused for thinking, at first sight, that the lamprey is a true fish.
But it is not.
It has a kind of backbone, in the form of the flexible rod, but it does not have jaws.
Its head ends in a large circular disc in the centre of which is a tongue covered with sharp spines.
There are two small eyes with a single nostril between them leading to a blind sac, and on either side of the neck a row of gill slits.
With the disc, the lamprey clamps itself on the flank of a fish, and with the tongue it rasps off the flesh, eating the fish alive.
Lampreys and their wholly sea-living relatives, hag-fish, are still common.
Sometimes their population in American rivers reaches plague proportions.
The swarming lampreys consume not only dead or sickly fish but set upon otherwise healthy ones.
Their tiny eyes, rubbery sucking mouths and writhing bodies scarcely make them attractive from a human point of view.
Nonetheless they deserve notice and respect, for their forebears were once the most advanced and revolutionary creatures in the seas.
Their remains have now been found in rocks that are about 500 million years old, very nearly as ancient as the Burgess Shales.
These newly discovered pieces of evidence are only fragments of scales, but they can be identified because they match those from complete skeletons that have been found in later rocks.
These jawless proto-fish were mostly quite small, the size of large minnows, and they were heavily armoured.
In some forms, the whole of the head and body was encased in a cuirass of bony plates.
In front there were two eyes and a single central nostril, like that of a lamprey.
From the back of the armoured box projected a muscular tail fringed by a fin.
By beating this they could drive themselves through the water but their heavy foreparts must have kept their heads low and close to the bottom.
Although one or two species had simple flaps of skin in the shoulder region, most had no fins at all, apart from their tail, to help them navigate or give precision to their movements.
So few were able, initially, to swim consistently above the sea floor.
Those waters remained the domain of the jellyfish and other floating invertebrates.
Without jaws, the proto-fish could not prey upon shelled molluscs.
Their lot was to nuzzle their way across the sea bottom, sucking up mud and refuse through their simple circular mouths, filtering out the edible particles and expelling the rest through the slits on either side of their throats.
The little proto-fish, however, survived and increased in numbers and variety.
Their heavy armour-plating may have originated as a way of disposing of the salts derived from their food which accumulated in their bodies.
It also must have given them much-needed protection, for the seas at this time were tyrannised by the huge, two-metre-long sea scorpions armed with massive claws which fed on the smaller creatures of the sea floor.
The heavy deposits of bone in the head regions of some of these proto-fish make possible the most detailed investigation of their anatomy.
By taking a whole series of slices through the fossilised skull, the shape of the cavities that contained the nerves and  blood vessels can be charted.
Such research has shown that one group of these creatures had a brain very like that of the living lamprey.
It also had a balancing mechanism contrived from two arching tubes at right angles to one another in a vertical plane.
The liquid within them, moving over their sensitive inside surface, enabled the proto-fish to be aware of its posture in the water.
Living lampreys have a very similar mechanism.
Some of these creatures now grew to a considerable size, 60 centimetres or so.
Many were quite mobile, with suits of scales, and were probably able to make sallies into the waters well above the sea floor.
None of them, however, could be described as skilled swimmers.
The single median fins down the mid-line of their backs or undersides prevented them from spinning in the water and gave them a degree of stability, but none had paired lateral fins.
So the situation remained for a hundred million years.
During this immensity of time, the corals arrived and began to build reefs, and the segmented animals developed into forms that soon would leave the sea and establish a bridgehead on land.
Important changes also took place among the proto-fish.
The slits in the sides of their throats which had originated as filtering mechanisms, were walled with thin blood vessels so that they also served as gills.
Now the pillars of flesh between them were stiffened with bony rods and the first pair of these bones, slowly over the millennia, gradually hinged forward.
Muscles developed around them so that the front ends of the rods could be moved up and down.
The creatures had acquired jaws.
The bony scales in the skin which covered them grew larger and sharper and became teeth.
No longer were the backboned creatures of the sea lowly sifters of mud and strainers of water.
Now they could bite.
Flaps of skin grew out of either side of the lower part of the body, helping to guide them through the water.
These eventually became fins.
Now they could swim.
And so, for the first time, vertebrate hunters began to propel themselves with skill and accuracy through the waters of the sea.
It is possible to walk across the sea bed of that time, 400 million years ago.
In the flat desert land of a cattle station in Northwestern Australia, close to a place called Gogo by the aborigines, rises a line of strange steep-sided rocky bluffs, 300 metres high.
Geologists, mapping the site, found it difficult to understand how they could have been shaped by the normal forces of erosion.
When they came to examine their gully-riven fronts in detail, they discovered that the rocks were full of the remains of coral.
Once sea had covered this area and these cliffs were reefs, bordering deep fish-filled lagoons.
Rivers from the land behind had flowed through them, their muddy waters, in which coral cannot grow, maintaining gaps in the reefs.
Slowly the lagoons filled with accumulated sediments and the sea retreated.
Eventually the level of the whole Australian continent rose.
Rain and rivers eroded the soft sandstones that had filled the lagoon basin, scouring them away so that today the reefs are exposed once more, high and dry, facing not the sea but desert covered with clumps of spinifex grass and stunted mulga trees.
At their foot, on what was once the sea floor, lie nodules.
From the ends of some of them project groups of thin blade-like bones.
The dead bodies of lagoon fish had occasionally acted as a focus for the processes of petrification.
The surrounding sand  and mud became particularly hard, staying solid while the rest of the deposit crumbled.
The geologists took the nodules back to the laboratory and soaked them for months in acetic acid.
Gradually the rock fell away and exposed, in astonishing perfection, the first complete and undistorted skeletons of the world's earliest true fish.
There were many different species.
Most, like their predecessors, were armoured in some way, with heavy scales attached to bony plates in the skin, and they had fearsome teeth in their jaws.
They were also acquiring an internal bony skeleton including the beginnings of a vertebral column running longitudinally through the body and surrounding the primitive flexible rod.
All of them had well-developed lateral fins, usually in two pairs, the pectorals just behind the throat, and the pelvics near the anus.
There were, however, many variations.
One form had a whole line of lateral fins; the pectoral fins of another were encased in tube-like bones and looked like probes or props.
Some were bottom-living, some free-swimming, and one or two were gigantic, reaching 6 or 7 metres in length.
In the face of this competition, nearly all the jawless proto-fish died out.
At about this time, a pronounced split appeared in the fish dynasty.
One group developed which lost nearly all the bone in their skeletons but developed instead, cartilage, a softer, more elastic and lighter material.
The descendants of this group are the sharks and rays.
The reduction of bone in their bodies doubtless made them considerably lighter, size for size, than their ancestors.
Even so, flesh and cartilage is heavier than water and to remain above the sea floor, the sharks have to keep swimming.
They drive themselves through the water in the same way as their ancestors, by the sinuous motion of the rear half of their bodies and the powerful thrash of their tails.
But with the thrust coming from the back the body is nose-heavy and liable to dive downwards.
To correct this, the shark has two pectoral fins spread horizontally like the vanes of a submarine or the wings of a rear-engined aircraft.
They are, however, relatively inflexible.
The shark cannot suddenly twist them to a vertical position to act as brakes.
Indeed, a charging shark cannot stop, it can only swerve away to one side.
Nor can it swim in reverse.
Furthermore, if it stops beating its tail it sinks.
Some species, indeed, take rests at night and slumber on the sea floor.
One branch of the cartilaginous fish has adopted this position more or less permanently, abandoning the energy-consuming labour of perpetually beating their tail to maintain themselves in mid-water.
These are the rays and skates.
Their bodies have become greatly flattened, their pectoral fins enlarged into undulating lateral triangles that have taken over the function of locomotion.
The tail, therefore, need no longer beat.
It has lost nearly all its muscles and become thin and whip-like, sometimes with a poisonous spine at the end.
The method works very well but it does not provide the speed possessed by the free-swimming sharks.
But the rays do not need that.
They are not active hunters and live largely on molluscs and crustaceans which they grub up from the sea floor and crush in their mouths which open on the underside.
This position of the mouth is convenient for feeding but causes considerable complications in breathing.
Sharks take in water through the mouth, pass it over the gills and out  through slits.
Were the rays to collect their water in the same way, it would be full of mud and sand.
So instead they have two openings on the upper surface of the head that take in water and lead it straight to the gills.
It is then expelled on the underside through the gill slits.
One kind of ray, the manta, has reverted to swimming in the surface waters.
The lateral extensions of its body enable it to remain aloft with only a small expenditure of energy using the water for support as gliders use air.
But undulating side-wings are not such powerful propellants as a thrashing tail, so the manta cannot swim as fast as its shark cousins or rival them as hunters.
Instead it sails slowly through the water on flapping wings, sometimes as much as 7 metres across, its immense slot-like mouth wide open, gathering by filtration the floating shoals of crustaceans and small fish.
The second great group of fish retained bone in their skeleton and it is their descendants that today dominate the waters of the world.
They arrived, in a roundabout way, at a very effective solution to the problem of weight.
During the early period when most fish had heavy bone-based scales in their skins, several families spread from the open seas into coastal waters and eventually into shallow lagoons and swamps.
Breathing for a fish is difficult in such places.
The warmer water becomes, the less oxygen it can hold in solution.
The open seas never become hot, but shallow waters do and in consequence become oxygen-poor.
So when fish came to live there, they had to develop additional ways of getting oxygen.
The bichir, a heavy-scaled fish of ancient ancestry which lives in the rivers and swamps of Africa, still demonstrates the method they adopted.
It regularly rises to the surface of the water and takes a gulp of air.
This goes down its throat and into a pouch that opens from the top wall of its gut.
This has walls thick with blood capillaries which absorb gaseous oxygen.
The bichir, in fact, not only has gills like any other fish, but a lung as well.
But an air-filled pouch brings other incidental advantages.
It provides buoyancy and this, for the bulk of the descendants of these air-breathing pioneers, became a more important faculty.
With a bag of air inside them, they could float in the water without perpetually labouring their tails.
Eventually bony fish with swim bladders appeared in the sea.
Many different species with such structures swam in the lagoons beside the Gogo reefs, together with other more antiquated kinds.
Soon species appeared which could fill their air-bags by diffusing gas into them from the blood rather than by rising to the surface and swallowing air.
In some cases the tube connecting the bag to the gut became no more than a solid thread.
So the fish acquired a swim-bladder.
The techniques of swimming were now revolutionised.
By diffusing gas in or out of the bladder or expelling it directly through the connecting tube, a fish could accurately control its level in the water.
Its pectoral fins, freed from the job of providing lift, could be used to give great refinement to the fishes' control of movement, and their swimming skills reached near-perfection.
Water is eight hundred times as dense as air, and the slightest bump or protuberance on the body can cause drag, more even than it would on a bird or an aeroplane.
So the  high-speed ocean-going fish — tuna, bonito, marlin, mackerel — have most marvellously streamlined bodies, sharply pointed in the front, swelling quickly to maximum diameter and then tapering elegantly to the two-bladed symmetrical tail fin.
The whole of the rear half of the fish is in effect the engine for this propeller.
Banks of muscles are attached to the backbone so that the tail can be beaten from side to side with unflagging strength throughout the fish's life.
The scales, so heavy and rough in the early forms, have now become thin and smoothly fitting or been lost altogether.
The surface is lubricated by mucus.
The plate covering the gills fits closely to the body and the eyes barely bulge above the smooth contours.
The pectoral and pelvic fins and the dorsal along the crest of the back play no part in propulsion.
They serve only as rudders, stabilisers or brakes.
When the fish is moving at speed and they are not required they are clamped to the fish's sides fitting exactly into depressions and grooves on the surface.
And along the top and bottom edge of the body, on either side of the tail, are tiny triangular blades that serve as spoilers to prevent turbulence.
The perfection of this design is attested by the fact that species belonging to quite different families of fish have adopted it and thus bear a strong resemblance to one another.
Once a species moves into the open ocean, and relies on great speed, either to eat or to avoid being eaten, the ruthless selections of evolution refine the fish's shape towards this, the most efficient, the most mathematically perfect form for the purpose.
Some species of surface-living fish, in danger of being out-paced by the hunters, have turned their pectoral fins to a special purpose.
When pursued, they shoot out of the water and spread greatly elongated, broad pectorals which until now have been held close to the body.
As the air catches the membranes, the fish is lifted above the waves and it glides for hundreds of metres leaving its pursuers baffled.
Sometimes as they fly, they tilt their bodies so that their tails dip into the water, and beat a further few strokes, renewing their impetus and extending their flight.
Not all fish have adopted a life of speed.
Those living in mid-water or along the shores have different problems and requirements, but for them too, the acquisition of a swim-bladder has had a potent effect on structure, for it has freed their body fins for all kinds of purposes.
Those of a pike have become elegant filmy sculls, rotating slowly back and forth from a joint within the body, so that the fish can compensate for the tiniest variation of current and hang above a rock as though it were suspended from an invisible wire.
Gouramis have turned their pelvic fins into long thread-like feelers with which they explore the water ahead of them and, at breeding times, caress their mates.
The dragonfish has expanded them into spectacular defensive weapons, each ray barbed with poison.
Several species, since body weight is no longer such a problem, have once again taken to armour.
The box-fish, in the highly populated and potentially dangerous world of the reef, sails over the coral packaged in a crate of bone, its pectorals whirling, its tail fin flickering.
The sea horse is also armoured and stiff-bodied.
Its tail has no fin on it but is used as a hook with which the fish anchors itself to weed or coral.
Its body is held upright and what was the dorsal fin has become an undulating rear engine, which with  the help of whirling pectorals on either side, enables it to move erect and stately through the corals and weed forests.
The trigger fish feeds on coral, crunching the stony branches and extracting the little polyps.
It has concentrated its finnage on its rear half, with a large flapping dorsal next to the tail and an equivalent one on the underside.
This keeps its head free so that it can thrust it deep between the branches of the coral and select a particularly toothsome piece.
The trigger, which gives the fish its name, is the leading ray of its dorsal fin which has become bony.
The two rays behind have been turned into a locking device on the joint of its base.
When waves crash over the reef, the fish swims into a crevice, sticks up its bony trigger and locks itself in place so firmly that neither ocean currents, hungry predators nor inquisitive skin divers can extract it.
Some bony fish have emulated the cartilaginous skates and rays and taken to the bottom-living life, abandoning the swim-bladder that, ancestrally, was the source of their success.
Their pectoral fins have been turned to yet more purposes.
The gurnard has dispensed with the membrane on the front part so that the rays are free and can be moved independently rather like the legs of a spider.
It uses them to turn over stones when it is looking for food.
The flounder has become adapted to bottom-living to a quite extraordinary degree.
It illustrates again the tendency of creatures to rehearse their past history during their own individual development, for when it hatches, it swims above the sea floor just as its ancestors undoubtedly did.
After a few months, it undergoes a transformation.
It loses the swim-bladder it has had until now.
Its head becomes twisted and the mouth moves sideways.
One eye shifts right round the body so that it takes up a position alongside the other.
Then the fish descends to the bottom and lies on its side.
The pectoral fins are now of little use, though the fish still retains them.
It swims by undulating the much enlarged dorsals and anals that fringe its sides.
So, driven by their beating tails, sculled by their pectorals, planing on lateral fringes, the fish swim with speed and accuracy through all the varied habitats of the sea, from the rococo constructions of the reef to the mountains and plains of the sea bed, from the swaying forests of kelp to the blue sunlit waters of the open ocean.
But mobility demands sensitivity: if you travel, one way or another you must be aware of where you are going.
All fish have one sense for which we have no parallel.
Down their flanks and branching over the head, runs a line with a slightly different texture from the rest of the body.
It consists of a number of pores, connected by a canal running just below the surface.
This lateral line system enables the fish to detect differences of pressure in the water.
As it swims, a fish creates a pressure wave that travels ahead of it.
When this meets some other object, the fish by means of its lateral line can detect the change.
It is also made aware, by this ability to feel at a distance, of the movements of other fish swimming alongside it, an important ability for those species that form shoals.
The fish's sense of smell is most acute.
The nostrils open into cups which can detect the most minute changes in the chemical composition of water.
Sharks, when the current is in their favour, can smell blood issuing from a body at a distance of nearly half a kilometre.
They rely greatly on smell to guide them to food which may be an  explanation for the shape of that most grotesque of sharks, the hammerhead.
Its nostrils are placed at the ends of two extremities that grow out from the side of its head.
If it scents its prey, it swings its head from side to side to determine the direction from which the smell is coming.
When it is equally strong in both nostrils, then the hammerhead swims straight ahead — and is often one of the first predators to reach the scene.
Fish are likely to have been able to detect sound from a very early period.
The capsule containing the two arching semicircular canals that are found in either side of the skull of the proto-fish and the lamprey has been improved considerably by the jawed fish.
They have a third canal in a horizontal plane and beneath it a large sac.
All three canals and the sac have very sensitive linings and contain small limy particles which move and vibrate.
Sound travels better in water than in air, and as the fish's body contains a high proportion of water within it, the sound waves penetrate the skull and reach the semicircular canals without the aid of the special passage needed by vertebrates that live in air.
So fish are aware of the popply, slapping noises that other fish make as they travel at speed through the water, of the clicks made by crustaceans snapping their hard shells and the scrapings made by fish grazing over the coral.
The acquisition of a swim-bladder brought the possibility of further improvements in both receiving and -transmitting sound.
Several thousand species of fish have developed bony connections of some kind to link their swim bladders to the inner ear capsules, so that the vibrations picked up and amplified by the sympathetic resonance of the swim bladder are transmitted to the semicircular canals.
Some have also developed special muscles so that they can vibrate the swim-bladder and produce a loud drumming noise.
Catfish of several species do so and appear to be calling to one another as they move in murky water.
Sight was also an ability acquired very early.
The lancelet's eye-spot makes it aware of the difference between light and dark.
The jawless fish, even though their heads were heavily plated with bone, had chinks in their armour to accommodate eyes.
Since the laws that govern the behaviour of light are universal, it is not surprising that the number of basic designs for an efficient eye are small.
The trilobites produced the mosaic eye which has been retained by the insects.
Otherwise, image-producing eyes, no matter which organism develops them, have a similar fundamental structure — a closed chamber with a transparent window and a lens in front and a photosensitive lining at the back.
This is the pattern of the squid and octopus eye as well as of the artificial mechanical one built by man, the camera.
It is also the basis of the eye developed by the fish and bequeathed by them to all land-living vertebrates.
The lining may contain two kinds of differently shaped cells, the rods and the cones.
The first distinguish between light and dark, the second are sensitive to colour.
The eyes of almost all sharks and rays lack cone cells, so they cannot perceive colour.
Not surprisingly, therefore, they are themselves drab creatures dressed in browns and greys, olive green and steel blue.
When they are patterned, their designs tend to be simple spots and dapples.
Bony fish, on the other hand, are strikingly different.
Their eyes have both rods and cones, their colour vision is, for the most part, excellent and  their body colours are accordingly vivid and various.
Sulphur fins are attached to sapphire bodies, orange spots are scattered on a sage-green flank, chocolate-brown scales are individually rimmed with peacock blue, tails are patterned like archery targets with a golden centre surrounded by outers of scarlet, black and white.
There seems to be no pattern, no shade in the spectrum, that the bony fish have not deployed to decorate their bodies.
The most brilliantly patterned of all are those fish that live in clear sunlit waters where their designs are easily seen — in tropical lakes and rivers and, particularly and most lavishly, around coral reefs.
Here because of the abundance of all forms of life and the richness of food, there is a huge and crowded population.
In such circumstances, species identification becomes very important and the fish have adopted the most vivid liveries to assist in it.
One group of fish, called because of the beauty of their coloration, butterfly fish, show how diverse such patterning can be within one small family.
They are all about the same size — only a few centimetres long — with roughly the same shape, slim, approximately rectangular, with high foreheads and small pouting mouths.
Each species has its own particular place on the reef, with its own favoured depth and preferred source of food.
One has elongated jaws for picking between the coral stems, another may specialise in cropping a particular kind of small crustacean.
It is in the interests of each individual therefore to proclaim clearly among the confusion of swarming fish, that its particular niche is occupied so that no other individual of the same species will poach its territory.
Equally, the colours will draw the attention of a female to the presence of a male of the only kind with which she can have a fertile union.
In many environments, the need to advertise in this way is limited by the danger of becoming a conspicuous target for a predator.
For the butterfly fish, this risk is small for, hovering over the coral, it can dart to safety among the stony fronds within a fraction of a second.
So each species of the family, on the near-identical canvas of its body, carries a vivid and individual design based on stripes and patches, dots, eye-spots and zigzags.
As spawning time approaches, the need for species identification becomes particularly intense.
Away from the reefs, in more dangerous and exposed waters, the males still often adopt brilliant colours, risking conspicuousness, in order to threaten rivals and attract females.
Pigment granules diffuse within their skins as they become excited and they fight with their colours, circling one another and flexing and quivering their fins like bull-fighters' capes.
They beat their tails and send pressure waves along the lateral lines of their rivals.
They tear at the patterns on one another 's fins.
Eventually when one has had enough, he signals submission by contracting the pigment in one set of cells and expanding that in another so that his flank patterns change and he hoists the flag of surrender.
The winner is now free to court his female.
He then uses much the same repertory of colours and patterns and fin displays as he did for aggression, but in a female these trigger a series of different responses that eventually culminates in the laying of eggs.
The eyes of some fish enable them to see not only what is going on in the water around them but in the air above the surface.
The archer fish is partial to flies and other insects that may settle on plants growing on the banks.
It takes aim, compensating for the way that light bends as it passes from water to air and squirts a jet of drops, knocking the insect from its foothold so that it falls into the water and can be eaten.
A small fish from Central America is even more specialised.
It has a horizontal division across its pupil which effectively gives it four eyes — the two lower halves for seeing underwater, the two upper for doing so in air — and the fish can swim along the surface looking for food above and below it at the same time.
At the other extreme of the fishes' habitat, in the depths of the ocean, around 750 metres and below, there is no light by which fish can see one another 's signals, so many create their own.
Some have modified cells that are capable of producing luminous chemicals.
Others possess cultures of phosphorescent bacteria in special organs with flaps of skin over them which can be moved to expose or conceal the bacteria in a series of winks and flashes.
So the depths of the oceans are full of lights moving rhythmically around and continually turning off and on.
It is an obvious guess that these are social signals of some kind — instructions to the rest of the shoal, summons to mates — but much more work has to be done before their exact functions are properly understood.
One category of luminescence, however, has a plain and unmistakable purpose.
The deep-sea angler fish has a spine in front of its dorsal fin elongated into a thin thread which droops over the front of the mouth.
On its end hangs a glowing green bulb.
Other fish are drawn to investigate this swaying light, the angler suddenly opens its cavernous mouth — and engulfs one more meal.
And there are dark waters elsewhere.
Some tropical rivers are covered with floating vegetation, and so full of rotting leaves that they are black and turbid.
Here fish live that have developed a method of finding their way about that no other creature so far has emulated.
They generate electricity within their bodies.
Many small species do so — knife fish in South America, elephant fish in West Africa, so called because they have an elongated lip like a small probing trunk.
If you want to discover them, all you need is two wires at the end of a pole leading to an amplifier, powered by a small battery and attached to a little loudspeaker.
If you dip the end of the wires in a stream where such fish are searching for food in the muddy bottom, you will hear a series of clicks.
These are the electric signals, translated into sound so that they are detectable by human ears.
The fish have modified muscles in their flanks which generate and transmit these electric discharges.
Some species send out signals almost continuously, others emit short bursts.
Each seems to have its own identifiable code.
The transmission creates flow-patterns of current in the surrounding water.
Any object with a conductivity different from that of the water will distort the pattern.
The fish becomes aware of the change through receptor pores spaced out over its body and even in the darkest, most stygian waters, knows the shape and disposition of the objects around it.
The largest of such fish is the South American electric eel.
It is not related to the true eels but looks superficially like them and so has acquired their popular name.
It grows to a  metre and a half in length and as thick as a man's arm.
Often it makes its home in holes beneath a river bank or among rocks.
Reversing into these holes for a lengthy creature like an eel, must pose considerable steering problems.
The eel does it with the aid of electricity.
As you watch one tackling such a problem in a tank, you can detect the clicks of its discharges increasing as it identifies the outlines of the selected parking place behind it and slowly manoeuvres its great length into it without once touching the sides.
But the electric eel has another set of batteries that produce not steady low-voltage diction-finding transmissions but sudden massive shocks so strong that if you pick up such a fish without the insulation of rubber gloves and boots, it can throw you flat on your back.
The eel uses this kind of discharge for hunting.
It is one of the very few creatures in the world that can kill by electrocution.
Today, five hundred million years after those jawless armour-laden creatures began to wag their tails and blunder over the muddy bottoms of the ancient seas, the fish have evolved into some 30,000 different species.
Between them, they have colonised every part of the seas, lakes and rivers of the world.
Their mastery of the waters is epitomised by that most splendid, valiant and efficient of fish, the salmon.
Five species of them visit North American rivers.
They spend the bulk of their lives in the Pacific ocean.
When they are small, they feed on plankton.
As they grow larger, they take to eating fish.
In August each year, the fish that have just reached adulthood travel towards the American coast.
They assemble offshore and then begin to battle their way up the rivers, fighting and dodging the swift downward current, selecting with the help of the pressure-sensitive pores of their lateral lines, the reaches where the current is marginally slacker, resting in quiet pools, recovering their strength before tackling another stretch of rapids.
These rivers are not chosen at random.
Each salmon remembers the precise taste of the waters in which it hatched, a flavour derived from the mix of minerals in its mud and the plants and animals that live in it.
They can detect this flavour even when their home water is diluted to one part in several million.
This memory draws them across several hundred miles of ocean, brings them to a particular bay and, as the scent gets stronger and stronger, up one special river and into one particular stream.
We know that it is smell that guides them, for salmon with their nostrils blocked get lost.
Unhampered, the accuracy of their memory and navigation is astounding.
Many thousands of young fish have been marked soon after they hatched.
Only one or two return to a river other than the one in which they first swam.
The compulsion to return may be strong, but the obstacles are huge.
The move from saltwater to fresh in itself requires major adjustments to the chemistry of the body, but the salmon manages to make them.
On their way upstream, they may encounter waterfalls.
Their sharp eyes select the lowest part of the lip of the fall.
Then, flexing their powerfully muscled silver bodies, they thrash their tails and leap from the water.
They may have to jump again and again before at last they land in the pools at the head of the falls and can continue on their journey.
Eventually they reach the shallow stretches where their parents spawned and they lie  there resting, their heads pointing upstream, flank to flank and so thick that the pale sand of the river bed is hidden by the black of their backs.
Now, within a few days, the shape of their bodies changes with astonishing speed.
They develop high humps on their backs.
Their upper jaws become hooked and their teeth grow into long fangs.
These are useless for feeding — but the time for feeding has long since passed.
These teeth are for battle.
The males wrestle and fight, flank to flank, seizing one another 's jaws, striking at their opponents with their splayed teeth.
The water is so shallow that their writhing humped backs break clear of the surface.
At length, one wins and claims a scrape in the gravel.
A female joins him.
Swiftly eggs and milt are shed and sink beneath the gravel grains.
Now the adults are totally spent.
They do not have enough energy even to heal their battered wounded bodies.
Their scales fall off, the once powerful muscles dwindle and they die.
Not a single one of the millions of fish that fought their way up the river ever returns to the sea.
Their frayed bodies lie rotting in drifts on the surface of the streams and are washed up in piles on the sandbanks.
Here and there, a last survivor makes a few final despairing flaps.
Gulls gather in flocks to peck out eyes and strip the yellowing flesh.
But in the gravel, the eggs remain, a thousand or so from every female.
They stay safe throughout the hard winter.
Next spring they hatch.
The fry remain in the streams for a few weeks, feeding on the flush of insects and crustaceans that appear in the warming waters.
When they are fingerlings, they leave, following the current downstream to the sea.
Some species will swim there for two seasons, others for up to five.
Many will be eaten by other fish in the sea, but eventually the survivors will fight their way back up their own river to spawn and die in the very place where they were hatched.
Three-quarters of the world's surface is covered by water.
Three-quarters of the world belongs to the fish.
THE INVASION OF THE LAND
One of the most crucial episodes in the history of life took place some 350 million years ago in a freshwater swamp.
Fish began to haul themselves out of water and become the first back-boned creatures to colonise the land.
To cross this frontier, they like the first terrestrial invertebrates had to solve two problems: first, how to move around out of water, and second, how to obtain oxygen from the air.
There is one fish, alive today, which manages to do both these things — the mudskipper.
It is not closely related to those fish who pioneered the land, so any comparisons with them have to be made with caution, but even so it can give us a hint about how that momentous move was accomplished.
Mudskippers are only a few centimetres long and you can find them in mangrove swamps and muddy estuaries in many parts of the tropics, lying on the glistening mud well beyond the lap of the waters.
Some may even be clinging to the arching aerial roots of the mangroves or clambering up the trunks.
A sudden movement or an abrupt noise will send them skittering back to the safety of the water.
They come out to feed on the insects and other invertebrates that swarm on the soft oozy surface of the mud.
They move by suddenly flexing the hinder end of their body so that they give a little skipping jump.
But they also have a steadier, more sober way of edging themselves forward with their front pair of fins.
Each of these has a fleshy base supported internally by bones the fin is, in effect, a rigid crutch.
With it the fish can lever itself forward.
Such fins are similar, in principle, to those of a whole group of primitive bony fish that were living in that remote period when the move to land was first made.
The most famous of them is the coelacanth.
Many species of coelacanth have been found as fossils.
They are not large thirty centimetres or so in length.
Some specimens have been preserved in miraculous detail with every scale and fin-ray present.
A juvenile was uncovered in the rocks of Illinois with traces of its yolk sack beneath its belly, plain to see.
They are most abundant in deposits about 400 million years old, but thereafter they become scarcer and none has been found in rocks younger than 70 million years.
Since they were flourishing during the period when the land was invaded and since they certainly possessed limb-like fins, it seemed likely that they were the creatures from which the first land vertebrates were descended.
Their fossils were therefore studied with great care to try and determine exactly how they moved and how they breathed.
But scientists reconciled themselves to the fact that the answers to such questions would never be known with certainty since the fish had obviously become extinct long ago.
And then, in 1938, a trawler fishing off the coast of South Africa brought up a very strange fish.
It was large, nearly two metres long, with powerful jaws and heavy armoured scales.
After the catch had been landed at East London, the curator of the small local museum, Miss Courtenay-Latimer, came down to look it over.
She noticed this peculiar fish and although she was not a fish specialist, she became convinced that it was of great importance.
She wrote to Professor J. B. L. Smith of Grahamstown University, the greatest authority on African fish, describing it briefly.
Before he could get to the specimen, its entrails had decomposed so badly that they had to be thrown away, so it was a gutted specimen that he eventually saw.
In spite of this, and the fact that it was so large, he recognised it immediately as a coelacanth.
He named it Latimeria and informed an astonished world that a creature thought to have been extinct for 70 million years was still alive.
The discovery was hailed as the scientific sensation of the century and a huge search for another specimen was mounted.
Leaflets and posters carrying a picture of Latimeria and offering a huge reward were distributed among the countless fishing villages that dot the coasts of southern and eastern Africa.
But without result.
Then, fourteen years later, after it had seemed that this strange fish had appeared only to disappear totally, another was caught, not off South Africa but a thousand miles away in Anjouan, one of the tiny Comoro Islands that lie in the Indian Ocean midway between Madagascar and the coast of Tanzania.
The first one, it seems, was a stray, for the fishermen of the Comores said that the coelacanth was no stranger to them.
They caught one or two each season in depths of about two or three hundred metres.
They did not often fish for them deliberately, for a coelacanth fights hard when it is hooked and a man might have to struggle with one of them for many hours before it could be hauled on board his canoe.
And after all that trouble, its flesh is oily and not particularly good to eat.
Indeed, almost the most valuable part of the coelacanth anatomy, to the Comoreans, is its rough heavy scales.
They are very useful for rubbing down inner tubes when mending a puncture.
Since that time, several dozen more coelacanths have been caught and paradoxically, science now knows more about Latimeria than many an abundant fish.
A pregnant female has been caught with young inside her attached to their yolk sacs, just like the Illinois fossil, showing that the species does not lay its eggs but gives birth to live young.
But because it is so powerful a fish, such a doughty fighter and has to be dragged up from such depths, Latimeria very seldom reaches the shore alive.
Many expeditions have gone to the Comores hoping to catch a living specimen.
A British team managed to reach one that, although it had been hooked several hours before, was still just living when its captor got it ashore.
They put it in a bath and filmed it from above the surface of the water as it moved feebly about, but they were unable to get any detailed shots.
We ourselves, on another expedition, searched for them, night after night, by lowering highly sensitive electronic cameras to the sea floor in areas where coelacanths have been most frequently caught, but without success.
Then just before the last of us left the island, a fisherman brought one in, lashed to the side of his canoe.
It, too, was nearly dead, but he was persuaded to release it in a bay long enough for it to be filmed with an underwater camera as it swam slowly above the bottom.
And indeed, it did hold its stout pectoral fins away from the sides of its body, and it was not hard to imagine that had it been vigorous, it could have used them to help it move over the rocky sea floor of its true environment.
What is more, it was also clear that, mechanically, such fins would be of real assistance out of water as in it, had the fish, like its ancient forebears, been living in shallow water and become stranded.
But what solution could the early fish find to the problem of breathing out of water?
The mudskipper manages to do so by holding water in its mouth which it swills over the lining of its mouth with a rolling action of its head to extract the oxygen.
It also absorbs some directly from the air through its moist skin.
But these devices allow it to remain out of water for only a short time.
Within a few minutes it has to return to wet its skin and take a fresh mouthful of water.
Nor can the living coelacanth suggest an answer, for today it never leaves its deep waters.
Once again, however, there is a living creature that has a solution.
Many of the swamps around the flood plains of African rivers turn to hard sun-baked mud during the dry season, yet one fish, the lungfish, manages to live in them and survive from season to season by breathing air.
As the pools shrink, the lungfish burrows into the mud at the bottom.
There it curls into a ball, wrapping its tail around its head, and secretes mucus to line its hole.
As the sun bakes out the last moisture from the mud, the mucus turns to parchment.
The bichir and other primitive freshwater fish have a pouch opening from the gut to enable them to breathe air.
The lungfish has a pair and now, out of water It is totally dependent on them.
In burrowing down, the fish made a tube through the mud an inch or so across.
Air now passes down this to the mouth of the fish which is connected to tiny openings in the parchment cocoon.
By pumping its throat muscles, the fish draws air down its throat to its pouches.
The walls of these are thick with blood vessels which absorb gaseous oxygen.
These organs are, simple lungs and with their aid, the lungfish can survive for several months, even years.
When the rains do finally return and water fills the pond again, the fish, within the space of a few hours, comes to life, wriggles free of its cocoon and the resoftened mud and swims off.
In the water, it breathes with its gills like any normal fish, but like the bichir it uses its lungs too, rising every now and then to gulp air from the surface, a talent which is particularly valuable when the water in the pools becomes tepid and foul and loses most of its oxygen.
Four different species of lungfish are found in Africa, one in Australia and another in South America.
They were, however, very much more abundant 350 million years ago and their fossils are often found in the same sort of deposits that contain coelacanths.
Between them, these two kinds of fish possessed both the essential abilities that the  ancient land-exploring fish must have required.
But neither fish can be regarded as the one whose descendants eventually colonised the land permanently.
Both are disqualified because the bones of their skulls are so different from those of the first fossil amphibians that the one cannot be derived from the other.
However, there is a third fish found in the deposits of that early and critical period.
It belongs to the same broad group as the coelacanths and the lungfish.
It has leg-like fins with fleshy bases like the coelacanth; it seems very likely that it had air-breathing pouches from its gut like a lungfish.
Its skull, however, has the crucial feature which neither the coelacanth nor the lungfish possess — a passage linking its nostrils with the roof of its mouth.
All land vertebrates have this feature and it is this which confirms that this fish is indeed very close to the ancestral line.
This creature is called Eusthenopteron.
Its fossils have been investigated by cutting them into thin slices, a technique that has revealed a great deal about its anatomy, even down to the details of the structure of its blood vessels.
When the fins of fossil specimens are carefully dissected, the lobes at the base are found to be supported by one stout bone close to the body, two bones joined to it and finally a group of small bones — the pattern that is found in the limbs of all land vertebrates.
But why should the descendants of Eusthenopteron have troubled to clamber about laboriously on the land?
Perhaps, like the lungfish of today, they lived in pools that were seasonal and used lungs and legs to search for other water when their homes went dry.
Perhaps, like the mudskipper, they were tempted out by a hitherto untapped source of food, for already at this period there were abundant worms, snails and the ancestors of insects.
Maybe it was the emptiness of the land that attracted them: there were no reptiles, birds or mammals so it was a comparatively safe place for them.
Perhaps it was a combination of all these reasons.
Whatever it was that lured or drove them there, these creatures, over the millennia, lumbering after their food, became more and more efficient at moving and breathing out of water.
The swamps through which they waddled were thick with great horsetail and clubmoss trees.
These eventually were fossilised as coal and from coal-mines today come the bones of those first vertebrate inhabitants of the land, the amphibians.
Some of them must have been terrifying.
They grew to a length of three or four metres and their jaws were spiked with lines of cone-shaped teeth.
For the next hundred million years, they dominated the land.
Eventually, they were eclipsed by the reptiles and much reduced in numbers.
In consequence, amphibian fossils become very scarce indeed in later geological periods and there are long gaps in their fossil history.
Modern forms differ from the early ones in many major ways and the connections between early and contemporary amphibians are therefore still a matter for speculation and argument.
The living amphibians that give the best impression of the appearance of the early ones are the salamanders and newts.
Collectively these are known as the urodeles, "tailed ones" .
The largest of them lives in the rivers of Japan.
It is a nightmarish creature with a flat spade-like head, tiny button eyes and a wrinkled warty skin that hangs in  folds around its body.
It grows to a length of about a metre and a half, only a quarter of the size of its ancestors but exceptional for contemporary amphibians.
Most of them are very much smaller.
More typical of the urodeles is the newt, a mere ten centimetres or so long.
The newt's legs, advanced though they are compared with the fin of a coelacanth or a mudskipper, are not very efficient.
They are short and thin and to take a reasonable stride forward with its hind leg, the newt has to flex its body laterally.
Most of its time is spent on land, hiding beneath stones or sheltering in damp mossy places searching for the worms, slugs and insects on which it lives.
But it cannot stray far from water.
For one thing, its skin is permeable and in consequence the animal, in a dry atmosphere, loses its body liquids very quickly and dies.
To make matters worse, the newt, like other amphibians, lacks a mechanism for drinking with its mouth.
It has to absorb all the liquid it requires through its skin.
It must also keep its body moist to help it breathe.
Its lungs are relatively simple and not totally sufficient for its needs, so its oxygen intake, like the mudskipper's, is supplemented by absorption through its wet skin.
Both these requirements restrict it, and most amphibians, to moist places.
But there is a third need that ties it to water: its eggs, like those of a fish, do not have waterproof shells, so it has to go back there to breed.
During its water-living phase in the breeding season, the newt becomes quite fish-like.
It swims, with its legs tucked out of the way alongside its flanks, by sinuous movements of its body and by beating its tail.
The male of some species develops a crest along his back like a dorsal fin and becomes brightly coloured as fish do during courtship.
When he displays, he beats water with his tail and flexes his crest, sending powerful currents towards the female or rivals.
These they detect with lines of sensors on the head and along the sides of the body which are an inheritance from the fish and an equivalent of their ancient lateral line system.
The female lays a great number of eggs, attaching each individually to the leaf of a water plant.
When the young hatch, they are even more fish-like than their parents, for they have no legs and breathe not with lungs, which will develop later, but with feathery external gills.
They are tadpoles.
Some salamanders in Central America exploit the possession of such a water-living larva to give themselves two alternative ways of spending their adult lives.
One species living in a lake in Mexico, regularly changes to a land-living adult form in the normal fashion.
But if there is a particularly wet season and its lake does not shrink and dry, then its larvae retain their feathery gills.
They continue to grow well beyond the size at which they would normally change shape and become as big, if not bigger, than the land-living form.
Eventually, while still retaining their tadpole appearance, they become sexually mature and breed.
In a nearby lake, a related creature has reverted permanently to the aquatic life of its ancestors.
It always breeds in a larval condition, its external gills growing into great branching bushes on either side of its neck.
The Aztecs, perhaps recognising how odd this was, gave it a name which means "water monster" — axolotl.
The fact that it is a  salamander can be experimentally demonstrated by feeding it with thyroid extract.
It will then lose its external gills, develop lungs and turn into a creature that closely resembles a burrowing salamander that lives in Florida.
Farther north in the United States, one amphibian has reverted irrevocably to water-living — the mud puppy.
It has both gills and lungs, lays its eggs in a nest in the bottom of a stream and remains in water throughout its life.
No scientist has yet discovered any means of inducing this creature to change into a different form; but we need have no doubt that its ancestors were true amphibious salamanders.
Some salamanders have taken this reversion to a fish-like existence even further.
They seem to be losing not only their lungs but their legs.
The siren, a metre-long amphibian from the southern United States, has lost its back legs altogether and its front legs are not only greatly reduced in size but have no bones within them, merely cartilage, so that they are of no practical use in locomotion.
The amphiuma, from the same part of the world, still possesses all four of its limbs but they are so minuscule that you have to look very carefully if you are not to miss them.
Indeed, it is superficially so like a fish that it is known locally as the Congo eel.
This abandonment of both the major innovations made by the descendants of Eusthenopteron during their colonisation of the land occurs not only among those salamanders that have taken to water but even among some that spend their lives almost entirely on land.
Many American salamanders have lost their lungs and yet manage to breathe adequately through their wet skin and the moist membranes lining their mouths.
But this can only be done at the price of a restriction of body size.
Breathing in this way will be more efficient if the body is of the size and shape that gives maximum skin area and minimum body volume and this indeed, is just what is found among these lungless salamanders; their bodies are thin and elongated and none of them grows to more than a few centimetres in length.
One group have lost their legs altogether and taken to burrowing underground.
Their anatomy is so specialised and so different from the urodeles that they are classified in an order of their own, the caecilians.
They live only in warm parts of the world, the bulk of them in the tropics.
Not only do they lack legs but there is no sign of an internal girdle of bones at either shoulder or hip.
They also have an extremely elongated body.
Urodeles usually have a dozen or so vertebrae in their spines; a caecilian, however, may have as many as 270.
Eyes are of little use, burrowing underground and often they have become covered in skin.
Compensating for this loss of sight, some species have small extendable tentacles at the angle of their jaws which serve as sensitive feelers.
Caecilians are rarely seen for they seldom come to the surface except at night and even if they are accidentally dug up, they may well be mistaken for brightly coloured earthworms.
But unlike earthworms, which eat rotting vegetation, the caecilians are carnivores.
They have hunter's jaws and when they suddenly expose a huge gape, they can be quite alarming if you think you are handling an ordinary, inoffensive worm.
There are about 160 species of caecilians known and about 300 species of urodeles, but by far the most numerous amphibians alive today belong to a third group, the anurans, "tail-less ones" .
There are about 2600 of them.
In temperate parts of the world, there are two kinds of anurans: those with smooth moist skins which we call frogs, and those with dryer more warty skins, the toads.
The distinction, however, is little more than skin deep.
In the tropics, where the bulk of the anurans live, it is not nearly so clear, and there are intermediate forms which could be called frog or toad with equal accuracy.
Instead of lengthening their bodies, like the caecilians, they have shortened it, their vertebrae having become fused together, and far from losing their legs, they have developed them enormously, and some have become prodigious leapers.
The biggest anuran of all, the goliath frog from West Africa, is able to jump three metres or so.
Spectacular though this is, many smaller frogs can easily outdo it, if their jumps are judged in relation to their body size.
A few tree-living species can travel fifteen metres or so through the air, about a hundred times their body length, by becoming gliders.
The web of skin that unites their toes has become greatly enlarged so that each foot is, in effect, a small parachute.
When the frog leaps off the branch of a tree, these are spread so that instead of falling, it planes gently downwards, and usually to another tree.
The frog's leap is not merely a way of getting from one point on the ground to another.
It is also a very effective method of escaping from an enemy — so explosive, so surprising, that catching a frog can be a difficult business, whether you are a human or a hungry bird or reptile.
And as anurans, with their soft vulnerable bodies, are much sought after as food, they need all the defences they can muster.
Many rely on concealment.
Some match the green of the glossy leaves on which they crouch; others, camouflaged with blotches of brown and grey, are almost invisible, crouching among the leaf litter on the forest floor.
But some anurans defend themselves in a more active way.
The common European toad, when it meets a snake, inflates its body and stands on tip-toe, a procedure that makes it appear to have grown suddenly and that seems to baffle most of the snakes that encounter it.
The fire-bellied toad, when alarmed, suddenly throws itself on its back, so exposing its underside which blazes with a yellow and black pattern, a colour combination which is widely recognised in the animal world as a warning.
Nor is this entirely bluff on the part of the firebelly.
All amphibians have mucous glands in their skin which produce a slime that helps to keep it moist and some of these in the firebelly's skin produce a bitter-tasting poison.
In Central and South America at least twenty kinds of frogs have developed this defence still further.
The poison they produce from their skin is so lethal that it can paralyse a bird or a monkey immediately.
It is of no value to the frogs, as individuals, if their attacker dies after they themselves have been eaten, so they have also developed the most striking, vivid colours — not just yellow and black, but scarlet, virulent green and purple.
For this protective advertisement to be effective, it must be seen; so these frogs, unlike most others, are active not at night but during the day, moving boldly around the forest floor, confident and secure in their brilliant livery.
From the beginning of their history, the amphibians were hunters, preying on the worms, insects and other invertebrates that had preceded them on to the land.
They remain so today despite the appearance of bigger and more powerful hunters which have compelled them to be more circumspect in their behaviour.
Some indeed are still quite formidable.
The horned toad of South America has a gape so big that it can with ease engulf nestling birds and young mice.
But no amphibian can truthfully be described as nimble and for hunting they have to rely on something other than agility their tongue.
The extendable tongue is an amphibian invention.
No fish ever had one.
It is attached not to the back of the mouth as ours is, but to the front.
In consequence, the frogs and toads can stick it out much further than we can, simply by flicking it forward a useful talent for a rather slow-moving hunter without a neck.
Its end is both sticky and muscular so that a toad can use it first to grasp a worm or a slug and then to carry it bodily back to the mouth.
Many amphibians, including the horned toad, have very serviceable rows of teeth on their jaws, as their ancestors had, but these are used for defence or as a way of gripping the prey.
They do nothing to break up the food into easily swallowed gobbets or to tease out the hard inedible bits.
No amphibian can chew.
This is the reason why toads, when they seize one end of a worm, methodically rake the length of it with their forefeet to remove any bits of sticks or earth that might be stuck to it.
The tongue helps the process of swallowing by producing a lot of mucus which lubricates the food and prevents it scratching the delicate membranes of the throat.
The tongue also assists in moving the food back along the floor of the mouth.
So, it seems, do the eyes.
All frogs and toads blink when they swallow.
Their eye-sockets have no bony floor, so when they blink, the eye-balls are drawn down into the skull and make a bulge in the roof of the mouth which squeezes the lump of food to the back of the throat.
The amphibian's eyes are fundamentally the same in structure as those of their fish ancestors.
Optically such eyes work just as well out of water as in it.
The only modification needed to make them operate efficiently in air is some means of keeping their surface clean and smooth, so the amphibians developed the capacity to blink and a membrane that they can draw across the front of the eyeball.
The equipment they use to perceive sound waves in the air is, however, quite new.
The fish's method of receiving sound through their bodies, amplified in some instances by the resonance of the gas-filled swim-bladder, does not work efficiently in air, so most frogs and toads have developed eardrums.
These detect sound vibrations in the air very efficiently indeed.
While exploiting this ability to hear, the anurans developed a voice.
Frogs, and toads are most impressive singers.
The lungs which blow air through their vocal chords are still simple and relatively feeble, but many frogs amplify the sound of their voices with huge swelling throats or resonating sacs bulging from the corner of the jaws.
An assemblage of frogs, calling in a tropical swamp, can create such a noise that a human voice has to shout to make itself heard.
The variety of sound produced by different  species is enormous and amazing to anyone who has only heard frogs of the temperate regions.
There are groans, metallic clicks, mewing and wails, belches and whinnies.
It is intriguing to speculate, as you stand in a swamp listening to this astounding and deafening chorus, that, although much must have changed in the millions of years since the first amphibians appeared, it was, nonetheless, an amphibian voice that first sounded over the land which, until then, had heard nothing but the chirps and whirrs of insects.
The amphibians' chorus, rising from a pool or a swamp, is a prelude to mating, a summons to all other members of the same species to assemble and breed.
The great majority of amphibians still mate in water.
Though males usually grasp the females, the act of fertilisation still, with very few exceptions, takes place outside the body.
Sperm swim to the eggs, as fish sperm does, and for this process, water is normally essential.
Once this has happened, the adults usually return to land.
Thus abandoned, the eggs are now beset by danger.
Unprotected by a shell, they are easy meat for insect larvae and flatworms.
Those that survive and hatch are then pounced on by water beetles, dragonfly larvae and many kinds of fish.
The mortality is gigantic; but so is the number of eggs laid.
A female toad may lay 20,000 eggs each season; perhaps a quarter of a million in her lifetime.
Out of all these, only two have to live to maturity to maintain the level of the population.
The strategy is an ancient one.
Fish used it and still do.
But it is an expensive one in terms of living tissue produced and it is not the only one possible.
Some frogs have adopted a different technique.
They lay comparatively few eggs but look after them carefully, protecting them from predators.
The Pipa toad is one of the most aquatic of the anurans, spending all its life in water.
It is a grotesque creature with a flattened body and a squashed-looking head.
When they mate, the male grasps the female with his arms as most water-breeding anurans do.
But then follows the most extraordinary and graceful ballet.
The female kicks with her legs so that the pair soar upwards in an elegant slow somersault.
As they descend, the female extrudes a few eggs which are immediately fertilised by the male's sperms that have been discharged into the water at the same time.
Then, with delicate movements of his webbed hind feet, toes distended so that they form a fan, he gathers up the eggs and gently spreads them over the female's back.
And there they stick.
Again and again this arching leap is performed until a hundred or so eggs are fixed in an even carpet on the female's back.
The skin beneath them begins to swell and soon the eggs appear to be embedded in it.
A membrane rapidly grows over them and within thirty hours, the eggs have disappeared from sight and the skin on the female's back is smooth and entire once more.
Beneath the skin, the eggs develop.
After a fortnight, the whole of the female's back is rippling with the movements of the tadpoles beneath.
Then after 24 days, the young break holes in the skin and swim swiftly away to seek safe hiding places.
Other pond-dwelling anurans find safety for their brood in less extreme ways.
Several simply find or manufacture private swimming pools.
This is not so difficult in the tropical rainforest where the rainfall is so heavy and so well spread throughout the  year that the centres of many plants are permanently filled with water.
Members of the bromeliad family are shaped like great rosettes with deep water-filled centres.
Some grow, tall-stemmed on the ground.
Others squat on the branches of forest trees with their roots dangling beneath them in the humid air.
Their centres then become, in effect, miniature ponds high in a tree.
No fish could possibly reach them.
But frogs can and several species in South America have taken up permanent residence.
They lay their eggs in these chalices and there the young go through their entire development, sharing their pool with nothing more dangerous than a few innocuous insect larvae.
In Brazil, another small frog builds its own ponds on the margins of forest pools, constructing a crater ringed with a low mud wall about 10 centimetres high.
The eggs are laid here and the tadpoles will stay in their privileged and exclusive water until rain raises the level of the main pool and floods their quarters or breaks down the walls.
When the first amphibians appeared, there was, of course, one comparatively safe place for their eggs and young — the land.
At that time no other vertebrates were there to steal eggs and gulp the larvae, no risks comparable to those threatened in the water by shoals of hungry fish.
If the amphibians could manage to deposit their eggs out of water, their young would certainly have greatly increased chances of survival.
But there were problems.
How could the eggs be prevented from drying out and how could tadpoles develop out of water?
Whether the ancient amphibians overcame those difficulties we do not know.
Had they done so they would certainly have greatly accelerated the rate at which they colonised the land.
Today the attraction of the land for breeding is not so great, for the amphibians no longer have it to themselves.
There are reptiles, birds and even mammals that relish amphibian eggs and tadpoles if they can find them.
Nonetheless, even today, many frogs and toads find it advantageous to follow this strategy.
One European species, the midwife toad, spends most of its life in holes, not far from water.
It mates on land.
As the eggs are extruded the male fertilises them.
A quarter of an hour later, he begins to take up the strings of eggs, twining them around his hind legs.
For the next few weeks, he hobbles about with them wherever he goes.
If his surroundings get dangerously dry then he moves to moister ones.
Eventually, when the eggs are about to hatch, he hops down to the edge of the pool and dips his legs with their burden of eggs into the water.
He stays there for the hour or so that is necessary for all the tadpoles to emerge and then returns to his hole.
The South American poison frogs have a variation of the same technique.
Their eggs are also laid on moist ground and the males crouch beside them on guard.
When the tadpoles hatch, they immediately wriggle to the male and climb on his back.
His skin secretes a great deal of mucus which both keeps the young attached and prevents them from drying out.
They have no gills, but obtain their oxygen by absorbing it through the skin of their body and greatly enlarged tails.
In Africa, there are frogs that manage to breed on the branches of trees.
They select one that overhangs water.
They couple and the female begins to excrete a liquid from her vent which both she and her mate beat into a lather with their hind legs.
The eggs  are then laid in the resulting ball of froth.
In some species the outside of the suds hardens into a dry crust, retaining the moisture within; in others, the female regularly descends to the pond or stream beneath, absorbs water through her skin and then returns to the egg-mass and moistens it with her urine.
The eggs hatch and the young tadpoles develop within the froth until, at the appropriate time, the lower part  liquefies and the tadpoles drop out and fall into the water below.
Other frogs avoid the need to provide water for their tadpoles by producing young that complete the whole of their development within the egg membrane.
This, however, makes it impossible for them to feed during the larval stage, as free-swimming tadpoles can do, so they have to nourish themselves with specially large quantities of yolk.
This, in turn, means that the female can only lay a relatively small number of eggs in a clutch.
The whistling frog from the Caribbean, which practises this technique, lays only a dozen or so, which it places on the ground.
Development is very rapid and within twenty days each egg contains a tiny froglet which pierces the egg membrane with a minute spike on the tip of its snout and so emerges having dispensed with external water altogether.
The most extreme and physically complicated breeding techniques are those in which the eggs and the developing larvae are kept moist by being retained actually within the body of the parent.
The female of one South American frog, Gastrotheca, has a brood pouch on her back with a slit-shaped entrance.
When the pair begin to spawn, the male, who is smaller than she is, climbs on her back and clasps her around the throat.
She then raises her hind legs so that she is crouching with her nose down and her back tilted.
One by one she extrudes eggs.
The male fertilises them and they roll down a moist groove and into the brood sac.
There they develop and hatch.
One species of Gastrotheca produces about 200 young at a time.
These emerge and are released into water as tadpoles.
Another species, however, has only about twenty young but provides them with more yolk each and they remain within the sac until they become froglets.
The female releases them by reaching forward with her hind leg, inserting her longest toe into the sac entrance and pulling it so that it enlarges and her young are able to clamber out.
The most bizarre of all these techniques, at least to our eyes, prejudiced as we are to a mammalian way of doing things, is that practised by Rhinoderma, a tiny frog that Darwin found in Southern Chile.
When the females have laid their eggs, which they deposit on the moist ground, the males sit in groups around them on guard.
As soon as the developing eggs begin to move within their globes of jelly, the males lean forward and appear to eat them.
Instead of swallowing them, however, the eggs are taken into the vocal sac which is unusually large and extends right down the underside of the male's body.
There they develop until one day the male gulps once or twice, suddenly yawns and a fully-formed froglet leaps out of his mouth.
The acme of parental care among amphibians, however, is that provided by a West African species of Nectophrynoides, the females of which retain their young inside their bodies in a way that compares very closely with the technique of placental  mammals.
These toads are only about 2 centimetres long.
Most of the year they are hidden in rock crevices.
When the rains come, however, they emerge in great numbers and mate, the male clasping the female around the groin.
Their vents are pressed together so that the sperm can make its way into the female.
The fertilised eggs are not then laid but remain inside the female's oviduct.
The tadpoles that develop from them are complete with mouths and external gills and they feed within the oviduct on tiny white flakes secreted from its walls, nibbling them just as though they were independent creatures browsing in a tiny pond.
When, after nine months, the rains at last return, the female gives birth.
Her stomach and oviduct do not have muscles which can contract and so expel her young as a mammal's womb has.
She achieves birth, instead, by bracing her body against the ground with her forelegs and then inflating her lungs so that they swell into her abdomen and squeeze the young out by pneumatic pressure.
So by these and many more ingenious techniques, the anurans have minimised their dependence on moisture for mating and for hatching and rearing young.
Their permeable skins, however, still dictate that their surroundings are to be moist if the animals are to avoid death by desiccation.
But one or two species have succeeded in minimising even this requirement.
There could scarcely be a less promising environment for an amphibian than the desert of central Australia where sometimes several years may pass without any rain falling.
And yet a few kinds of frogs manage to live even here.
The water-holding frog, Cyclorana, appears above ground only during the brief and infrequent rain storms.
Water then may lie on the rocks of the desert for several days, even a week or so.
With frantic speed, the frogs feast on the great flush of insects that have also come with the rain.
And they mate, laying their eggs in the shallow tepid pools.
The eggs hatch and the tadpoles develop at a spectacular rate.
As the rain water soaks away and the desert once again dries, the frogs, adults as well as young, absorb water through their skins until they are tightly bloated and almost spherical.
Then they burrow deep into the still soft sand and excavate a small chamber.
Here they secrete a membrane from their skin so that they resemble a plastic-wrapped fruit from a supermarket.
This effectively prevents water-loss by evaporation through the skin, though the animal must doubtless lose some moisture by breathing, which it is able to do through tiny tubes attached to its nostrils and opening through the membrane.
It can remain in this state of suspended animation for at least two years.
The technique is very reminiscent of that used by the amphibians' far distant and antique cousin, the lungfish.
Nonetheless, the fact remains that even this frog is dependent upon rains arriving at some time and its active life is, in reality, condensed to that brief moment when the desert is wet.
To survive, remain active and breed in areas where there is little or no rain and no open water at all, a creature must have both a watertight skin and a watertight egg.
The acquisition of those two characters constituted the next great evolutionary breakthrough.
It brought to an end the era of amphibians and it was introduced by the next great group to appear, the reptiles.