

Exigez le véritable Cheddar français
"The Comté
"Privileged heir of the Gruyère's great and noble family, it is made in the Franche-Comté and its surroundings.
The paste is coloured like pale yellow ivory, when it is cut, holes appear well shared exactly, like a hazelnut, sometimes, at most, like a cherry."
"The Beaufort
This Gruyère is made in the high alpine mountains, the paste is soft and supple, the cut shows not any hole like butter."
"The Emmental
This Gruyère, from the Savoy is like a settler who knew to put himself forward leaving off the East countries for other lands.
The mosaic of the cut looks like a great distribution of attractive holes.
 "As soon as one enters" Jura"and the whole region centred on this French Department, one is aware of the respect which is due to French Gruyère cheese.
Public opinion has long remained wrongfully ignorant of what the French Gruyère cheeses really are.
The above extracts are from a leaflet issued for the American and English markets by the French manufacturers of Le Creuset fondue sets.
Under the signature of Raymond Oliver, the Parisian gastronomic  publicist and owner of the Grand Véfour restaurant in the Palais Royal, is appended the information that "you will always find your dairyman has one of the great vintages of French Gruyere" .
This instructive leaflet also supplies three recipes for fondue, one to be made with Emmental, one with Comté, one with Beaufort.
None of the versions differs in any notable respect from the rustic Swiss cheese fondue.
That famous dish of cheese stewed with white wine and flavoured very expensively, but very necessarily, with kirsch, has of late years received so much publicity that you can find a recipe for it in almost any cookery book or magazine you pick up.
What to me seems surprising is that M. Oliver, who presumably supplied the recipes for the Le Creuset leaflet, does not give what is said to be the old and traditional fondue of Franche-Comté, a dish in every respect superior to its primitive Swiss counterpart, having both greater finesse of flavour and texture and far less brutally indigestible qualities.
Like Brillat-Savarin's famous fondue and the fonduta of Piedmont, the fondue of Franche-Comté is really a cream of eggs and cheese (not, be it noted, scrambled eggs and cheese) and has been rejected, I fancy, as being unauthentic either because it is more difficult to cook correctly than the Swiss version or because it is the cheese purveyors rather than the egg-marketeers who have been on the job.
Since Raymond Oliver's assertion to the effect that your, dairyman always has one of the great vintages of French Gruyère cannot be said to apply to any of my dairymen both the questions of authenticity and of relative skill with the fondue set are academic.
All the same, just for the record, here is the version of the fondue of Franche-Comté given by Pierre Dupin in Les Secrets de la Cuisine Comtoise (Ed.
Nourry, Paris, 1927).
FONDUE DE FRANCHE-COMTÉ
"Into a saucepan you pour 2 decilitres (approximately 7 fluid oz.) of white wine, you add a large clove of garlic, chopped, and you boil the wine until it is reduced by half and the garlic is cooked.
Strain the wine and leave it to cool.
"In a bowl mix 10 well-beaten eggs with 60 gr. (2 oz.) of Gruyère cut into very tiny pieces, 60 gr. of butter, pepper and a little salt.
You add the wine, and mix it with the eggs and cheese, pour the mixture into a flameproof casserole and put it to cook immediately, but you do not leave it for an instant: you stir ceaselessly until you have a homogenous cream, and you serve it sizzling in the recipient in which it has cooked."
Well, that is the authentic recipe.
One of them anyhow.
At a period when I kept house in France and could lay hands on the Gruyère of the Comté I used on occasion to cook a similar version.
When it comes off it is a very fine dish indeed.
But in addition to great patience it does demand a little advance planning; the business of adding the already garlic-flavoured and cooked but cooled wine to the cheese and eggs and putting the whole mixture together into the cooking pot is important.
Then, as M. Dupin stresses more than once in his book, all types of genuine Gruyère cheese should be cut into little pieces for cooking, never on any account grated, a procedure which causes it to form sticky masses rather than the long creamy threads which constitute one of its essential characteristics — a characteristic considered especially important when it comes to the soupe au fromage of the eastern French provinces, that same soup which, transmogrified into the onion soup of the Paris all-night bistros, has now found its way into packets labelled la soupe au fromage instantanée.
(Ingredients: dehydrated Gruyère cheese, potato-starch, spices, salt.)
Which would seem to reduce the whole matter of authenticity to the level of farce.
If the word Gruyère on the packet can induce people to buy the product in question (I have tasted it; and it seems only fair to say that of its kind it is of a matchless ignobility) then it becomes clear that it is a too innocent belief in authenticity and the efficacy of the ancient formula which has made us such easy victims of the purveyors of the farmyard-fresh Surrey chicken from the battery house, the mountain-brook trout from the breeding tank, via the deep-freeze, the hedgerow-ripened blackberry pie-filling out of the cardboard box.
When the original ingredients of a dish become obsolete or so debased as to be unrecognizable radical change is preferable to make-believe replacements.
By accepting changes and variations on the ancient recipes we can achieve a different kind of authenticity, one which has at least some semblance of reality.
In the matter of genuine Gruyère, for example, a great deal sold in this country turns out, on close inspection, to be German Emmental.
This is a cheese  which is expensive, smells of drains — it is marketed in wrapped wedges so you do not find this out until you get it home — and in consistence is more suitable for mending tyres than for the cooking pot.
(One longs for the Germans to give up trying to make facsimiles of other people's cheeses.
They are terrible duffers at it.
It is, I am told, German settlers in County Wexford who are responsible for the Irish Brie called St Edi now being peddled in this country; the assault of its ammoniac smell brought back to me with terrible force a twenty-two-year-old memory of the Camembert of war-time Egypt which, I now realize, could have been none other than the handiwork of a German fifth column active in Alexandria.)
Among newly-invented cheese dishes which seem to me worth a trial are a French Welsh Rabbit and an Anglo-Irish fondue.
These recipes are being currently hawked around by, respectively, the publicity agents of Guinness and of the Trappist monks who own the Port-du-Salut cheese factory in North-Western France.
Recipes disseminated by such bodies — one does appreciate that in the case of the Trappists a spokesman is essential — are bound to be suspect, but not all the public relations cookery experts are as cruelly antihumanitarian as the lady who publicized the traditional Welsh trifle for St David's Day to be made with one tin of fruit salad and one packet of Birds Pineapple Instant Whip, a leek confected from angelica, piped cream, cocoa powder and desiccated coconut adding the finishing festive touches.
Insults so ferocious as the recipe for Sussex Layer Pancakes — why pick on Sussex?
Was it directed at the restaurants of Chichester or Glyndebourne?— calling for two 16-oz. cans of spaghetti in tomato sauce, 9 oz. of plain flour and 6 oz. of shredded suet (put about by the Atora Suet Bureau) are also uncommon.
Even the recipe for George Washington's mother's gingerbread allegedly found "in an old worn cookery book" dated 1784, of which the first item on the list of ingredients is ½ cup of margarine, could be said to be honest in the sense that it is candidly admitted that margarine is what is actually now used in the kitchens at Claverton Manor, the American Museum near Bath where both the gingerbread and the leaflet giving the recipe are purveyed to the public.
After all, one feels, Mrs Washington was surely a thrifty housewife; had the invention of margarine occurred a century sooner than it did, no doubt she would have taken advantage of the development.
And we must not forget that it is to a Public Relations expert that we owe the invention of traditional Irish coffee laced with Irish whiskey, which nobody will deny is a very great improvement on Irish coffee tout court.
I have not, by the way, yet tried the Guinness fondue recipe, but I do know from past experience that stout is an excellent and enriching alternative to wine for a number of meat and game dishes.
Why not also for cheese?
CHEESE AND GUINNESS FONDUE (makes one pint)
2 lb. grated Cheddar cheese; ½ pint Guinness (good measure); 6–8 teaspoons Worcestershire Sauce; salt; pepper; Cayenne pepper; 1 level tablespoon cornflour.
Put grated cheese into a 7-inch fondue dish or enamelled iron casserole and melt gently, stirring continuously.
Add remaining ingredients and stir until the fondue thickens slightly.
For dipping use chunks of French bread or toast.
Note
If a normal 7-inch or bigger dish is used, one pint of fondue is the right quantity.
For half the quantity, a smaller dish must be used.
Canadian Black Diamond Cheddar (the straightforward one, not the wine-cured variety) is without question by far the best Cheddar now generally available to the British public.
There is also the point that it has in fact so excellent a flavour that I doubt if a fondue made with it would need 6 to 8 teaspoons (which is an awful lot) of Worcestershire sauce.
It might even not need the Guinness.
Then there is the matter of the French Cheddar (not to be confused with an unidentified English cheese known for generations to the French public as Chester) now being made down at Castres in the Tarn department of the Languedoc.
I do not know if Guinness is imported by the French on anything like the scale on which Scotch whisky pours into France.
If not, this recipe, plus French Cheddar — by no means an uninteresting cheese (French Dairy Farmers Ltd, 17 Bentinck Street, w.1 are importing it into England)— should help; and a new French regional dish will have come into being.
For that matter, why not a Scottish fondue made with the Orkney Cheddar distributed under the auspices of the North of Scotland Milk Marketing Board?
For eating purposes Orkney Cheddar is pretty soapy and bears no resemblance whatever to a cheese actually brought from the Orkneys which I once tasted in the house of Edinburgh friends of mine.
Still, in the cooking pot, and enlivened  let's say with a dash of Cutty Sark or Christopher's Finest Old Scotch, I don't see why it shouldn't make out pretty well.
As for Welsh Rabbit, over the years it seems to have evolved from primitive toasted cheese into a dish not all that different from the fondues of France and Switzerland.
An authentic Welsh version was, according to Lady Llanover's Good Cookery (1867) once upon a time made with ewe's milk cheese (Lady Llanover lived in Monmouthshire for about ninety years), now presumably obsolete.
Double Gloucester and new Lancashire are the more conventionally accepted cheeses vintages which your dairyman can usually supply for toasting or for English Welsh Rabbit.
FRENCH WELSH RABBIT
(Recipe by the Comtesse Mapie de Toulouse-Lautrec for a leaflet publicizing Port-Salut cheese.)
"For 2 people: 2 large slices of bread, 4 oz. of Port-Salut, 1 large glass of beer, ½ a glass of kirsch, 2 oz. of butter, Cayenne pepper.
Melt the butter in a frying pan and put the bread slices in it so that they are golden coloured on both sides.
In a large saucepan, pour the beer that you warm for 5 minutes.
Then add the Port-Salut, minced as thinly as possible, the kirsch and a pinch of Cayenne pepper.
Stir with a wooden spoon until the cheese is quite melted.
Put the bread slices in an oven dish, buttered beforehand, cover them with cheese cream and leave in the oven to brown."
A mixture of beer and kirsch?
H'm.
Not quite as Cambrian as the Pineapple Instant Whip.
But perhaps the Comtesse's fried bread is better than the toast which traditionally accompanies Welsh Rabbit.
And, in passing, it is worth noting that French (I have not tried the Danish imitation) Port-Salut makes an excellent cooking cheese with a low melting point, which means that it turns creamy but not rubbery.
The other day I put it into a fondue made according to the Franche-Comté method.
It gave the dish a very subtle flavour, that Port-Salut.
There is, of course, no temptation to take the quick way out by grating it.
You can't grate Port-Salut.
And myself, I do not find the creamy threads formed by melting Gruyère all that beguiling.
In my experience creamy threads are all too often elastic bands with knots in.
Dutch Gouda, by the way, makes just as good Welsh Rabbit as French Port-Salut; and there is always Caerphilly from Somerset, not to mention the Caerphilly (it may, I think, have now vanished) made by Irish nuns — not I fancy in this case German parachutists.
It was a delicious cheese, as good as the true Glamorgan Caerphilly used to be.
Wine and Food, Summer 1964
Having Crossed the Channel
THE WORK OF X. MARCEL BOULESTlN
A refugee from the Colette-Willy ménage of the early nineteen hundreds, from what promised to be a long stint of sterile work as Willy's secretary and as yet another among the throng of that extraordinary man's unacknowledged collaborators, the young Marcel Boulestin fled the malicious gossip, the dramas and scandals in which these two now legendary figures were for ever involving each other and their friends.
Avoiding the recriminations which he knew would ensue should he inform Willy of his decision, Boulestin slipped away from Paris while his employer was absent.
Thenceforth he made his life in England.
As a result of two previous visits to London, Boulestin had already gone through a period of serious anglomania which extended even to our food, and an attempt to make his father's household in Poitiers appreciate the beauty of mint sauce with mutton, the fascination of Sir Kenelm Digby's Stuart recipes for hydromel and mead, and the anglo-oriental romance of curry as served at Romano's.
In Paris he bought mince pies and English marmalade, took Colette to tea at the British Dairy, shared a blazing plum pudding with her at Christmas, drank whisky instead of wine at a dinner party at Fouquet's, spent two summer holidays in Dieppe because it was so English, and there made friends with Walter Sickert, William Nicholson, Reggie Turner, Ada Leverson, Marie Tempest and Max Beerbohm.
As a result he did a French translation of The Happy Hypocrite which was published in 1904 by the Mercure de France, illustrated with a caricature of Boulestin by Max (Boulestin had some difficulty in convincing the Mercure's editor that Max Beerbohm actually existed and was not an invention of his own).
At the time of the Beerbohm translation Boulestin was already a writer and journalist of some experience.
Before his Colette-Willy period he had contributed a weekly column of musical criticism to a  Bordeaux newspaper.
Willy was an astute talent-spotter.
The young men who made up his troupe of ghosts were seldom nonentities.
I have been told by Mr Gerald Hamilton that Boulestin's novel called Les Fréquentations de Maurice, published about 1950, is highly entertaining.
In France the book had quite a succès de scandale.
Dealing with the life of a gigolo it was considered altogether too fast for the English public.
It was not until after the 1914 war and nearly five years with the French army — although domiciled in England for some thirty years he never at any time entertained the idea of becoming a naturalized British subject, considering it highly improper for a Frenchman to renounce his country — and following the failure of his London decorating business, which before the war had been successful, that Boulestin turned to cookery writing.
In the first years of the twenties Boulestin had been dabbling, in a small way, in picture dealing, starting off promisingly with a Modigliani bought in Paris for £12 and sold in London for £90.
Returning to interior decorating he imported French wallpapers and fabrics designed by Poiret and Dufy.
He found his English customers unready for such innovations.
Before long he was broke.
During the course of negotiating the sale of some etchings by his friend J. E. Laboureur to Byard, a director of Heinemann's, Boulestin asked if a cookery book would be of any interest at that moment.
It would, said Byard.
On the spot a contract was produced and signed.
An advance of £10 was paid over.
Boulestin's writing still seems so fresh and original that it comes as a shock to realize that these happenings occurred over forty years ago, and that his first cookery book Simple French Cooking for English Homes appeared in 1923.
On the plain white jacket of the little book, and as a frontispiece, was a design, enticing, fresh and lively, by Laboureur.
The book, priced at 5s., was reprinted in September of the same year, again in 1924, 1925, 1928, 1930 and 1933.
In the meantime Boulestin had written cookery articles for the Daily Express, the Morning Post, Vogue, the Manchester Guardian and the Spectator; in February 1925 A Second Helping was published, also with a Laboureur jacket and frontispiece.
It was uncommon in those days, and still is, for publishers to commission artists of such quality to illustrate cookery books, and a little of the success of Boulestin's early books must be acknowledged to his publishers who, no doubt under the guidance of their author, produced them in so appropriate a form, in large type, on thick paper: chunky, easy little books to handle, attractively bound.
(To the general reader such matters may appear trifling.
From the point of view of a book being lastingly used and loved the effect of the rightness and appropriateness as a whole is enormous.)
A Second Helping is perhaps the least successful of Boulestin's books.
A certain proportion of "amusing" recipes and chic asides "get your rabbits sent from Dartmoor" give it a distinct sniff of the fashion-magazine hostess style.
Later the same year appeared, for 3s. 6d., The Conduct of the Kitchen.
In that year also the first Boulestin restaurant was opened in Leicester Square.
Again, artists and innovators in the decorating business collaborated with Boulestin.
Allan Walton, the enlightened owner of a prosperous textile firm in the Midlands, produced a friend who produced the capital for the restaurant, and supplied also the fabrics (he was employing artists of the stature of Cedric Morris, Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant to design for him) with which the restaurant was furnished.
In 1930 Boulestin collaborated with Jason Hill on Herbs, Salads and Seasonings, illustrated with unique grace by Cedric Morris.
In 1931 came What Shall We Have Today,(5s. and in paper covers 35.), the most popular of all the Boulestin books, containing a large selection of recipes plus a sample luncheon and dinner menu for each month of the year.
In 1932, in collaboration with Robin Adair, appeared three little volumes at 25. each, dealing with Savouries and Hors-d"uvre, Eggs and Potatoes.
Reprinted by Heinemann in 1956, these little books are still (or were last year) available at 25. 6d. each.
The grotesquely inappropriate and anti-food coloured board covers have presumably hampered their sales even at what is today a give-away price.
In 1934 came Having Crossed the Channel, a lighthearted record of a journey through the Vendée, the Landes, the Bordelais, a pilgrimage back to his native Périgord and into his youth, a drive across central France, down to the coast, into Italy and Southern Germany and back via Belgium and Holland.
This little nugget of a book (but all Boulestin books are nuggets) contains some of Boulestin's best writing about his own province and about the food of obscure country inns of a type now all but vanished.
In this book also are the best illustrations Laboureur ever did for Boulestin, one being of the archetype of the French small-town restaurant, the wide, shuttered window, the tree in a tub on the pavement, the facade which has not changed and which still promises decent and  genuine country cooking at modest prices.
That you may find neither when you get inside is another matter.
The evocation is there.
In 1935 Boulestin's Evening Standard Book of Menus was published by Heinemann.
This book is in its way a tour de force.
It contains a luncheon and dinner menu for every day of the year, plus every relevant recipe.
It was directed at an audience to which a man of lesser wit and native grace might have been tempted to talk down (it has to be remembered that by this time Boulestin and his restaurant had already become almost legendary) but this was a trap into which he was at the same time too subtle and too naturally courteous to fall.
What he produced was a volume for which he really should have kept his title The Conduct of the Kitchen — a title borrowed incidentally from Meredith — because that was just what the book of menus was about: the logical and orderly conduct of a kitchen as related to daily life and seen not through the medium of a few isolated menus for special occasions, but as part of the natural order of everyday living.
Given time, Boulestin could perhaps with his book of menus have opened the door to organized cooking for thousands of young women who in the thirties were finding themselves on their own in flats and bed-sitting rooms knowing nothing more about how to make a meal than that it ought to taste nice and should not be a bore.
As things turned out, time was something not just then at our disposal.
Very soon we were to be concerned with matters less peaceful than the conduct of our kitchens.
In the summer of 1939 Boulestin left as usual to spend his holidays in the house he had built for himself in the Landes.
Caught by the outbreak of war he and Robin Adair lingered, not knowing what to do.
Boulestin's services, offered to the British Ministry of Food and to the Army Quartermaster General, were refused.
When France fell Adair was too ill to flee and Boulestin of course stayed with him.
Arrested and interned by the Germans, Adair was eventually moved from Bayonne to Fresne.
Boulestin went to live in occupied Paris to be near his friend.
There, on 22nd September 1943, he died, aged, so Adair tells us, sixty-five.
M. André Simon, Boulestin's compatriot and contemporary, writing two years ago of Boulestin's rule that all wines young or old, red or white must be served in a decanter, recorded that "he never liked the shape and colour of wine bottles standing on the table: they  were of the greatest use, of course, but their right place was the cellar or pantry" .
 "He was a born artist," says M. Simon of Boulestin, "and he was right." 
Quotation is my only means of conveying something of that artistry, of the essence of Boulestin's writing, of his intelligence, sense and taste, of his ease of style, un-scolding, un-pompous, un-sarcastic, ineffusive, and to so high a degree inspiriting and creative.
The handful of extracts, words of kitchen advice, recipes, menus, and descriptive passages I have chosen to quote are none of them to be found in The Best of Boulestin, the American-selected anthology published in England by Heinemann in 1952 and still available at 21s.
This volume does indeed contain many of Boulestin's best recipes, but not one single one of the delicious menus in the composition of which he excelled; and it was a mistake for the editors to suppose that they understood French syntax better than their author.
Boulestin was no illiterate peasant: when he called a recipe sauce moutarde he did so because that is correct French.
There was no call to make him look like an Anglo-Saxon writing in schoolboy French by altering it to sauce de moutarde.
For that matter little seems to have been gained by the translation of gâteau petit duc into Little Duke Cake and crêpes normandes into French pancakes Normande.
At any rate anybody who buys The Best of Boulestin should be warned to pay no attention to the announcement on the jacket which informs us that the book contains a selection of the best recipes of a "World-Famous Chef" .
A chef in the professional sense of the word is just exactly what Boulestin was not and certainly did not pretend to be.
The implications of that piece of grandiloquence would not have been at all to his taste, as anyone can see from reading a paragraph or two of any of his books.
It would be a mistake for anyone to infer that Boulestin was a man who had no more sense than to attempt amateur cooking in his own restaurant.
He hired an experienced French chef (his name was Bigorre.
He came from Paillard's in Paris), but not one who would substitute an arid classicism for personal taste and character in his cooking.
Boulestin was not out to emulate Escoffier.
He was creating something new, as much in his restaurant as in his cookery writing.
In his very first book his admonitions about the indiscriminate use of stock, even of fine stock, were news, and good news: Do not spoil the special taste of the gravy obtained in the roasting of beef, veal, mutton or pork by adding to it the classical stock which gives to all meats the same deplorable taste of soup.
It is obvious that you cannot out of a joint get the sauceboat full which usually appears on the table.
Simple French Cooking for English Homes
The chief thing to remember is that all these soups — unless otherwise specified — must be made with plain water.
When made with the addition of stock they Jose all character and cease to be what they were intended to be.
The fresh pleasant taste is lost owing to the addition of meat stock, and the value of the soup from an economical point of view is also lost.
What Shall We Have Today?
That commodities such as simple sardine or anchovy butter which we had hitherto regarded as sandwich fillings, egg dishes which belonged to the breakfast table, the bed-sitting room or the night club, and little hot dishes which were ordinary English family supper savouries were valuable resources which could be quite differently deployed and offered as party dishes were ideas which had occurred to few people in pre-Boulestin days:
SARDINE BUTTER
"Take a tin of sardines, carefully remove the skins and bones and pound well.
Add same quantity of butter, salt and pepper.
Mix thoroughly so that it becomes a smooth paste.
Serve very cold.
Quite ordinary sardines will do for this."
The Evening Standard Book of Menus
Boulestin's idea was that while you were at it you made — as in a great many of his recipes — enough of this mixture (he treats smoked cod's roe and anchovy fillets in precisely the same manner) for two meals: you serve it as a first course, with toast, for two very differently composed lunches.
On a Friday in January it is followed by Irish stew and cheese (not for me, that menu, but Boulestin had something for everybody), on Saturday by cold ham and pressed beef, a hot purée of leeks with croutons as a separate course, and fruit.
On an August Thursday he thinks of it again.
It precedes a saute of liver and bacon, potato croquettes and fruit salad.
On the Saturday it is followed by a Spanish omelette, cheese and fruit.
And bless him, it is delicious, his sardine butter, and marvellously cheap and quick.
You allow, or at any rate, I allow, an ounce of butter per Portuguese sardine.
Pack the paste into a little terrine, chill it — and  you will never again feel it necessary to go to the delicatessen for bought liver pâté or any such sub-standard hors d'oeuvre.
From the same book come these two menus for September luncheons:
Salad of Tunny Fish and Celery
Risotto Milanaise
Fruit
Scrambled Eggs with Haddock
Vegetable Salad
Creamed Rice.
In those days only Boulestin thought of actually inviting people to lunch to eat scrambled eggs.
It goes without saying that he did not serve scrambled eggs with smoked haddock, he cooked the haddock first, flaked it, and mixed it with the beaten eggs before cooking them.
He added a little cream to the finished scrambled eggs and put fried croutons round them.
In January the same breakfast dish appears as a first course before the cold turkey and salad, the meal to be ended with English toasted cheese.
BRAISED VEAL WITH CARROTS
"Take a good piece of veal, about three pounds in weight, brown it both sides in butter.
Put in a fireproof dish eight carrots cut in round pieces, about half an inch thick, half a dozen small onions, parsley, salt and pepper and a rasher of bacon cut in small pieces, add a tablespoon of water, cover the dish and cook on a slow fire for about three and a half hours.
Shake the dish occasionally, but do not remove the lid."
The Conduct of the Kitchen
This recipe must have been one of Boulestin's favourites.
It appears over and over again in his books.
His omission of detail was deliberate.
It is impossible, he was in the habit of saying, to give precise recipes.
And certainly precision — unless carried to the ultimate degree, as in Madame Saint-Ange's Livre de Cuisine or Julia Child's Mastering the Art of French Cooking — can be more misleading than vagueness.
Boulestin was impatient of written detail.
When he does specify precise quantities or times he is often  wrong.
His special gift was to get us on the move, send us out to the butcher to buy that good piece of veal, into the kitchen to discover how delicate is the combination of veal, carrots, little onions, a scrap of bacon, seasonings and butter all so slowly and carefully amalgamated — and all done with butter and water alone.
Three and a half hours for a three-pound piece of veal — and on top of the stove too — is an awful long time.
At minimum heat and in a heavy well-closed pot stood on the floor of the oven rather than on a shelf, the timing would be however just about right.
Most of us know enough about absentee cooking these days to work out such details for ourselves.
Those who do not would I think be well advised to use Boulestin recipes in conjunction with a fully detailed work such as one of those mentioned.
Where Boulestin never falters or misleads is in the sureness of his taste and the sobriety of his ingredients even when his recipes are new inventions.
Anglophile he may have been.
Not so much as he thought he was.
His recipes could never be mistaken for anything but the recipes of an educated Frenchman.
It was, I think, Boulestin who introduced the English public to the Basque pipérade.
A recipe for it or a description of this beguiling dish of peppers, onions, tomatoes and eggs appears in every one of his books, even down to the booklet commissioned from him by the Romary biscuit firm and which sold for sixpence.
The briefest pipérade recipe is the one recorded in Having Crossed the Channel as it was blurted out by a tipsy smuggler one morning in a Basque inn on the Bidassoa.
 "Vous faîtes cuire vos piments et vos tomates et vous…foutez vos oeufs dedans." 
(This was later translated by Adair as "shove in your eggs" .)
In the same little volume Boulestin gives us an explanation of the old-fashioned French custom of serving a vegetable before the roast — an explanation which contains also some sound gastronomic advice:
We had at Aurillac, where we avoided the two main hotels, a delicious meal in a quite ordinary inn full of market people.
Trout was on the menu, done in a rather unusual way, and a cabbage which was almost a revelation, firm, white, and beautifully seasoned; the meat was well-flavoured and tender, and the cheese perfection.
…
There they still serve the vegetable course before the roast.
This is constantly done, especially in small, old-fashioned towns; but the foreigner must not think that this is provincial lack of knowledge.
It is simply due to the fact that these little hotels have remained faithful to habits dating from 1840 or so.
In those days dinners were much longer, and there was always an entrée and a roast.
It became the rule to serve the vegetable a fairly plain dish — as a pleasant change after the usually rich taste of the entrée, as a kind of diversion after the sauce, and, so to speak, to clean the palate for the roast to come, the roast being always (it still is) accompanied by a green salad.
Having Crossed the Channel
As can be seen even from these brief extracts Boulestin did not by any means invariably advocate traditional French bourgeois or regional cooking.
He was nothing if not open-minded, adapting English ingredients to his own purposes and forever exercising his gift for fantasy.
A dish he calls Maltese curry — an unlikely and most interesting mixture of onions, tomatoes and fruit with eggs mixed in at the end of the cooking, rather in the pipérade manner — was another recipe he repeated in several of his books.
It is given in The Best of Boulestin and was a feature of his restaurant menu.
Another of his favourites seems to have been a tomato jam; this he uses for a sweet called Peaches Barbara with cream and kirschwasser and pistachio nuts.
One may and one does read plenty of freakish recipes in cookery books.
To dismiss them out of hand is a sign either of defective knowledge or lack of imagination on the reader's part or of the author's incapacity to convince.
In the case of writers whose taste is to be trusted the very oddness of a recipe often means that here is something worth special investigation.
It turns out that the tomato jam has great finesse of flavour and emerges as a most beautiful translucent cornelian-red preserve, delicious for a jam served in the French manner as a sweet with plain cream or fresh cream cheese.
Fantasies these little dishes may be.
Again we see that in their subtlety and the manner in which they are presented they are still French fantasies.
One indication of the effect produced by Boulestin's recipes is that whenever a second-hand copy of one of his books turns up — and that is not often — one finds it scarred with pencil marks against the recipes which have been cooked by the previous owner and often, slipped somewhere among the pages, a list of dishes noted for future trial.
One 1 commend to your attention is a mousse de laitues, a kind of soufflé of cooked lettuces, given in The Finer Cooking and reproduced in The Best of Boulestin.
Another is a pickled ox-tongue, plain-boiled and served hot with a very smooth purée of white turnips enriched with butter and slices of hard-boiled egg.
This was one of the original and unique specialities of the Boulestin  restaurant.
The recipe which, under the name of langue savoyarde again appears in several of his books, is to be found in The Best of Boulestin.
So is the formula for the famous cheese soufflé which so wonderfully conceals melting whole poached eggs, an old dish of French cookery and one served by Boulestin at a luncheon given at his restaurant to celebrate the publication by Cassells on 26 September 1936, of the autobiography entitled Myself, My Two Countries.
An uncommonly good lunch it must have been that day.
The wine was a Cheval Blanc 1925 and the sole liqueur was Armagnac.
A modest show as press luncheons given by famous restaurateurs go.
So was the luncheon given at Boulestin's by a party of American journalists in honour of M. Aristide Briand.
Somehow Boulestin contrived to persuade these gentlemen that the great statesman, surfeited with political banquets and pompous food, would appreciate something simple and at least one dish and one wine from his native Nantais country.
Where today, one wonders, would a visiting celebrity be allowed so unceremonial a ceremonial meal, and one with so much character?
Less than perfect, such a meal could indeed be a memorable flop.
That Boulestin recorded the menu and the occasion indicates, one deduces, that it was no such thing:
Hors d'oeuvre Omelette au crabe
Chou farci
Fromages et Fruits
Vins:
Muscadet 1928
Château Gruaud Larose 1923
The Finer Cooking"
At the premises in Southampton Street, Covent Garden, to which the Boulestin Restaurant moved from Leicester Square there exists still today an establishment which bears Boulestin's name.
The Dufy panels and some of the original decorations still exist.
Its founder, was, I think, the first amateur to venture on a London restaurant and certainly the only one to acquire an international reputation for his food.
In Ease and Endurance, the continuation of the autobiography which Boulestin wrote in French under the title of A Londres Naguère and which was published after his death in a somewhat harum-scarum translation by Robin Adair (at one point  Adair has Boulestin exploring the Cecil Hotel in a taxi), he tells how the place was crammed night after night with customers from the Savoy, Ritz and Carlton belt, stage stars, artists, writers, royalty and High Bohemia.
His prices were reputed to be the highest in London.
And still the restaurant did not pay.
Boulestin had found, like so many before and since, that in England the price of perfection is too high.
During most of the fourteen years that he was running his restaurant he found it necessary to supplement his earnings by articles, books — heaven knows how he found the time to write them — cookery classes, lectures and the television demonstrations which were the first of their kind.
One final passage from Myself My Two Countries vividly evokes the influences which formed Boulestin's tastes in food and implanted in him that feeling for the authenticity which alone is true luxury.
Here he remembers the kitchen quarters of his grandmother's house at St Aulaye in the Périgord:
In the store room next to the kitchen were a long table and shelves always covered with all sorts of provisions; large earthenware jars full of confits of pork and goose, a small barrel where vinegar slowly matured, a bowl where honey oozed out of the comb, jams, preserves of sorrel and of tomatoes, and odd bottles with grapes and cherries marinating in brandy; next to the table a weighing machine on which I used to stand at regular intervals; sacks of haricot beans, of potatoes; eggs, each one carefully dated in pencil.
And there were the baskets of fruit, perfect small melons, late plums, under-ripe medlars waiting to soften, peaches, pears hollowed out by a bird or a wasp, figs that had fallen of their own accord, all the fruits of September naturally ripe and sometimes still warm from the sun.
Everything in profusion.
It is no doubt the remembrance of these early days which makes me despise and dislike all primeurs, the fruit artificially grown, gathered too early and expensively sent, wrapped in cotton wool, to "smart" restaurants.
The garden could hardly be called a garden; it was large, wild and not too well kept.
There were fruit trees amongst the flowers, here a pear tree, there a currant bush, so that one could either smell a rose, crush a verbena, or eat a fruit; there were borders of box, but also of sorrel and chibol; and the stiff battalion of leeks, shallots, and garlic, the delicate pale-green foliage of the carrot, the aggressive steel-grey leaves of the artichokes, the rows of lettuce which always ran to seed too quickly.
Wine and Food, Spring 1965 
Pomiane, Master of the Unsacrosanct
 "Art demands an impeccable technique; science a little understanding." 
Today the mention of art in connection with cookery is taken for pretension.
Science and cookery make a combination even more suspect.
Because he was a scientist by profession, making no claims to being an artist, Docteur de Pomiane's observation was a statement of belief, made in all humility.
Vainglory is totally missing from de Pomiane's work.
He knew that the attainment of impeccable technique meant a lifetime — in de Pomiane's case an exceptionally long one — of experiment and discipline.
Out of it all he appears to have extracted, and given, an uncommon amount of pleasure.
Docteur Edouard de Pomiane's real name was Edouard Pozerski.
He was of purely Polish origin, the son of  émigrés who had fled Poland and settled in Paris after the Revolution of 1863.
Born and brought up in Montmartre, he was educated at the Ecole Polonaise — an establishment described by Henri Babinski, another celebrated Franco-Polish cookery writer, as one of ferocious austerity — and subsequently at the Lycée Condorcet.
Pomiane chose for his career the study of biology, specialising in food chemistry and dietetics.
Before long he had invented a new science called Gastrotechnology, which he defined simply as the scientific explanation of accepted principles of cookery.
For a half-century — interrupted only by his war service from 1914 to 1918 — de Pomiane also made cookery and cookery writing his hobby and second profession.
After his retirement from the Institut Pasteur, where he lectured for some 50 years, he devoted himself entirely to his cookery studies.
He was 89 when he died in January 1964.
De Pomiane's output was immense — some dozen cookery books, countless scores of articles, broadcasts, lectures.
In France his books were best-sellers; among French cookery writers his place is one very much apart.
Many before him had attempted to explain cookery in scientific terms and had succeeded only in turning both science and cookery into the deadliest of bores.
De Pomiane was the first writer to propound such happenings as the fusion of egg yolks and olive oil in a mayonnaise, the sizzling of a potato chip when plunged into fat for deep-frying, in language so  straightforward, so graphic, that even the least scientifically minded could grasp the principles instead of simply learning the rules.
In cooking, the possibility of muffing a dish is always with us.
Nobody can eliminate that.
What de Pomiane did by explaining the cause, was to banish the fear of failure.
Adored by his public and his pupils, feared by the phoney, derided by the reactionary, de Pomiane's irreverent attitude to established tradition, his independence of mind backed up by scientific training, earned him the reputation of being something of a Candide, a provocative rebel disturbing the grave conclaves of French gastronomes, questioning the holy rites of the "white-vestured officiating priests" of classical French cookery.
It was understandable that not all his colleagues appreciated de Pomiane's particular brand of irony:
"As to the fish, everyone agrees that it must be served between the soup and the meat.
The sacred position of the fish before the meat course implies that one must eat fish and meat.
Now such a meal, as any dietician will tell you, is far too rich in nitrogenous substances, since fish has just as much assimilable albumen as meat, and contains a great deal more phosphorus…"
Good for Dr de Pomiane.
Too bad for us that so few of his readers — or listeners — paid attention to his liberating words.
It does, on any count, seem extraordinary that thirty years after de Pomiane's heyday, the dispiriting progress from soup to fish, from fish to meat and on, remorselessly on, to salad, cheese, a piece of pastry, a crème caramel or an ice cream, still constitutes the standard menu throughout the entire French-influenced world of hotels and catering establishments.
Reading some of de Pomiane's neat menus (from 365 Menus, 365 Recettes, Albin Michel 1938) it is so easy to see how little effort is required to transform the dull, overcharged, stereotyped meal into one with a fresh emphasis and a proper balance:
Tomates à la crème
Côtelettes de porc
Purée de farine de marrons
Salade de mâche à la betterave
Poires
An unambitious enough menu — and what a delicious surprise it would be to encounter such a meal at any one of those country town  Hôtels des Voyageurs, du Commerce, du Lion d'Or, to which my own business affairs in France now take me.
In these establishments, where one stays because there is no choice, the food is of a mediocrity, a predictability redeemed for me only by the good bread, the fresh eggs in the omelettes, the still relatively civilised presentation — which in Paris is becoming rare — the soup brought to table in a tureen, the hors d'oeuvre on the familiar, plain little white dishes, the salad in a simple glass bowl.
If it all tasted as beguiling as it looks, every dish would be a feast.
Two courses out of the whole menu would be more than enough.
Now that little meal of de Pomiane's is a feast, as a whole entity.
It is also a real lesson in how to avoid the obvious without being freakish, how to start with the stimulus of a hot vegetable dish, how to vary the eternal purée of potatoes with your meat (lacking chestnut flour we could try instead a purée of lentils or split peas), how to follow it with a fresh, bright, unexpected salad (that excellent mixture of corn salad and beetroot — how often does one meet with it nowadays?) and since by that time most people would have had enough without embarking on cheese, de Pomiane is brave enough to leave it out.
How much harm has that tyrannical maxim of Brillat Savarin's about a meal without cheese done to all our waistlines and our digestions?
For a hot first dish, de Pomiane's recipe for tomates à la crème is worth knowing.
His method makes tomatoes taste so  startlingly unlike any other dish of cooked tomatoes that any restaurateur who put it on his menu would, in all probability, soon find it listed in the guide books as a regional speciality.
De Pomiane himself said the recipe came from his Polish mother.
That would not prevent anyone from calling it what he pleases:
TOMATES A LA CRÈME
"Take six tomatoes.
Cut them in halves.
In your frying pan melt a lump of butter.
Put in the tomatoes, cut side downwards, with a sharply-pointed knife puncturing here and there the rounded sides of the tomatoes.
Let them heat for five minutes.
Turn them over.
Cook them for another ten minutes.
Turn them again.
The juices run out and spread into the pan.
Once more turn the tomatoes cut side upwards.
Around them put 80 grammes (3 oz. near enough) of thick cream.
Mix it with the juices.
As soon as it bubbles, slip the tomatoes and all their sauce on to a hat dish.
Serve instantly, very hot."
The faults of the orthodox menu were by no means the only facet of so-called classic French cooking upon which de Pomiane turned his analytical intelligence.
Recipes accepted as great and sacrosanct are not always compatible with sense.
Dr de Pomiane's radar eye saw through them: "Homard à l'américaine is a cacophony…it offends a basic principle of taste." 
I rather wish he had gone to work on some of the astonishing things Escoffier and his contemporaries did to fruit.
Choice pears masked with chocolate sauce and cream, beautiful fresh peaches smothered in raspberry purée and set around with vanilla ice seem to me offences to nature, let alone to art or basic principles.
How very rum that people still write of these inventions with breathless awe.
De Pomiane, however, was a man too civilised, too subtle, to labour his points.
He passes speedily from the absurdities of haute cuisine to the shortcomings of folk cookery, and deals a swift right and left to those writers whose reverent genuflections before the glory and wonder of every least piece of peasant cookery-lore make much journalistic cookery writing so tedious.
By the simple device of warning his readers to expect the worst, de Pomiane gets his message across.
From a village baker-woman of venerable age, he obtains an ancestral recipe for a cherry tart made on a basis of butter-enriched bread dough.
He passes on the recipe, modified to suit himself, and carrying with it the characteristically deflating note:
"When you open the oven door you will have a shock.
It is not a pretty sight.
The edges of the tart are slightly burnt and the top layer of cherries blackened in places…
It will be received without much enthusiasm for, frankly, it is not too prepossessing.
"Don't be discouraged.
Cut the first slice and the juice will run out.
Now try it.
A surprise.
The pastry is neither crisp nor soggy, and just tinged with cherry juice.
The cherries have kept all their flavour and the juice is not sticky — just pure cherry juice.
They had some good ideas in 1865."
Of a dish from the Swiss mountains, Dr de Pomiane observes that it is"a peasant dish, rustic and vigorous.
It is not everybody's taste.
But one can improve upon it.
Let us get to work."
This same recipe provides an instructive example of the way in which Dr de Pomiane thinks we should go to work improving a primitive dish to our own taste while preserving its character intact.
Enthusiastic beginners might add olives, parsley, red peppers.
Dr Pomiane is scarcely that simple.
The school-trained professional might be tempted to superimpose  cream, wine, mushrooms, upon his rough and rustic dish.
That is not de Pomiane's way.
His way is the way of the artist; of the man who can add one sure touch, one only, and thereby create an effect of the pre-ordained, the inevitable, the entirely right and proper:
TRANCHES AU FROMAGE
"Black bread — a huge slice weighing 5 to 7 oz., French mustard, 8 oz.Gruyère.
"The slice of bread should be as big as a dessert plate and nearly 1 inch thick.
Spread it with a layer of French mustard and cover the whole surface of the bread with strips of cheese about ½ in. thick.
Put the slice of bread on a fireproof dish and under the grill.
The cheese softens and turns golden brown.
Just before it begins to run remove the dish and carry it to the table.
Sprinkle it with salt and"pepper.
Cut the slice in four and put it on to four hot plates.
Pour out the white wine and taste your cheese slice.
In the mountains this would seem delicious.
Here it is all wrong.
But you can put it right.
Over each slice pour some melted butter.
A mountaineer from the Valais would be shocked, but my friends are enthusiastic, and that is good enough for me.
This is the best kind of cookery writing.
It is courageous, courteous, adult.
It is creative in the true sense of that ill-used word, creative because it invites the reader to use his own critical and inventive faculties, sends him out to make discoveries, form his own opinions, observe things for himself, instead of slavishly accepting what the books tell him.
That little trick, for example, of spreading the mustard on the bread underneath the cheese in de Pomiane's Swiss mountain dish is, for those who notice such things, worth a volume of admonition.
So is the little tomato recipe quoted above.
All de Pomiane's vegetable dishes are interesting, freshly observed.
He is particularly fond of hot beetroot, recommending it as an accompaniment to roast saddle of hare — a delicious combination.
It was especially in his original approach to vegetables and sauces that de Pomiane provoked the criticism of hidebound French professional chefs.
Perhaps they were not aware that in this respect de Pomiane was often simply harking back to his Polish origins, thereby refreshing French cookery in the perfectly traditional way.
De Pomiane gives, incidentally, the only way (the non-orthodox way) to braise Belgian endive with success — no water, no blanching, just butter and slow cooking.
The English public knows little of de Pomiane's work and it is missing something of great value.
Although his Cooking in Ten Minutes (Bruno Cassirer, distributed by Faber, 15s.), a lighthearted treatise on how to make the most of charcuterie or delicatessen food — first published in England in 1948 — has proved a great favourite, there exists a much more representative book, a collection of lectures, radio talks, recipes and articles, called Cooking with Pomiane (Bruno Cassirer, distributed by Faber, 18s.).
It is most adroitly put together and translated into English cookery usage by Mrs Peggie Benton.
Published four years ago and still relatively unknown, the book is modest in appearance and in size, its jacket is the reverse of eyecatching, there are no colour photographs, no packaging.
It is just a very good and immensely sane book.
The Sunday Times Colour Supplement, 22 January 1967
Many a time, in the years since the explosion of nouvelle cuisine, I have wanted to write more of Dr de Pomiane and his unorthodox approach to classic French cookery.
I wonder how many of the younger of today's professional chefs realise that the origins of their great rebellion of the late 19605 and early 19705 stem, at least in part, from the days of Dr de Pomiane and his protests against illogical and harmful eating habits.
At any rate, some of those rebel chefs must surely know, even if they don't acknowledge as much, that some of their most publicised inventions were not their inventions at all, but were derived however indirectly, from the Polish and Jewish recipes published or described by Pomiane in his books and radio talks of the 19305.
That confiture d'oignons, for instance, for which the recipe appeared in Michel Guérard's Cuisine Gourmande and which has since made the tour du monde surely derived from Pomiane's dish of sweet-sour onions in which the sweetening elements were sultanas and pain d"épices, the spiced honey cake of central Europe, and which Pomiane had in turn borrowed from the  Jewish cookery of his native Poland.
True, Guérard uses sugar rather than pain d "épices, adds red wine, sherry vinegar, and grenadine syrup" to warm up the purple colour", and suggests that as well as sultanas, prunes or little pieces of dried apricot may be added.
Again, Guérard gives a recipe for saddle of hare with hot beetroot which differs only in minor respects from the one Pomiane published two or three times and which I myself used often in the fifties, and eventually quoted, with acknowledgements, in French Provincial Cooking.
As I mentioned in the Sunday Times article, Pomiane was fond of hot beetroot, and used it often, mixing vinegar and cream with it, a very un-French combination, and by no means the only one of his unconventional suggestions in the domain of vegetable cookery to arouse the scorn of reactionaries.
In the days when Pomiane was writing, chefs did not dream of braising vegetables — lettuces, leeks, Belgian endives, for example— without a preliminary blanching.
That rule was immutable, and woe betide anyone who disregarded it.
Dr de Pomiane bypassed it, and I adopted his method, particularly his recipe for cooking Belgian endives in butter and entirely without a prior water baptism.
That sort of unorthodoxy got one into trouble.
I have referred, in my Introduction, to the venerable French chef who in the fifties pursued me and my Sunday Times cookery articles with a zeal worthy of a Spanish inquisitor.
One of his more intemperate outbursts, I recall, concerned a recipe for dipping sliced young fennel bulbs, mushrooms and scallops in batter and deep frying them in oil to make a fritto misto in the Italian manner.
That idea was already red rag enough to the old gentleman.
Worse was my omission of any mention of the essential ordeal by blanching of the vegetables, and of course of the scallops.
In those days a French chef simply did not serve vegetables crisp.
They had to be soft and woolly.
(I have remembered for many years the patronne of a restaurant in the little Norman port of Barfleur who refused to cook artichokes for dinner that night — it was then 6.30 p.m. — on the grounds that they required two hours boiling.
I'm afraid she meant it.)
As for the idea that scallops might be cooked in one minute and no more, that old chef was genuinely outraged by it.
There was just one way he, as a man who had risen to eminence in his profession, had learned to do things.
It was the classical French way.
There was  no other.
it did not occur to him that there might be.
Today's chefs have very properly outlawed that preliminary blanching which spelled ruin to so many vegetables — of course there are still those such as celeriac and turnips which may need it — and one of their most fiercely held tenets concerns the brief cooking of fish, in particular of the fragile scallop.
Heaven knows it was not before time that reformation in that respect came about.
i hope it has penetrated the middle and lower echelons of French restaurant chefs.
How many times have i nearly wept at the destruction of delicate little scallops at the hands of ignorant or insensitive chefs?
The uninformed criticism of the narrow-minded, whether it came from members of the cooking profession or from old-fashioned gourmets among his own colleagues, did not worry Dr de Pomiane one jot.
His own unorthodox approach extended to his study of historical cookery and even to his choice of words when describing an ancient recipe he wanted to revive.
That particular trend, now a flood, was something of a novelty in Pomiane's day.
A sauce he adapted from Les Dix Livres de Cuisine d'Apicius, of which a French translation by the cookery historian Bertrand Guégan appeared in 1933, providing the starting point of the new trend, was one containing dates, almonds and a very large amount of chopped parsley.
The way Pomiane chose to convey the necessary quantity to his listeners — he must have been a compelling radio talker — and later to his readers was in terms of "a bunch as large as a bunch of violets" .
Everybody in Paris and indeed in all France knows what a flower seller's bunch of violets looks like, but whoever heard of such a cookery direction, let alone of a sauce containing a mixture of dates and parsley?"
To the conventional, whether professional cooks or serious gourmets, this sort of thing was at best perverse and eccentric, at worst a blasphemous crime committed on the sacred body politic of la cuisine française.
To me, and to the hundreds of ordinary French housewives who listened to his talks and read his books, his ideas and his attitude to cookery were stimulating and liberating.
Now that we have become accustomed to reading about, if not to eating, such unconventional combinations of foods as duck foie gras with turnips in a sweet-sour sauce composed of wine vinegar, sugar, sherry and port, plus the odd 30 grammes of truffles; paupiettes of crayfish garnished with leaves of Brussels sprouts; lobster mould with a sauce of carrots and port blended in turn with a sauce américaine, Pomiane's innovations don't sound very audacious.
Nobody is surprised by the idea of spirals of black Spanish  radish, forerunners of the Troisgros serpentins de legumes, as part of an hors d'oeuvre, or lettuce dressed with orange juice as well as oil and vinegar.
Turnip salad with capers is no shock today and raw choucroûte salad, an idea Pomiane had picked up in Moscow — buy very fresh choucroûte from the charcutier and stop at the village pump to wash it thoroughly, he told those of his French readers who went in for picnics on canoeing and automobile excursions — should be the joy of vegetarians.
Even apples filled with honey, spiced with cumin or dried mint and baked in pastry, another adaptation from Apicius, seems timid in comparison with Michel Guérard's Ali baba, two fantasy babas made with 110 grammes of mixed candied fruits and sultanas to only 250 grammes of brioche batter.
The cooked babas are hollowed out, filled with confectioners' custard, sugared, gratinés in the oven, chilled in the refrigerator, and ultimately served with a coulis of raspberries or caramelised peaches.
Altogether more of a Second Empire kind of guzzle than a Roman treat, that invention.
A long time ago, in 1956,]published a little review of a new edition of Pomiane's delightful and much loved Cooking in Ten Minutes in my Sunday Times cookery column.
He wrote me a touching letter of thanks.
 "J'ai été très heureux d'avoir été compris par une si aimable Anglaise" , he said, and ended"if you were French I should give you a kiss.
But I believe in England that is not done".
If I have really understood Dr de Pomiane aright, 1 fancy that while an extravaganza such as Maitre Guérard's Ali Baba would not have met with his unqualified acclaim, with many of the nouvelle cuisine innovations he would surely have been in sympathy.
1 think he would have been amused rather than otherwise at finding his own dishes reappearing as specialities of the starry restaurants of the 1970s, and pleased that reforms in the matter of lighter meals and more logical sauce and vegetable cookery which he had preached in the 1930s have at last been put into practice.
if there are lapses, obsessions, aberrations — and few would deny that there are — in the practise of the new style chefs, well, Pomiane was a man with a sense of humour and without a sense of self-importance.
He would have smiled and said those are the foibles of innovators, they must be excused, and you are not after all obliged to mop up all those pools of beurre blanc which appear on your plate in such quantity.
Nobody forces you to consume the equivalent of halfa dozen eggs  at one meal, but it is very easy to do so, so if you have eaten a mousseline of scallops, red mullet, and écrevisses floating in a lake of sabayon sauce, then do not follow it with a honey ice cream or one of those ali baba affairs nor with a peach charlotte containing five egg yolks, but rather with a tarte fine chaude aux pommes acidulées, which is nothing more outlandish or richer than an old-fashioned apple tart made on a base of puff pastry.
Come to think of it, myself]would just as soon have a try at Doctor de Pomiane's honey-filled and cumin-spiced Apician apples.
The recipe may be found on p.203 of Cooking with Pomiane, of which a paperback version was published by Faber in 1976. if obtaining a copy of either version should entail a search, 1 do not think anyone will regret the time spent on it.
May 1984
Table Talk
If we are to believe late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century etiquette writers (which I don't altogether) this was a period when it was thought gross to talk about food except to your cook, and in bad taste to discuss your host's wine.
What did provide a fruitful source of conversation at dinner was the table setting.
No drinks were served before dinner, so some form of ice-breaking equipment in the way of elaborate and festive flower decorations which everybody could remark upon must have been invaluable weapons in the hands of a conscientious hostess.
If we are to believe the cookery contributor (are we to?
It's early to tell yet) to a recent number of one of the fashion monthlies, the wheel has turned just about half-circle and arrived at the point where it is almost essential to talk about the food and drink, because they have been chosen mainly with a view to distracting attention from the table decorations.
The idea is that while your guests are chattering happily away about the fabulous cottage pie, you, the host, are making subtle  changes in the dining-room decor.
Cool and fresh it's to be for the fish, more studied and solid for the main course; for the dessert, fragile and delicate.
Skilfully thought out, this writer says, such transformations can be effected without anybody noticing.
This is splendidly unlike the early thirties, when Lady Mendl published her Recipes for Successful Dining.
"In the year 1929 I used two rock-crystal vases in which were branches of white orchids, but those days are gone I fear for ever, and a few white carnations have to suffice now.
at Christmas time 193 1 I had a table of gold, hoping that it might in some way draw us all back to the old gold standard again gold lame tablecloth, old white Mennecey china, many yellow roses.
Now Lady Mendl was after all a highly successful professional decorator, and whatever her sumptuous simplicities in the matter of table decoration — a little white Ming rabbit at each guest's place, a remnant of sixteenth-century French green silk brocade used as a tablecloth, one flawless magnolia on the tea tray (the photograph of her butler carrying this same tray alone makes a copy of the book worth searching for)— she certainly didn't seriously intend playing them down.
Not for her, one feels fairly sure, would have been sables worn as a chemise, nor Savonnerie carpets used as underfelting.
Had she arranged for the sets to be changed three times during a dinner party, she would have seen to it that everybody noticed.
So, quite certainly, would Mrs Brooks, a journalist of the turn of the century who thought that the flowers, the food nd the wine should be chosen to match the hostess's dress, and her contemporary, Mrs Alfred Praga, who believed, on the contrary, that the hostess's dress should be chosen to harmonize with the food and decor.
The style of Mrs Praga's book, Dainty Dinner Tables and How to Decorate Them (published in 1907), may be archaic, but something about the tone and even the context is curiously familiar.
"Have you ever tried a great bunch of ruddy brown-red wallflowers in an old majolica vase?
Blue larkspur against a table-slip of faded mauve velvet, oh! how unutterably delicious it is to tired eyes For half-a-crown, one of those gigantic glazed brown earthenware jugs (filled with cream) and for 5 ½d. each half a dozen tiny ones to match.
When the cream has gone fill them with daffodils, set them on a table centre of tawny orange silk with a bordering of asparagus fern.
Hey! how one's pen flies!…"
Keeping up with that galloping pen of hers, Mrs Praga one day devised "a scheme based on deep orange-hued carnations" , the  table-slip to be of deep sunset yellow satin edged with écru lace (sunset yellow, she tells us elsewhere, was a Liberty colour — in fact most of her inspiration came from Liberty's).
At each corner, satin ribbon bows.
A squat Nuremberg bowl for the centrepiece and eight or ten specimen glasses of the same ware to be filled with orange carnations and silver grasses, each guest's place was to have a boutonnière to match and each finger bowl a floating full-blown orange carnation plus a few drops of orange flower water.
Menu cards of sunset yellow lettering on deep orange, salt-sticks tied with ribbons to match, table glass of brown Nuremberg throughout, liqueurs to be yellow Chartreuse and old cognac.
Candles deep yellow, shades orange silk, place cards written in orange on a yellow background, ices coloured yellow with saffron or turmeric and served in paper baskets of a deep orange colour.
The sweets to be deep orange and the coffee served in deep brown and orange Wedgwood cups.
 "If the hostess happens to be a brunette she can wear an orange gown…to heighten and complete the illusion." 
Really, it's too bad of her, that last line.
Is it all illusion, then?
Is that what the decorator-hosts and hostesses are trying to tell us?
The cool, fresh fish, the fragile dessert, the gold lame, the gigantic brown earthenware cream jugs, the tawny orange silk?
Didn't any of it ever exist?
Not even the turmeric-flavoured ices?
The Spectator, 22 December 1961
Whisky in the Kitchen
Two or three years ago a friend of mine who is a publisher applied to me for help in dealing with a complaint from a man who had bought one of his cookery books.
The recipe which was causing a minor commotion was for a lobster set ablaze with whisky.
What, the gentleman would like to know, did a reputable publisher mean by allowing his author to suggest such a preposterous concoction?
Whisky!
Merciful heavens, what next?
Surely everybody knew that cognac was the correct, and the only correct, spirit to use in conjunction with lobster.
Do let us have some regard for the classic recipes…not mislead the public…irresponsible chatter…a  French cook would never…barbaric mixture…
I shudder to think…the great Escoffier said…
As it happens, the offence on this occasion was not mine, but I am familiar — what cookery writer is not?— with the tone of voice and with the gale force of the feelings expressed.
Quite often something one had thought perfectly uncontroversial or even almost too insultingly obvious to include in one's cooking instructions arouses readers to a pitch of rage and scorn which strikes one as very much out of proportion to the offence committed.
The truth, I fancy — and the discovery that letters of this kind tend to be written in oddly similar terms (the writer invariably shudders to think, the mixtures are always revolting or barbaric) does something to bear out my theory is simply that reference to some particular ingredient has, subconsciously, touched off a painful nerve in the reader.
(Unworkable or downright fatuous recipes and real howlers often get by unchallenged.
Once, owing to a printer's understandable failure to decipher my proof corrections, a book of mine appeared with a recipe which called for the whisked whites of 123 eggs…no reader has ever written to me demanding an explanation of this recipe.)
The clue to the whisky affair is not entirely obvious.
Had the complainant been a woman it would have been easier to spot.
Whisky is still, to many Englishwomen, a man's drink, tough masculine tipple.
Advice to splash it into the saute pan strikes a rough rude note.
Cognac, being foreign and French, is altogether more glamorous and elegant-sounding, therefore more appropriate to the refinements of good cooking.
I wonder if deep down that peppery gentleman's irritation might perhaps have been due to fear that once the gaff about whisky not being suitable for the kitchen was blown the master's bottle would no longer be quite sacrosanct.
The little woman, instead of having to explain the spending of twenty-five shillings of the housekeeping money on a half bottle of "cooking" brandy, would be at liberty to raid the Scotch for a few tablespoonsful at any time, and nobody the wiser.
In France, whisky was once a very smart and snob drink; it is now astonishingly popular.
In 1961, it is estimated, 682,000 gallons of whisky were consumed by the French, and that was twice as much as in 1960.
How many hundreds or thousands of those gallons were tipped into the saucepans the report does not reveal, but certain it is that in these days it is not at all uncommon to find dishes of chicken, langouste or lobster flambé au whisky on the menus of French provincial and Parisian restaurants.
(For chapter and verse without going to France look at the lists of specialities given by the starred restaurants in the guide books.)
An establishment at Arras even serves a speciality of andouillettes flambées au whisky — a faint echo of the haggis ritual…?
I find the French development encouraging, for I have myself for years been experimenting with whisky in the cooking pots.
One of the circumstances which drove me to these experiments will be familiar to most home cooks.
It was simply that a bottle of brandy, even of the kind intended only for the kitchen (by which I don't mean something not fit to drink, I mean something one prefers not to drink), somehow always turns out in fact to have been drunk by somebody just when it is needed for cooking and hasn't been replaced, while whisky is a supply which is more or less automatically re-ordered as soon as it runs out.
And not only have I found whisky successful as an alternative to cognac and armagnac in many fish and poultry dishes, but it has frequently had to do duty instead of Calvados in Norman dishes of veal, pork, pheasant and apples.
Calvados isn't always easy to come by in this country and such as we can get is usually one or other of the commercial brands which in spite of their high prices are pretty crude.
So, for that matter, are all too many three-star-quality cognacs.
Obviously, the flavour which whisky gives to a sauce differs from that produced by cognac, armagnac or Calvados; certainly the aromas coming from the pot while the whisky is cooking are also very different; but by the time the alcohol has been burned and cooked away I wonder how many people would spot what precisely the difference is.
Not that that is quite the point.
There should be no attempt to deceive.
To take the simplest example, faisan à la normande would be understood, by anybody who knew a little about French regional cooking, to imply a dish of pheasant with a cream sauce and apples, blazed with Calvados.
If the dish is blazed with whisky instead it is possible that nobody will know the difference; but a point of principle is involved; once the wedge is in how long before the apples have been replaced with carrots and peas, and the cream with tomato purée or pineapple juice?
So all the restaurateur has to do (in the privacy of one's own kitchen one can, after all, call one's inventions what one pleases; until they leave the house one's guests  are in no position to pass remarks) is to follow the French example and describe his dish as faisan flambé au whisky or alternatively pheasant au Scotch.
And if he feels that the French have an unfair advantage in that to them the words "whisky" and "scotch" are good selling points whereas to us they are just rather blunt or evocative in the wrong way then he can invent some totally new name.
The whisky hurdle cleared, one quickly finds the way open to the successful use of all kinds of supposedly unorthodox spirits and wines in the kitchen.
Not only have I used whisky instead of the brandy usually specified in pork and liver pâté recipes, which is a question of only about two, but two important, tablespoons to 1½ lb. of the mixture, but I have resorted also to rum (white rum is especially useful in the kitchen) and to gin for the same purpose, and the results have been excellent.
Gin, we are told, is one of the purest spirits made, and juniper berries, the baies de genièvre or ginepro from which Geneva or gin derived its name, provide the characteristic flavouring which everyone who ever drank a glass of gin in their lives would recognize when he tastes the juniper-berry flavour in Provençal game terrines and certain Northern Italian sauces and stuffings for partridge and pheasant; and eau de vie de genièvre is a spirit used in French and Belgian Ardennais regional cooking, so it seems extraordinary that people blanch at the suggestion that gin should go into the casseroles.
At least, before shuddering or crying "barbarism!" and"Escoffier never said.
look up — and cook — the delicious recipe for veal kidneys à la liégeoise given by Mr Ambrose Heath in his Good Food (Faber & Faber).
The kidneys are cooked whole in butter and just before serving them you"throw in a wineglassful of burnt gin and a few crushed juniper berries.
This is quite wonderful…"
Then there is that recipe for a sauce for lobster which I came across in a French dictionary of cooking of the 1830s.
Among the collection of outlandish ingredients called for were anisette liqueur and soy sauce.
In those days cookery writers weren't just filling out their recipes with ingredients they were being paid to sell.
There must be some basis in reason for that sauce.
Why not try it?
I did, and came to the conclusion that it was the best sauce for lobster ever invented; and it is extraordinary that it has remained for so long buried in the cookery books.
In a moment I will produce the recipe — and please, will readers do their best to suspend disbelief until they have tried it?— but one of the main points about this recipe is that it taught me (for after all, one does not buy lobsters all that often) that  anisette is, improbably but incontrovertibly, a quite magical ingredient in fish dishes and sauces.
You rarely need more than a teaspoonful, you add it at the absolute final moment of cooking, you do not blaze it (at least I do not), you treat it simply as a seasoning.
To a creamy sauce for white fish such as John Dory, brill and sole, to dishes of molluscs such as mussels and scallops, its concentrated, pungent-sweet and aromatic qualities give a lift such as could hardly be achieved with a mountain of fennel stalks or seeds used in the preparation of the initial stock (anise is a close relation of fennel, caraway and dill), and this in turn gives one ideas as to the use of many other liqueurs, aromatic vermouths, country wines, even drinks such as Pernod and Pastis in the cooking of fish and white meat and poultry dishes.
LOBSTER COURCHAMPS
For one freshly boiled, medium large (about 1 ½ lb.) hen lobster or langouste (if you are boiling the creature at home, you can always add the large goblet of Madeira called for in the original recipe), the ingredients for the sauce are 2 small shallots, a heaped teaspoon of tarragon leaves, 2 tablespoons of chopped parsley, salt, pepper, a scant teaspoon of strong yellow French mustard, 24 to 30 drops of soy sauce, approximately 6 tablespoons of mildly fruity Provence olive oil, the juice of half a rather small lemon, 1 teaspoon of anisette de Bordeaux.
From the split lobster extract all the red and creamy parts.
Pound them in a mortar.
Mix with the finely chopped shallots, tarragon and parsley.
Add the seasonings and the soy sauce, then gradually stir in the olive oil; add lemon juice.
Finally, the anisette.
Divide the sauce into two portions, and serve it in little bowls or squat glasses placed on each person's plate, so that the lobster can be dipped into it.
The lobster meat can be cut into scallops and piled neatly back into the shells.
Apart from its sheer deliciousness (most cold lobster sauces, including mayonnaise, are on the heavy side for what is already rich and solid food) this sauce has other points to recommend it.
Anisette is not a liqueur which, speaking at least for myself, one has a great compulsion to swig down in quantity; in my cupboard a bottle lasts for years.
A half-crown's worth of soy sauce also tends — unless you are keen on Chinese cooking -to remain an old faithful among the stores; and although nothing can quite compare with  fresh tarragon, it is perfectly possible to use the excellent Chiltern Herb Farm dried version.
The makings of your sauce, then, are always with you.
All you need is the freshly boiled hen lobster And, as it is not a classic regional or other recognized traditional dish, you can call it what you please.
It has no name of its own.
I have named it after the Comte de Courchamps, author of the first of the three books in which I found the recipe.
The others were by Dumas the Elder and the Baron Brisse.
Highly imaginative as they were, all three gentlemen called it Sauce for Boiled Lobster.
The Compleat Imbiber 4, 1963
A Gourmet in Edwardian London
The last years of Queen Victoria's reign and the beginning of the Edwardian era saw the rise to fame and prosperity of the great London hotels we know to-day; the Savoy, the Ritz, the Carlton, the Berkeley, Claridges (even then known as "the home of kings" ), the Piccadilly, the Hyde Park and — the only one which has since disappeared — the Cecil.
At that time Romano's was at the height of its glory; Mr Lyons and Mr Salmon were presiding at the Trocadero; and at Simpson's in the Strand a fish luncheon for three, consisting of turbot, stewed eels, whitebait, celery and cheese, with two bottles of Liebfraumilch, cost £1.1s.3d.
The restaurant world of that period was described in detail by the Edwardian gourmet, Colonel Newnham-Davis, the gastronomic correspondent of the Pall Mall Gazette.
The Colonel made a habit of inviting to dinner certain of his friends whom, in his subsequent reports, he would disguise under discreet pseudonyms.
A regular guest of his was Miss Dainty, an actress.
One evening she dined with him at, curiously it seems to us, the Midland Hotel.
A railway hotel dinner in those days seems hardly to have been the dread experience    it would be to-day.
The Colonel and Miss Dainty ate oysters, soup, sole, a fillet of beef cooked with truffles and accompanied by pommes de terre soufflées, wild duck à la presse, a pudding and an ice-cream (bombe Mid/and).
With a bottle of wine this meal cost 28s. for the two of them.
Miss Brighteyes was a debutante who, to her host's grief, drank lemonade with her caviare and gossiped of dresses and weddings while she ate terrine de foie gras.
The Colleen — what a tiring girl she sounds — prattled incessantly of horses.
The little Prima Donna was an American taken by the Colonel to the Star and Garter at Richmond.
They had a pleasant drive down there (Goodwood was over and London deserted) and arrived at sunset; on this occasion the food was not a great success.
There was petite marmite and, not for the first time, the Colonel is at a loss to understand why some restaurant managers seem unaware of the existence of any other soup.
The mullet was not fresh — "I guess it has not been scientifically embalmed," said the Prima Donna.
I should like to think that the Colonel's sister-in-law (the daughter of a dean) to whom he gave dinner at the Café Royal, the Aunt whom he entertained at the Walsingham, and the Uncle whom he nicknamed the Nabob, were really his relations and not figments of his humorous imagination.
Alas, they are just a trifle over life size.
The dean's daughter did not care for shell-fish, so they were forced to start dinner with caviare.
The inevitable clear soup followed (pot au feu this time); the sole was served in a delicate sauce almost imperceptibly flavoured with cheese, and the dean's daughter appreciated it so much that the Colonel's initial peevishness began to wear off.
The lamb which followed the sole was tough.
Foie gras came next, then quails en cocotte.
The ice which ended the meal was christened Pôle Nord and consisted of a soft cream encased in ice-cream, resting on an ice pedestal carved in the shape of a bird sitting on a rock.
This creation cost 2s. 6d., the foie gras 4s.
Champagne Rose was what they drank and, with liqueurs and coffee, the total bill came to £2.4s.6d.
The maiden aunt who was invited to Walsingham House arrived in a four-wheeler.
She wore a stiff black silk dress, a lace cap and an expression of disapproval — "I hope they won't take me for one of your actress friends," she boomed.
The Walsingham was in Piccadilly, on the site now occupied by the Ritz; from the Colonel's description of the panelling of inlaid woods, the white pillars and cornices touched with gold, the curtains of deep crimson velvet, the  ceiling of little cupids floating in roseate clouds, the dining-room must have been every bit as ravishing as the pink and white Louis XVI restaurant which succeeded it and which, under the direction of César Ritz, became synonymous with all that was elegant, rich and glamorous in the early years of this century.
Mrs Tota and her husband George were friends from the Colonel's Indian Army days.
George, it has to be faced, was a bore; he grunted and grumbled and refused to take his wife out to dinner on the grounds that the night air would bring on his fever.
So the Colonel gallantly invited Mrs Tota, a maddeningly vivacious young woman, to a select little dinner for two.
She was homesick for the gaieties of Simla, the dainty dinners and masked balls of that remarkable hill station.
 "We'll have a regular Simla evening," declared the Colonel, and for this nostalgic excursion he chose to dine in a private room at Kettner's, which still exists to-day, in Romilly Street, Soho; after dinner they were to proceed to a box at the Palace Theatre, return to Kettner's, where they arranged to leave their dominos, and thence to a masked ball at Covent Garden.
The meal, for a change, began with caviare, continued with consommé filets de sole à la Joinville, langue de boeuf aux champignons accompanied by spinach and pommes Anna (how agreeable it would be to find these delicious potatoes on an English restaurant menu to-day), followed by chicken and salad, asparagus with sauce mousseline, and the inevitable ice.
They drank a bottle of champagne (15s. seems to have been the standard charge at that period, 1s. each for liqueurs).
Mrs Tota was duly coy about the private room decorated with a gold, brown and green paper, oil paintings of Italian scenery and gilt candelabra ( "very snug" , pronounced the Colonel); she enjoyed her dinner, chattered nineteen to the dozen and decided that Room A at Kettner's was almost as glamorous as the dear old Châlet at Simla.
Although he was strictly fair in his reports and seldom expressed a particular preference, it is clear that one of the Colonel's favourite restaurants was the Savoy.
It was D'Oyly Carte, of Gilbert and Sullivan fame, who invited César Ritz, then at the Grand Hotel, Monte Carlo, to come to London and take charge of his recently opened Savoy Hotel.
With him Ritz brought Escoffier to supervise the kitchens, and Echenard, proprietor of the famous Hotel du Louvre, Marseille, to assist him as manager in the restaurant — a formidable combination indeed; no wonder the Savoy soon became the favourite haunt of stage celebrities, industrial magnates, Indian  princes (there was a well-known curry cook attached to the Savoy kitchens) and, in fact, of all classes of the rich, the great, the greedy.
Escoffier's mousse de jambon, served on a great block of ice and melting like snow in the mouth, was recognised as a masterpiece; and the bortsch, with cream stirred into the hot strong liquid, was declared by Colonel Newnham-Davis to be the best soup in the world.
Joseph, who succeeded the Ritz-Escoffier partnership, had an almost unique devotion to his art.
On one occasion, when Sarah Bernhardt was the guest of honour at a Savoy dinner, he cooked the greater part of the meal at a side table under her very eyes; his carving of the duck was a flamboyant display of swordsmanship; when asked if he ever went to the theatre he replied that he would rather see six gourmets eating a perfectly cooked meal than watch the finest performance of Bernhardt or of Coquelin.
A few years later, the Savoy became the scene of all manner of fabulous banquets.
At one of these the courtyard was flooded to represent a Venetian canal, tables were arranged all round, and Caruso sang to the guests as he floated in a gondola.
What, I wonder, would our reactions be to-day to these junketings?
What of the long menus and, the everlasting sameness of the food?
With stupefaction one thinks of the wholesale slaughter of ducks and chickens, of pheasant and quail, the shiploads of Dover sole and the immense cargoes of foie gras from France, of caviare from Russia, the crates of champagne and the tons of truffles, which went to make up a single day's entertainment in the great hotels of Europe.
By present day standards the prices were, of course, absurd, although the cooking was luxurious and the service impeccable.
The petite marmite, the pot au feu, the croûte au pot were made with rich beef, veal and chicken stock; the fillets of sole were invariably cooked with truffles and cream or with mushrooms and lobster sauce, with artichoke hearts or with white wine and grapes; noisettes d'agneau, from the finest baby lamb, made such frequent appearances on the menu that one wonders how any sheep has survived; the chicken was stuffed with a mousse de foie gras; the little birds which followed — quail, ortolan or snipe — were again presented with truffles; asparagus, in and out of season, were always accompanied by hollandaise sauce; and the bombe glacée, indispensable, it seems, to a good dinner, was the signal for all the display of which the confectionery chef was capable.
The wines were probably better than anything we shall ever drink  again in England, and served in the proper manner.
What on earth would the Colonel have said to the waiter at a world famous hotel, who the other day brought a bottle of Chambertin to the table in a bucket of ice?
What, for that matter, would he have done, when confronted with the pile of chips and mass of Brussels sprouts heaped onto a plate containing an alleged sole meunière, in a restaurant where they ought to know better?
Even so, a course of Edwardian dinners might well prove a sore trial to-day.
Although Colonel Newnham-Davis consistently pleaded for more varied menus and shorter meals, this did not prevent him from ordering and eating, with evident enjoyment and approval, what seems to-day a perfectly astounding meal.
On this occasion, his uncle, the peppery old Nabob, was bidden to dine at the Cecil Hotel, in order that it might be proved to him that a respectable curry could be had outside the portals of the East India Club.
This is the menu as recorded by the Colonel and solemnly consumed down to the last friandise:
Hors-d'oeuvre variés
Consommé Sarah Bernhardt
Filet de sole à la garbure
Côtes en chevreuil: Sauce poivrade
Haricots verts à la Villars
Pommes Cecil
Mousse de foie gras et Jambon au champagne
Curry à l'indienne
Bombay duck, etc., etc.
Asperges
Bombes à la Cecil
Petites friandises choisies
By the time they reached the curry, which was accompanied by a whole battery of poppadoms, chutneys and relishes, it was hardly surprising that the Nabob's resistance had almost given out.
He was only able to murmur,"Good, decidedly.
I don't say as good as we get it at the Club "— there was still a spark of spirit left in him —" but decidedly good."
It should be added that the dinner, with champagne, liqueurs and cigarettes, cost £2.8s.6d., and that the bombe à la Cecil appeared with an electrically illuminated ice windmill as a background.
 "I'll Be with You in the Squeezing of a Lemon" 
Oliver Goldsmith
In 1533 the Company of Leathersellers offered Henry the Eighth and Anne Boleyn a great banquet to celebrate Anne's coronation on Whit Sunday in Westminster Hall.
Among the princely luxuries which graced the feast was one lemon, one only, for which the Leathersellers had paid six silver pennies.
Now that in England we pay an average of six copper pence per lemon, I think I would still find them almost worth the silver pennies which in z 533 must have represented a pretty large sum.
It is hard to envisage any cooking without lemons, and indeed those of us who remember the shortage or total absence of lemons during the war years, recall the lack as one of the very worst of the minor deprivations of those days.
Without a lemon to squeeze on to fried or grilled fish, no lemon juice to sharpen the flatness of the dried pulses — the red lentils, the split peas — which in those days loomed so largely in our daily diet, no lemon juice to help out the stringy ewe-mutton and the ancient boiling fowls of the time, no lemon juice for pancakes, no peel to grate into cake mixtures and puddings, we felt frustrated every time we opened a cookery book or picked up a mixing bowl.
In short, during the past four hundred years the lemon has become, in cooking, the condiment which has largely replaced the vinegar, the verjuice (preserved juice of green grapes), the pomegranate juice, the bitter orange juice, the mustard and wine compounds which were the acidifiers poured so freely into the cooking pots of sixteenth and seventeenth-century Europe.
There are indeed times when a lemon as a seasoning seems second only in importance to salt.
To Mediterranean cooking the juice of the lemon is vital.
It is the astringent corrective, as well as the flavouring, for olive-oil-based dishes and fat meat.
By English cooks this point is not and has never been sufficiently appreciated.
For example a home-made brawn or pig's-head cheese seasoned with a generous amount of lemon juice (squeezed in after cooking and when the meat is shredded or chopped ready for potting or moulding) transforms an often insipid dish into a delicacy.
And to me a lentil soup or purée is unthinkable without the complement of lemon and olive oil; then, just try to imagine lamb kebabs without lemon…
In scores of English and French creams, ices, cakes, soufflés, sweet omelettes and preserves, it is the aromatic oil contained in the peel or zest, rather than the juice, which is the operative part of the lemon.
For these dishes choose thick-skinned fruit.
One of the best of lemon graters is lump sugar, although Hannah Glasse (The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy, I747) who was perhaps partial to a pun, directed her readers to grate lemon skins with a piece of broken glass.
Possibly in her day that practical little utensil known as a lemon zester had not yet been invented.
And the lump sugar business, called for in so many recipes, is often exasperating because it is unexplained.
When however it is remembered that sugar was bought in loaves, the whole procedure becomes logical.
You simply hacked off a sizeable lump, and with this big piece, rasped off the skin of the lemon, thus releasing the essential oil of the zest which is so important to the flavour of creams, ices, and particularly of that uniquely English speciality, lemon curd.
This lovely dish does of course also include the juice of the lemons.
So do all the lemon recipes which I have chosen for this article.
There is something especially satisfactory about using the whole of the fruit in one dish.
Even more satisfactory are the beautiful flavours and scents of these dishes authentically made and eaten when fresh.
(Lemon curd has been one of the most painfully travestied and ill-used of all our true English preserves.
No commercially-made version gives so much as a hint of its true nature.)
ENGLISH LEMON CURD
To make 1 lb. approximately, ingredients are: 2 large lemons, preferably thick-skinned; ½ lb. loaf sugar; 4 whole large eggs; ¼ lb. of unsalted or slightly salted butter.
Rub sugar lumps on to the peel of the lemons, holding them over a bowl, until each lump starts crumbling, then start on another.
About four lumps will rub sufficient outside peel and oil out of each lemon.
Put all the sugar together into the bowl.
Squeeze the lemons, and strain the juice.
Whisk the eggs very thoroughly with the strained juice.
Cut the butter into small cubes.
Set the bowl in, or over, a pan of water.
When the sugar has dissolved add the eggs, then the butter.
Stir until all ingredients are amalgamated and the whole mixture looks rather like thick honey, with about the same consistency.
Remove the bowl (older cooks still find an old-fashioned stoneware jam jar the best vessel for making  lemon curd.
I prefer an open bowl.
I like to see what's happening) and stir until the curd has cooled.
Turn into small jars and cover with good quality kitchen parchment such as Bakewell, to be bought at Boots, Fine Fare, John Lewis shops, and many Co-ops.
To the straightforward lemon curd, a couple of sponge fingers, broken up, are sometimes added.
They thicken the curd, giving it extra body and making it more stable when spread into flan cases or flat, open plate pies.
A richer alternative is a small proportion of ground almonds.
Allow up to 2 oz. for the quantities given.
Writers of old recipes often claimed that lemon curd keeps for years.
Perhaps it does.
I would say that three months is about the maximum, and that long before this period is up the confection, like a fresh fruit sorbet stored in the deep freeze, has lost its exquisite flavour and the edge has gone from the sharp scent.
Use lemon curd to make a delicious filling for little brown bread sandwiches to eat with ices, to spread on brioche or currant bread, or as a sauce for little yeast pancakes as well as for the traditional lemon curd pie made with rich, sweet short crust.
SHORT CRUST FOR LEMON CURD PIE OR LEMON CHEESE-CAKE
Proportions for the crust, which is rich, sweet, and crumbly, are easy to remember.
They are 3 oz. of sugar, 6 oz. of butter, 9 oz. of flour, 1 whole egg plus a little iced water for moistening the dough, which should be mixed and rolled out, very quickly and lightly, and cooked at once.
The 3, 6, 9, formula makes enough for two 7-inch tins.
It is easy enough to halve the quantities and use only the yolk of the egg, but easier still to remember the recipe in its original formula.
The pastry cases are cooked blind (do not forget to prick the base with the tip of a sharp little knife) protected with paper (it burns easily, like all pastry containing sugar) and filled with dry beans or rice.
Put it into the centre of a hot oven, gas no. 6 or 7, 410°F. to 440°F., and bake for 10 minutes, then lower the temperature to gas no. 4, 370°F., and cook for another 15 minutes.
This seems a long time.
It is intentional.
So much English pastry is spoiled by timid cooking and under-baking.
While still hot remove the beans and the paper.
Fill with lemon curd — about 6 to 8 tablespoons — and put back into the oven for 5 minutes, just enough time for the filling to warm through, no more.
The effect to aim at is a crisp, sugary crust with the contrast of a smooth, delicately aromatic and refreshing filling.
CURATIVE PROPERTIES OF LEMONS
It was during the last years of the reign of Anne Boleyn's daughter Elizabeth that the curative effects of lemon juice on scurvy victims was observed, although neither cause nor effect were understood.
Only as late as 1918 was it established — by a woman doctor — that the juice of lemons is more than twice as rich in anti-scorbutic vitamins as that of the lime, for long thought to be as or more effective than lemon juice in the prevention of scurvy.
The lime juice myth was so firmly entrenched that it is still commonly believed.
TO PRESERVE LEMONS IN CLOVES
Finally, here is a beautiful little lemon recipe from the MS.
Receipt Book of Anne Blencowe, dated 1694, and printed by Guy Chapman, the Adelphi, in 1925.
The segments of lemon embedded in clear apple jelly must have made a ravishing little dessert dish:
"You must pare them very close.
Part ye cloves, then scrape all ye white off, but have a care not to break ye cloves when you scrape them.
Take out all ye seeds, then weight them and take their weight in sugar.
To a pound of sugar half a pint of water.
Sett all on a slow fire and keep them covered with syrup & paper, but let them not boyl.
So sett them by till ye next day; then heat them again as you did before, & when you think their sowrness is pretty well out, they are enough.
Then make a Jelly with pipins & put them in.
So let them have one boyl Then glass them.
They must not stand upon the fire above an hour att a time.
The cloves of ye Lemon must be taken clean from ye syrup to put to ye jelly."
Wine and Food, February/March 1969 
Pleasing Cheeses
In food-song and travel-story the scene, the characters, and the opening dialogue are familiar enough: the inn is humble and is situated close to the banks of the radiant Loire.
(In legend the Loire is always radiant.
Quite often it actually is radiant.
On this particular day it is super-radiant.
The inn, ever-humble, of French cookery fables is, on this occasion, archi-humble.)
The cook-proprietress is where she should be, in the kitchen, cooking lunch.
Her own lunch, not ours.
Frying-pan in hand, she is saying she has nothing for us, she hadn't been expecting customers; at this time of year there are visitors only at weekends.
The customers reply never mind about lunch, they will drink a carafe of wine and perhaps Madame has some bread and sausage?
Oh, if that is all monsieur and madame wish, would they be seated?
One will attend to them.
Enter the cross-eyed daughter, bearing wine, plates and cutlery.
She sets the oilcloth-covered table.
Couldn't we eat out of doors?
On such a beautiful day it seems sad to sit in the dank, scruffy room.
The girl looks scared.
She does not answer.
We repeat our request.
She shakes her head.
Deaf as well as cross-eyed.
Oh well.
We were thirsty and hungry.
Not to make a palaver.
Bread, butter, sausage and sliced raw ham were put before us.
The loaf was very large, flat, brown-crusted, open-textured, a pain de ménage, the real household French bread such as is rarely produced nowadays in restaurants and inns.
That bread alone was well worth the journey.
We ate so much of it, it was so marvellous, that we hardly wanted the sausage and the ham, noticed only in passing that the wine wasn't up to much, and that the eggs in the omelette which presently appeared were spanking fresh and buttercup yellow — in the French countryside one takes that for granted.
And anyway, by now the son of the house had come in for his midday meal, turned on the television, created havoc out of the quiet day.
Like his sister, the young man was cross-eyed, deaf and simple.
His mother came in from the kitchen to ask if we'd like cheese or fresh cheese with cream.
The two, please.
We need not have bothered with the cheese proper.
The fresh cheese with cream was all we, or at any rate I, wanted.
The telly faded, the shoddy oilcloth vanished, the beautiful sunshine we were missing was forgotten.
There it was, the big glass  bowl half-filled with soft, very white, very fresh milk cheese with its covering of fresh thick cream.
It was just as I had remembered it for over thirty years, it was just as it used to appear at least once a week at lunch in the Paris household where I spent two years of my youth with a greedy Norman family: two years of study interspersed with the most trying of family meals, endless and infinitely to be dreaded but for the blessed beauty of the food.
It was first class, not at all, as I later understood, ambitious or opulent, but of consistent quality, very fresh and, in effect, just very good French bourgeois food, carefully bought, traditionally cooked, presented with much visual taste.
Sorrel soups we used to eat, and lettuce soups, delicate vegetables such as salsify and celeriac, golden melting potatoes, a nutmeg-flavoured rice salad with tomatoes, apricot soufflés, and the famous fromage frais à la crème invariably presented in a glass bowl with sugar and more cream, Norman cream (well, I said they were greedy), on the table.
So what did she mean, the proprietress of the lugubrious little estaminet on the banks of the lovely Loire, what could she have meant when she said she had nothing in the house for lunch?
She had that astonishingly good bread, did she not, and she had the freshly made fresh cream cheese — goat's milk cheese and cow's milk cream, not too thick, not rich, not yellow, appearing cream coloured only because the cheese it half-concealed and half-revealed (you see the point of the glass bowl) was so muslin-white and new.
Where did all our own home-made cream and milk cheeses go?
Time was when we had scores of versions of them.
Every English cookery book and manuscript collection from the fifteenth to the early twentieth century gave recipes for fresh milk cheeses, cream cheeses, whey cheeses, cream curds, bandstring curds, rush cheeses, napkin cheeses, snow cheeses.
Some of these cheeses were eaten the day they were made, with cream and sugar, some were for almond cheesecakes, some for the fillings of covered pies called Florentines, some for spiced cheese loaves baked in stoneware porringers.
Some were salted and stored in brine in stoneware jars, some were laid between rushes and turned daily until ripe for eating.
Some were whipped up with egg whites, lemon peel, and extra cream, some were served with raspberry, strawberry, redcurrant, apple, quince or medlar jelly.
Once these cheeses were known collectively as green cheeses — green in the sense of being unripened, unmatured.
Now they are all cream  cheeses even if they're made only of milk.
(Cottage cheese seems to be a term now applied almost entirely, and characteristically, in our looking-glass culinary language, to the thin and acid skim-milk product of big dairy factories.
It is popular with slimmers but not much good in cooking.)
Possibly, somewhere along the line, green became corrupted into cream and hence the confusion of nomenclature.
 "Take yolkys of Eyroun and putte ther-to a gode hepe, and grene chese putt ther-to," directs a fifteenth-century recipe which includes chopped pork, minced dates, ginger, cinnamon, and hard-boiled eggs baked in an open pie.
Although real cream cheese may be made from real cream it isn't real cheese, since it is not a curd but simply ripened cream, semi-solidified and drained of its fluid content.
Cheeses of this kind used to be known in country-house and home-farm dairy cookery as napkin cheeses.
The following recipe from The Cookery Book of Lady Clark of Tillypronie (1909) is a typical one:
OSBORNE CREAM CHEESE
"Take 1 pint of very thick cream, and put it into a fine damask cloth, previously dipped in strong salt water, and tie up.
At the end of 2 hours, turn it into a clean cloth, and repeat the process every 2 hours throughout the day, when the cheese will be ready for use.
The cheese will generally be of the right consistency in 12 hours if the cream is thoroughly good and the weather not too warm."
For such cream cheeses moulds are not strictly necessary, although the cheese looks more presentable if it has been pressed in a muslin-lined basket, a heart-shaped mould, a cake tin pierced with holes, even an expendable carton or a flower pot — always provided that the essential lining is not forgotten.
For cooking purposes, this rich cream cheese, mixed with Parmesan and chopped walnuts, makes a lovely sauce for pasta, similar to the one the Italians make with their own mascarpone cheese.
On home-baked brown bread it takes the place of butter.
To make a fresh milk cheese at home is the simplest of processes.
Like bread-making, any mugwump can do it.
In the same way, it is uncommonly satisfactory in that it is a simple basic skill with great possibilities of expansion and variation of which the full exploration does suppose a certain creative intelligence and deductive wit.
For example, although many people hold that pasteurized milk won't make acceptable cheese of any kind, the Italian-owned  Milkflower factory which produces such delicious fresh ricotta cheese — a traditional Italian whey cheese — right here in the centre of London (in Percy Mews, W.I, to be exact) uses ordinary Marketing Board milk.
In that case so can you or I. The next point is that the special rennet that professional cheese-making demands is available only in bulk, and therefore — since only a teaspoonful or so per half-gallon of milk is required — of little use for making cheese at home.
So we have to use junket rennet.
There is nothing wrong with this, and in fact soft milk cheese is little more than an extension of junket.
(Our word derives from the French jonches or rushes, one of the numerous old French names for freshly made milk cheese drained in rushes or a rush basket.)
But whereas junket is made with great rapidity and is eaten almost as soon as the curd has set and without being drained, soft cheese takes longer to turn because less rennet must be used and the milk is barely heated, too much rennet and/or too much heat producing a leathery and acid curd.
Once drained, which takes anything from four to eight hours, the cheese can be eaten immediately, with or without the addition of fresh cream; or it can be left draining until it is all but dry, when it can be kept for cooking, or salted and flavoured for consumption as a mild cheese.
FRESH MILK CHEESE
To make a good pound of cheese, ingredients are 4 pints of ordinary full cream milk, 1 teaspoons of junket rennet (liquid, not powder) and a little salt.
Implements and utensils are a gallon-size pan, a long-handled cooking spoon, a cloth, a colander, a skimmer or flat perforated slice, a 14 to 18 inch square of muslin or cheesecloth, a big basin and a pierced mould.
Pour the milk into your large pan.
Heat it very gradually until it is little more than tepid.
Put in the rennet, measuring it carefully and remembering about too much making a tough and acid curd; stir it well into the milk.
Cover the pan with a cloth — to prevent steam from condensing on the cover of the pan and falling back on the curd — and the lid, and leave it for two to four hours, until the curd is fairly firm.
Have ready a colander standing in a deep bowl, and lined with the dampened muslin or cheesecloth.
With the skimmer or perforated slice, break up the curd, spoon it into the lined colander.
As the whey runs out and the curd sinks, add more, until all the curd is taken from the pan.
Knot the corners of the cloth, hang it up on a  hook with the basin underneath to catch the whey.
Leave it for an hour, until the bulk of the whey has drained off, and transfer the curd, still in its cloth, to the mould.
If this is an improvised one such as a pierced cake tin, without feet to raise it from the plate on which it drains, set it in the top of a basin, mixing bowl, saucepan, wide jar, or any vessel in which it will fit without actually resting on the bottom.
There must be space underneath for the whey to drain.
A curd which has been soaking in its own whey makes an acid cheese (which explains the often sharp taste of Eastern Mediterranean white cheeses which are sometimes stored in whey).
In about eight to twelve hours the cheese will be firm enough to be turned into a deepish glass dish or large soup plate.
Pour fresh cream over the cheese, covering it completely; serve caster sugar separately.
Alternately, having made the cheese as above, leave it draining for an extra six to eight hours.
Turn it out on to a plate.
Now, and not before, sprinkle it with salt on both sides (a teaspoonful for each side is enough), put it into a clean cloth and leave it draining until it is to be used.
For cooking, the cheese should be dry.
Any substantial quantity of moisture forced out of the cheese when it is subjected to heat may spoil the consistency of a dish, making it watery.
In the case of cream cheese fillings for pies and flans, the risk is that the moisture may sink into the pastry, making it soggy.
CREAM CHEESE CROÛTONS
Mash 3 to 4 oz. of soft-curd milk or cream cheese or demi-sel with 4 tablespoons of grated Cheddar, Gruyère, Parmesan, or any other hard cheese you have to hand.
Add plenty of freshly milled black pepper and lots of herbs — chopped fresh parsley, or dried basil, or chopped celery leaves.
Then stir in one whole well-beaten egg.
Spread this mixture on not too thick slices of white, brown, or French bread from which you have cut the crusts.
There is enough for I 1 croutons.
On top of each put little pieces of anchovy fillet (or anchovy paste squeezed from a tube) and/or halved, stoned black olives.
Put the croutons on a baking sheet and cook them near the top of the oven for 15 minutes at gas no. 3, 330°F.
Incidentally, this cream cheese mixture, spread on little fingers of bread and cooked in just the same way, is extremely good for a cocktail party as a change from those eternal sausages.
The egg in the mixture makes it stay put, instead of running all over the place as most cheese mixtures do.
Nova, October 1965
Sweet Aristo
The enormous ridged tomatoes were cored with a little sharp knife, cut round roughly into sections, thrown into a shallow bowl, mixed with thickly sliced raw onions, mild and very sweet.
Salt, a sprinkling of olive oil and wine vinegar were the only seasonings.
In the little white house in the almond and lemon country of South-Eastern Spain where I stayed last summer every midday meal started with the tomato and onion salad.
It has no regional or picturesque name.
It is just ensalada.
In all the restaurants down on the coast they offer you very much the same salad, sometimes with a few olives, cucumber slices and cos lettuce all prettily arranged on a flat dish, a mixture not unlike the salade niçoise of Southern France.
I prefer the basic tomato and onion salad.
It is so rich in flavour, so sweet, so cool, fresh — and so entirely appropriate to the high summer of the Mediterranean.
Every day, with the first taste of that lovely fresh salad came also the reminder that the tomato at its best is a luxury and should be treated as such.
The trouble is that in England a tomato good enough to be eaten raw and unadorned is becoming a good deal more of a rarity than a ripe avocado, and nearly as elusive as a perfect fresh peach or purple fig.
Only during the brief summer season of English out-of-doors tomatoes can we count on a tomato worth eating.
Mass-grown Channel Island and Canary tomatoes are a sore disappointment to anyone familiar with native Spanish tomatoes."
The Spanish growers may be doing their best to provide tomatoes acceptable to the English market but evidently English varieties and the Spanish soil and climatic conditions just don't suit each other.
Dutch tomatoes lack character.
French tomatoes we seldom get nowadays.
Some five years ago a few growers in the Nîmes district of Southern France made an attempt to raid the English market by cultivating Moneymaker, a favourite high-yield English commercial tomato.
The experiment was not an unqualified success.
In the summer of 1961 the Board of Trade clamped down on imported tomatoes early in the season.
The French growers were  landed with hundreds of tons of English-type tomatoes unacceptable in the local cooking and unsuitable for canning or preserving.
In the wholesale markets of Provence the customers wouldn't even take English-type tomatoes as gifts.
English importers and wholesalers on the other hand stubbornly refuse to touch either the little pear-shaped Roi Humbert variety of tomatoes grown in Provence and Italy for sauce and for canning, or the big meaty, untidy tomatoes which are so important to Mediterranean cookery for salads and fresh tomato sauces.
It is the same old story.
Whether it's potatoes or plums, lettuces or leeks, mushrooms or mangoes, the English greengrocery trade is reluctant to handle any produce which does not conform to a given size, a given number to the pound.
Five years ago it was announced in a communique issued from Agriculture House that tomatoes which are smallish, about 7 to the pound, round, red all over, and firm are the best and command the highest prices.
In other words — in, to be precise, the words of the public relations bureau of the Cucumber and Tomato Marketing Board — the tomato which commands the highest price is an all-purpose (or is it non-purpose?) product; "not every mouth" and I quote "can afford to choose caviare instead of kippers or an aristocratic difficult low yielding variety of tomato rather than a less fastidious tomato with a heavy yield." 
Ah, that difficult, aristocratic, fastidious tomato, what's the betting that quite a few mouths would go for it were it on offer?
(Harbinger and Ailsa Craig are, according to gardeners, the aristocrats of the English tomato world.)
The Tomato Marketers might be interested to know that back in the twenties, when grapefruit was making its way in France, so highly reputed an establishment as the old Café de Paris listed that novelty in the special corner of the menu normally reserved for caviare alone.
Maybe we should reassess the tomato.
These days it is the authenticity of a product, not its basic price, which spells luxury.
Along with the Israeli melons, the Swaziland avocados, and the  Kenya asparagus of present-day classy restaurants there might well be a place for Mediterranean tomatoes.
Some four or five years ago one of our gastronomic columnists wrote of a Leicester Square bistro called Chez Solange that an advance telephone call would ensure production of an "authentic salade de tomates" .
The makings of a quite substantial tomato salad mystique are scattered around waiting to be gathered up by some enterprising buyer who will get the produce flown in from Barcelona or Marseilles, Naples, Valencia or even possibly from Portugal, where the tomatoes are as good and plentiful as anywhere in Mediterranean lands.
It was after all from the Portuguese that the French took the hint about the rightness of fresh tomato sauce with eggs, fish and rice; à la portugaise signifying, in French cookery, a dish in which the tomato figures.
And our own early recipes for tomato soups thickened with rice or bread were derived from Portuguese rather than American, French or Italian cookery.
A world devoid of tomato soup, tomato sauce, tomato ketchup and tomato paste is hard to visualize.
Could the tin and processed food industries have got where they have without the benefit of the tomato compounds which colour, flavour, thicken, and conceal so many deficiencies?
How did the Italians eat spaghetti before the advent of the tomato?
Was there such a thing as a tomato-less Neapolitan pizza?
What were English salads like before there were tomatoes to mix with lettuce?
Did Provençal cooking exist without tomates provençale, salade niçoise and ratatouille?
Then there is that warmed red billiard ball with its skin slit round the middle, so oddly known as a grilled tomato.
(I believe the official name for this dish is dressed tomatoes.)
Without it could the British landlady's and railway dining-car breakfast ever have become what it is?
How many people would accept baked beans innocent of tomato sauce?
And many of us still remember that among the food shortages of the war years and after, the scarcity of fresh tomatoes was a privation on the same level as the lack of lemons, onions and butter.
Incredible though it now seems, the tomato, brought by the Spaniards from Peru to Spain at the close of the sixteenth century and shortly afterwards planted in France, Portugal, Italy and England, was well known to us as an ornamental plant for two hundred years before its culinary possibilities were perceived.
The  first English cookery book recipes for tomatoes appear only at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
They were for ketchup-type sauces.
Since the tomato, being a member of the Solanaceae tribe which includes also the poisonous nightshades, was long regarded as a dangerous if not actually deadly fruit (the potato and the aubergine, also of the Solanaceae family, have in their time suffered from the same associations) presumably the mixture of vinegar and spices used in the early sauces were regarded as safety-devices against the possibly toxic effects of the fruit itself.
By the end of the nineteenth century, when tomatoes had become an upper-class luxury and tomato soup was well on its way, a new legend had become attached to the tomato.
It was reputed to induce cancer.
It was also, wrote Miss Anne Buckland, the anthropological scholar and author of an entertaining book called Our Viands (1893), too expensive to be generally popular, and was regarded with suspicion by the poor who "despise and dislike it" .
Adding that a splendid show of numerous varieties of outdoor tomatoes at the Crystal Palace had recently caused some stir among market gardeners, Miss Buckland remarks that while awaiting cheaper and more plentiful fresh tomatoes "the tinned tomatoes from America and France answer fairly well for cooking purposes" .
In the seventy years which have elapsed since the publication of Miss Buckland's book the tomato has taken its revenge for three centuries of neglect.
What we need now is a tomato antidote or at least a little of the restraint implicit in the observation made in a French book of Dissertations Gastronomiques (1928) by Ernest Verdier, owner of the Maison Dorée, a restaurant celebrated in the Paris of the Belle Epoque.
 "The tomato" , says M. Verdier,"imparts its delicious taste, at the same time acid and slightly sweet, to so many sauces and dishes that it can fairly be classed among the best of condiments.
Happy are those who understand how to use it judiciously."
Those of us who remember the food shortages of the war years and after learned the lesson the hard way.
Lacking fresh tomatoes and meat we tried to compensate by piling tomato paste into all our stews and soups and sauces.
In the end the taste of tinned concentrated tomato became all-pervading and deadly.
So, for a start, be miserly about tomato paste in meat sauces for pasta.
Used in conjunction with fresh tomatoes a teaspoonful will be enough to give extra colour and body to a sauce for four people.
Covered with a sealing layer of olive oil the paste in an opened tin will keep in the refrigerator for a week or more.
Italian and Bulgarian canned peeled tomatoes are terrific value.
Used occasionally and in very small quantities they work wonders for chicken and fish stocks and soups, pizza fillings and sauces made from insufficiently ripe tomatoes.
Used to excess they become monotonous and sickly.
Two to three tablespoons of tinned tomatoes are enough for a sauce made from 2 lb. of the fresh fruit or for 3 pints of stock.
Cookery book instructions to "de-seed" tomatoes or squeeze out the watery parts before cooking are unrealistic; the water content of tomatoes is 94 per cent and the sole effective way to get rid of it is by evaporation.
On the degree of evaporation or reduction to which the tomatoes are subjected the flavour of the sauce very largely depends.
A tomato sauce can be completely changed by two or three minutes more or less of reduction or concentration by steady simmering.
Demonstration of this point makes an illuminating cookery/chemistry lesson.
As for the ideal consistency of a tomato sauce to go with, or to be incorporated in, any given dish, a cookery-student's thesis could be written on the subject, and for all I know already has been.
When the potentialities of the tomato were first being explored in the nineteenth century, it was nearly as often used for sweet dishes as for sauces and soups.
French cookery books of the period nearly all include recipes for tomato jam.
Escoffier gives a couple, and in England an eight-volume Encyclopedia of Practical Cookery, published in 1899, gives a formula for candied tomatoes, several for jam, and another for green tomatoes to be stewed in a sugar syrup and eaten cold with cream.
Evidently even tomato soups were heavily sweetened.
A booklet put out in 1900 by the Franco-American Food Company of Jersey City made the point that its canned tomato soup was a spiced rather than a sweet one,"and our increasing sales of this variety show that it suits the taste of the majority.
Sugar could be added "when desired" ."
Although slightly strange, tomato jam is a most delicate and attractive preserve, with the charm of the unfamiliar.
It is worth trying, even if only in a very small quantity.
First published in Nova, July 1965.
The second half of the article reappeared in my Spices, Salt and Aromatics in the English  Kitchen, 1970, so did the recipes which followed the introductory essay.
These I do not repeat here, but my version of Boulestin's sweet tomato conserve, which I had intended to include in the same book and which is indeed indexed as appearing in it, somehow got away.
The recipe is neither long nor complicated.
For those who grow their own tomatoes or can buy from the market when the fruit is cheap, here it is:
TOMATO PRESERVE
This may sound freakish but is a delicate and beautiful preserve.
Evidently it was one of Marcel Boulestin's favourite sweetmeats; a recipe for tomato jam or preserve appears in every one of his cookery books.
2 lbs.
of very ripe and sweet tomatoes, z lbs of sugar, a vanilla bean, ½ pint of water.
In a wide preserving pan boil the sugar and water to a syrup.
Add the tomatoes, skinned and sliced.
Boil steadily, stirring fairly often, for about 35 minutes.
Put in the vanilla bean (vanilla essence will not do).
Cook for approximately 10 to 15 minutes longer or until setting point is reached.
Remove the vanilla pod, skim the jam, and let it cool for a few minutes before turning it into small jars.
Tomato jam is particularly good when eaten in the French way, as a sweet, with fresh cream cheese or plain pouring cream.
TOMATO HONEY
This is a recipe I tried in 5973 and found excellent.
It is of American origin and comes from Miss Leslie's Complete Cookery, Philadelphia, 1837.
"To each pound of tomatoes, allow the grated peel of a lemon and six fresh peach leaves.
Boil them slowly till they are all to pieces; then squeeze and strain them through a bag.
To each pint of liquid allow a pound of loaf-sugar, and the juice of one lemon.
Boil them together half an hour, or till they become a thick jelly.
Then put it into glasses, and lay double tissue paper closely over the top.
It will be scarcely distinguishable from real honey."
Be sure to use really juicy tomatoes for this preserve, or the yield of juice will be very small, and at best will not be more than I pint from 2½ lb. of fruit.
Peach leaves being unavailable in my strip of London back garden, I used instead a few drops of real almond  essence, towards the end of the cooking, when the juice and sugar are on the boil.
Tomato honey is excellent with pork, especially the salted or pickled variety, and goes nicely too with lamb, as a change from redcurrant or mint jelly.
Escoffier and the canned tomato industry
It is interesting to learn that Escoffier played an important part in the creation of the canned tomato industry.
According to his own testimony, when he was Chef de Cuisine at the Petit Moulin Rouge restaurant in the Champs Elysées in the mid 1870s he had had the idea of preserving tomatoes in such a way that they would replace fresh ones at any season.
At the time tomato purée for the restaurant was preserved in champagne bottles which were then sterilised — a method which was demonstrated to me by the cook at a pensione in Anacapri where I stayed during the summer of 1952, and which I described in Italian Food.
The same method was used by country people in Spain in the 19605 and probably still is.
The bottles didn't have to be champagne bottles.
Any wine bottles would do).
To Escoffier the disadvantage of the bottled purée was that it could only be used for sauces, so he set about evolving a method which would ensure a supply of crushed tomatoes — by which he meant tomates concassées — for any dish which required them whenever the fresh fruit was unobtainable.
Having experimented to his own complete satisfaction — he does not say what method he used — he contacted various firms of food manufacturers, among them La Maison Gilbert at Lambesc in the Bouches-du-Rhone, and La Maison Caressa at Nice.
Finding that neither firm was interested, and that further attempts to get the idea taken up had failed, Escoffier dropped the matter until after he had taken charge of the Savoy Hotel kitchens.
In August one year he spent a few days holiday at Saxon-les-Bains in the Rhone Valley, where he had an interest in a fruit preserving factory.
It so happened that the summer was an exceptionally hot one, the yield of tomatoes in the region was unusually high, and "taking advantage of this wonderful opportunity, two thousand 2 kilo cans of crushed tomato were manufactured and despatched at once to the Savoy Hotel." 
Still recounting his own story, Escoffier reported that the following year the factory at Saxon, all set to manufacture a quantity of the canned crushed tomatoes, was obliged to abandon the project because of the loss of the tomato crop owing to periods of intense cold that summer.
Escoffier was not the man to let go easily.
Returning to the Maison Caressa at Nice, he persuaded the factory which had turned down the project fifteen years earlier to manufacture "a certain quantity" of 2 kilo cans of crushed tomato according to his own specification.
The new product was an immense success, its fame spread rapidly, the following year the Maison Caressa canned 60,000 kilos of tomatoes and the director thanked Escoffier — as a friend — for his advice.
The story of the Escoffier canned crushed tomatoes is told in  George Auguste Escoffier by Eugène Herbodeau and Paul Thalamas, published by the Practical Press Ltd, London, 1955 (pp.99–104).
The authors do not acknowledge the source of Escoffier's account, but recount that it was during his days as an army chef de cuisine at the siege of Metz in 1870 that he had first grasped the necessity of improving the techniques of canning food.
Again, according to Escoffier himself a Paris factory, the Maison Fontaine took up the canned tomato industry, the whole department of the Vaucluse started to specialise in the same business, and it was only after the events recorded by him that Italy and America introduced their own versions of canned tomatoes.
Escoffier's story is entirely credible.
He was not one to make exaggerated claims, and scarcely needed to.
He was in any case always an innovator.
But what happened to the crushed tomatoes which had been such a success, Were they abandoned in favour of whole canned tomatoes?
English Potted Meats and Fish Pastes
In the late forties and the early fifties, every new member of the Wine and Food Society received, together with a copy of the current number of the Society's quarterly magazine and a membership card, a pamphlet entitled Pottery, or Home Made Potted Foods, Meat and Fish Pastes, Savoury Butters and Others.
The little booklet was a Wine and Food Society publication, the author's name was concealed under the whimsical pseudonym of "A Potter" , and the date was 1946.
The Wine and Food Society's propaganda in favour of homemade potted meats and fish was premature.
In those days of rationing and imitation food we associated fish paste and potted meat with the fearful compounds of soya bean flour, dried egg and dehydrated onions bashed up with snoek or Spam which were cheerfully known as "mock crab paste" and meat spread".
By 1954, when fourteen years of rationing came to an end none of us wanted to hear another word of the makeshift cooking which potted meats and fish pastes seemed to imply.
It was not until ten years later that we began to see that in fact these very English store-cupboard provisions, so far from being suited to the cheese-paring methods necessitated by desperate  shortages, demand first-class basic ingredients and a liberal hand with butter.
It is indeed essential to understand that the whole success of the recipes described in this booklet depends upon these factors, and upon the correct balance of the ingredients.
Hungry as we are today for the luxury of authenticity and for visual elegance, we find that the Potter's work makes enticing reading: "How delicious to a schoolboy's healthy appetite sixty years ago, was a potted meat at breakfast in my grandmother's old Wiltshire home.
Neat little white pots, with a crust of yellow butter suggesting the spicy treat beneath, beef, ham or tongue, handiwork of the second or third kitchenmaid…"
The Potter whose grandmother employed the second and third kitchenmaids in question was, M. André Simon tells me, Major Matthew Connolly (father of Mr Cyril Connolly); and with his felicitous evocation of a mid-Victorian country breakfast table and those second and third kitchenmaids pounding away at the ham and tongue for potting he makes a number of points, most relevant of which concerns the kitchenmaids.
What but the return of these handmaidens to our kitchens in the re-incarnated form of electric mixers, blenders and beaters has made the revival of one of our most characteristic national delicacies a feasible proposition?
Then, the neat little white pots, the crust of yellow butter, there is something fundamentally and uniquely English in the picture evoked by Major Connolly.
It is a picture which belongs as much to the world of Beatrix Potter (Major Connolly would no doubt have appreciated the coincidental pun) as to that of the military gentleman from Bath, making it doubly an insult that the mass-produced pastes and sandwich spreads of the factories should go by the honourable names of potted meat, potted ham, tongue, lobster, salmon, shrimp and the rest.
Potted shrimps alone remain as the sole representative of these products to retain something of its original nature, although a few smoked haddock pastes are beginning to appear on London restaurant menus.
These are usually somewhat absurdly listed as haddock pâté, or pâté de haddock fumé.
In an expensive Chelsea restaurant I have even seen — and eaten — a mixture called rillettes écossaises or "pât✓e of Arbroath smokies with whisky" .
The dish was good, but to label such a mixture rillettes  when this is a word applicable exclusively to potted fat pork, or pork with goose or rabbit, does seem to touch the fringe of restaurateur's lunacy.
For that matter, I find it sad that Arbroath smokies, the most delicate, expensive and rare of all the smoked haddock tribe, should be subjected to such treatment.
Simply heated through in the oven with fresh butter, smokies are to me one of the most exquisite of our national specialities.
That crust of yellow butter so important to the true English potted meats and pastes as opposed to the Franglais and the factory-produced versions, does perhaps need a little more explanation than the late Major Connolly, who refers to it throughout his little work as "melted butter" , thought necessary to clarify.
Clarified in fact is what it is, or should be, that butter.
And since for the successful confection and storage of many, although not all, potted meats and fish, clarified butter is a necessary adjunct, it seems only fair to warn readers that the process does involve a little bother, although a trifling one compared to the services rendered by a supply of this highly satisfactory sealing, mixing, and incidentally, frying ingredient.
Storage of Potted Foods
Concerning the keeping qualities of home-potted foods, there are some essential points to make.
First, all juices and liquid which come from fish or meat to be potted, whether especially cooked for the purpose or whether left-over from a joint, must be drained off before the food is pounded or packed up for potting.
Because stock or gravy from salmon, game or beef, let us say, happens to look rich and taste delicious, that does not mean it will not go bad if it separates from the meat or fish in question and settles to the bottom of the pot.
We all know what happens when jellied gravy and sediment is left at the bottom of a bowl of dripping or lard.
It is also important to eliminate as far as possible any air pockets in pots of meat and fish.
This means that the pots must be packed very full and the contents pressed and pressed until they are as tightly packed as possible.
Finally, make sure that the layer of melted clarified butter with which the pots are covered is sufficiently thick to seal the contents completely.
Given these conditions there is no reason why potted  meat and fish should not keep, in a correctly ventilated larder, for several weeks.
 "Game to be sent to distant places" , wrote Meg Dods, long before the advent of the refrigerator "and potted without cutting up the birds will keep for a month." 
Once broached, the contents of a pot should be stored in the refrigerator and quickly consumed.
For this reason, potted meats and fish are essentially delicacies to be packed into small pots.
Failing the old-fashioned neat white pots described by Major Connolly use miniature white china soufflé dishes or ramekins, small straight-sided glass jars, foie gras or pâté terrines, or white, covered pots such as those associated with Gentleman's Relish — still a favourite fish paste.
Apart from the dimensions and shape of the pot, an important point to remember is that whatever the colour or decoration on the outside of the pots or jars used for potted meats, the inside should be of a pale colour and preferably white, so that the delicate creams and pinks of the contents with their layer of yellow butter look fresh and appetizing against their background.
When and How to Serve Potted Foods and Pastes
 "A noble breakfast," says George Borrow of the morning meal offered him at an inn at Bala in North Wales, "there was tea and coffee, a goodly white loaf and butter, there were a couple of eggs and two mutton chops — there was boiled and pickled salmon — fried trout also potted trout and potted shrimps." 
A few weeks later he returns in search of more country delicacies.
He is not disappointed.
"What a breakfast!
Pot of hare; ditto of trout; pot of prepared shrimps; dish of plain shrimps; tin of sardines; beautiful beef-steak; eggs, muffins, large loaf, and butter, not forgetting capital tea…"
George Borrow was writing of Wild Wales in the eighteen-fifties.
When you come to analyse his splendid breakfasts you find that with slight changes he might almost be describing a nineteen-sixties, chop-house revival period, West End restaurant lunch.
The potted shrimps, the trout, the steak, the pot of hare (now the chef's terrine de lièvre), the mutton chops (now lamb cutlets), the salmon, now smoked rather than pickled, are very much with us still.
The March of Progress has alas transformed the goodly white bread into that unique substance, restaurateur's toast, while tea and coffee are replaced by gin-and-tonic or a bottle of white wine, and for my part I would say none the worse for that.
Tea with a fish breakfast or  coffee with beefsteaks have never been my own great favourites in the game of what to drink with what.
Here we are then with plenty of ideas for an easy and simple English lunch; potted tongue or game followed by a simple hot egg dish; or smoked salmon paste with butter and brown bread to precede grilled lamb chops, or oven-baked sole, or fillet steak if you are rich.
For a high-tea or supper meal spread smoked haddock paste on fingers of hot toast and arrange them in a circle around a dish of scrambled eggs.
For cocktail parties, use smoked salmon butter, fresh salmon paste, sardine or tunny fish butter, potted cheese, as fillings for the smallest of small sandwiches.
Fish, meat and cheese pastes do not combine successfully with vol-au-vent cases, pastry or biscuits, but in sandwiches or spread on fingers of coarse brown bread they will be greeted as a blessed change from sticky canapes and messy dips.
Stir a spoonful or two of potted crab or lobster (minus the butter covering) into fresh cream for eggs en cocotte, into a béchamel sauce to go over poached eggs or a gratin of sole fillets.
And as Mrs Johnstone, alias Meg Dods, author of the admirable Housewife's Manual of 1826 wrote, "What is left of the clarified butter (from potted lobster or crab) will be very relishing for sauces" while "any butter from potted tongue or chicken remaining uneaten will afterwards be useful for frying meat and for pastry for pies" .
Recipes
CLARIFIED BUTTER
In a large frying or saute pan put a slab of butter (I use a good quality butter and find that it pays to prepare 2 lb. at a time since it keeps almost indefinitely and is immeasurably superior to fresh butter for frying bread, croquettes, rissoles, fish cakes, veal escalopes, fish à la meunière and a score of other tricky cooking jobs).
Let the butter melt over very gentle heat.
It must not brown, but should be left to bubble for a few seconds before being removed from the heat and left to settle.
Have ready a piece of butter muslin wrung out in warm water, doubled, and laid in a sieve standing over the bowl or deep wide jar in which the butter is to be stored.
Filter the butter while it is still warm.
For storage keep the jar, covered, in the refrigerator.
The object of clarifying butter is to rid it of water, buttermilk  sediment, salt and any foreign matter which (a) for purposes of frying cause the butter to blacken and burn, and (b) render it susceptible to eventual rancidity.
The clarification process also expels air and causes the butter to solidify as it cools, making it a highly effective sealing material.
In French cookery clarified beef suet, pigs' lard and goose fat are used in precisely the same way to seal pâtés and home-preserved pork and goose.
These are the famous confits which are the French equivalents of our eighteenth and nineteenth century potted meat, game and poultry.
The delicious pork and goose rillettes and rillons of Western France are also close relations of English potted meats — in other words cooked and shredded or pounded meat packed into pots after cooking, as opposed to the pâtés and terrines which are made from raw ingredients cooked directly in the pots or the crust in which they are to be stored and served.
POTTED TONGUE
To my mind this is the best and most subtle of all English potted meat inventions.
My recipe is adapted from John Farley's The London Art of Cookery published in 1783.
Farley was master of the London Tavern, and an unusually lucid writer.
One deduces that the cold table at the London Tavern must have been exceptionally good, for all Farley's sideboard dishes, cold pies, hams, spiced beef joints and potted meats are thought out with much care, are set down in detail and show a delicate and educated taste.
Ingredients and proportions for potted tongue are ½ lb. each of cooked, brined an/or smoked ox tongue and clarified butter, a salt-spoonful of ground mace, a turn or two of black or white pepper from the mill.
Chop the tongue and, with 5 oz. (weighed after clarifying) of the butter, reduce it to a paste in the blender or liquidizer, season it, pack it tightly down into a pot or pots, smooth over the top, cover, and leave in the refrigerator until very firm.
Melt the remaining 3 oz. of clarified butter and pour it, tepid, over the tongue paste, so that it sets in a sealing layer about one eighth of an inch thick.
When completely cold, cover the pot with foil or greaseproof paper.
The amount given will fill one ¾ to I pint shallow soufflé dish, although I prefer to pack my potted tongue in two or three smaller containers.
Venison can be potted in the same way as tongue, and makes one of the best of all sandwich fillings.
Salt beef makes another excellent potted meat.
TO POT HAM WITH CHICKENS
Readers interested in more than the bare formula of a dish will appreciate the charming, simple and well explained recipe below.
Apart from the eighteenth-century country house atmosphere evoked by the writing, we get also a very clear picture of the manner in which these potted meats were presented and a substantial hint as to the devising of other permutations and combinations of poultry, game and meat for potting:
 "Take as much lean of boiled ham as you please, and half the quantity of fat, cut it as thin as possible, beat it very fine in a mortar, with a little oiled butter, beaten mace, pepper and salt, pot part of it into a china pot, then beat the white part of a fowl with a very little seasoning; it is to qualify the ham, put a lay of chicken, then one of ham, then chicken at the top, press it hard down, and when it is cold, pour clarified butter over it; when you send it to the table cut out a thin slice in the form of half a diamond, and lay it round the edge of your pot." 
Elizabeth Raffald, The Experienced English Housekeeper, 1769
POTTED CHICKEN LIVERS
This is a recipe which produces a rich, smooth and gamey-flavoured mixture, rather like a very expensive French pâté, at a fraction of the price and with very little fuss.
Ingredients are 4 oz. of chicken livers (frozen livers are perfectly adequate); 3 oz. of butter; a tablespoon of brandy; seasonings.
Frozen chicken livers are already cleaned, so if they are being used the only preliminary required is the thawing-out process.
If you have bought fresh livers, put them in a bowl of tepid, slightly salted water and leave them for about a couple of hours.
Then look at each one very carefully, removing any yellowish pieces, which may give the finished dish a bitter taste.
Heat I oz. of butter in a small heavy frying pan.
In this cook the livers for about 5 minutes, turning them over constantly.
The outsides should be browned but not toughened, the insides should remain pink but not raw.
Take them from the pan with a perforated spoon and transfer them to a mortar or the liquidizer goblet.
To the buttery juices in the pan add the brandy and let it sizzle for  a few seconds.
Pour it over the chicken livers.
Add a teaspoon of salt, and a sprinkling of milled pepper.
Put in the remaining 2 OZ. of butter, softened but not melted.
Pound or whizz the whole mixture to a very smooth paste.
Taste for seasoning.
Press into a little china, glass or glazed earthenware pot or terrine and smooth down the top.
Cover, and chill in the refrigerator.
Serve with hot crisp dry toast.
If to be made in larger quantities and stored, seal the little pots with a layer of clarified butter, melted and poured over the chilled paste.
Rum (white, for preference) makes a sound alternative to the brandy in this recipe.
Surprisingly, perhaps, gin is also very successful.
N.B. Since this dish is a very rich one, I sometimes add to the chicken livers an equal quantity of blanched, poached pickled pork (not bacon) or failing pickled pork, a piece of fresh belly of pork, salted overnight, then gently poached for about 30 minutes.
Add the cooked pork, cut in small pieces to the chicken livers in the blender.
POTTED GAME
Grouse "potted whole, stowed singly into pots with clarified butter poured over" as described by Professor Saintsbury (the old boy didn't miss much) are infinitely enticing, exceedingly extravagant with butter and not very practical for these days, but you can make one young cooked grouse or partridge go a very long way by the simple method of chopping the flesh, freed from all skin and sinew with about one quarter of its weight in mild, rather fat, cooked ham.
You then put the chopped grouse and ham in the electric blender with tablespoons of clarified butter to every"is lb. of the mixture.
Add salt if necessary, a few grains of cayenne, a few drops of lemon juice.
Reduce the mixture to a paste or purée.
Pack it in to small straight-sided china, glazed earthenware or glass pots.
Put"these into the refrigerator until the meat is very cold and firm.
Then seal the pots with a layer of just-melted clarified butter.
Potted game is most delicious and delicate with hot thin crisp brown toast for tea or as a first course at lunch.
It goes without saying that old birds can, equally, be used for potting, but they are much less delicate, need very long slow and  thorough cooking, a larger proportion of fat ham (or pickled pork but not smoked bacon), and must be carefully drained of their cooking juices before they are prepared for chopping and pounding, otherwise sediment seeps through, collects at the bottom of the little jars and causes mould.
RILLETTES OR POTTED PORK IN THE FRENCH MANNER
This very famous charcutiers' or pork butchers' speciality is native to Southern Brittany, Anjou and Touraine.
It could be described as the French equivalent of our potted meat — although it is very different in texture and taste.
2 lb. of a cheap and fat cut of pork such as neck or belly; s lb. of back pork fat; salt; I clove of garlic; 2 or 3 sprigs of dried wild thyme on the stalk; a couple of bay leaves; freshly milled black pepper.
Ask your butcher to remove the rind and the bones from the piece of pork meat (the bones can be added to stock and the rind will enrich a beef dish for the next course) and if he will, to cut the back pork fat into cubes.
Rub the meat with salt (about a couple of tablespoonsful) and let it stand overnight or at least a few hours before cutting it into 1 ½-inch thick strips along the grooves left by the bones.
Put these strips, and the fat, into an earthenware or other oven dish.
In the centre put the crushed clove of garlic, the bay leaf and twig of thyme; mill a little black pepper over the meat and add about half a pint of cold water.
Cover the pot.
Place it in a very cool oven, gas no.
I, 290°F., and leave for about 4 hours.
Now place a sieve over a big bowl.
Turn meat and fat out into the sieve, so that all the liquid drips through.
With two forks, pull apart the meat and fat (which should be soft as butter) so that the rillettes are shredded rather than in a paste.
Pack the rillettes lightly into a glazed earthenware or stoneware jar of about ¾ pint capacity (or into two or three smaller jars).
Taste for seasoning.
Pour over the rillettes (taking care to leave the sediment) enough strained fat to fill the jar.
Cool, cover and store in the refrigerator until needed.
Rillettes should be soft enough to spoon out, so remember to remove the jar several hours before dinner.
Serve with bread or toast, with or without butter, as you please.
Potted Fish and Fish Pastes
POTTED SALMON
Any woman who has salmon-fishing relations or friends will appreciate the point of this dish.
Evolved at a time when salmon was comparatively cheap, and before the days of the tin and the refrigerated larder, potted salmon provided one method (pickling in wine and vinegar, salting, drying, kippering and smoking were others) of preserving surplus fish.
Even today there will be readers who will be glad to know of a formula for dealing with a salmon or a piece of one received as a present, too big to be consumed immediately and likely to prove wearisome if eaten cold day after day.
For this recipe, evolved from instructions given in Elizabeth Raffald's Experienced English Housekeeper (an admirable book first published in 1769) all you need, apart from fresh salmon, are seasonings of salt, freshly milled white pepper, nutmeg, fresh butter and clarified butter.
Cut the salmon into thinnish steaks, arrange them in one layer in a well-buttered baking dish, sprinkle them with salt and seasonings, add about I oz. of fresh butter, cut in pieces, for every pound of salmon, cover the dish with buttered paper and a lid, and put to cook in the centre of a moderately heated oven, gas no. 3, 330 F. In 45 to 50 minutes — a little more or less according to the thickness of the steaks — the salmon will be cooked.
Lift the steaks, very carefully, on to a wide sieve, colander, or wire grid placed over a dish so that the cooking butter drains away.
Pack the salmon steaks into a wide dish or pot with the skin side showing.
The dish or pot should be filled to capacity without being so crammed that the fish comes higher than the rim of the pot.
I make my potted salmon in a shallow round white pot decorated on the outside with coloured fish.
It is one of the old dishes especially made for potted char, the freshwater fish once a celebrated delicacy of the Cumberland lake district.
Cover with a piece of oiled foil or greaseproof paper and a board, or the base of one of the removable-base tart or cake tins now to be found in many kitchen utensil shops, to fit exactly inside the dish.
Weight the board.
Next day pour in clarified butter to cover the salmon and seal it completely.
Serve potted salmon in its own dish with a cucumber or green salad and perhaps jacket potatoes.
A good luncheon or supper dish — and very decorative looking when cut at the table, into the  cross-slices of which Elizabeth Raffald notes that "the skin makes them look ribbed" .
SALMON PASTE
A more ordinary version of potted salmon can be made using cooked salmon and clarified butter in similar proportions and the same manner as for potted tongue (page 221).
A salmon steak weighing about 7 oz. will make a pot of salmon paste ample for four people, so it is a quite economical proposition.
POTTED CRAB
Extract all the meat from a freshly boiled crab weighing about z lb.
Keep the creamy brown body meat separate from the flaked white claw meat.
Season both with salt, freshly milled pepper, mace or nutmeg, cayenne, lemon juice.
Pack claw and body meat in alternate layers in small fire-proof pots.
Press down closely.
Pour in melted butter just to cover the meat.
Stand the pots in a baking tin of water, cook uncovered on the bottom shelf of a very low oven, gas no. 2, 310°F., for 25 to 30 minutes.
When cold, seal with clarified butter.
Serve well chilled.
Potted crab is very rich in flavour as well as in content, and is best appreciated quite on its own, perhaps as a midday dish served only with crisp dry toast, to be followed by a simple lettuce salad or freshly cooked green beans or purple-sprouting broccoli eaten when barely cold, with an oil and lemon dressing.
Those who find crab indigestible may be interested in the advice proffered by Merle's Domestic Dictionary and Household Manual of 1842, to the effect that after eating fresh crab it is always advisable to take "a very small quantity of good French brandy, mixed with its own bulk of water" .
POTTED LOBSTER
Make in the same way as potted crab.
Meg Dods (The Cook's and Housewife's Manual, I 826) instructs that if this is to be kept as a cold relish the white meat and the coral and spawn should be packed "in a regular manner, in layers, or alternate pieces, so that when sliced it may have that marbled appearance, that look of mosaic work which so commends the taste of the cook" .
SMOKED HADDOCK PASTE
Smoked haddock on the bone or in fillets, fresh butter, cayenne pepper, lemon.
Pour boiling water over the fish, cover it, leave so minutes.
Pour off the water, skin and flake the fish.
(Taste it at this stage.
If it is very salty, pour a second lot of boiling water over it.)
Weigh it.
Mash it or purée it in the blender with an equal quantity of fresh unsalted butter.
Season with plenty of lemon juice and a very little cayenne.
No salt.
Press into pots, cover, and store in the refrigerator.
I do not advise frozen haddock fillets for this paste.
The false flavours of dye and chemical smoke are all too perceptible in the finished product.
There are restaurateurs and cookery journalists who like to call confections such as haddock and kipper paste by the name of pâté.
I find this comical and also misleading.
KIPPER PASTE
As for smoked haddock.
Smoked trout, mackerel and smoked cod's roe paste (not to be confused with the Greek taramasalata in which the cod's roe is mixed with olive oil and garlic) are also made in the same way, except that the boiling water treatment is superfluous.
SARDINE BUTTER
For this wonderfully simple little delicacy the sole requirements are good quality sardines in oil, fresh butter, lemon, and cayenne pepper.
No clarified butter seal is necessary.
Drain off the oil.
Skin and bone the sardines.
To each large sardine allow a scant ounce of butter,"is oz. if the sardines are small.
Mix butter and sardines very thoroughly, mashing them with a fork until you have a smooth paste.
Season with a few drops of lemon juice and a sprinkling of cayenne pepper.
Pack the sardine butter into small pots, cover, store in the refrigerator, serve well chilled, with thin, crisp brown toast.
SMOKED SALMON BUTTER
Make this in the same way as sardine butter, using the same proportions of fish and butter.
It is an excellent way of turning a second-grade smoked salmon, i.e. imported Canadian or Norwegian, or a few slices cut from the end of a side (sometimes sold cheaply by fishmongers and delicatessen merchants) into a real  delicacy.
If possible, use unsalted or only very slightly salted butter.
A good deal of lemon juice will be needed.
For a first course for four, 6 oz. each of salmon and butter is a plentiful allowance.
Have lemons and a pepper mill on the table and toast as for sardine butter.
TUNNY FISH BUTTER
Same again.
But pick your brand of tunny carefully.
It isn't worth wasting butter or work on coarse dark tunny.
About the best English-packed brand is Epicure.
The Portuguese Nice is better.
COD'S ROE PASTE IN THE GREEK MANNER
Cheap, easy, made in advance, an admirable standby.
What you can do with a two-ounce jar of smoked cod's roe, a few spoonfuls of oil and a potato is quite a revelation to many people.
For a 2-oz. jar of smoked cod's roe the other ingredients are about tablespoons of olive oil, a medium sized potato, lemon juice, cayenne pepper, and water; and, optionally, a clove of garlic.
An hour or two before you are going to make the paste, or the evening before if it's more convenient, turn the contents of the jar into a bowl, break it up, and put about 3 tablespoons of cold water with it.
This softens it and makes it much easier to work.
Drain off the water before starting work on the making of the dish.
Pound the garlic and mash it with the cod's roe until the paste is quite smooth before gradually adding 3 tablespoons of the oil.
Boil the potato without salt, mash it smooth with the rest of the oil, combine the two mixtures, stir again until quite free from lumps, add the juice of half a lemon and a scrap of cayenne pepper.
Pack the mixture into little pots or jars.
Serve chilled with hot dry toast.
Enough for four.
This little dish, or a similar one, is now listed on the menus of scores of Cypriot-Greek taverns and London bistros under the name of taramasalata.
It is indeed very much akin to the famous Greek speciality, except that true taramasalata is made from a cod's roe much more salty, more pungent, and less smoked than our own.
There is also a great deal more garlic in the Greek version, and very often bread instead of potato is used as a softening agent.
Booklet published by Elizabeth David, 1968
English Potted Meats and Fish Pastes first appeared in article form in the April 1965 issue of Nova.
Rearranged, revised and slightly augmented, the original article was turned into a booklet in 1968, price 2/9.
I did not choose to reprint it, but the material has been freely drawn on by others, sometimes in all but word for word form.
The recipes, I was happy to notice, rapidly found favour with restaurateurs.
That was as it should have been.
I am pleased to have the opportunity of reprinting the material from the original booklet here.
It may be found useful to a new generation of cooks, professional and amateur.
Syllabubs and Fruit Fools
Syllabub
It was Herbert Beerbohm Tree's wedding day.
His half-brother had been called in to act as best man in place of his real brother who had vanished to Spain.
At the celebration breakfast there were syllabubs.
Herbert was beguiled by the biblical rhythm of the name.
 "And Sillabub, the son of Sillabub reigned in his stead," he intoned.
His stepbrother, half-scandalized and wholly impressed by Herbert's levity, never forgot the episode.
He had been ten years old at the time of Herbert's wedding; his name was Max Beerbohm; the story is recounted in Lord David Cecil's Max, A Biography; the date was 1882, and sillabub, added Max, was then his favourite dish.
Max Beerbohm's generation must have been the last to which the delicious syllabub was a familiar childhood treat.
Already for nearly a century the syllabub had been keeping company with the trifle, and in due course the trifle came to reign in the syllabub's stead; and before long the party pudding of the English was not any more the fragile whip of cream contained in a little glass, concealing within its innocent white froth a powerful alcoholic punch, but a built-up confection of sponge fingers and ratafias soaked in wine and brandy, spread with jam, clothed in an egg-and-cream custard, topped with a syllabub and strewn with little coloured comfits.
Came 1846, the year that Mr Alfred Bird brought forth custard powder; and Mr Bird's brain-child grew and grew until all the land was covered with custard made with custard powder and the Trifle had become custard's favourite resting-place.
The wine and lemon-flavoured cream whip or syllabub which had crowned the Trifle had begun to disappear.
Sponge cake left over from millions of nursery teas usurped the place of sponge fingers and the little bitter almond macaroons called ratafias.
Kitchen sherry replaced Rhenish and Madeira and Lisbon wines.
Brandy was banished.
The little coloured comfits — sugar-coated coriander seeds and caraways — bright as tiny tiddlywinks, went into a decline and in their stead reigned candied angelica and nicely varnished glacé cherries.
Now seeking means to combat the Chemicals Age, we look to our forbears for help.
We find that the syllabub can replace the synthetic ice cream which replaced the trifle which replaced the syllabub in the first place.
The ingredients of a syllabub, we find, are simple and sumptuous.
The skill demanded for its confection is minimal, the presentation is basic and elegant.
Swiftly, now, before the deep-freezers, the dehydrators and the emulsifiers take the syllabub away from us and return it transformed and forever despoiled, let us discover how it was made in its heyday and what we can do to recapture something of its pristine charm.
In the beginning then, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there were three kinds of syllabub.
There was the syllabub mixed in a punch bowl on a basis of cider or ale and sometimes both, sweetened with sugar and spiced with cinnamon or nutmeg.
Into the bowl the milkmaid milked the cow so that the new warm milk fell in a foam and froth on to the cider.
The contents of the bowl were left undisturbed for an hour or two, by which time a kind of honeycombed curd had formed on the top, leaving alcoholic whey underneath.
Sometimes, on top of the milk curd, a layer of thick fresh cream was poured.
This syllabub was more a drink than a whip, a diversion for country parties and rustic festivals.
Co-existing with the syllabub of pastoral England was one made with wine and spirits instead of cider and ale, and with cream instead of milk.
This mixture was a more solid one.
It was about four-fifths sweetened whipped cream, to be spooned rather than drunk out of the glasses in which it was served, and one-fifth of wine and whey which had separated from the whip, and which you drank when you reached the end of the cream.
Then, at some stage, it was discovered that by reducing the proportions of wine and sugar to cream, the whip would remain thick and light without separating.
This version was called a solid or everlasting syllabub.
One eighteenth-century author, E. Smith, whose Complete Housewife, published in 1727, was also the first cookery book to be printed in America, claimed that her Everlasting Syllabubs would remain in perfect condition for nine or ten days, although at their best after three or four.
Not all syllabubs were necessarily made with wine.
Sir Kenelm Digby, whose book of recipes collected from his contemporaries and friends has provided posterity with a graphic record of Stuart cookery, notes that he himself made a fine syllabub with syrup left over from the home-drying of plums; being "very quick of the fruit and very weak of sugar" this syrup "makes the Syllabub exceeding well tasted" says Sir Kenelm.
He adds that cherry syrup may be used in like manner.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, syllabubs were sometimes made with the juice of Seville oranges, and in these days we can devise cream and wine or cream and fruit-syrup syllabubs to suit ourselves.
Before venturing on new formulas, however, it is as well to have an idea of what the old recipes were like and to know in what quantities, approximately, the ingredients were portioned out.
From the following cross-section of recipes, chosen from cookery books written by professional and practising cooks and from household receipt books of the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, emerges a fairly clear picture of the ways in which the cooks of the Stuart, the Georgian and the Victorian eras made and served their syllabubs.
Historical and documentary interest apart, some of the old recipes are remarkable for the beauty and the clarity of the English in which they are written.
The Seventeenth Century
AN EXCELLENT SYLLABUB
 "Fill your Sillabub pot half full with sider, and good store of sugar, and a little nutmeg, stir it well together, and put in as much cream by two or three spoonfuls at a time, as hard as you can, as though you milk it in; then stir it together very softly once about, and let it stand two hours before you eat it, for the standing makes it curd." 
Robert May, The Accomplisht Cook, 1660
The author of this celebrated Stuart cookery book was a professional cook whose father, also a professional, apprenticed him to  Arthur Hollingsworth, cook and caterer to one of the City Guilds during the last years of the sixteenth century.
Since May was seventy-two when his book was published, it is clear that many of his recipes must date back to the days of Queen Elizabeth 1st.
A SYLLABUB
"My Lady Middlesex makes Syllabubs for little glasses with spouts, thus.
Take three pints of Sweet Cream, one of quick white wine (or Rhenish) and a good wine glassful (better the ¼ of a pint) of Sack: mingle with them about three quarters of a pound of fine Sugar in Powder.
Beat all these together with a whisk, till all appeareth converted into froth, and let them stand all night.
The next day the Curd will be thick and firm above, and the drink clear under it.
I conceive it may do well, to put into each glass (when you pour the liquor into it) a sprig of Rosemary a little bruised, or a little Limon-peel, or some such thing to quicken the taste; or use Amber-sugar, or spirit of Cinnamon, or of Lignum-Cassie, or Nutmegs, or Mace, or Cloves, a very little."
The Closet of the Eminently Learned Sir Kenelme Digby Kt.
Opened, Published by his Son's Consent, 1669
Sir Kenelm Digby, philosopher-scientist, soldier-diplomat, ardent royalist, lifelong friend and confidant of Charles the First's widow, Queen Henrietta Maria, was born in 1603 and died in 1664.
His recipes, some his own and many collected from his friends and contemporaries, were put together in the form of a private notebook rather than for publication.
They provide us with a first-hand and unique record of cooking as it was understood and practised in the kitchens and still-rooms of aristocratic houses of the first half of the seventeenth century.
The Eighteenth Century
TO MAKE WHIPT SYLLABUBS
 "Take a quart of Creme and a pint of rhenish wine and the juice of 4 lemons sweeten it to your taste and put in some leamon peele then whip it up with a small rod and put it with a spoone into syllabub glasses." 
The MS. receipt book of Judith Frampton of Morton House, nr Dorchester, Dorset.
1708.
Quoted in Dorset Dishes of the 18th Century, edited by J. Stevens Cox, published by the Dorset Natural History and Archaeological Society, Dorchester, 1961
TO MAKE LEMON SYLLABUB
 "To a pint of cream put a pound of double-refined sugar, the juice of seven lemons, grate the rinds of two lemons into a pint of white wine, add half a pint of sack, then put them all into a deep pot, and whisk them for half an hour, put it into glasses the night before you want it: it is better for standing two or three days, but it will keep a week if required." 
Elizabeth Raffald, The Experienced English Housekeeper, 1769
Elizabeth Raffald was a Yorkshire woman, housekeeper in the Cheshire household of Lady Elizabeth Warburton.
She married Lady Elizabeth's head gardener, left her service to run a catering establishment in Manchester, bore sixteen daughters, and managed the kitchens in two different Manchester inns.
Her book, substantially as she wrote it, was still in print, and selling, a hundred years after its original publication.
A FINE SYLLABUB FROM THE COW
"Sweeten a quart of cyder with refined sugar, grate a nutmeg over It; and milk the cow into your liquor.
When you have added what is necessary, pour half-a-pint of the sweetest cream over it."
Barbara Young, Steyning, Sussex.
MS. receipt book, 5785.
From Dorset Dishes of the 18th Century, already quoted above.
The Nineteenth Century
SOMERSETSHIRE SYLLABUB
"Sweeten a pint of port, and another of Madeira or sherry, in a china bowl.
Milk about three pints of milk over this.
In a short time it will bear clouted cream laid over it.
Grate nutmeg over this, and strew a few coloured comfits on the top if you choose."
Mistress Margaret Dods, The Cook's and Housewife's Manual, 4th edition, 1819.
The copious footnotes to the recipes in this book were believed by his contemporaries to have been written by Sir Walter Scott.
Margaret or Meg Dods is a character in Scott's St Roman's Well.
It  was also the pseudonym used by Christine Isobel Johnstone, wife of an Edinburgh publisher.
Her cookery book is still one of the two main sources of authentic Scottish recipes.
The other is The Scots Kitchen, a fine book by a living writer, Marian McNeill.
The Scots Kitchen was first published by Blackie and Son in 1929.
The Twentieth Century
My own version of Everlasting Syllabub:
One small glass, or 4 oz. of white wine or sherry, 2 tablespoons of brandy, one lemon, 2 oz. of sugar, ½ pint of double cream, nutmeg.
The day before the syllabub is to be made, put the thinly pared rind of the lemon and the juice in a bowl with the wine and brandy and leave overnight.
Next day, strain the wine and lemon mixture into a large and deep bowl.
Add the sugar and stir until it has dissolved.
Pour in the cream slowly, stirring all the time.
Grate in a little nutmeg.
Now whisk the mixture until it thickens and will hold a soft peak on the whisk.
The process may take 5 minutes, it may take as long as 15.
It depends on the cream, the temperature and the method of whisking.
Unless dealing with a large quantity of cream, an electric mixer can be perilous.
A couple of seconds too long and the cream is a ruined and grainy mass.
For a small amount of cream a wire whisk is perfectly satisfactory and just as quick as an electric beater.
An old-fashioned wooden chocolate mill or whisk held upright and twirled between the palms of both hands is also a good implement for whisking cream.
The important point is to learn to recognize the moment at which the whisking process is complete.
When the cream is ready, spoon it into glasses, which should be of very small capacity (2 to 2 ½ oz.) but filled to overflowing.
Once in the glasses the cream will not spoil nor sink nor separate.
As suggested by Sir Kenelm Digby, a tiny sprig of rosemary or a little twist of lemon peel can be stuck into each little filled glass.
Keep the syllabubs in a cool place — not in the refrigerator — until you are ready to serve them.
They can be made at least two days before they are needed.
The quantities given will fill ten small syllabub or custard cups or sherry glasses and will be enough for four to six people.
Though circumstances are so changed it is relevant to remember that in their heyday syllabubs were regarded as refreshments to be offered at card parties, ball suppers and at public  entertainments, rather than just as a pudding for lunches and dinners, although they did quite often figure as part of the dessert in the days when a choice of sweetmeats, fruits, jellies, confectionery and creams was set out in a formal symmetrical array in the centre of the table.
This seems to have been particularly the case in aristocratic Scottish houses in the early decades of the eighteenth century.
In The Household Book of Lady Grisell Baillie 1692–1733, edited, with Notes and Introduction, by Robert Scott-Moncrieff, W.S. Edinburgh, 1911, many of the bills of fare for dinners and suppers recorded between 1713 and 1728 featured syllabubs, regardless of the season.
On Christmas Day 5755 "w t 9 of our frinds 14 at table in all" Lady Grisell's dessert consisted of ratafia cream, two dishes of butter and cheese, jacolet [chocolate]walnuts and almonds, apples, stewed pears, chestnuts, "sillibubs and jellys" .
On May 26th 1718 "at Mr Johnstons" the dessert was "cherries, sillibubs with strawberries, sweetmeats, oranges" , and four dishes of milk.
The dessert for Lord Anadall's dinner guests on January 29th 1719, "10 at table" was a specially fine affair.
The way it was arranged was indicated by Lady Grisell:
Desert
a salver with sweet meats
stewed pears pistosenuts
butter cheese
sillibubs and jellies a lagere salver sillibubs and jellies
wt sweet meats
cheese butter
pistache nuts stweed aples
a salver with sweet meats
At Lord Anadall's supper that night there was lobster and roast lamb (obviously cold) "a ring w t wild foull collops and pickles etc" brawn, a cold tart, "two salvers of silibubs and jellies" , and two dishes of confections.
On December 14th 1719 "Super at Mr Cockburn 11 at table 22 persons in al" there were "eating poset in cheana [china]high dish at the head of the table, at the foot a haunch of venison," in the midle of the table a pirimide sillibubs and orang cream in the past, above it sweet meets dry and wet ", on the sides black pudding, partridge, larks, celery salad" made and unmade ", veal collops white sauce," 2 boyld pullets w t persley sauce, in the midle pickles of other sort than the comon ones."
It was at about this time that the epergne, a standing centre-piece with branched supports for the dessert was coming into fashion.
At the Princess of Wales's at Richmond on July 15th 1720 Lady Grisell noted that the "Deseart" was "a big dish in the Midle with connections and frute only" , and on April 12th 1725, at the Duke of Chandos' magnificent house at Canons, near Ed are, with "A Duson at Table" there was"ane Eparn in the Midle.
Again in 1727"We was eight days at Twitenham.
We had always an Eparn in the midle".
It is interesting to note that when an epergne stood on the table, there were no creams, jellies, or syllabubs in glasses mentioned in the dessert course, but Lady Grisell herself did not possess such an ornament and for her own dinners still served "sweetmeats and jelly and sillibubs" , curds and cream, pears and apples, "pistaches and scorcht almonds, Bisket round the milk" in the old way in separate dishes, in glasses on footed salvers, and in sweetmeat glasses.
For those interested in tracing the evolution of our national dishes, the brief recipe on page 145 shows how the syllabub and the trifle were eventually amalgamated to make one glorious sticky mess.
Then, looking back into the old recipes for English fruit fools, we find that trifles, syllabubs, creams and fools have all at some point merged one with the other.
In the history of cookery nothing is conveniently consistent.
English Fruit Fools
 "Our frailties are invincible" .
Robert Louis Stevenson
Soft, pale, creamy, untroubled, the English fruit fool is the most frail and insubstantial of English summer dishes.
That at any rate is how it should be, and how we like to think it always was.
Here the old cookery books interrupt the smooth sequence.
The seventeenth- and eighteenth-century writers do describe a number of fruit fools, fools made from gooseberries, raspberries, strawberries, redcurrants, apples, mulberries, apricots, even from fresh figs; but few of these dishes turn out to be the simple cream-enriched purées we know today.
Some were made from rather roughly crushed fruit (the French word foulé, meaning crushed or pressed must surely  have some bearing on the English name), often they were thickened with eggs as well as cream, sometimes they were flavoured with wine and spices, perfumed sugar and lemon peel.
Two hundred years ago it was those recipes listed under the heading of creams which were much more like the fruit fools of today.
Evidently, at some stage, it came to be appreciated that the eggs and the extra flavourings were unnecessary, that they even distort the fresh flavour of the fruit.
This is especially true of berry fruits and of apricots.
Gradually the delicacy now regarded as the traditional English fruit fool came to be accepted as a purée of fruit plus sugar, fresh thick cream, and nothing more.
Like the syllabub, the fruit fool was almost always served in glasses or custard cups, although Susannah MacIver, an Edinburgh cookery teacher and author of an excellent little book called Cookery and Pastry, 5774, directs that her gooseberry cream be served on an "asset" , the old Scots word for platter.
From the following few recipes it is easy to see that there was never any one method of making English fruit creams and fools, and that over the past three centuries the two have fused.
In the process some charming variations have disappeared.
Some of these would be worth reviving, for example Elizabeth Hammond's gooseberry or apple trifle quoted on page 240 and Robert May's beautiful "black fruit" mixtures.
In this selection of old and modern recipes I give precedence to those dishes made from the gooseberry, because green gooseberry fool is — to me at any rate — the most delicious as well as the most characteristic of all these simple, almost childlike, English dishes.
GOOSEBERRY FOOL
This is my own method of making gooseberry fool.
2 lb. of green gooseberries; ½ lb. of sugar; a minimum of"is pint of double cream.
Wash the gooseberries.
There is no need to top and tail them.
Put them in the top half of a double saucepan with the sugar, and steam them (or if it is easier bake them in a covered jar in a low oven) until they are quite soft.
Sieve them through the mouli having first strained off surplus liquid which would make the fool watery.
When the purée is quite cold add the cream.
More sugar may be necessary.
Later in the season when gooseberries are over, delicious fools can be made with uncooked strawberries; a mixture of raspberries  and redcurrants, also uncooked; and blackberries, cooked as for gooseberries; but in this case I think that cream spoils the rich colour of the fruit and should be offered separately.
To me it is essential to serve fruit fools in glasses or in simple white cups, and with shortbread or other such biscuits to go with them.
ICED GOOSEBERRY FOOL
1 quart green gooseberries; /2 lb. white sugar; 5 pint of whipped cream; brandy or maraschino; vegetable greening; a little water; grated lemon peel.
"Stew very slowly one quart of green gooseberries with half a pound of white sugar and enough water to prevent fruit from burning.
Rub through a hair sieve and use a very little vegetable greening to make it a pretty colour.
(Add brandy or maraschino if required.)
One pint of cream whipped stiff and grated lemon peel.
Mix well together and freeze.
Should take two hours to freeze and should be worked with a wooden spoon from time to time."
Ruth Lowinsky, Lovely Food, a Cookery Notebook, Nonesuch Press, London, 5931
I find this recipe most interesting.
The thirties was the decade when smart hostesses took to serving a great many dishes iced or frozen simply for the originality of the idea.
In England at this time it was quite avant garde to possess a refrigerator.
Iced camembert cream, frozen horseradish sauce, and tomato ice all belong to this period.
I remember a cook of my childhood whose great dish was a crème brulée in which the layer of glass-like caramel concealed, not the usual egg-thickened cream, but a delicate and softly frozen gooseberry fool.
Ruth Lowinsky's book is a true period piece, which is to say that in its time it was bang up to date.
The recipes and the suggested menus evoke the days of English parlourmaids handing round every course in silver-plated entrée dishes far too big for the food they contained, while the illustrations of table decorations devised by Mr Thomas Lowinsky depict such conversation stimulators as "two dead branches in an accumulator jar" , or "a spiral of chromium-plated steel pierced with holes through which the stems of flowers are passed" .
Today's equivalents do not adorn our tables.
They are worn by our guests.
The clanking camisoles and the chain mail adornments of the sixties are certainly less static than the table  decorations of the thirties; they exist surely for the same reason, to invite comment.
In sharp contrast the redundant vegetable greening and liqueurs in Mrs Lowinsky's gooseberry fool recipe hark back to Hannah Glasse and the mid-eighteenth century.
Hannah Glasse's book, The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy was first published in 1747 in the 1751 edition appears what is possibly the first English printed recipe for an ice cream.
The formula is for a simple raspberry purée and cream mixture which today we should call a raspberry fool.
Mrs Glasse directs that the cream be frozen in "pewter basons" .
What else are our fruit fools but the basis of modern cream ices or frozen desserts?
In the next recipe, the fool has amalgamated with the syllabub and the trifle, the gooseberry fool taking the place of the cake at the bottom of the dish.
An attractive recipe.
GOOSEBERRY OR APPLE TRIFLE
"Scald a sufficient quantity of fruit, and pulp it through a sieve, add sugar agreeable to taste, make a thick layer of this at the bottom of your dish: mix a pint of milk, a pint of cream, and the yolks of two eggs: scald it over the fire, observing to stir it: add a small quantity of sugar, and let it get cold: then lay it over the apples or gooseberries with a spoon, and put on the whole a whip [a syllabub]made the day before.
If you use apples, add the rind of a lemon grated."
Elizabeth Hammond, Modern Domestic Cookery and Useful Receipt Book, c. 1857.
The next recipe comes from a work compiled by two eighteenth-century London publicans.
TO MAKE GOOSEBERRY FOOL
"Put two quarts of gooseberries into about a quart of water, and set them on the fire.
When they begin to simmer, turn yellow, and to plump, throw them into a cullender to drain out the water, and with the back of a spoon carefully squeeze the pulp through a sieve into a dish.
Make them pretty sweet, and let them stand till they are cold.
In the meantime, take two quarts of milk, and the yolks of four eggs beaten up with a little grated nutmeg.
Stir it softly over a slow fire, and when it begins to simmer, take it off, and by degrees stir it into the gooseberries.
Let it stand till it be cold, and then serve it up.
If you make it with cream, you need not put any eggs."
Francis Collingwood and John Woollams, The Universal Cook and City and Country Housekeeper, 1791
The main point of interest about the book from which the foregoing recipe is extracted is the French translation which appeared in Paris in 1810.
The flow of English translations from French cookery books has been well-sustained ever since the mid-seventeenth century when La Varenne's celebrated French Cook appeared in England.
French kitchen terms peppered throughout English cookery books, and half-anglicized names of French dishes are no novelty to us.
When for once the tide runs in the reverse direction we get a new view of our own cookery, and a revealing insight into the oddness of traditional names as they appear in another language.
In the case of Le Cuisinier Anglais Universel ou Le Nec Plus Ultra de la Gourmandise there are some interesting metamorphoses, as well as signs that the translator was defeated by the names of some of our cherished specialities, among them le catchup and le browning ( "to even the most skilled of French cooks these sauces will be new" , says the publisher's preface).
The syllabub turns up as Eternel Syllabub, syllabub solide, and syllabub sous la vache.
La plume of the French translator gives a new aspect to several of our old sweet dishes, among them the trifle which as bagatelle, regains something of its lost charm.
Cheesecakes also return to grace and elegance as talmouses.
As for folie de groseilles vertes it is no longer perfidious Albion's frailty, serene and cool, but a wild whirl of summer gaiety and greenery.
I fancy that across the channel where Napoleon's wars were ravaging all Europe, our two innkeepers fell flat as pancakes, and were it not for the felicities of their translator they would scarcely be worth comment.
All their recipes had been borrowed — by their own admission — from earlier works and their style is charmless.
It is a relief to turn back to something with the flavour of originality, an evocation of a truly pastoral summer dish, half fruit fool, half syllabub.
TO MAKE CREAM OF SUNDRY KINDS OF FRUITS
"Take either currants, mulberries, raspberries or strawberries, sprinkle them with a little rose-water; press out the juice, and draw the milk out of the cow's udder into it; sweeten it with a little sugar, and beat it well with birchen twigs, till it froth up; then strew over it a little fine beaten cinamon, and it will be an excellent mess.
You may do this with the juice of plums, gooseberries, apricots, figs, or any juicy fruit."
The Family Magazine Containing Useful Directions in All the Branches of House-keeping and Cookery, 1741
Now two seventeenth-century gooseberry dishes:
TO MAKE GOOSEBERRY CREAM
"Codle them green, and boil them up with sugar, being preserved put them into the cream strain'd or whole scrape sugar on them, and so serve them cold in boil'd or raw cream.
Thus you may do strawberries, raspas, or red currans, put in raw cream whole, or serve them with wine and sugar in a dish without cream."
Robert May, The Accomplisht Cook, 1660
TO MAKE A GOOSEBERRY HUFF
 "Take a quart of green gooseberries boil them and pulp them thro" a sieve, take the whites of 3 eggs, beat them to a Froth, put it to the Gooseberries and beat it both together till it looks white, then take ½ pound refin'd sugar, make it into a Syrrup with Spring Water, boyl it to a Candy,[i.e. to the small thread]let it be almost cold then put it to the Gooseberries and Eggs and beat all together till tis all froth, which put into Cups or Glasses — Codlings [green apples]may be done the same way.
 "N.B. Eleven Ounces of Codlin pulp'd thro" a sieve is a proper quantity to the above Eggs and Sugar."
Dorset Dishes of the 17th Century, edited from MS. receipt books and published by J. Stevens Cox, The Toucan Press, Guernsey, 1967
BLACK FRUIT FOOL OR BLACK TART STUFF
This is a recipe adapted from a dish evidently popular three hundred years ago in the days of the Stuarts, when a purée of dried prunes, raisins and currants cooked in wine was used as a filling for tarts and  pies.
Recipes for this "black tart stuff" as it was called appear in at least two cookery books of the second half of the seventeenth century.
One of these books, The Accomplisht Cook of 1660 has already been quoted on pages 231 and 242.
It is a most beautiful piece of cookery literature.
The author, Robert May, worked in a number of grand and noble households, including that of the Countess of Kent, whose book of medical receipts appeared posthumously in 1653 under the title A Choice Manual, Or Rare Secrets in Physick and Chirurgery.
Published together with A Choice Manual was a little book of cookery receipts entitled A True Gentlewoman's Delight, often also attributed, although probably wrongly, to the Countess of Kent.
Robert May gives several different variations on his "black tart stuff" recipe, one of which includes damsons.
A True Gentlewoman's Delight also gives a formula for black tart stuff.
My own version is the result of experiments with these different recipes.
I find it a delicious and refreshing cold fruit purée.
As a pie filling it is rich and dark without the cloying and heavy qualities of mincemeat.
It has also a certain originality which provides a small surprise at the end of the meal.
Exact proportions of the different dried fruits are not important, but as a rough guide, use ½lb. of good large prunes, ¼ lb. of raisins (Spanish muscatels are the best for flavour and colour, stoneless Australian or South African raisins are cheaper) and 1 oz. of currants, plus ¼ pint of red table wine or ⅛ pint of port.
Put the prunes in an earthenware oven dish, with the wine and enough water to cover them.
Leave them, in the covered pot, in a very slow oven, anything from gas no. ½ to 1 or 290°F., to gas no. 3 or 330°F., for 2 to 3 hours or longer, until they are very swollen and completely soft and have absorbed most of the liquid.
During the final hour or so of cooking put the raisins and currants previously well washed, in a separate oven pot, and with water to cover them, to bake.
Stone the prunes, sieve them, with any remaining juice.
Strain and discard the water from the raisins and currants.
Sieve them.
Mix the two purées together.
Serve well chilled in glasses, or in one large bowl, with a layer of thin pouring cream floated on the top, and with sponge or shortbread fingers.
When the purée is made a little extra port can be added by those who like a stronger flavour of wine.
These quantities fill six glasses of about 3-oz. capacity.
The purée keeps well in the refrigerator, so it is economical to make a batch and store it.
A note for teetotallers: I have several times eaten another modern version of this dish in which black coffee rather than wine is used for flavouring the dried fruit.
QUINCE FOOL
Quarter and core the quinces but do not peel them; put them in a vegetable steamer — the kind known as an adaptable steamer, which looks a bit like a colander, and fits on the top of the saucepan, not a bain marie or double boiler — over a pan of water, and cover them.
Steam until they are quite soft.
Sieve them.
Into the hot pulp stir caster sugar (about 6 to 8 oz. for ½ lb. of quinces, but this is a matter of taste).
When quite cold fold in about ⅓ to ½ pint of fresh cream.
This is my version of a quince cream recipe from the note book of Mrs Owen of Penrhos in Anglesey, 1695.
DRIED APRICOT FOOL
The way to get the maximum flavour out of dried apricots is to bake them slowly in the oven instead of stewing them.
They emerge nicely plump, with a roasted, smoky flavour which I find irresistible; although only, it must be said, if they have been dried without the sulphur dioxide used as a preservative for dried fruit.
To get good dried apricots it is nowadays necessary to shop for them in wholefood and health food stores.
Put ½ lb. of fine dried apricots to soak in water just to cover for a couple of hours — or overnight if it is more convenient.
Cook them, in the same water and without sugar, in a covered oven-pot at a moderate temperature, gas no. 3, 330°F., for about an hour.
Strain off the juice.
Put the apricots through the coarse mesh of the vegetable mill, and into the resulting purée mix about 4 tablespoons of honey — the amount depends upon the quality of the apricots as well as upon your own taste — and then stir in about ¼ pint of thick, slightly whipped cream.
A good addition to dried apricot fool is a spoonful or two of freshly ground almonds.
Serve chilled in glasses or cups.
Enough for four.
RHUBARB FOOL
Rhubarb fool is made in just the same way as gooseberry fool, but needs an even larger proportion of sugar, preferably dark brown, and it is very necessary when the rhubarb is cooked to put it in a colander or sieve and let the excess juice drain off before the purée is made and the cream added.
Rhubarb fool is a very beautiful dish — and to me the only way of making rhubarb acceptable.
The brown sugar, incidentally, gives rhubarb a specially rich flavour and colour.
A NINETEENTH-CENTURY TRIFLE
 "Cover the bottom of the dish with Naples biscuits, and macaroons broken in halves, wet with brandy and white wine poured over them, cover them with patches of raspberry jam, fill the dish with a good custard, then whip up a syllabub, drain the froth on a sieve, put it on the custard and strew comfits over all." 
Frederick Bishop, The Wife's Own Book of Cookery, 1852
It is rarely appreciated that in Bishop's day, a Trifle was not a nursery pudding squashed anyhow into a common fruit bowl, but built up into a pyramid in an elegant stemmed glass compote dish.
Crowned with its frothy whip and scattered with coloured comfits, the Trifle was a very pretty dish for a party.
Eliza Acton, in Modern Cookery 1845, referred to a special trifle-dish.
So did Mrs Beeton, in the first edition of Household Management 1860, and gave two illustrations of it, a black and white one on p.750, and a coloured one on plate VI.
She garnished her built-up Trifle with strips of bright currant jelly, crystallised sweetmeats or flowers.
Coloured comfits were rather old-fashioned, she thought.
In her day cream was 1s. per pint and she estimated the total cost of her trifle at 5s. 6d.
ALMOND SHORTBREAD
A good and simple shortbread to serve with syllabubs, fruit fools, and creams.
3 oz. plain flour; 3 oz. unsalted butter; 1 ½ oz. of caster sugar; s oz. of ground almonds; ½ to 1 oz. of rice flour or cornflour.
Crumble the softened butter into the flour, sprinkling in the rice flour or cornflour at intervals, as and when the butter seems to be getting sticky.
Add the almonds and the sugar.
The ingredients should not be worked too much.
Grainy pieces will disappear in the cooking.
Spread the mixture into a 6-inch sandwich tin or tart tin with a removable base.
Press it down lightly and smooth over the top with a palette knife.
Prick the top surface with a fork.
Bake in the centre of a very slow oven, gas no. 2, 310°F., for an hour and a quarter, until the shortbread is a very pale biscuit colour.
Leave to cool in the tin, but before it is completely cold cut into small neat wedges.
Enough for four people.
Booklet published by Elizabeth David, 1969
In its original form my article on Syllabubs appeared in the very first number of Nova, in March 1965.
The historical recipes which I had included in my typescript were, however, omitted from the published article, and these, together with several for English fruit fools, and a new introductory essay, were published in Queen magazine in the summer of 1968, in the days of Hugh Johnson's editorship.
On that occasion the article was illustrated with reproductions of Thomas Lowinsky's wonderful twenties designs for table centres, drawn originally for Lovely Food, his wife Ruth's book published by the Nonesuch Press in 1931.
For its next reincarnation, I rearranged, revised and slightly augmented the text of the Queen article, replacing the new introductory essay with the original one from Nova, and in 1969 published it in booklet form under the title Syllabubs and Fruit Fools.
It was the last of a series of four little booklets which I published myself and sold to Elizabeth David Ltd. for the Pimlico kitchen utensil shop I had launched in 1965.
Two years after the publication of the Syllabub book disagreements with my partners over policy matters led to my resignation as chairman and director of the firm and eventually to my total severance of all connection with it.
When the booklets were finally sold out, I did not reprint them.
The first of the series, Dried Herbs, Aromatics and Condiments, 1967, formed the nucleus of my Spices, Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen, Penguin 1970.
Another, The Baking of an English Loaf, 1969, an article first published in Queen, December 4th 1968, was eventually incorporated, much rewritten, in my English Bread and Yeast Cookery, Allen Lane 1977.
The fourth, English Potted Meats and Fish Pastes, 1968, is reprinted in the  present volume, pp.216–229.
The retail price of the Herb and the Bread booklets was 2/6d, the Potted Meat and the Syllabub ones were all of 2/9d.
I give these bibliographical details because from time to time I get asked for them by collectors and booksellers.
Operation Mulberry
Every August or early September for the last few years I have been lucky enough to receive a present of ripe mulberries from a magnificent old tree in the garden of Rainham Hall in Essex.
I use them to make a Summer Pudding or a water ice.
Last year I added a new dish of mulberries and almonds to the repertory.
SUMMER PUDDING OF MULBERRIES
For a small pudding, enough for four people, you need 1 lb. of home-made white bread at least two or three days old; 2 lb. of ripe mulberries; about 6 oz. of white sugar; a Pyrex soufflé mould of 20-oz. capacity.
Cook the mulberries with the sugar until the juice runs.
Line the mould with narrow, crustless slices of bread.
These must fit the dish exactly, with no spaces for the juice to seep through.
This task is made quite easy if you dampen the bread slightly so that it can be pressed into the shape you need.
Pour in the warm mulberries, with just a little of their juice, reserving the rest for later, and leaving enough room at the top for a covering layer of bread slices.
When these are fitted into place put a flat plate or saucer inside the dish.
On top put a 1-lb. weight.
Transfer the pudding to the refrigerator, where you may safely leave it for several days.
It is in fact all the better for a prolonged wait in the cold.
The juice is best stored in the freezer.
Turn the pudding out into a deep plate or a dish with room to hold some of the juice reserved for pouring over it.
Don't swamp it though.
With this most delicious version of summer pudding- raspberries and redcurrants make the next best — you need a jug of good rich cream of pouring consistency.
A note: if you don't make your own bread try white bread from a  Greek or Italian bakery.
On no account use a factory loaf.
I did once, in the interests of discovery.
The experiment was expensive (a waste of good raspberries), disastrous and conclusive.
A MULBERRY AND ALMOND DISH
Mix 12 oz. to 1 lb. of mulberries cooked with sugar as above with 1½ to 2 oz. of fresh soft white breadcrumbs and 1½ to 2 oz. of skinned and finely ground almonds.
Serve chilled, in narrow goblets or white china cups, with a little cream floated on top.
The mulberry-almond-bread combination is a good one.
It was suggested to me by an Italian recipe for a sauce or relish called sapore de morone which appears in Epulario, first published in Venice in 1516.
According to Lord Westbury, Handlist of Italian Cookery Books, Florence, 1963, this work, attributed to Giovanni Rosselli, is in reality taken from the same Maestro Martino manuscript used in the earlier and better known De Honesta Voluptate by Bartolomeo Sacchi, printed in Venice in 1475.
I suspect that the mulberry sauce — we are not told for what manner of meat it was intended — may have originated somewhere in Asia Minor and was perhaps brought to Italy after the Venetian conquest of Constantinople in 1204 A.D. It could equally have come via Persia or Afghanistan where, as in Turkey, the berries of the white or silk mulberry are dried to provide a supply for the winter.
In the Epulario sauce the berries — whether white or black we do not know — are uncooked, crushed lightly in a mortar, spiced with cinnamon and nutmeg — no sugar — and pressed through a fine cloth sieve together with the pounded almonds and breadcrumbs.
MULBERRY WATER ICE
I make this in the same way as a strawberry or raspberry water ice, except that mulberries need no additional lemon or orange juice.
Make a thickish syrup with 8 oz. each of sugar and water.
Purée 2 lb. of mulberries in a blender or food processor.
Press them through a stainless steel wire sieve.
Mix the syrup and the mulberry pulp and chill in the refrigerator before turning into a mould, ice trays, or an electric sorbetière to freeze.
It was from the late Sir Harry Luke, author of that delightful and civilized book The Tenth Muse (Putnam, 1954, and revised edition 1962) that I learned of the beauty of mulberry ices.
MULBERRIES AS A DESSERT FRUIT
If you have just a few mulberries, not enough to make a pudding or an ice, arrange them in a little pyramid, if possible on shiny green leaves, on a plain glass compote dish, with a separate bowl of sugar.
They are glorious.
But beware the juice.
It stains.
Petit Propos Culinaires No. 2, 1979
Foods of Legend
Refined or classic French cookery — call it haute cuisine if you must — and French regional, provincial, farmhouse and peasant styles of cookery cannot arbitrarily be isolated and set apart one from the other.
All are interdependent and to a certain extent intermixed.
Each borrows and learns from the other.
The transposition of a dish from one category into another happens in many different ways.
For the sake of argument, let us say for example that the son of a humble couple in a Provençal village leaves home to train in the catering business.
In the course of time he becomes one of the world's most famous cooks.
At the height of his fame and glory he thinks with nostalgia of the rough country food of his childhood.
He would like to reproduce for his customers a certain dish of sliced potatoes and artichoke hearts baked with olive oil and garlic and scented with wild thyme.
So rustic a dish can hardly, he realizes, be offered to the fine ladies and gentlemen who frequent the elegant restaurant over which he presides.
From force of habit he banishes the garlic and adds sliced truffles.
It is a period in the history of cooking when the addition of truffles would make a poached mouse or a fricassee of donkey's ears acceptable to those rich and great ones who flock to eat the creations of this famous chef.
They do not know that, for once, they will be eating what is almost a peasant dish.
Truffles are one of the natural products of Provence.
In a dish of potatoes and artichokes — another of the local products — they are by no means out of place.
The olive oil of the country will not however be acceptable to Parisians or to Londoners.
Butter must be used instead.
Concentrated, clear meat juice, must, it goes without saying, be added.
In the classic cooking of professionals meat juice or broth goes with everything, olive oil with nothing save salads, vinaigrette and mayonnaise sauces.
A poor Provençal family might find their great son's version of a familiar dish lacking in savour, although in its original form it would have made, with a saucerful of olives and perhaps a dish of fresh figs, an entire meal.
To the customers of the Provençal village boy who is now the renowned and glorious Auguste Escoffier, potatoes, artichokes and truffles do not make even one course.
They belong with a joint of meat.
So Escoffier uses his vegetables as a foundation upon which to bake a choice little cut of spring lamb, a loin or best end of neck.
For a festival or a wedding feast a very similar dish, a gigot of mutton on a bed of sliced potatoes, might have been taken by Madame Escoffier senior to the village baker's oven to cook.
It would be no more, and no less, than the ancient gigot boulangère with a midi accent.
Madame Escoffier's son gives it a more elegant name.
To honour his compatriot, the Provençal poet Frédéric Mistral, he calls his creation carré d'agneau Mistral.
He publishes the recipe in a book; and another of the myriad village dishes of France has entered the repertory of la cuisine classique.
Before long, wine scholars and menu compilers are gravely debating the question of which Bordeaux vintage will best harmonize with the lamb, the potatoes and the artichokes, wondering whether the presence of the truffles does not after all call for a burgundy.
Sometimes the rags to riches progress of a dish is reversed.
A Parisian-born chef of the early nineteenth century brings to perfection — or to what at the time is considered perfection — a grandiose dish of sole in a white wine and cream sauce with a ceremonial garnish of freshwater crayfish, fried gudgeons, oysters, mushrooms and prawns impaled on ornamental skewers.
The chef in question, who has perhaps first-hand knowledge of Normandy, and obtains his supplies of fish from the Norman coast, calls his creation sole à la normande.
The recipe is modified and simplified by succeeding generations of cooks.
Some hundred years later the great revival of regional specialities is initiated by a band of patriotic French men of letters fearful that the post-1918 influx of tourists demanding international palace hotel food (it is, alas, le classique which has opened the door to this dreariest of all styles of cooking) wherever they go will end in the annihilation of the typical specialities of the provinces of France.
These entirely estimable men, among whom the prime movers are Curnonsky, Marcel Rouff and Count Austin de Croze, set to work compiling their wonderful catalogues and books concerning regional dishes and products, and their guides to  the provincial restaurants where such things are served.
At the same time the members of this happy band of pioneers do not hesitate to flay, in newspaper and magazine columns, the bad restaurateurs and the hoteliers who pander to ignorant tourists with mass-produced, characterless food.
One day these gentlemen, visiting a renowned restaurant in Rouen (or was it Caen, Trouville, Honfleur?) enjoy a modernized version of the original sole normande.
The patron of the restaurant explains that a garnish of crayfish and oysters only is the right and true traditional one for sole normande.
It is not long before this information gets into the newspapers and cookery books.
An expert in Norman folklore proceeds to argue that the whole thing is too complicated.
Cooks in the households of Norman seaside towns do not, he says, have freshwater crayfish at their disposal.
They enrich their sole dishes with mussels and shrimps only; and they cook their fish in locally produced cider, not in expensive white wine imported from other regions.
It is a matter of months only before a learned historian unearths evidence which proves that the first sole normande was simply a mixture of fish boiled in a bucket of seawater on board the ship which took William of Normandy to Hastings.
What the creation of the Parisian chef (his name is said to have been Philippe, owner of a restaurant in the rue Montorgueil) has lost in splendour it has gained in ancient antecedents and a background which will make a godsend for publicity men, compilers of travel literature, and the experts in picturesque magazine cookery.
It is all good publicity for French tourism and the restaurants and hotels of Normandy.
What is more, the proprietors of seaside cafés and catering establishments actually take up the recipe and produce their own versions of it.
Who can say now that the dish is not, in fact, of ancient Norman lineage?
Because some local speciality has caught the imagination of tourists, it has, today, almost automatically come to be accepted as a great dish.
Overestimation of the merits of a dish which relies purely on local conditions and ingredients for its charm will, in the end, kill it stone-dead.
Take, say, from a salade niçoise the little pungent black olives of Provence, the fruity oil in the dressing, the sweet, ripe southern tomatoes, the capers and the brined anchovies which are all characteristic products of the region, and what is left?
Little more than an English mixed salad…
To reproduce French cooking in England with any success at all it  is best, I think, to go for dishes with less resounding reputations and less specialized ingredients.
This should not be difficult.
For every French regional dish of international repute there are a hundred comparatively unknown, equally interesting and more easily adaptable to differing conditions.
Here are some recipes for such dishes.
I learned about them during the course of visiting various wholesale food markets in France: visits which proved a great deal more instructive than a thousand meals in restaurants, however good, could ever be.
GRILLADE DES MARINIERS DU RHÔNE
This is just one version out of the score of recipes for this venerable dish which is not a grill at all and which you will scarcely find nowadays simmering away in the galleys of the great petrol barges which whirl down the Rhone to Marseille.
But curiously enough this dish, although made with fresh meat rather than with left-over boiled beef, has much in its flavour and composition which makes it akin to the celebrated miroton, always reputed to be characteristic of the cooking of the Paris concierge.
Buy about 1 ½ to 2 lb. of a good lean cut of beef — topside is perhaps the best — and cut it into small steaks each weighing about 3 to 4 oz.
The other ingredients are about 1 lb. of onions, 1 oz. of butter, 1 heaped teaspoon of flour, 2 or 3 tablespoons of chopped parsley, a clove of garlic, 3 tablespoons of olive oil, 1 of wine vinegar, 4 anchovy fillets, salt, pepper.
Slice the onions fairly fine.
Put a layer of them in a not-too-deep earthenware casserole.
On top put two or three of the steaks, sprinkled with salt and pepper.
Then a layer of onions, another of meat and so on, finishing with a layer of onions.
Work the butter and flour together.
Divide it into tiny knobs.
Spread them over the top of the onions and round the sides of the casserole.
Cover with buttered paper and a lid, and cook in a very slow oven, gas no. 1, 290°F., for about 2 hours.
Mix the chopped parsley, garlic, olive oil, chopped anchovy fillets and vinegar to make a little vinaigrette sauce.
Pour this mixture into the casserole.
Replace the paper and the lid and cook another hour.
As you see, a primitive but excellent way of making a richly flavoured stew with a slightly thickened sauce but without the addition of stock, wine, or even water.
The dish can of course be reheated without coming to any harm.
MUSEAU DE PORC EN SALADE
Now here is another extremely simple little dish, a dish which anyone who has a helpful butcher can make with very little trouble or expense.
I saw it, and tasted it, for the first time, on a charcutier's stall in the market at Montpellier.
Ask your butcher to put a boned pig's cheek into brine for 24 hours.
When you get it home, leave it soaking in cold water for an hour.
Put it into a pot with an onion, a couple of carrots, peppercorns, a bay leaf and a few parsley stalks.
Just cover with fresh cold water and add a tablespoon of wine vinegar.
Cook it very gently in a covered pot for about z /z hours.
Take it from the liquid, sprinkle it with oil, press it between two plates and leave it until the next day.
Cut it, rind included, into the finest possible slices.
Mix it with a vinaigrette sauce made with a couple of chopped shallots, a couple of tablespoons of finely chopped parsley, a teaspoon of yellow French mustard, a little salt, 6 tablespoons of olive oil and z of wine vinegar.
Add, just for the look of the thing, a half tomato, all pulp and seeds discarded, cut into tiny pieces.
Serve, as part of a mixed hors-d'oeuvre, on a flat dish, strewn with more chopped parsley.
There will be enough for 6 to 8 people.
FROMAGE NORMAND
The old Norman way — or one of the old ways — of making a cream cheese for dessert is to boil a pint of thick cream with a couple of tablespoons of sugar for about 5 minutes.
If you like you can add a tablespoon or two of orange flower water.
Turn the cream into a big bowl and leave it to get quite cold.
You then whip the cream (it is easier if you have left it an hour or two in the refrigerator after cooling) and when it stands in peaks you can turn it in to the muslin or clean napkin with which you have lined an earthenware or metal cheese mould or drainer — which can be  improvised by piercing holes in a cheap cake tin or in a tub-shaped carton — and leave it 3 or 4 hours, or overnight.
To serve you turn it out in to a shallow dish and eat it with sugar and, if you like, strawberry, raspberry, red currant or quince jelly.
There will be enough for 6 to 8 helpings.
The Gourmet, 1969   
The Markets of France: Cavaillon
It is a Sunday evening in mid-June.
The cafés of Cavaillon are crammed.
There isn't an inch to park your car.
The noise is tremendous.
In the most possible of the hotels — it goes by the name of Toppin — all the rooms are taken by seven o'clock.
But the little Auberge La Provençale in the rue Chabran is quite quiet and you can enjoy a good little dinner — nothing spectacular, but genuine and decently cooked food well served — and go to bed early.
The chances are you won't sleep much though, because Monday is the big market day in Cavaillon and soon after midnight the carts and lorries and vans of the big fruit farmers' co-operatives, of the market gardeners, of the tomato and garlic and onion growers, will start rattling and roaring and rumbling into the great open market in the place du Clos.
At dawn they will be unloading their melons and asparagus, their strawberries and red currants and cherries, their apricots and peaches and pears and plums, their green almonds, beans, lettuces, shining new white onions, new potatoes, vast bunches of garlic.
By six o'clock the ground will be covered with cageots, the chip vegetable and fruit baskets, making a sea of soft colours"and shadowy shapes in the dawn light.
The air of the Place is filled with the musky scent of those little early Cavaillon melons, and then you become aware of another powerfully conflicting smell — rich, clove-like, spicy.
It is the scent of sweet basil, and it is coming from the far end of the market where a solitary wrinkled old man sits on an upturned basket, scores and scores of basil plants ringed all around him like a protective hedge.
With a beady eye he watches the drama of the market place.
The dealers, exporters and wholesalers walking round inspecting the produce, discussing prices, negotiating; the hangers-on standing about in groups smoking, chatting; the market police and official inspectors strolling round seeing that all is in order.
On the whole the scene is quiet, quieter at least than you would expect considering that this is one of the most important wholesale fruit and vegetable markets in France, the great distributing centre for the primeurs of the astonishingly fertile and productive areas of the Vaucluse and the Comtat Venaissin. — areas which less than a hundred years ago were desperately poor, inadequately irrigated, isolated for lack of roads and transport, earthquake-stricken, devastated by blights which destroyed the cereal crops and the vines.
It was with the building of the railways connecting Provence with Paris and the north, with Marseille and the ports of the Mediterranean to the south, that the possibilities of the Rhone and Durance valleys for intensive fruit and vegetable cultivation first began to be understood.
New methods of irrigation, the planting of fruit trees in large areas where the vines had been stricken, the division of the land into small fields broken with tall cypress hedges as windbreaks against the scourging mistral, the ever-increasing demand in Paris and the big towns of the north for early vegetables, and the tremendous industry of these Provençal cultivators have done the rest.
And to such effect that last year eighty thousand kilos of asparagus came into Cavaillon market alone between 15 April and I5 May; in the peak month of July three hundred tons of melons daily; five hundred tons of tomatoes every day in July and August.
Altogether some hundred and sixty thousand tons of vegetables and fruit leave Cavaillon every year, about fifty per cent by rail, the rest by road.
And Cavaillon, although the most important, is by no means the only big market centre in the neighbourhood.
Avignon, Châteaurenard, Bollène, Pertuis, all dispatch their produce by special trains to the north; vast quantities of fruit are absorbed locally by the jam and fruit preserving industries of Apt and Carpentras; and every little town and village has its own retail vegetable and fruit market, every day in the bigger towns, once or twice a week in less populated places.
But now seven o'clock strikes in the market at Cavaillon.
The lull is over.
This is the moment when the goods change hands.
Pandemonium breaks loose.
The dealers snatch the baskets of produce they have bought and rush them to waiting lorries.
A cartload of garlic vanishes from under your nose.
A mountain of melons evaporates in a wink.
If you try to speak to any body you will be ignored, if you get in the way you'll be knocked down in the wild scramble to get goods away to Paris, London, Brussels, and all the great centres of northern and eastern France.
Suddenly, the market place is deserted.
At eight o'clock you emerge from the café where you have had your breakfast coffee and croissant.
The market place is, to put it mildly, astir once more.
It is surrounded by vans and lorries disgorging cheap dresses and overalls, plastic kitchenware, shoes and scarves and bales of cotton, piles of plates and jugs, nails and  screws and knives, farm implements and packets of seeds, cartons of dried-up-looking biscuits and trays of chemically-coloured sweets.
You dive down a side street where you have spied a festoon of pretty cotton squares, and there, under gaudy painted colonnades, lilac and orange, cinnamon and lemon and rose, in patterns more typical of Marseille or the Levant than of Cavaillon, the retail market stalls are already doing business.
The displays seem rather tame after the wholesale market and there is not a melon to be seen.
It is too early in the season, they are still too expensive for the housewives of Cavaillon.
Five thousand francs a kilo they were fetching today, and a week later in London shops 12s. 6d. each for little tiny ones.
But the street opposite the painted colonnades leads into the square where more and more food stalls are opening and the housewives are already busy marketing.
Here you can buy everything for a picnic lunch.
Beautiful sprawling ripe tomatoes, a Banon cheese wrapped in chestnut leaves, Arles sausages, pâté, black olives, butter cut from a towering monolith, apricots, cherries.
It is still early and you can drive out towards Apt and branch off across the Lubéron.
The roads are sinuous but almost empty, and they will take you through some of the most beautiful country in Provence.
Perched on the hillsides are typical old Provençal villages, some, like Oppéde-le-Vieux, crumbling, haunted, half-deserted, others like Bonnieux with a flourishing modern village built below the old one, and up beyond Apt, through the dramatic stretch of ochre-mining country, the strange red-gold village of Roussillon appears to be toppling precariously on the edge of a craggy cliff.
Round about here, the network of caves under the ochreous rocks has been turned into vast champignonnières, and at the modest little Restaurant David (no relation) you can eat the local cultivated mushrooms cooked à la crème or à la provençale with, naturally, olive oil, parsley and garlic.
And the Rose d'Or, a little hotel opened only a few weeks ago, promises a welcome alternative to the establishments of Apt, Aix and Cavaillon.
POT-AU-FEU PROVENÇAL
A simple pot-au-feu is typical of the real old Provençal cooking of the days before Provençal specialities became chic restaurant food and got fussed up and transferred into goodness knows what fantasies.
Even an inexperienced cook can make a pot-au-feu in its basic form.
And with a little extra trouble it can be turned into a  splendid party dish — not for a grand formal party to be sure, or even a buffet party, but the sort of meal for intimate friends when you can put all the food on a huge scrubbed kitchen table and everyone sits round and helps themselves.
It is a heartening sight, evocative of all the sun and bright colours of Provence; it is economical because it is one of those composite dishes which you gradually build up, to which you can make additions or subtractions and for which the planning of the colours, flavours, extra salads, vegetables, sauces, becomes perfectly intoxicating — but steady, keep a hold, or you'll find you've made enough food for thirty, and you'll have to order another case of wine and invite twenty more guests…
For the basic pot-au-feu, then, you need 2½ lb. approximately of flank of beef, 2½ lb. of shoulder, middle neck or breast of lamb (it is the lamb which gives it its essentially Provençal character), 1 lb. of shin of veal.
All these meats are best cooked with bone.
The flavouring vegetables are 2 each of large carrots, leeks, onions and tomatoes; a bouquet of herbs consisting of parsley stalks, a piece of celery, a bay leaf and a crushed clove of garlic all tied together; 1 tablespoon of salt.
If the pot-au-feu is for a special occasion you include as well a boiling chicken, but since so many kitchens aren't equipped with a soup pot large enough to hold a chicken at the same time as all the meat, this may have to be cooked separately.
Tie the beef and lamb into compact rolls or squares so that they retain their shape during cooking and will be easy to cut.
Put them with the veal bone, and the chicken if there is room, into your biggest soup pot and cover with 4 or 5 pints of water.
Bring gently to simmering point.
As the grey scum rises, skim it off.
When the scum becomes white and foamy, stop skimming.
Put in the vegetables, the bouquet, the salt.
At this stage you can add a glass of white wine if you have it to spare.
Cover the pot.
Cook at very low heat either on top of the stove or in the oven for 3 to 4 hours, until the chicken and meat are very tender.
Take out the chicken and meat, put them in a deep dish and sprinkle them with olive oil and salt while they are still hot.
The vegetables will be cooked to rags and can be discarded.
Strain the stock into a bowl.
Next day, remove the fat from the stock (keep it for frying bread, potatoes, etc.) and if you have not already cooked the chicken, simmer it, with its giblets and feet, in the stock for about 3 hours.
Or if you are using a roaster instead of a boiler, 45 to 50 minutes will cook it.
As a matter of fact, although it is an extra extravagance from the point of view of fuel, the chicken will be very much nicer  cooked the same day as it is to be eaten, before it has had time to harden up.
To serve the meat, you cut it all from the bones, slice it in very fine thin pieces, and keeping the beef, lamb and veal separate, sprinkle each with more oil, chopped parsley, shallots.
Arrange them with the jointed chicken, all on one huge dish.
In bowls all round you have some or all of the following: a salad of chick peas, an aïoli, black olives, capers (these are the four typical, native Provençal dishes), a spicy tomato sauce, a grated carrot salad, a Jerusalem artichoke salad, potatoes, beetroot, celery, sweet red peppers, gherkins, hard-boiled eggs — it depends what is available, how many people you have to feed, on your own and your guests' tastes.
And for a first course all you will need is either the broth from the pot-au-feu, which will have a very fine flavour and which you can thicken if you like with a little rice — there should be enough for seven or eight people — or perhaps a dish of mussels, or a light fish soup.
SALADE DE POIS CHICHES
Chick peas are those knobbly corn-yellow peas rather the shape of nasturtium seeds, which the Spanish call garbanzos and the Italians ceci.
At one time they were very much cultivated in Provence and are still popular there.
In England they can be bought in Soho shops; they make delicious soups and salads.
Soak ½ lb. of chick peas overnight in plenty of cold water into which you stir a tablespoon of flour.
Next day put them in a saucepan with the same water, plus a half teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda.
Simmer them for an hour.
Skim and strain them.
Rinse out the saucepan, fill it with pints of fresh water, bring to the boil, add a tablespoon of salt, put in the chick peas and simmer another 1 to 2 hours, until the peas are perfectly tender and the skins beginning to break.
Strain them (keep the liquid — it will make a good basis for a vegetable soup), put them in a bowl and while still hot stir in plenty of olive oil, sliced onion, garlic, parsley, and a little vinegar.
If you can't get chick peas, the same sort of salad can be made with haricot beans.
AÏOLI
Most readers will probably already be familiar with the famous garlic mayonnaise of Provence, so just as a reminder you will need, for eight people, a minimum of 2 large cloves of garlic — but more if you have avid garlic-eaters to entertain — 2 egg yolks, at least a half-pint of good olive oil, salt, lemon juice.
You first pound the garlic to a mash, then stir in the yolks, add a little salt, then the oil, exactly as for a mayonnaise.
Lastly, the lemon juice.
This beautiful golden ointment-like sauce is really the pivot and raison d"être of the whole affair, so you need plenty of it.
THE OLIVES AND CAPERS
The black olives of Provence are small, wrinkled, salty; all the tang of the South is in them.
If you can't buy these little black olives in Soho, at least avoid the great brownish ones sold in most delicatessen stores; they really haven't anything of the same character.
But there are two bottled brands (Sharwood's and Noel's) which are quite good.
As for capers, another typical product of Provence (the best are the non-pareilles from the Var and the Bouches du Rhone), buy the finest French ones.
Simply serve them in tiny bowls or hors-d'oeuvre dishes, or pile up little mounds of them beside the sliced lamb and beef.
COULIS DE TOMATES À LA MOUTARDE
This is really an alternative to the aïoli, in case you have anti-garlic guests.
But it is an excellent sauce in its own right, hot with a boiled chicken, beef, lamb and fish, or cold as in the present case.
Ingredients are 2 lb. of tomatoes, a small onion, 1 clove of garlic, 1 carrot, a little piece of celery top, half a dozen parsley stalks, a teaspoon of dried basil, a dessertspoon of salt, 2 tablespoons of olive oil, 4 teaspoons of yellow Dijon mustard.
Heat the oil in a wide shallow pan, put in the sliced onion, carrot, chopped celery and parsley stalks.
After two or three minutes add the sliced tomatoes, garlic, basil and salt.
Cook gently, uncovered, stirring from time to time, for about half an hour, until most of the moisture has evaporated and the tomatoes are in a pulp.
Sieve the mixture in a food mill.
Taste for seasoning — it may need sugar — then stir in, a little at a time, the mustard.
Vogue, January 1960 
The Markets of France: Yvetot
Duclair is a little town on a loop of the Seine twenty kilometres outside Rouen towards Dieppe.
It is not particularly picturesque and the main road and the ferry over the Seine make it noisy.
But I always try to stay the night there on my way down through France and on the way back again because of the Hotel de la Poste where the Swiss proprietor and his pretty Norman wife provide such a warm welcome and such good food.
Their big airy dining-room overlooks the river, their delicious pâté of Rouen duckling cooked with port is brought to table in the gigantic old terrines in which it has been baked, their hors-d'oeuvres are always fresh, well chosen, original and beautifully served, ducks and chickens are roasted on a spit in the old Norman fireplace in the kitchen.
And if you happen to arrive on a Monday evening you could see a typical Norman market, both wholesale and retail, at Duclair early on Tuesday morning.
It is as good a way as any to the beginnings of an understanding and appreciation of any French province, to see the local markets in action, to watch the produce unloaded from the carts and vans, to hear the talk of the farmers and buyers in the cafés after the main business has been transacted.
And to us, whose country markets are rapidly vanishing, the extraordinary activity and the variety of foodstuffs on sale in a little town of only three thousands inhabitants like Duclair, so few miles away from Dover, has a particular fascination.
One could almost go over there to do one's weekly marketing — or on into Rouen, where the big market day is also on Tuesday, and from where you could bring home butter made from unpasteurized cream, great bowls of tripes à la mode, and duck pâtés, and baskets full of big round Breton artichokes for a tenth of the price we have to pay here.
And Norman cheeses too: genuine Pont-l'Evèque made on the farms of the Pays d'Auge from milk still warm from the cows; Livarot, that powerful and marvellous cheese which has been made in the district since the thirteenth century; even a good Norman Camembert can be found if you look.
But progress is on the march in Normandy, and in a big way.
It won't be long before cheeses such as these become rarities.
More and more of the farms are going over to pasteurized milk, their produce is sent to the cooperatives, the butter and the cheese no longer have the characteristic ripe flavours  one used to expect.
On the whole, though, the Norman producers are acting with sense and foresight over the development of their dairy industry.
They are frankly calling their new cheeses by new brand names, making them in different shapes and original packings, selling them on their own merits rather than attempting to pass them off as the great traditional products of an unmechanized and unstandardized age.
There are, of course, big areas of Normandy where the farmers are still producing milk, butter, cream and cheeses by the old methods.
The outlet for these products are the local wholesale markets.
The great centre of the rich Pays d'Auge, also cider and Calvados country, is Vimoutiers, only a few kilometres from the cheese villages of both Camembert and Livarot.
The big butter market is on Monday afternoons.
The centre of the Bray district is Gournay, where over a hundred years ago Petit Suisse cream cheeses were evolved by a farmer's wife and a Swiss herdsman.
There are now almost a dozen different varieties of these cream cheeses, and the Gervais factory, at Ferrières, absorbs something like 50,000 gallons of milk daily for the demi-sel and other fresh cheeses.
Yvetot is the great butter market of the Caux country and provides a sight worth seeing if you happen to be in the district on a Wednesday morning.
Out of the vans are coming huge cones of butter fresh from the farms.
It is made from ripened, unpasteurized cream, and divided into loaves of 35 or 70 kilos each; they are wrapped in crisp white cloths or in polythene wrappings and stacked in huge baskets or wire carriers.
Each parcel of butter is tasted with a long scoop and then re-weighed before a buyer will accept it.
On the long rows of stalls are ranged all sorts of fresh farm products — eggs, vegetables, salads, churns of cream, live chickens and ducks — brown Rouen ducks, black Muscovy ducks, white Pekin ducks, turkeys, baby chicks; one old woman has just one basket of produce for sale — eggs, a few fresh peas, and a bunch of green turnip-tops.
But even this little collection of cottage garden produce won't change hands without some stern bargaining.
As for the farm butter, it is being borne away by the purchasers in the great baskets which look as if they might have been used by the Scarlet Pimpernel to smuggle refugee aristos out of Paris.
Tomorrow this butter will be enriching many a roast chicken, thousands of omelettes and cakes and pastries, filling the kitchens of France with the incomparable scent of butter gently sizzling in a frying pan…
And indeed it is high time to think about lunch.
There is Totes not far away on the Dieppe road, and the famous old Hotel des Cygnes where Guy de Maupassant wrote Boule de Suif and where the proprietor appears the very embodiment of Norman robustness.
At the Marée in the market place of Rouen there are delicious fish dishes, excellent food at the Beffroy in the rue du Beffroy, all the more unexpected because the place looks too like Ye Olde Bunne Shoppe to be true.
But perhaps it is better to avoid Rouen, the midday traffic going in and coming out is too much of a worry.
Better to drive a bit farther, down in to lower Normandy and the beautiful Vallée d'Auge, past old Norman farms and manors, through country thick with apple trees, and pastures so opulent and green that unless you have seen some of the raw, rebuilt little towns, it is hard to believe in the terrible devastation of only fifteen years ago.
At Orbec, twenty kilometres from Lisieux, is the Caneton, a restaurant which you know is going to be good as soon as you enter its doors — the smell is so appetizing — but it is small and not exactly unknown, so it is prudent to telephone for a table in advance.
The menu gastronomique at the Caneton is generous and good value for 1800 francs, but a trifle fussy and rich, and a better choice for my taste is the plat du jour, with perhaps a duck liver pâté, or local charcuterie, to start with, which is what you see the inhabitants eating.
Vogue, February 1960
The Markets of France: Montpellier
"Buy a pound of choucroûte from a village charcutier.
As you pass the municipal pump, pause a moment…
Any English cookery writer who published a recipe opening with these words would be thought distinctly out of touch.
The evocative sentence comes in fact from a little book called La Cuisine en Plein Air by that most adorable of French gastronomes, Dr Edouard de Pomiane.
The little volume, which deals with cooking out of doors for motorists, cyclists, campers, walkers, and fishermen has never been translated into English and wouldn't be of much practical use to us if it were, because the majority of the recipes are based on the  products to be bought at the "village charcutier" , an institution which doesn't exist in the British Isles.
It is only when one has haunted the markets of France and the food shops in the country towns and villages, watched the housewives doing their shopping, listened to them discussing their purchases at the pâtisseries and the charcuteries that one realizes how much less they are tied to their kitchens than we had always been led to suppose.
The point is that in France no shame is attached to buying ready-prepared food because most of it is of high quality.
The housewives and small restaurateurs who rely upon the professional skill of charcutiers and pâtissiers for a part of their supplies see to it that the pâtés and sausages, the little salads for hors-d'oeuvre, the galantines and terrines and fish quenelles, the hams and tongues and pies, pastries and fruit flans, the petits fours and the croissants maintain high standards of freshness and excellence, and that any popular regional speciality of the district continues to be cooked with the right and proper traditional ingredients, even if the methods have been speeded up by the introduction of modern machinery.
Here in England we find little in our local delicatessen shop — the only approximation we have to the charcutier who sells many ready-prepared foods besides pork butchers' products — but mass-produced sausages, pork pies and fish cakes off a conveyor belt, piled slices of pale pink and blood-red flannel which pass respectively for cooked ham and tongue, bottles of pickled onions and jars of red cabbage in vinegar, possibly a potato salad dressed with synthetic mayonnaise and, with luck, some herrings in brine.
In any French town of any size at all we find perhaps three or four rival charcutiers displaying trays of shining olives, black and green, large and small, pickled gherkins, capers, home-made mayonnaise grated carrot salad, shredded celeriac in rémoulade sauce, several sorts of tomato salad, sweet-sour onions, champignons à la Grecque, ox or pig's muzzle finely sliced and dressed with a vinaigrette sauce and fresh parsley, a salad of mussels, another of cervelas sausage; several kinds of pork pâté; sausages for grilling, sausages for boiling, sausages for hors-d'oeuvre, flat sausages called cré pinettes for baking or frying, salt pork to enrich stews and soups and vegetable dishes, pigs' trotters ready cooked and breadcrumbed, so that all you need to do is to take them home and grill them; cooked ham, raw ham, a galantine of tongue, cold pork and  veal roasts, boned stuffed ducks and chickens So it isn't difficult for the housewife in a hurry to buy a little selection, however modest, of these things from the charcuterie, and plus her own imagination and something she has perhaps already in the larder to serve an appetizing and fresh little mixed hors-d'oeuvre.
When we visited the big open-air retail market in the upper town at Montpellier, there was an ordinary enough little charcuterie-épicerie stall offering the ingredients of what might be called the small change of French cookery, but to our English eyes it looked particularly inviting and interesting.
The atmosphere helped, of course.
The sun, the clear sky, the bright colours, the prosperous look of this lively, airy university town and wine-growing capital; the stalls massed with flowers; fresh fish shining pink and gold and silver in shallow baskets; cherries and apricots and peaches on the fruit barrows; one stall piled with about a ton of little bunches of soup or pot-au-feu vegetables — a couple of slim leeks, a carrot or two, a long thin turnip, celery leaves, and parsley, all cleaned and neatly bound with a rush, ready for the pot; another charcuterie stall, in the covered part of the market, displaying yards of fresh sausage festooned around a pyramid-shaped wire stand; a fishwife crying pussy's parcels of fish wrapped tidily in newspaper; an old woman at the market entrance selling winkles from a little cart shaped like a pram; a fastidiously dressed old gentleman choosing tomatoes and leaf artichokes, one by one, as if he were picking a bouquet of flowers, and taking them to the scales to be weighed (how extraordinary that we in England put up so docilely with not being permitted by greengrocers or even barrow boys to touch or smell the produce we are buying); a lorry with an old upright piano in the back threading round and round the market place trying to get out.
These little scenes establish the character of Montpellier market in our memories, although by now we have spent many mornings in different southern markets and have become accustomed to the beauty and profusion of the produce for sale and to the heavy smell of fresh ripe fruit which everywhere hangs thick in the air at this time of year.
Well, plenty of tourists spend their mornings in museums and picture galleries and cathedrals, and nobody would quarrel with them for that.
But the stomach of a city is also not without its importance.
And then, I wouldn't be too sure that the food market  of a big city shouldn't be counted as part of its artistic tradition.
Where do they get their astonishing gifts for display, these French stall keepers?
Why does a barrow boy selling bunched radishes and salad greens in the market at Chinon know by instinct so to arrange his produce that he has created a little spectacle as fresh and gay as a Dufy painting, and you are at once convinced that unless you taste some of his radishes you will be missing an experience which seems of more urgency than a visit to the Chateau of Chinon?
How has a Montpellier fishwife so mastered the art of composition that with her basket of fish for the bouillabaisse she is presenting a picture of such splendour that instead of going to look at the famous collection of paintings in the Musée Fabre you drive off as fast as possible to the coast to order a dish cooked with just such fish?
And what can there be about the arrangement of a few slices of sausage and a dozen black olives on a dish brought by the waitress in the seaside café to keep you occupied while your fish is cooking that makes you feel that this is the first time you have seen and tasted a black olive and a piece of sausage?
When one tries to analyse the real reasons for the respect which French cookery has so long exacted from the rest of the world, the French genius for presentation must be counted as a very relevant point, and its humble beginnings can be seen on the market stalls, i the small town charcutiers' and pâtissiers' shops, in the modest little restaurants where even if the cooking is not particularly distinguished, the most ordinary of little dishes will be brought to your table with respect, properly arranged on a serving dish, the vegetables separately served, the object of arousing your appetite will be achieved and the proprietors of the establishment will have made the most of their limited resources.
This in a sense is the exact reverse of English practice.
We seem to exert every effort to make the least of the most.
When you order a grilled Dover sole in an English restaurant it will very likely be a fine sole, fresh and well cooked.
But when it is dumped unceremoniously before you with a mound of inappropriate green peas and a pool of cold tartare sauce spreading beside it on the hot plate, then your appetite begins to seep away…
To decorate a dish of smoked salmon, so beautiful in itself, with lettuce leaves, or to strew it with tufts of cress, is not to make that salmon which has cost 38s. a pound look as if it cost £3, but to belittle it so that you begin to feel it is some bargain basement left-over which needs to be disguised.
Alas, where here is our  celebrated capacity for understatement?
Well, we have our own gifts, but the presentation of food is not one of them, and since French cooks and food purveyors so often appear to lose the lightness of their touch in this respect when they leave their native land and settle abroad, one can only conclude that the special stimulant which brings these gifts into flower is in the air of France itself.
Does it sound trivial or  over-rarefied to make so much of such small points?
I don't think anyone in full possession of their five senses would find it so.
Writing of the work of Chardin, whose most profoundly moving paintings are revelations of how trivial, homely, everyday scenes and objects are transformed for us when we see them through the eyes of a great painter, Proust says, "Chardin has taught us that a pear is as living as a woman, a kitchen crock as beautiful as an emerald." 
Since Proust wrote these words painters and writers have revealed other beauties to us — they have made us see the poetry of factory canteens and metro stations, the romance of cog-wheels, iron girders, bombed buildings, dustbins and pylons.
But in the excitement of discovering these wondrous things we shall be poorer if we don't also give a thought now and again to the pear and the kitchen crock.
Vogue, March 1960
The Markets of France: Martigues
One of the meals we all enjoyed most during our journeyings round the markets of France last summer was a lunch in the end-of-the-world little town of Salin-de-Giraud on the edge of the Camargue.
After a pretentious dinner and a bad night — it is rare, I find, to get through even a fortnight's motoring trip in France without at least one such disaster — spent in a highly unlikely establishment disguised as a cluster of Camargue guardian huts, we left before breakfast and spent a healing morning lost in the remaining lonely stretches of this once completely wild, mysterious, melancholy, half-land, half-water, Rhone estuary country.
Much of the Camargue has now been reclaimed, roads and bridges have been built, and huge rice fields have been planted.
They have been so successful that from an initial yearly production of  about 250 tons during the middle forties these rice fields now yield 145,000 tons a year and supply France with the whole of her rice requirements.
It has been a great triumph for France's construction and agricultural engineers, a dazzling testimony to the industry and enterprise of a people who so often appear, to those who do not know them, to be in a perpetual state of political and economic chaos.
One cannot but rejoice for France, and wholeheartedly admire the determination and ingenuity which has turned an almost totally waste land into a productive and prosperous one.
Alas, though, for the animals and the wild birds, for the legendary beasts which frequented the Camargue, for the shimmering lonely stretches of water, for the still heart of this mournful mistral-torn and mosquito-ridden country.
The harpies from Paris running the road houses which must inevitably multiply will be a worse scourge than the mosquitoes.
Owners of souvenir shops selling china Camargue bulls and plastic flamingoes and scarves printed with Provençal recipes will be more implacable than the mistral.
These rather gloomy thoughts were in our minds as we arrived, a bit soothed but still edgy, to find that the last ferry over the Rhone from Salin which would take us on to the road to Martigues had left at 11.30 and there would not be another until 2 o'clock.
Forlornly we made our way to the local restaurant.
And there, instead of the omelette and the glass of wine which we had expected to swallow in a nervous hurry, we found the Restaurant La Camarguaise serving a well-chosen and properly cooked and comforting meal in a clean and high-ceilinged dining-room.
The menu was 600 francs, and while the food was very simple it reminded me of what Provençal restaurants used to be like in the days before even the most ordinary of Provençal dishes became a "speciality" listed on the menu as a supplement at 750 francs.
There was an hors-d'oeuvre of eggs and anchovies, there were hot grilled fresh sardines to follow, the vegetable course was côtes de blettes, the rib parts of those enormous leaves of the spinach family which we know as chard and which are much cultivated in the Rhône valley; the leaves themselves are cooked in the same way as spinach, the fleshy stalks and ribs were, on this occasion, sautéd in olive oil and flavoured with garlic and were delicious.
The boeuf Gardiane which followed brought tears to our eyes; we had been overwrought and dropping with fatigue, and while the food we had already eaten had cheered and comforted us, it wasn't until the cover was taken off the dish of beef stew and we smelt the wine and  the garlic and the rich juices and saw the little black olives and the branches of wild thyme which had scented the stew laid in a little network over the meat, that the tension vanished.
We ordered more supplies of the cheap red wine and decided that the 2.30 ferry would have to go without us.
Well, God bless the French lunch hour.
It must have been nearly 5 o'clock when, having finally got the cars across that ferry, we eventually drove into Martigues in dazzling late afternoon sunshine to see the fishing boats come in.
In this still picturesque village, beloved and painted by generations of English as well as French artists, so charmingly, proudly, and absurdly known as the Venice of Provence — it is built on the Lagoon of Berre, west of Marseille — most of the inhabitants still live by fishing, and in spite of tremendous industrial development round about it is still comparatively unspoilt.
It won't be for long.
Martigues will soon be all but swallowed up in the new harbour constructions planned to stretch west from Marseille.
But for a little moment Martigues still stands, and we drink coffee on the quay as we wait for the boats to come in.
Anthony is taking pictures of a faded blue warehouse door on which pink and coral and pale gold stars are hanging.
They are starfish dried by the sun.
Somewhere here in Martigues they are also drying something slightly more edible — the famous poutargue, compressed and salted grey mullet roes, a primitive speciality of Martigues whose origin goes back, they say, to the Phoenicians.
It is made in Sardinia, too, and Crete, and for collectors of useless information, poutargue, or botargo, was among the dishes served at King James II's coronation feast.
As a matter of fact we had some too, with a bottle of white wine for breakfast next day at M. Bérot's lovely restaurant the Escale, at Carry-le-Rouet, across the hills from Martigues and overlooking a real honest-to-goodness, glorious postcard Mediterranean bay.
The children watching us are also watching for the boats, and they have spotted the first of the fleet coming in.
So have the cats.
The Yves-Jacky chugs into her berth, ties up; the skipper's wife, ready at her post, wheels her fish barrow aboard.
Almost before you can see what has come up out of the hold the fish is loaded on the barrow and trundled off at breakneck speed, followed by the small boys and the cats.
The auction in the market place on the quay has started.
A few minutes later, in quick succession, come the Espadon and the St-Jean and the Bienvenue.
The boats are blue, the nets are black, and the whole scene does remind me a little of the Adriatic, even if not precisely of Venice.
None of the boats have sensational catches today.
This part of the Mediterranean is terribly overfished.
A large percentage of Marseilles fresh fish supplies is brought from the North Sea and Channel ports.
But still there are some fine and strange-looking fish gleaming with salt water and sparkling in the sun.
There's a brown and red and gold beast called a roucaou; it's a bit like the famous rascasse which goes into the bouillabaisse, but larger.
Here is a boxful of tiny poulpes, a variety of squid which never grow big and which are exquisite fried crisp in oil.
There's a langouste or two, and some kind of silver sea bream which they call sarde round here, and some baudroie, that fish with the wicked antennae-like hooks growing out of its huge head — the fish they call rana pescatrice in Western Italy and rospo on the Adriatic, and angler or monk fish in England.
The baby ones are as pretty and appealing as kittens with their little round heads.
And there is a familiar friend, a gigantic turbot, and a long black fish with an arrow-shaped head.
They call it émissole here, and to us it's a dogfish.
There is a silver loup de mer, or sea-bass, and some big, rather touchingly ugly John Dories, called St-Pierres in France, because of the black St Peter's thumb marks on their sides.
Some of these big fish fetch big prices, two or three times as much as we would pay for them here, and they will go to the classy restaurants or the Marseille fish shops, but the boxes of little slithery bright pink fish called demoiselles and the miscellaneous collections of bony little rock fish, undersized whiting and other small fry, will go for very little.
Most of the buyers are women — so is the auctioneer, a brawny, competent, good-humoured young woman with a Levantine cast of countenance and a thick Midi accent — who will re-sell them locally this very evening; any minute now the housewives of Martigues and Lavéra and round about will be turning them into la soupe or la friture for the evening meal.
Vogue, April 1960 
The Markets of France: Valence
To drive from Lascaux of the prehistoric caves in the Dordogne right across country to Valence on the Rhone is possibly not the most expeditious way of getting from the deep south-west of France to the Mediterranean.
But if time is not too desperately important it is one way of seeing a vast stretch of surprising and magnificent country, some interesting and unspoiled old towns, perhaps even of discovering some village in the heart of the still primitive agricultural Auvergne, some little-known hotel where one would like to stay instead of hurrying on, to which one would return another year.
At the least, perhaps a country inn somewhere in the Limousin or the Cantal district will yield a new dish or a wine which was worth the detour.
A charcuterie in Aurillac or Vic-sur-Cère or some other small but locally important town will possibly provide a pâté the like of which you never tasted before, or a locally cured ham, a few slices of which you will buy and carry away with a salad, a kilo of peaches, a bottle of Monbazillac and a baton of bread, and somewhere on a hillside amid the mile upon mile of golden broom or close to a splashing waterfall you will have, just for once, the ideal picnic.
Was it up here above Aurillac that one of our party found the best picnic place in France?
A stretch of water, mysterious, still, full of plants and birds, away from the road, sheltered with silver birches, and with a stone table evidently waiting there especially for us?
We had driven from Montignac near Lascaux.
We had stayed at the Soleil d'Or, a little hotel as warm-hearted as its name.
We had eaten a good dinner — among other things a golden bolster of an omelette bursting its seams with truffles — and drunk some excellent red wine of Cahors and afterwards a glass of that remarkable eau-de-vie of plums called Vieille Prune which is one of the great Dordogne products — another is the odd and delicious walnut oil with which, if you are lucky, you may get your salad dressed.
In spite of all this, or perhaps because of it, we made an early enough start to reach Aurillac in plenty of time to buy our picnic lunch and see something of the old town.
Had it been a Saturday we should have stayed to see the cheese market.
For Aurillac is one of the centres for the distribution of the splendid cheese of Cantal, to my mind one of the best and most interesting in France.
It is a cheese  which has a texture not unlike a good Lancashire, and when properly matured a flavour which beats most modern English cheeses on their own ground.
There is also a less interesting, creamy, unripened version called a tomme de Cantal, much used for cooking, especially in farmhouse potato and egg dishes.
After our picnic lunch we'll have to hurry.
We must get across the Plomb du Cantal, into the Velay, and through the scruffy pilgrimage town of Le Puy.
But I shall stop to buy some of those beautiful little slate-green lentils for which the district is famous and which a greedy guest of mine recently proclaimed as good as caviare — and also to telephone to Madame Barattero at the Hotel du Midi at Lamastre to say we are coming for dinner.
Valence is the big shopping centre and market town for Lamastre.
The wholesale fruit and poultry market opens before dawn on Saturday and is all packed up by seven o'clock in the morning.
In the big retail market which opens later on the combined scents of ripe peaches and the fresh basil and thyme plants lying in heaps on the ground gave us our first sniff of Provence.
But the plump little white ducks and the fresh St-Marcellin cheeses from the Isère, the exquisite black and green olives from Nyons which we bought for lunch tempted us to drive north or south-east of Valence instead of directly south.
The Drôme, the Tricastin, the Nyonsais regions are so different from Provence, so unfrequented early in the year, so interesting historically and architecturally why hurry off to the south?
The names of the little towns round about Valence ring like peals of bells compelling you to go and look at them.
If, let us suppose, you were driving south from Mâcon or Bourg-en-Bresse (I would stay chez La Mere Blanc at Vonnas) you could drive through La-Tour-du-Pin, Saint-Rambert d'Albon, Beaurepaire d'Isère, Beaumont-les-Valence, La Garde-Adhémar, St-Paul-Trois-Chateaux — the three castles which gave their name to the Tricastin district — then down to Suze-La-Rousse and the tiny village of Donzère and its great nearby dam which is as wondrous and absorbing a spectacle in its way as any of the great Roman glories of this province through which, they claim, Hannibal marched with his Carthaginians — and presumably his elephants — two thousand one hundred and seventy-seven years ago.
The cooking of this mid-Rhône country is in a sense a cross-roads cooking.
There are already the olive oil and the garlic and the  aromatic herbs of Provence; there are the cream and the cheeses of the Dauphine; there are the sumptuously cooked duck and chicken dishes of the Ardè; che side of the Rhone.
There are the crayfish and the creamy quenelles and the charcuterie which still belong a little to Lyon.
And there are some old dishes entirely characteristic of this stretch of the Rhone itself and which have hardly spread farther than the villages and towns on the river banks.
They are the dishes invented or popularized by the bargemen of the Rhone and their wives, and by the proprietors of the humble inns and charcuteries who used to cater for the men who worked the inland waterways.
Such a dish is the grillade des mariniers, for which I have given a recipe on p.252 of the present volume.
BLETTES À LA CRÈME
This is a very everyday dish in the southern Rhone country.
Just how good it is depends mainly upon how much care one takes over the cream sauce.
For 1 ½ lb. of blettes or poirée, the chard which one sees displayed for sale in huge bundles in every market in the southern Rhone country make a cream sauce with 1 ½ oz. of butter, 2 tablespoons of flour, ¾ pint of milk, seasonings of salt, pepper and nutmeg and about 3 oz. of double cream.
Melt the butter; then, off the stove, stir in the flour.
When it is smooth start adding the warmed milk, little by little.
When the mixture looks creamy, return the saucepan to a very low heat, add the rest of the milk.
Season lightly with salt, freshly milled pepper and a scrap of nutmeg.
Let the sauce almost imperceptibly bubble for fifteen to twenty minutes, stirring frequently.
Now add the cream.
The sauce should be very smooth, ivory-coloured and no thicker than cream.
You can now if you like add a tablespoon or two of finely grated Gruyère or Parmesan cheese, just as a seasoning.
And if your sauce has turned lumpy, press it through a sieve.
Clean the chard, discard the hard leaf stalks and central veins, cook it in just a very little water, salt it lightly half way through the cooking.
Drain it in a colander, press out excess moisture by putting a plate and weight on top.
Chop it roughly.
In a gratin dish pour a little of your cream sauce.
On top put the  chard and cover with the rest of the sauce.
The gratin dish should be quite full.
Spread a few tiny knobs of butter over the surface, heat in a moderate oven, gas no. 4, 350°F., for about 20 minutes, until the sauce is just faintly golden and bubbling.
Of course, all this is a trouble to do, but it makes an excellent and not very expensive first dish for a luncheon for four people.
It is one I often serve before a simple meat dish, beef, lamb or veal, which is probably already cooking in the oven before the vegetable dish goes in.
Vogue, May 1960