

THE HOUSES OF ANJOU AND AQUITAINE
RICHARD was born on 8 September 1157 at Oxford, presumably in the royal palace of Beaumont.
But although he was born in England neither his parents nor his grandparents were English.
His father King Henry II was a Frenchman from Anjou, the descendant of a long line of counts who had ruled Anjou for two hundred and fifty years.
His mother Eleanor was, in her own right, Duchess of Aquitaine, the duchy which her forefathers had ruled since the tenth century.
To find an English ancestor it was necessary to go a long way back in Richard's genealogy — to one of his great-grandmothers, Edith, the wife of King Henry I. This English link, slight as it was, was none the less well known to the men who frequented the princely courts of Europe, for in their world family connection was all-important.
It shaped the destinies not just of individuals but of entire provinces and kingdoms.
One contemporary student of these matters, the learned historian Ralph of Diss, traced Richard's ancestry through Edith to the Anglo-Saxon Kings of Wessex, the line of Alfred the Great and Cerdic, and then, through them, back to Woden and Noah.
But remarkable though they were, his English forefathers seem to have meant little to Richard himself — and this despite the fact that the old Germanic god of war was among their number.
When he jokingly referred to the story that he was descended from the Devil he meant no disrespect to his ancestor Woden.
He was referring to an Angevin legend, the story of Mélusine.
She was a lady of unearthly beauty who married a Count of Anjou and bore him four children.
Everything about her and about her marriage seemed to be perfect, apart from one disquieting fact: she hated going into churches and she absolutely refused to be present at the consecration of the Host.
Jealous voices reminded the Count of this again and again; eventually he decided to put her to the test.
He summoned her to attend church and then, at the moment of consecration, just as she was about to leave, four armed men stopped her.
But as they seized her by the mantle, she shook it from her shoulders, folded two of her children in her arms and floated away through a window, never more to be seen by her husband and the two children she had left behind.
The point is that Richard's closest family associations, whether real or legendary, were with western France and not with England or Normandy.
Throughout the tenth and eleventh centuries the Counts of Anjou had belonged to a group of princes who were alternately enemies and allies in the struggle for land and power in northern and western Gaul.
Their most striking success had been the gradual acquisition of the Touraine, inch by inch, castle by castle, at the expense of their eastern neighbours, the Counts of Blois.
The possession of Tours, the city of St Martin, an important market and a vital communications centre, gave the Angevins a tremendous strategic advantage; and the building of the great castles of Chinon, Loches and Loudun showed that they were determined to hold on to it.
By the thirteenth century and perhaps by the twelfth Anjou and the Touraine were a single regional society with a common body of custom.
Other territorial gains had been short-lived.
To the north they had obtained the county of Maine only to lose it to William the Conqueror, Duke of Normandy.
To the south they held the Saintonge for a while but the Counts of Poitou (who were also Dukes of Aquitaine) soon won it back again.
As a dynasty the Angevins had done well, but noticeably less well then either of their main rivals, the Normans (who had conquered England) and the Poitevins (who had acquired Gascony).
All this was to change in a few explosive years of expansion in the mid-twelfth century, shortly before Richard's birth.
It began with the marriage of Geoffrey Plantagenet, otherwise known as le Bel (the Handsome), the heir to Anjou, to Matilda, daughter of King Henry 1 and probable heiress to England and  Normandy.
This was in 1128 but any expectations of a swift entry into the inheritance when Henry I died in 1135 were immediately dashed by the dramatic political coup brought off by Stephen of Blois — a member of the family which had earlier lost Touraine to the Angevins.
Count Geoffrey, by concentrating his forces on the conquest of Normandy, was able to recover the continental part of his wife's inheritance by 1144, and in 1150 he passed it on to his eldest son Henry Plantagenet, now twenty years old.
But for all his troubles Stephen, an amiable and gallant king, had managed to hold on to England and it took three strange twists of fortune to transform the situation.
The first was the premature death of Count Geoffrey, still under forty, in September 1151.
If he had lived long enough to see Henry crowned king at Westminster he would have been able to carry out his plan of leaving Anjou to his second son Geoffrey.
As it was, the dying Count could do no more than give instructions that his body should not be buried until Henry had promised to observe the terms of his father's will.
When Henry, who had not been present at the death-bed, arrived for the funeral, he at first refused to take the oath but eventually, confronted by his father's decomposing body, he agreed to do so.
The second remarkable event was Henry's marriage in May 1152 to another great heiress — not for nothing has the twelfth century been called the "Century of Heiresses" .
This was to Eleanor of Aquitaine and it was celebrated just eight weeks alter her first marriage, to King Louis VII of France, had been annulled.
As a ruler of the vast duchy of Aquitaine, covering something like one-third of the area of modern France, she brought a tremendous accession of wealth and prestige to her new husband.
The third event was the unexpected death of King Stephen's elder son Eustace in August 1153.
Disheartened by this blow the old King was persuaded to recognize Henry Plantagenet as his heir.
In December 1 154 Henry II was crowned King of England.
Now he was supposed to hand over Anjou to his younger brother.
But that oath had been taken while Eleanor of Aquitaine was still married to Louis VII.
Whether or not Henry would have kept his promise if she had remained so is an open question, but it is clear that once he had also acquired Aquitaine he would never relax his grip on the  territories which served as the vital bridge connecting his mother's lands in the north and his wife's lands in the south.
Thus Henry kept Anjou and found himself ruler of an immense empire stretching all the way from the Scottish border to the Pyrenees.
Between 1144 and 1154, as the result of a series of flukes unscrupulously exploited, the position of the Count of Anjou had been transformed.
From being one prince among many others he became the most powerful ruler in Europe, richer even than the Emperor, and completely overshadowing his own nominal overlord, the King of France.
The assemblage of lands which he ruled is traditionally called the Angevin Empire and the name is important.
For though some historians doubt whether such a loose conglomeration of territories, each with different traditions and customs, cobbled together by "an unholy combination of princely greed and genealogical accident" and just as likely to fall apart again, can properly be called an empire, none doubts the accuracy of the term Angevin.
Its heartland lay in the valley of the Loire, in Anjou, not in England.
In English historical atlases the Angevin Empire, like the nineteenth-century British Empire, is often coloured red, but this is misleading.
It was not the first British Empire.
Henry II was horn at Le Mans, died at Chinon and was buried at Fontevraud — all places which lay within the borders of his patrimony, the lands he inherited from his father.
But the phenomenal surge of Angevin power way beyond its familiar frontiers in the mid-twelfth century inevitably left behind a trail of disappointed and resentful men.
Chief among them were Henry's brother Geoffrey and the ex-husband of Henry's wife, Louis of France.
Geoffrey had been cheated of his rights; Louis was alarmed "and angered by Eleanor's choice of a new husband, particularly since she had not asked for his consent despite the fact that he continued to style himself" Duke of Aquitaine"and regarded her as his ward.
By the time of Richard's birth, however, Henry seemed to have overcome both of these difficulties.
He was absolved from the obligation to carry out his father's wishes by a dispensation obtained from the English Pope, Adrian IV.
In February 1156 he met Louis VII on the border between Normandy and France and there did homage for Normandy, Anjou and Aquitaine.
In the summer he crushed Geoffrey's rebellion and compelled him to renounce his  claim.
Later in the same year he was able to compensate his brother in handsome style.
The citizens of Nantes rebelled against their lord, Count Hoel, and appealed for Henry's help.
It was given and, in return, Geoffrey was installed as the new Count of Nantes.
This was a notable acquisition, long sought alter by the Angevins.
Not only was Nantes the largest town in Brittany, it was also an important sea-port, indeed for the Angevins a vital one.
Situated at the mouth of the Loire, it was their chief outlet for exports of all kinds — the fine metalwork for which Tours was famous, for example, but, above all, the wines of Anjou and Touraine.
Right up to the nineteenth century the winegrowers of Anjou and Touraine would refer to their best wines as "vins pour la mer" , the wines which were going to be taken down to the sea via Nantes.
With these gains under the belt of the young ruler and the land route to Aquitaine secured, all seemed well when Henry and Eleanor celebrated the Christmas of 1156 at Bordeaux.
But although they had been settled for the moment the two great political problems of the next half-century had already been foreshadowed: first, the tensions within the Angevin family; second, the feudal question of the relationship between lord and vassal, between Capetian and Angevin.
Henry II, moreover, had performed homage while King and although it was homage for his continental possessions and not for his kingdom, this was a step to which none of his predecessors as Kings of England had ever steeled themselves.
But whatever the future might hold, the friendly relationship between Henry and Louis which that act of homage had helped to establish was an important contributory factor in the happy and optimistic atmosphere in which Richard was conceived — the fourth child born to Eleanor and Henry in five years of marriage.
For Eleanor the contrast between her first and second husbands must have been immense.
Her marriage in 1137 to the heir to the French throne seemed at first to be an ideal match.
In political terms it was a sensible alliance for a fifteen-year-old heiress deprived of a father's or an uncle's protection.
Her father, Duke William x of Aquitaine, had died suddenly, and without sons, while on a pilgrimage to Compostella.
Her uncle Raymond, Count of Tripoli, was ruler of one of the crusader-states and too far away either to help  her or to threaten to take her inheritance for himself.
Moreover contemporaries believed that, as a husband, Louis VII gave her love as well as protection.
But as time went by the marriage turned sour.
Louis became an extremely devout and ascetic man.
The story went around that once, when he was seriously ill, he was advised by his doctors that it would improve his chances of survival if he were to sleep with a woman.
An attractive young lady was taken to him but Louis would have nothing to do with her, saying that he would rather die than commit the sin of adultery, even for medicinal purposes only.
Eleanor, on the other hand, was said to be beautiful and lively; she was certainly headstrong and indiscreet.
Whether or not there was any truth in them, the fact remains that rumours about her affairs became common gossip.
In time they reached legendary, almost Messalina-like proportions.
She, wrote one historian, was the real Mélusine.
Not surprisingly she is said to have complained that Louis was more like a monk than a king.
That the two were incompatible was clear by the late 1140s but this of itself would not have brought about the annulment.
At all times the social function of marriage has been to produce heirs and this their marriage had failed to do.
After an early miscarriage she bore Louis just two children in fourteen years, and both of them were girls.
The lesson to be learned from the recent history of England and Normandy was that it was virtually impossible for a daughter to keep a hold on her inheritance.
If Louis VII were to prevent a repetition of Stephen's reign from happening in France then he needed sons.
In 1154, after the clergy of France had put an end to his marriage to Eleanor, he married Constance of Castile.
She too, however, bore only girls and then died, in childbirth, in 1160.
The need for a male heir to the throne of France was now desperate and it took Louis only five weeks to find a third wife, Adela of Champagne.
Eventually, in August 1165, a son was born.
The mood of the Parisians, when they heard the news for which they had been waiting so long, was recorded by a young Welshman living in a rented room on the Ile de la Cité.
The fame of Peter Abelard had helped to make Paris the centre of the intellectual world of the twelfth century, the Mecca of all students.
So Gerald of Wales went to Paris and there, on a warm summer's night, he was abruptly  awoken when all the bells of the city began to peal.
Through his window he could see the flickering light of flames.
His first thought was that Paris was on fire — an ever-present threat when wood was the chief building material.
He rushed to the window.
But the fires were bonfires and the bells told not of danger but of joy.
The narrow streets were crowded and it was not long before Gerald had discovered the cause of the exultant bedlam.
 "By the grace of God there is born to us this night a King who shall be a hammer to the King of the English." 
The newborn boy was given the name of Philip.
In the course of time he and Richard were to become fellow-crusaders and bitter enemies.
But in the late 1150s that night in August 1165 was still far away, and it is not difficult to imagine Louis VII'S exasperated mood.
In fourteen years Eleanor had not produced an heir to his kingdom, but in the first six years of her second marriage she had had five children and four of them were boys: William, who died in 1156, Henry, Richard and Geoffrey.
Altogether Henry II and Eleanor had eight children, the last of whom, John, was born in 1167.
Henry, it was clear, was no monk.
In 1157, the year of Richard's birth, he was a solidly built young man of twenty-four, twelve years younger than his wife.
He was to be a great king, for thirty-five years the master-politician of Western Christendom, able to overwhelm or out-manoeuvre all his rivals.
Only at the end, when in the grip of his last illness, was he defeated.
He was an intelligent and well-educated man who enjoyed argument and conversation, whether in French or Latin.
Impatient of court ceremonial and indifferent to the trappings of majesty, he felt most comfortable in the hard-wearing clothes of the huntsman.
Like all members of the aristocracy he was addicted to hunting and liked nothing better than to be in the saddle and away before the crack of dawn.
On the other hand he could work at all hours of the day and night — much to the dismay of his advisers and household servants who would have preferred a more predictable routine.
He hated sitting still, and remained constantly on the move, restless and seemingly tireless, preferring to call for needle and thread to mend his own clothes rather than do nothing.
Quick-tempered and at times reduced to mindless fury — for example by what he regarded as Becket's betrayal of him — he could  also be marvellously patient.
This is how he was described by one of his courtiers, Walter Map: "Whatever way he goes out he is seized upon by the crowds and pulled hither and thither, pushed whither he would not and yet, surprising to say, he listens to each man with patience, and though assaulted by all with shouts and pullings and rough pushings, does not threaten anyone because of it, nor show any sign of anger; only, when he is hustled beyond bearing, he silently retreats to some place of quiet." 
Generally he seems to have dealt with those who came to him with requests by saying that he would do something for them, and then repeating this promise whenever he had to, postponing action for as long as possible.
According to Walter Map this was his mother's teaching: he should keep aspirants waiting in hope, she said, deliberately spinning out their affairs, for an unruly hawk, if meat is held out to it and then snatched away or hid, will become keener and more inclined to be attentive and obedient.
But a king could not simply sit back and wait for people to come to him.
To ensure that his subjects acquired the habit of carrying out his instructions he had to visit them as often as possible, and although the king's itinerary was normally publicized in advance — so that merchants and tradesmen, as well as petitioners, could frequent his court without difficulty — it was sometimes useful to turn up without warning.
Thus the education of a king's son was supposed to include learning to sleep in a hard or badly made bed to prepare him for the rigours of a life of non-stop, and sometimes unexpected, movement.
With the whole of the Angevin Empire to govern Henry Ii had to travel further and faster than most ruling princes.
Despite the rumour that he could fly, all this really meant for Henry was that he was in the saddle so much that he suffered from sore legs.
In these circumstances it was inevitable that for Richard and his brothers and sisters their father was a distant figure, always in a hurry.
It seems likely that as small children they stayed in the relative security of England while Henry spent most of his time abroad, immersed in what was always to be the central concern of his life, governing his continental dominions.
In a letter written in the summer of 1160 Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury asked the King to return to England.
Among other arguments he reminded Henry  of his children.
 "Even the most hard-hearted father could hardly bear to have them out of his sight for long." 
But the letter failed to achieve its object.
Not until January 1163 did Henry again set foot in England, after an absence of four and a half years.
There is not much, at this stage of his life, to suggest that Henry was fond of his children.
In May 1165 the Queen took Richard and his elder sister Matilda (born 1156) to Normandy; a fortnight later King Henry crossed the Channel in the other direction, leaving his family behind while he mounted a major campaign, albeit an unsuccessful one, against the Welsh.
Everything about his later life shows that Richard was much closer to his mother than to his father.
But Eleanor too had to travel a great deal, and in his earliest years it was almost certainly Richard's nurse who provided love and security on a day-to-day basis.
Twelfth-century romances make it plain that for a noblewoman to suckle her own child implied a quite exceptional degree of love.
Undoubtedly Richard was handed over to a wet-nurse.
We know a little about her.
She was called Hodierna and Richard seems to have remembered her with affection.
More than thirty years later, when he became king, he granted her a generous pension.
She became a wealthy and, in her own part of the world, a famous woman — perhaps the only wet-nurse in history to have a place named alter her: the Wiltshire parish of Knoyle Hodierne.
Although there is no direct evidence on the subject of Richard's upbringing and education — we do not even know the names of his tutors as we do in his father's case — it is none the less possible, by using romances and treatises, to reconstruct the type of education which he must have undergone.
As soon as he could walk he would be taught to ride, for horse-riding was inseparable from high social rank.
At first he would have remained chiefly in the care of women, learning how to behave, how to speak in a courtly fashion, when to keep silent, how to play and sing.
Then, when he was five or six years old, he entered a masculine world and his formal schooling began.
The description of Tristan's education given by the great medieval German poet Gottfried of Strasbourg bears witness to the fact that this change in the pattern of a child's life could be intensely felt and vividly remembered.
"In his seventh year his [foster]father took him and placed him in the care of a man of experience and  promptly sent him abroad with him to learn foreign languages and begin at once to study books.
This was his first loss of freedom…
Just when he was entering the springtime of life his best life was over…he had tasted freedom only to lose it.
Now he had to face cares and obligations which had been unknown to him before; and the beginning of his cares lay in the stern discipline of the study of books.
Yet once he had started he applied his mind and industry to it with such vigour that he had mastered more books in that short space than any child before or since.
He also spent many hours playing stringed instruments of all kinds, persevering from morning to night until he became marvellously adept at them.
He was learning the whole time, today one thing, tomorrow another, this year well, next year better."
Tristan, of course, was a child-prodigy.
All who met him were staggered by his easy command of innumerable languages, by his polished manners, by his superb musicianship and by his mastery of courtly pursuits like hunting and playing chess — not to mention his astonishing good looks.
Perhaps Richard was not quite as accomplished as this.
None the less we must always remember that he was not an ignorant or uncultivated soldier.
Nor was he just a patron of troubadours.
He was capable of composing his own songs and of writing verse in both French and Provençal.
Moreover he enjoyed sacred music too.
When the clerks of his royal chapel were singing in the choir, he would often walk among them, urging them with voice and hand to sing with greater gusto.
He was sufficiently well educated in Latin to be able to crack a Latin joke at the expense of a less learned Archbishop of Canterbury.
But there were still more things which the youth had to learn.
"Besides all this Tristan learned to ride nimbly with shield and lance, to spur his mount skilfully on either flank, put it to the gallop with dash, wheel and give it free rein and urge it on with his knees, in strict accordance with the chivalric art.
He often sought recreation in fencing, wrestling, running, jumping and throwing the javelin, and he did it to the utmost of his strength and skill."
In these subjects Richard was certainly in Tristan's class.
The knightly art of fighting on horseback, particularly with lances, was an extremely difficult discipline to master — for horse as well as rider.
The knight had  to swerve at the last moment to avoid a head-on collision with his opponent, but at the same time he had to couch his lance to his side as tightly as possible with his hand and under his arm so that the lance blow was struck with all the weight and momentum of his horse behind it, for if in swerving aside he moved his hand or used his arm to thrust at his opponent then a blow delivered in this manner would have no effect whatever.
It was a technique which required split-second timing and horsemanship of the highest order.
It also meant that well-trained war-horses were immensely valuable assets.
The poem which gives us the best insight into knightly and aristocratic life c. 1200, L'Histoire de Guillaume le Maréchal (the story of William Marshal), rarely fails to tell us how much a particular horse was worth: it could be as much as forty, fifty or even a hundred livres — and this at a time when a serf could be bought for ten livres.
In the event of a surprise attack a knight was advised first to mount and only then, if possible, to arm.
His first obligation was to save himself and his war-horse.
(He would, of course, also have other horses, for carrying his harness and baggage, for hunting and everyday riding, and for mounting the servants who travelled with him, a squire and a valet at the least.)
The best training in these disciplines took the form of war games called tournaments, particularly since these were splendid social occasions, enlivened by the presence of large numbers of ladies, musicians and merchants bringing wares from all over the world.
But the twelfth-century tournament was very different from the formalized jousting of the later Middle Ages which film-makers have made so familiar to us.
In war, skirmishes and battles were won by knights who had learned to fight together as a unit, not by displays of individual prowess.
Therefore tournaments were mock-battles contested by teams of knights and, as in war, the more knights in your team the more likely you were to win.
If one knight became separated from the rest of his team he might find five or six opponents all bearing down on him at once, and one of them might strike him in the back.
If thrown from his horse he would not be given the opportunity to remount.
All was fair in the tournament, as in war.
It was thought extremely clever tactics when one team pretended not to be taking part in a tournament, and only  joined in late in the day when all the other knights who had been fighting since soon after sunrise were exhausted.
As in war, if you were captured you lost your horse and armour to the victorious knight and you might have to pay a ransom as well.
Given the value of horses and armour this meant that a landless younger son could win fortune as well as fame if he became a tournament champion.
The classic example of this was William Marshal, the fourth son of a Wiltshire baron, the story of whose successful career on the tournament field is told with loving detail in L'Histoire de Guillaume le Maréchal.
Even foot-soldiers had a role to play.
As in war, you could use them as a screen behind which your knights could withdraw and wait until they were ready to charge.
In these circumstances tournaments were not confined within enclosed lists but ranged over several square miles of ground, taking in villages, woods and vineyards, all of which might suffer as much damage as in real war.
When Richard was a young man there was reckoned to be a tournament about once a fortnight on the Continent; in England they were prohibited on the orders of Henry II.
Tournaments were frowned upon by the church but in banning them Henry was not doing as he was told by the Pope; rather he was, as so often, following in the footsteps of his grandfather, Henry J. They were clearly a threat to public order.
As can be imagined, they were very easily degenerated into hot-tempered battles fought in deadly earnest.
Moreover, when barons and knights gathered together in arms, as though for war, who could tell what conspiracies and rebellions might not follow?
But when Richard became king he encouraged tournaments in England.
He knew their value as training for war and he did not fear rebellion.
The political and moral education of the boy and apprentice knight depended less upon the teaching of the church than upon the chansons de geste sung by minstrels.
Their tales of legendary warriors and kings, Roland, Guillaume d'Orange, Arthur and Charlemagne, of their great conquests and their deeds of arms and chivalry, were meant to stir the hearts of all who listened and move them to live their own lives according to the pattern set by the heroes of the past.
It was through the agency of the chansons that the young man might acquire a sense of honour and a sense of shame.
Whereas  the priests told him that he must die and would go either to heaven or to hell, the singers of songs told him that, though he must die, his name need not and that it was up to him whether he left behind a good or an evil reputation.
A death-bed repentance and confession might gain him entrance into heaven; it might save his soul, but it could not save his reputation after a lifetime of dishonour.
When William Marshal was dying a clerk tried to persuade him to sell about eighty fine robes in order to spend the money for the salvation of his soul.
The old man was not persuaded.
It had been his custom every year at Pentecost to distribute robes to the knights whom he maintained in his household; such acts of largesse were part of his duty as a good lord.
He rounded angrily upon the clerk.
"Be quiet, you tiresome idiot, have you no sense of shame?
Pentecost is at hand and my knights should have their new robes.
This is the last time that I shall be able to supply them, yet you try to stop me."
Similarly when told that only if he returned all his tournament winnings would he get to heaven William replied in exasperation that it was impossible.
"If because of this the kingdom of God is closed to me, there is nothing I can do about it, for I can't return these things.
I can only commend myself to God, repenting my sins.
Unless the clergy want my complete damnation they can ask for no more.
But their teaching must be false, or else no one would be saved."
These ideals, knightly rather than clerical, were the ones which Richard learned to share, though at the end, as he lay dying, he was perhaps less certain of them than William Marshal.
This is not to say that Richard was irreligious.
We cannot, of course, look into his soul but on the basis of his ascertainable behaviour he grew up to be a conventionally pious man.
He was assiduous in his attendance at Mass.
In view of his delight in music and ceremony there is every reason to believe that he enjoyed the liturgy of the church.
When he was king he was normally accompanied by the clerks of the royal chapel so he had plenty of opportunities to indulge in the pleasures of ritual.
It was, after all, a ritual which exalted kings.
Adam of Eynsham, the biographer of St Hugh of Lincoln, gives us a revealing description of Richard in the last summer of his life.
Richard had ordered the confiscation of the estates of the see of Lincoln and Bishop Hugh decided to go himself to Normandy and protest.
"He  found the King in the chapel of his new castle of the Rock of Andeli [that is, Château-Gaillard]hearing High Mass on the feast of St Augustine, and immediately greeted him.
The King was on a royal throne near the entrance, and the two Bishops of Durham and Ely stood at his feet A good omen had encouraged Hugh for just as he reached the chapel steps he heard the choir in full voice chanting the words "Hail renowned bishop of Christ" .
When Richard did not respond to his greeting except by frowning and then turning away, Hugh remained undismayed.
He said to him, "Lord King, kiss me." 
But Richard turned his head even further and looked the other way.
Then the Bishop firmly gripped the King's tunic round his chest and shook it violently, saying again, "You owe me a kiss because I have come a long way to see you." 
The King answered, "You deserve no kiss from me." 
He shook him more vigorously than before, this time by his cloak, and said boldly, "I have every right to one" ; adding, "Kiss me." 
Richard, overcome by his courage and determination, after a little while kissed him with a smile.
Later on, in discussion with the members of his household, the King referred to Hugh.
 "If the other bishops were like him," he said, "no king or ruler would dare raise up his head against them." "
Like his father, who had appointed him bishop, Richard could only admire the courage and saintliness of Hugh of Lincoln.
But the episode tells us more than perhaps Adam of Eynsham intended.
It shows Richard enthroned amidst his choir and his bishops in all there were two archbishops and five bishops present in his chapel on this occasion.
The King was a central figure in the ritual of the church.
Moreover the two bishops standing at the foot of the throne had both been appointed for administrative work done in the King's service.
Before becoming Bishop of Durham in 1 197, Master Philip of Poitiers had been a clerk of the King's chamber and his constant companion.
He had gone with Richard on crusade and had shared with him the hazards of the perilous journey home.
Master Eustace, consecrated Bishop of Ely in 1198, had been Vice-Chancellor and Keeper of the King's Seal since 1194.
Both men were typical members of the new class of civil servants, who had been educated at university and styled themselves "master" .
For all his reverence for Hugh of Lincoln Richard had always been determined that other  bishops should not be like him.
He looked upon bishoprics as rewards which he could bestow upon clerks who served him loyally and efficiently.
There was nothing remarkable about this point of view.
Not only did nearly all princes think in the same way, but so did nearly all clerks.
Very few men took clerical orders in the hope of devoting themselves to pastoral work at parish or diocesan level.
Most of them looked forward to an administrative career in the service of a lord, whether pope, king, bishop or earl.
Ritually and administratively, then, Richard could see the value of churchmen.
He was, of course, capable of being sarcastic at their expense.
When Fulk of Neuilly, the most famous preacher of the time, accused him of having three wicked daughters, pride, avarice and sensuality, Richard amused his courtiers by offering to give his pride to the Templars, his avarice to the Cistercians, and his sensuality to bishops and abbots — reminding Fulk of the notorious weaknesses of some members of the church.
But such remarks were commonplace and were made by ardent church reformers as often as by anyone else.
Moreover, despite his comment on the Cistercians, Richard was a notably generous benefactor to them, as was pointed out by the chronicler from the Cistercian house at Coggeshall in Essex.
Nor was the old order of the Benedictines made to feel left out in the cold.
At St Alban's in the mid-thirteenth century there was a strong tradition of a close relationship between the abbey and the King.
Richard also seems to have felt a special devotion for the shrine of Bury St Edmund's — he may well have been attracted by a cult which celebrated a king who died in the struggle against pagans.
Yet long before Richard's formal education had even started his future was being discussed.
Like all royal children his chief function in his parents' eyes was to undertake the role of a pawn in the diplomatic game.
Since diplomacy largely revolved around the family relationships of princely dynasties this meant that children had to expect to be betrothed early — and occasionally even married early.
His elder brother, Henry, was betrothed in August 1158 to Margaret, Louis VII's first daughter by his second wife.
At the time Henry was three years old while Margaret was still a baby.
But she was old enough to be assigned a dowry, a stretch of land which lay  between the rivers Seine, Epte and Andelle, known as the Norman Vexin.
It was agreed that this would be handed over to the Angevins when the marriage itself took place.
Until that date Louis was to retain the Norman Vexin while Margaret was to be kept in Henry's custody.
In September 1 158 Henry travelled to Paris and then took the little girl back to Normandy with him.
The point of this betrothal was that the castles of the Vexin controlled communications between Paris and Rouen.
Long ago the Vexin had been divided into two along the line of the River Epte: on the east bank the French Vexin held by the King of France, on the west the Norman Vexin held by the Duke of Normandy.
In 1145, however, Count Geoffrey of Anjou and his son Henry had granted the Norman Vexin to Louis VII in return for his acquiescence in their conquest of Normandy.
Now Henry II wanted it back.
Possession of its castles, Gisors, Neaufles, Dangu and a dozen others, was essential if he was to sleep secure in Rouen.
Richard's turn came a few months later.
Early in 1159 Henry II travelled south through Poitou and Saintonge until he came to Blaye on the Gironde.
There he met Raymond-Berengar IV, Count of Barcelona.
Since Raymond-Berengar was married to the been of Aragon and ruled that kingdom in his wife's name, he might have taken the title of king, but refused to do so, saying that it was better to be known as the greatest count rather than the seventh greatest king.
Henry and he made a treaty of alliance, agreeing that Richard should be betrothed to one of the Count's daughters and that, when married, they should be granted the duchy of Aquitaine.
The point of this betrothal was that Henry was planning a campaign against Count Raymond v of Toulouse and since the rich and powerful Raymond-Berengar was already at odds with Toulouse he made a natural and formidable ally.
As Eleanor's husband Henry II had taken over the old claim of the Dukes of Aquitaine to be lords of Toulouse.
Eleanor's grandfather, William IX of Aquitaine, had married Philippa, the only child of Count William iv of Toulouse.
Philippa was ousted by her uncle, William IV's younger brother, but in the eyes of her descendants she had been the rightful Countess of Toulouse and periodically they went to war to re-assert that claim.
Toulouse would be a rich prize and it would have been foolish  to allow the claim to drop.
Traditionally looked upon as the capital of the former Visigothic kingdom of Aquitaine it seemed therefore to belong to Aquitaine.
As the focus of roads linking the Atlantic ports of La Rochelle, Bordeaux and Bayonne with the flourishing maritime trade of the Mediterranean, Toulouse was an important commercial centre.
Care was taken to ensure that the River Garonne remained open to shipping all the way from Bordeaux to Toulouse; swamps were drained and the forests lining the river banks were cleared.
Thus financially and strategically his wife's claim made good political sense to Henry II, but naturally the present Count of Toulouse was not going to be dispossessed without a fight.
As husband of Louis VII's sister, Constance, Raymond of Toulouse could count on help from his brother-in-law.
The massive expedition launched in the summer of 1159 was the biggest military effort ever made by Henry II.
Although he failed in his main aim of forcing the Count of Toulouse to submit he did succeed in capturing Cahors and the Quercy.
As for Richard's betrothal nothing came of it.
The girl whom he was to have married vanishes from the pages of history and we do not even know her name.
But this short-lived diplomatic episode was not entirely without significance.
It marked the beginning of Richard's association with Aquitaine.
In area the duchy of Aquitaine was larger than Henry's Norman and Angevin lands put together.
As Counts of Poitou the Dukes had long ruled Poitou and Saintonge, and had been recognized as overlords by the Counts of Angoulême, La Marche and Périgord and by the Viscounts of Limoges.
Then with the acquisition of Gascony in the mid-eleventh century they became rulers of Bordeaux and overlords of a number of counties and lordships extending from the mouth of the Garonne to the Pyrenees, in area about twice the size of Poitou.
To the east lay border regions — Berry and Auvergne — where even the Duke's nominal suzerainty was at times doubtful.
In Poitou the inhabitants spoke a northern French dialect; to the south, from Saintonge onwards, the vernacular was Limousin, a dialect of Provençal or Occitan, the language of troubadour poetry and very different from the French of the north, the Langue d'Œuil, as opposed to the Langue d'Oc of the south.
Further south still towards Navarre, the inhabitants spoke Basque, a language  which no one else could understand.
According to an old story the Devil, intending to win the souls of the Basques, tried to learn their language, but after seven years of unremitting study had mastered only three words.
At first, as Counts of Poitou, the Dukes had been chiefly involved in northern French politics but once they had also become Counts of Gascony their interests turned more and more to the south, towards Toulouse and towards Spain, where they took a leading part in the Holy War against the Moslems.
Richard, therefore, on his father's side an Angevin, was a southerner on his mother's.
In his own lifetime the most vividly remembered of his maternal ancestors was his great-grandfather, Duke William IX (1071–1127).
William was a crusader, much admired for his prowess, generosity and handsome appearance.
But he was also a man whose attitude to life amused, astonished and alarmed his contemporaries.
Above all he was the first known troubadour and, as such, a key figure in the history of European literature.
In one of his songs he called himself a master of the art of love, good enough to be able to earn his living at it.
No one could spend a night with him without wanting more.
The content of the poem ought to be taken with several pinches of salt, partly because it belonged to the genre of boasting poem known as the gap which was a standard form of troubadour verse, and partly because William liked to mock himself as well as others.
But there were people who took poems like this at face value and were shocked.
They described him as the "enemy of all chastity" and ascribed to him the intention of founding an abbey of prostitutes in which the offices of abbess, prioress and so on would be distributed according to the professional skill of the inmates.
The real trouble with him, according to the Anglo-Norman chronicler William of Malmesbury, was that he took nothing seriously, that "he turned everything into a joke and made his listeners laugh uncontrollably" .
But as far as the church was concerned it was no joke when he refused to take excommunication seriously.
On one occasion he is alleged to have told a bald papal legate who had just excommunicated him for refusing to abandon his mistress that he would see the legate's hair in curlers before he gave her up.
But the poems which he wrote are much more subtle than this obvious insult.
Their craftsmanship makes  it clear that he took the business of composing verse and music very seriously indeed.
He wrote burlesque parodies and love lyrics, songs in which, as he himself put it, "love, joy and youth were intermingled" (totz mesclatz d'amor e de joy e de jouen).
And there was also the enigmatic poem Farai Un vers de dreyt nien — "I'll sing a song about nothing at all" — with verses like the following:
I cannot tell when I am asleep
Or awake unless someone tells me so.
My heart is on the point of breaking
With a deep sorrow
And I swear that this doesn't bother me
In the slightest.
I am sick and scared to death
Though I only know about it from what men say.
I'll look for a doctor who suits me
But I don't know one
And he'll be a good doctor if he can cure me
When I am not ill.
In the past William IX has been portrayed as the genius who, single-handed, created a new art-form, the poetry of romantic and sexual love, amour courtois or (as it is usually translated) "courtly love" .
In fact he was commenting upon and sometimes parodying a form of love lyric which was already familiar and was composing for an audience which was sufficiently sophisticated to appreciate this approach.
Among his successors as Duke of Aquitaine only Richard is known to have written verse and certainly neither of the two surviving poems attributed to him is of this quality.
But one great poet is perhaps enough in any family, even the most civilized.
For this is what William's descendants were: the most cultured princely family in twelfth-century Europe.
Because troubadour music and poetry were vital elements in the atmosphere which Richard breathed throughout his life it is important to understand just what courtly love was.
The idea that the appearance of amour courtois in late eleventh-century Aquitaine was one of the great moments in the history of mankind was most powerfully expressed by C. S. Lewis in The Allegory of Love.
It seems to us natural that love should be the commonest theme of serious imaginative literature: but a glance at classical antiquity or at the Dark Ages at once shows us that what we took for "nature" is really a special state of affairs, which will probably have an end, and which certainly had a beginning…
It seems or it seemed to us till lately — a natural thing that love (under certain conditions) should be regarded as a noble and ennobling passion: it is only if we imagine ourselves trying to explain this doctrine to Aristotle, Virgil, St Paul, or the author of Beomuy, that we become aware how far from natural it is.
Even our code of etiquette, with its rule that women always have precedence, is a legacy from courtly love, and is felt to be far from natural in modern Japan or India…
French poets, in the eleventh century, discovered or invented, or were the first to express, that romantic species of passion which English poets were still writing about in the nineteenth.
They effected a change which has left no corner of our ethics, our imagination, or our daily life untouched, and they erected impassable barriers between us and the classical past or the Oriental present.
Compared with this revolution the Renaissance is a mere ripple on the surface of literature.
These eloquent words contain an element of exaggeration.
Frenchmen in the late eleventh century were not the first people to experience romantic passion; the emotion found expression in earlier poems in places as far apart as ancient Egypt and tenth-century Germany.
But whereas such poems are rare in earlier periods, in twelfth-century Europe they multiply so explosively that the phenomenon cannot be explained merely as the reflection of a greater number of extant manuscripts.
In the course of the eleventh and twelfth centuries aristocratic society — courtly society — came to look upon sexual love, its desires and its complications, as an absorbing and fashionable subject.
It was part of a wider and profoundly important cultural movement — religious, theological and artistic as well as purely literary — whereby the problems of an individual's inner life, the reasonings of his mind, the demands of his heart, all came to be regarded as being as important as his external behaviour.
So Peter Abelard could argue that those who crucified Christ had not sinned because they genuinely believed that they were acting rightly.
On the cross Christ himself came to be portrayed as a man in agony rather than as a God in majesty.
This emphasis on the human side of Christ's nature went hand in hand with an increasing veneration  of his earthly mother.
And in the poetry of the troubadours other women became the object of a cult of adoration, though here it was adoration expressed in purely physical terms.
The lover's certainty that his love was the source of everything good and worthwhile in his life — the belief which lay behind the radiantly lyrical love poems of Bernard de Ventadour, some of which were composed at the court of Henry II and Eleanor — was a belief which gave to woman, as man's partner and sometimes, in this context at least, the dominant partner, a place at the heart of things which had not been hers before.
When a twelfth-century knight rode into a tournament or into battle he hoped to be worthy either of his lineage or of his lady; earlier he had thought only of his ancestors.
In the late twelfth-century romance L'Escoufle the good knight is "toujours amoureux, ce qui le rendait hardi" .
He could dance as well as fight, and he could make polite conversation.
 "We shall yet talk of this day in ladies' chambers," said the Count of Soissons at the Battle of al-Mansurah.
Not the kind of remark Roland would have made.
Even at the most material level there were some differences in the status of women.
In this new environment women were more frequently allowed to inherit property than they had been earlier, though inevitably the more they were heiresses the more those men who had power over them — uncles or guardians — regarded them as marketable assets.
Marriage remained very much an institution whereby property was transferred from one family to another — just as Aquitaine was transferred first to the Capetians and then to the Angevins.
To Orderic Vitalis, an Anglo-Norman monk of the early twelfth century, the love poetry of Aquitaine and Provence seemed to be evidence of the moral corruption of the south.
Orderic's attitude is hardly surprising.
Moral corruption began with Eve and the church's attitude to passionate love was entirely hostile.
Even in marriage it was sinful to seek pleasure in sex.
To make matters worse it is clear that much troubadour poetry was concerned with adultery.
In one poem William Ix said that a closely guarded married woman was as bad a prospect as a millpond without fish.
But since marriage was entered into for reasons of social, political and financial convenience it was hardly possible to celebrate love except outside it.
In  practice, of course, twelfth-century society adopted a double standard on the subject.
Men were expected to be unfaithful.
One chronicler noted with surprise that Count Baldwin of Hainault loved his wife alone and observed that such behaviour was rarely to be found in a man.
On the other hand a woman's infidelity was likely to produce a savage reaction.
When Count Philip of Flanders suspected that his wife had committed adultery with Gautier de Fontaines he had the young man killed by hanging him upside down in a cess-pit.
And not even in the land of the troubadours were husbands more tolerant.
When Aimar v, Viscount of Limoges, suspected that his wife and his uncle Archambaud of Comborn were having an affair he went to war against his uncle and made his first attack without warning.
It is not easy to understand why it should have been so but France south of the Loire was undoubtedly the seedbed of the whole "courtly love" movement.
Ebles of Ventadour, the only other troubadour known from William IX's time, came from the Limousin, and most of the outstanding song-writers of the next generation — Cercamon, Marcabru, Jaufré Rudel, Bernard de Ventadour — lived and worked within the borders of Aquitaine.
When four Poitevin knights were taken prisoner by Richard's Angevin grandfather Count Geoffrey Plantagenet they won their release by composing and singing a song in praise of their captor.
In the history of European music the twelfth century is a key period of development, when the unison of Gregorian chant gave ground before polyphony — much to the disgust of conservative intellectuals like John of Salisbury, who complained of "the wanton and effeminate sound produced by caressing, chiming and intertwining melodies, a veritable harmony of sirens" .
And in twelfth-century music there is no place more famous than the abbey of St Martial's in Limoges.
As well as church music many of the earliest troubadour lyrics, with their accompanying melodies, survive in manuscripts from St Martial's.
In the visual arts Limoges was the great European centre of enamel work.
In sculpture there are the magnificent and intricately carved facades of the church of Notre-Dame-la-Grande in Poitiers and of the cathedral at Angoulême.
Perhaps even more revealing  are the astonishing carvings which adorn many of the small Romanesque churches of the Saintonge, for whereas the facades of important churches, under the patronage of princes like the Duke of Aquitaine or the Count of Angoulême, may well be the work of internationally famous masters, these village churches make plain the strength of a purely local tradition of superb craftsmanship.
The duchy of Aquitaine was not just the most civilized province in France, it was also a region of great wealth — it would have needed to be to support so much fine art.
The learned English chronicler Ralph of Diss described its economy in glowing terms:
Aquitaine overflows with riches of many kinds, excelling other parts of the western world to such an extent that historians consider it to be one of the most fortunate and flourishing of the provinces of Gaul.
Its fields are fertile, its vineyards productive and its forests teem with wild life.
From the Pyrenees northwards the entire countryside is irrigated by the River Garonne and other streams; indeed it is from these life-giving waters [aquae]that the province takes its name.
Its main exports were salt and wine.
Salt, one of the indispensable ingredients of medieval life, was produced along the whole length of the duchy's Atlantic coast.
The main varieties were "Bay Salt" from the Bay of Bourgneuf in the north in the marches between Poitou and Brittany, the salt of Brouage, panned on the sheltered shores behind the isles of Oléron and Ré, and, in the far south, the salt of Bayonne.
However, for the twelfth century we are much better informed about the rapidly expanding wine trade.
There is plenty of evidence for the planting of new vineyards in the Bordelais and even a Poitevin was prepared to admit that Bordeaux wine was of superb quality, but at this date by far the most important wine-exporting region was further north, in Aunis and Saintonge.
A fine white wine was produced around Niort, St Jean d'Angely and La Rochelle and then shipped overseas from La Rochelle.
This port, founded as late as 1 130, very quickly came to enjoy all the characteristics of a boom town.
Its modern quays were well suited to accommodate the new large ships, known as cogs, which in the course of the second half of the twelfth century came to dominate the maritime trade of the Baltic, North Sea and Channel coasts.
With these  ships the merchants of La Rochelle could compete in the markets of England and Flanders with wines produced nearer at hand in the Paris Basin and the Rhineland.
So successfully did they break into the English market that they soon put the native vineyards out of business.
After all, as one late twelfth-century writer put it, English wine could be drunk only with closed eyes and through clenched teeth.
This growing export trade was of great importance to the Duke of Aquitaine.
By protecting the producers and merchants and by imposing tolls and customs dues he could profit from it doubly so if he ruled over the English and Norman ports into which the wine was imported.
These revenues, unknown and incalculable though they are, helped to make the Duke one of the greatest and most powerful princes in Western Europe.
It is misleading to write of Aquitaine as though it were one vast feudal jungle where vassals rebelled against their lords, nephews fought against their uncles, and all done with a passionate ferocity which left little or no room for effective ducal government.
Yet this still tends to be the way in which historians do in fact describe Aquitaine.
It is easy enough to point to famous feuds such as that between Ebles II of Comborn (in the Limousin) and his uncle Bernard, during the course of which Ebles raped his aunt in front of witnesses and which ended when his uncle castrated and murdered him.
But to generalize from such sensational particulars as these is to ignore both commonsense and political geography.
It is as nonsensical as measuring the power of English kings solely in the light of unusual incidents occurring in the marches against Scotland.
All princes had to face the problems posed by distant and turbulent borderlands.
The relatively peaceful and well-governed "home counties" of the Duke of Aquitaine, from Poitiers westwards to the sea at Talmont, then down the coast to Bordeaux and up the valley of the Garonne as far as Agen, comprised an area as large as midland and southeastern England and included some of the most prosperous and commercially developed parts of the whole duchy.
There was a special problem in the fact that castles held by the Lusignan family and particularly by the Counts of Angoulême could at times hinder land communications between the Duke's three administrative capitals, the old Roman  and episcopal cities of Poitiers, Saintes and Bordeaux.
But this difficulty was not necessarily insurmountable and certainly does not justify writing off the Duke as a political lightweight.
By using his superior financial resources Duke Guy-Geoffrey of Aquitaine had outfought and outwitted all other rival claimants to Gascony.
The subsequent shift of focus southwards meant that his descendants became yet more distant and therefore more insignificant-seeming figures to those influential writers whose field of vision was restricted to the Anglo-Norman realm on either side of the Channel.
The marriage of Henry of Anjou to Eleanor and his accession, two years later, to the throne of England had brought together under a single sceptre peoples and provinces which hardly knew each other.
In the century since 1066 England and Normandy had become two parts of a single political society, linked rather than separated by the Channel, the main road of the Anglo-Norman realm Men and women crossed easily from one side to the other; many wealthy families held lands in both England and Normandy; and even though sharp-red language snobs were soon able to mock French "spoken after the manner of Marlborough" , people at the upper levels of society in fact spoke the same language, Norman French, on both sides.
But very few Englishmen came to know Aquitaine; that is why Ralph of Diss took the trouble to include a lengthy description of the duchy and its inhabitants in his chronicle.
Only those who were sufficiently moved by piety or curiosity to go on a pilgrimage to the celebrated shrine of Santiago de Compostella, on roads which took them through Aquitaine, can have learned anything at all about the land which was to be the chief concern of Richard's life.
The cult of Santiago Matamoros, St James the slayer of Moors, was growing in popularity throughout the twelfth century and, like the wine trade, it was beginning to forge links between England and the south-west.
Henry I's most lavish monastic foundation, at Reading, where he was buried and where Henry II, in 1156, buried his first-born son William, was dedicated to St James.
Although its collection of relics contained many choice items, such as pieces of Aaron's rod and Christ's foreskin, the piece de resistance was undoubtedly the arm of St James, brought to England from Italy by Richard's grandmother, the Empress Matilda.
In 1173 an abbot of Reading became Archbishop of Bordeaux, and in 1181 Henry II endowed a hospital of St James for the benefit of poor pilgrims, also in Bordeaux.
By the mid-twelfth century pilgrims were sufficiently numerous to merit a guidebook.
It was written by a clerk who knew Poitou well.
He advised visitors what roads to take and pointed out the sights they should see on the way.
Some of them can still be seen — for example, the church of St-Hilaire-le-Grand in Poitiers, or the lower church of St Eutropius, who was believed to be a descendant of Xerxes of Persia, in Saintes.
Others have vanished, like the rich abbey of St Jean d'Angely where the head of St John the Baptist had been venerated ever since its miraculous discovery in the mid-eleventh century.
In Blaye, on the northern bank of the Gironde, the pilgrim could look upon the tomb of Roland, the hero of the Chanson de Roland, the most famous of all the chansons de geste.
In reality Roland had been killed in a Basque ambush at the Pass of Roncesvaux but in twelfth-century legend he died gloriously, fighting for Christendom in the great war against the infidel.
The nearer the pilgrim approached the Pyrenees the deeper he penetrated a countryside where almost every landmark had some kind of association with Roland.
In the abbey church of St Seurin at Bordeaux, for example, he could see Roland's horn, the sound of which might have summoned reinforcements to Roncesvalles but which Roland, more careful of his reputation than of his life, had refused to blow until it was too late.
In this landscape, which Richard learned to know well, the idea of a holy war against the Saracens must have seemed very real and very close at hand.
The guidebook also provides useful information about the people who lived in the regions through which the pilgrim would have to pass.
In Poitou they are tough and warlike, skilled with lances and bows and arrows, brave in the battle-line, swift in the chase, elegant in dress, handsome, articulate, generous and hospitable.
In Saintonge, however, they speak in a rustic fashion.
In the Bordelais the language is still worse.
As for the Gascons, they are gossipy, licentious, and poorly dressed; although they eat and drink far too much they don't sit at table but squat around a fire; they all share the same cup and when they go to sleep they all share the same rotting  straw, master and mistress, servants and all.
The Basques and Navarrese are much like the Gascons — only worse.
They all eat out of one big pot like pigs at a trough, and when they talk it sounds like a dog barking.
When they want to warm themselves in front of a fire they are not ashamed to lift up their kilts and display their private parts.
They treat their women like mules and they fornicate with animals; indeed in this respect they are so jealous that they go so far as to attach chastity belts to their mares and mules.
It is sadly obvious that as the author of the guidebook moved further south into regions more and more unfamiliar to him so his prejudices became more and more vitriolic.
But for most Englishmen and Normans Poitou itself lay deep in the unfamiliar south.
Even the pilgrims would have learned relatively little for they rarely strayed far from their fixed itinerary of shrines and hostels; like tourists they saw nothing except monuments and hotels.
Thus Aquitaine remained a far-off, unknown country and its inhabitants were well known for their fickleness and treacherousness.
No right-thinking Englishman would trust them an inch.
FAMILY CRISIS
1167–1174
ALTHOUGH Henry II suffered a partial setback in 1159 and never again mounted an expedition on the scale of the Toulouse campaign, he in no way altered his basic policy.
Far from drawing in his horns and going on the defensive, he continued to seek out and exploit opportunities for further expansion.
By November 1160 he had decided that Henry and Margaret were old enough to be married; Henry was now five and Margaret a couple of years younger.
Immediately after the ceremony the castles of the Norman Vexin were handed over — much to King Louis's chagrin.
Henry II's next targets were on his western frontiers.
With the exception of the Celtic lands of Wales and Brittany, over which he exercised only a loose over-lordship, he already controlled most of the seaboard of north-western Europe and he was determined to put an end to these exceptions.
But in the early 1160s he had little success at bending the Welsh princes to his will, while one major invasion attempt in July 1165 was thwarted by atrocious summer weather.
In Brittany by contrast matters went very much according to plan.
In 1166 he marched on the Breton capital, Rennes, deposed Duke Conan and took over the duchy in the name of Conan's infant daughter and heiress Constance.
The obvious thing to do with such an important heiress was to betroth her to one of his sons and the fact that he chose his third son, Geoffrey, shows that Richard was still marked out as the future Duke of Aquitaine.
Next year, in 1167, King Henry travelled south to spend Lent at one of his favourite monasteries, Grandmont in the Limousin.
There he met his old enemy Raymond v of Toulouse, who had  recently divorced his wife, Louis VII'S sister, and clearly needed new friends if he was to bear the Capetian's displeasure with equanimity.
We are not told what precisely it was that was agreed at Grandmont; we know only that Louis did not like it.
possibly Count Raymond offered to do homage to Henry and to hold Toulouse as a fief of the duchy of Aquitaine.
If so, Henry II had now by diplomacy achieved cheaply that which eight years earlier he had tried to do by the expensive means of war.
Jacques Boussard, the leading French historian of the Angevin Empire, felt confident enough to write that Henry's authority now extended as far as the Mediterranean!
What is undoubtedly clear is that during these years Henry's power was still steadily advancing, though most modern writers tend to create the false impression of a king entirely preoccupied with the awkward domestic problem of the quarrel with Thomas Becket.
In fact this was by no means the shatteringly important quarrel it appeared to be in hindsight to people living and writing under the shadow of Becket's murder.
It was, of course, a nuisance and particularly so after 1166 when Becket took refuge in the territory of King Louis, adding a further irritant to the permanently fragile relationship between the two kings.
But Henry was more concerned about the political repercussions of the advances he was making on the Continent than about the troubles of the church of Canterbury.
In the spring of 1167 he led an army into the Auvergne, right on the eastern border of Aquitaine, in order to lay waste the land of Count William of Auvergne, who seems to have dispossessed his nephew the young Count.
As ruler of Aquitaine Henry felt that it was his duty to impose a settlement, but in recent years Louis VII had been showing some interest in this region, which lay on the route between Paris and Toulouse.
He resented the assertion of Aquitainian authority coming hard on the heels of the Grandmont meeting and when Count William turned to him for help he responded by raiding the Vexin to draw Henry back north.
At the same time as this threat Henry found himself faced with a revolt of a section of the Breton nobility, alarmed by his high-handed treatment of their duchy, and there were already hints of trouble elsewhere in his dominions.
In these circumstances it was not in  Henry's interest to press Louis too hard, for the Capetian might well counter by lending support to disaffected elements within the Angevin Empire.
Moreover Henry was thinking more and more about the future of his dynasty and his lands.
He wanted to arrange a family settlement, no easy matter with so many children and such widespread territories to consider.
But since any arrangement would need the consent of Louis VII to be valid, he had somehow to come to terms with the French King — despite Toulouse, despite Auvergne, despite Becket.
Knowing Louis's concern for the Holy Land in 1147 he had led the French army on the Second Crusade — he put it about that all he really wanted to do was put his own house in order, make proper provision for his children, and then he would be off on crusade in his lord's company.
The plan which Henry still had in mind was for his eldest son to take all of those lands which he himself had inherited from his father and mother, i.e. Anjou, Maine, Normandy and England, while Richard should have the land which he had acquired by virtue of his marriage to Eleanor.
It occurred to no one that the empire might survive as a single political unit, or that it ought to do so.
What mattered was not the territorial integrity of the empire, but the just rights of each member of the family.
But then, early in 1168, a new revolt broke out and became entangled with the question of the family settlement.
Since this time it was a revolt in Aquitaine it was doubly significant for Richard's future.
What lay behind the rebellion is not at all clear, though historians claim that it was a reaction to Henry's policy of centralization, breaking down the traditions of local autonomy and introducing more advanced Anglo-Norman methods of government.
It may be so, but convincing evidence for any such policy on Henry's part is unfortunately lacking.
The most that can be said with any certainty is that the revolt was led by two families who were to play a great part in the next generation of Aquitainian politics, two families with whom Richard was to become very familiar: the house of Lusignan and the house of Angoulême.
The lands and castles belonging to the Taillefer Counts of Angoulême and their vassals at Jarnac, Bouteville, Archiac, Barbezieux and Montignac, as well as Angoulême itself, lay across the roads which linked the centres  of ducal power at Poitiers and Saintes with Bordeaux.
The lands and castles belonging to the Lusignans and their vassals at Couhe, Vouvant, Château-Larcher and Frontenay, as well as Lusignan itself, lay across the roads which linked Poitiers with Saintes and the new and thriving port of La Rochelle.
The facts of political geography are alone sufficient to suggest that there might be many occasions when the Duke of Aquitaine found himself at odds with the Taillefers and the Lusignans.
Indeed feuds with these families had been part of the staple political diet of the early twelfth-century Dukes, though neither Eleanor's father nor grandfather can be supposed to have been introducing "Anglo-Norman methods of government" .
In 1168 the Lusignans were nothing like as rich or powerful as the Counts of Angoulême, who ruled what was in effect an independent principality in the heart of Aquitaine, and yet it was Lusignan which seems to have been the storm centre of the revolt.
This may reflect King Henry's more immediate concern with rebels whose main fortress was only fifteen miles south-west of Poitiers, or it may be that Count William of Angoulême was overshadowed by the more vigorous personality of the new head of the house of Lusignan, Geoffrey de Lusignan.
In 1168 Geoffrey stood on the threshold of a long and turbulent career which was to earn him a great reputation as a knight both in Europe and on crusade and to help lift his dynasty out of the ranks of the barons of Poitou and place it firmly among the leading princes of Christendom.
At this date, however, the Lusignans were no match for Henry II, now at the height of his powers.
They had to look on while he laid waste their estates together with those of their supporters and captured and dismantled the great castle of Lusignan itself.
Only the fact that Henry had so many other calls on his energy and resources enabled them to survive.
In March he was summoned north by the news that the negotiations with Louis VII had reached a crucial stage.
The French King had provisionally agreed to a settlement and Henry's presence was required to ratify it.
The terms included clauses recognizing Richard as Duke-designate of Aquitaine and arranging a betrothal between him and Louis's daughter Alice.
Nothing was said about Toulouse, though the Capetian line on this was clear: the question  could only be settled by a judgement in the court of the feudal overlord, in other words in the court of King Louis.
Before going north to meet the French King, Henry had left Poitou in the hands of Queen Eleanor with an experienced commander, Earl Patrick of Salisbury, at her side as her military adviser.
The rebels seized the chance to return to Lusignan in force and begin to rebuild it.
When Henry heard of this he turned back again, deputing some of his officials to continue the discussions with Louis.
The French King seems to have taken this as an insult and, if he had not already been in touch with the Poitevin rebels, he very soon was.
He met their envoys at Bourges.
An alliance was quickly forged.
Both parties agreed not to make peace without the other's consent.
Louis promised to help the Poitevins recover their losses, while they handed over hostages as a guarantee that they would keep their side of the bargain.
By early April Henry, concerned above all to secure his family settlement, was prepared to make restitution to the Poitevins in order to salvage it.
But in the meantime Louis had taken a step back by withdrawing his consent to the betrothal of Richard and Alice.
While these talks were continuing on the Norman border, a clash in Poitou between the men of Geoffrey de Lusignan and Earl Patrick resulted in the Earl's death.
Making war in the twelfth century was rather like going on strike in the twentieth: it was a method of exerting economic and financial pressure on your opponent — it was not intended that it should end in his death.
By devastating his fields, orchards and vineyards you hoped to force him to listen to a case which he was otherwise disposed to ignore; by military means he was to be compelled to come to terms.
It was a regrettable side-effect of such disputes that the "general public" suffered — villagers might see their homes and livelihoods destroyed, they might be hurt or occasionally even killed, but how else was their lord to be brought to reason or to arbitration except by ensuring that he could not collect his rents?
If there were a powerful king he might find some other way of terminating disputes and for this reason the church — which was not supposed to engage in warfare — was generally in favour of a king who could provide strong government.
The emergence of strong governments in European history is a movement  labelled "progress" — and "progress" is obviously a good thing, if one has friends in the government.
In the meantime, in places like Poitou, noblemen tried to settle their disputes by going to war.
Yet, although making war was a fairly routine element in the life of an active nobleman, it was very rare indeed that one was killed; partly because, in the face of danger, a noble could don his expensive and effective armour, his helmet and coat of mail; and partly because his opponents did not try to kill him — if he should be so unfortunate as to be at their mercy they preferred to capture him and ransom him.
This would bring financial pressure to bear on his friends and family, and besides it was profitable.
But dead men paid no ransoms.
In war it was only the poor who were expected to die and so the death of Earl Patrick came as a great shock to everyone.
The Poitevins claimed that they had been attacked while peace talks were in progress and that though they had naturally defended themselves they had certainly not intended to kill the Earl.
But the Earl's followers — and among them was his young nephew William Marshal — told a very different story.
They said that he had been ambushed while unarmed and slain by a thrust in the back.
William, though himself without a helmet, fought like a lion to avenge his uncle's death but was eventually overborne by weight of numbers as well as by another sword thrust from behind — and carried off into captivity.
Years later that journey still remained vivid in his memory.
Fearing King Henry's anger his captors kept under the cover of woodland, moving stealthily from one secret hide-out to another, dragging William along with his wound unbandaged and still bleeding.
The whole episode left its mark on William's mind.
For him the Poitevins were and always would be faithless traitors.
The death of Earl Patrick in these confused and possibly scandalous circumstances inevitably embittered relationships and made peace even harder to achieve.
A further conference at La Ferté-Bernard in July 1168 met in an atmosphere of mutual suspicion and broke up with nothing achieved.
For a future Duke of Aquitaine there was additional cause for disquiet in the presence of envoys from Gascony as well as from Poitou, Brittany, Wales and Scotland in the French camp.
It seemed that both parts of his duchy were now in a state of unrest.
perhaps it was at this time that a clerk  associated with the rebel Poitevins produced a document designed to show that Henry and Eleanor were within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity and their marriage therefore invalid.
The war went on throughout the second half of 1 168.
As usual in his dealings with Louis VII, Henry seems to have held the upper hand.
He was much richer than Louis, able — as the French king was not — to hire large armies of mercenaries and to reduce his leading vassals, the Counts of Flanders, Boulogne and Blois for example, to a position of neutrality by paying them substantial pensions.
The contrast between the two kings was ruefully noted by Louis himself in a remark he made to Walter Map:
Your lord the King of England, who lacks nothing, has men, horses, gold, silk, jewels, fruits, game and everything else.
We in France have nothing but bread and wine and gaiety.
Map adds that he made a note of this observation "for it was merrily said, and truly" .
Finally in January 1169 peace was made at Montmirail.
Henry II renewed his own homage to Louis and then watched his two elder sons do homage: Henry for Normandy, Anjou and Maine, Richard for Aquitaine.
The betrothal of Richard and Alice was at last finalized; she was to come without a dowry.
Where Richard was during these years of military and diplomatic manoeuvring we do not know, but it is a reasonable guess that he was with his mother, since Aquitaine was her duchy and it was by her wish that it was to be made over to him.
His father too must have been well satisfied with the Peace of Montmirail.
In return for his family settlement he had agreed to be reconciled to the Poitevin rebels and make good the losses which they had suffered since the beginning of the war.
But this, of course, was a promise which Louis had no means of enforcing.
Whether he knew it or not the French King had effectively abandoned his allies.
Henry had set his house in order but had no thoughts about setting off on crusade.
Instead he was determined to punish the rebels.
In his own mind he was free to turn against them, despite the terms agreed at Montmirail, because he and they had not exchanged a kiss of peace.
Louis VII, having given Henry what he wanted, could do no more than bewail the fate of his friends.
The spring and early summer of 1169 Henry spent in the south, taking and demolishing many of the castles from which the rebels had defied his authority.
The Counts of Angoulême and La Marche submitted, while, in a notorious incident, one of their allies, Robert de Seilhac, died — or so it was believed — as a result of the harsh treatment he received in Henry's prison.
Despite the fact that Richard and his elder brother had performed homage to Louis VII for their lands it was obvious that their father had in no way relinquished control.
But, like it or not, he nearly had to in August 1170, when he was very seriously ill.
Believing that death was at hand he confirmed the territorial dispositions made at Montmirail and asked to be buried at the monastery of Grandmont in the Limousin, one of the monks of which had played an important part in the peace negotiations.
On his recovery he made a pilgrimage to the shrine of Rocamadour in the Quercy.
These and other indications — the marriage of his daughter Eleanor to Alfonso VIII of Castile, a projected campaign in the Auvergne, a claim that the archbishopric of Bourges rightfully belonged to the duchy of Aquitaine — show that the southern parts of his dominions continued to be very much in his mind in these months.
Even after the murder of Thomas Becket in his own cathedral on 29 December 1170, there were churches in Aquitaine which still turned to Henry for help and protection.
In March 1171 the monks of St Martial's, Limoges, though perhaps with some embarrassment, asked for, and were sent, aid in putting down a revolt of their townsmen at La Souterraine, a revolt which had the backing of Count Audebert of La Marche.
Soon after this incident Richard emerges from the obscurity which had surrounded his movements in the last two years since he knelt in homage at Montmirail.
When he does emerge we see him in the company of his mother.
Together he and Eleanor laid foundation stones for the monastery of St Augustine in Limoges in 1171.
And at last, in June 1172, when he was fourteen years old, the great day came when Richard was formally installed as Duke of Aquitaine.
In the abbey church of St Hilary in Poitiers where, four years earlier, Earl Patrick of Salisbury had been buried, he took his seat in the abbot's chair to receive from the hands of the Archbishop of Bordeaux and the Bishop of Poitiers the sacred lance and  banner which were the insignia of the ducal office.
But as Duke he was to be more than just the Count of Poitou.
So Richard moved on to Limoges and there he was again proclaimed Duke in a ceremony witnessed by the Limousin chronicler Geoffrey-of Vigeois, who at that date was one of the monks of St Martial's.
The climax of the ceremony came when the ring of St Valerie was slipped on to Richard's finger.
In twelfth-century legend St Valerie was the martyr (J saint who personified Aquitaine and her story as told at Limoges — where she had lived and died and where her "thousand-year-old" body was still preserved was intended to show that Limoges was a more venerable city than Poitiers.
Three years earlier Richard had performed homage to King Louis at Montmirail but now that he had worn the ring of St Valerie he could claim that he held his duchy in indissoluble union with the people of Aquitaine and the saints who watched over them.
The two ceremonies at Poitiers and Limoges were a ritual expression of Aquitaine's de facto independence from the King of France.
By the same token they might also be taken to mean that Richard's right to his duchy was independent of his father's will.
But whatever the symbolic significance of these ceremonies may have been, it is clear that in practice Henry still retained the reins of power.
It must have been in these years that Henry II and Eleanor became increasingly estranged.
Their last child, John, had been born in December 1167.
The evidence, scrappy though it is, gives no hint of a meeting for more than two years, between the autumn of 1170 and the end of 1172 when they held their last Christmas court together at Chinon.
Henry remained overall policy-maker but it looks as though Eleanor had been left to supervise the day-to-day running of her duchy and effectively in sole charge of her second son.
In this period of her life the fifty-year-old duchess has been transformed from a tough old battleaxe into "the presiding genius in a society of knights and troubadours" .
But here again we enter the land of romance and legend.
It has been said that at the court of Poitiers "the gilded youth of Poitou and Aquitaine breathed an air that seemed to belong to some tale of chivalry" .
Here there were music and dancing, tournaments and troubadours, talk of knight-errantry and courtly love.
At the centre of this joyous court life stood  the figure of Eleanor, "dominating all around her by that intellectual radiance, that love of literature and fine language which was her hall-mark" .
All very different, it is implied, from the sober court of Henry II where lawyers and administrator liked to spend their evenings discussing the wording of the latest royal writ.
Some literary historians have gone even further and have suggested that courtly love was much more than just a fashionable and pleasant way of passing time.
They see it as a revolutionary and subversive moral doctrine.
To glorify the love felt for another man's wife was to flout contemporary notions of obedience and authority, the authority of the church as well as the authority of the husband.
By undermining these two bastions of a male world courtly love was, in effect, threatening the existence of the whole social order.
The historians who have taken this line have identified Eleanor and her eldest daughter, Marie, Countess of Champagne (1140–98), as the outstanding patrons of this dangerous movement.
The contemporary tumours that Eleanor had been an adulteress made it possible to believe that she preached what she practised.
Marie is said to have been a frequent visitor to her mother's court at Poitiers and to have brought with her the greatest poet in France, Chrétien de Troyes.
Among Chrétien's works was a romance, Lancelot, written at Marie's request, which took as its hero a man who had an illicit affair with the wife of his lord, King Arthur.
In addition Eleanor and Marie appear to be central figures in a treatise entitled De Amore written by Andrew, a chaplain at the court of Champagne in the early 1180s.
This celebrated treatise, usually known as "The Art of Courtly Love" , lies at the origin of the legend of the Courts of Love, tribunals before which lovers were supposed to bring their quarrels in order to have them adjudicated by authorities in the art of love like Eleanor of Aquitaine and her daughter.
One such dispute was settled by Marie with a verdict apparently asserting that true love cannot exist between man and wife.
No one any longer seriously believes that Marie and Eleanor actually did preside over such tribunals.
It is accepted that the Courts of Love were a fiction, an intellectual game.
But it is still widely believed that it was a game which was avidly played at Poitiers whenever Marie, her chaplain Andrew, and  Chrétien de Troyes came to visit Eleanor.
As a result of this belief Eleanor retains her place as the woman who, above all others, symbolizes the new social and cultural pattern of courtly love.
She stands for the civilization of the South, of the Midi, the home of the troubadours, against the sterner, rougher, cruder world of the North, represented, in this image, by her husband, the King of the North Wind, whose authority she is subtly undermining and against whom she will soon break out in open rebellion.
On this view, in the tension between Richard's parents there was not just the clash of temperaments, there was also the conflict of two cultures.
It would be hard to imagine a more complex and bewildering environment for an adolescent to grow up in.
If it were true.
The trouble is that the revised version of the legend of the Courts of Love is as ill-founded as the old one.
Nowhere is there any evidence to show that the Countess Marie, Chrétien de Troyes and Andrew the Chaplain ever visited the court at Poitiers — or anywhere else, since Eleanor was certainly not continuously at Poitiers during these years.
 "The Art of Courtly Love" was not written until about 1186, by which time Andrew had probably left Marie's service.
The two verdicts which he attributes to Eleanor make it obvious that, in these passages at least, his intention was a satirical one.
In the first case Eleanor gave a judicial decision condemning consanguineous marriages — of which she had made two.
In the second case she judged the problem of a woman who had to choose between a mature knight of complete probity and a young man devoid of worth.
According to Andrew, Eleanor's verdict was that a woman would act less wisely if she chose the less worthy one.
Since Eleanor, at the age of thirty, had separated from a husband of her own age in order to marry a nineteen-year-old, Andrew's audience can hardly have missed the irony, particularly if — as seems possible — the book was written at the French royal court.
The Countess Marie's denial of the existence of love in marriage is "dated" to May 1174 — the one date in the whole book when Eleanor was held in Chinon Castle, her husband's prisoner.
The intellectual game was being played not by Eleanor in the years 1169–73 but by Andrew the Chaplain in the late 11805.
And if Andrew's approach was humorous and satirical can we afford to believe that  the "new concept" of love in adultery was ever at any time seriously advocated?
Exactly the same problem of irony is involved in evaluating Chrétien de Troyes Lancelot.
But the most serious fault with the modern legend of Eleanor of Aquitaine is the contrast drawn between her and her husband.
Eleanor, it is true, was a patron of literature and art, but so were most princes and certainly Henry II was.
Artists sought his favour more often than they sought his wife's, which is hardly surprising since he had more power and patronage to dispense.
Yet even Bernard of Ventadour, the poet of lyrical love, composed for Henry more often than for Eleanor.
But perhaps this too should not surprise us.
Although the rumours of the Queen's supposed adulteries were real enough and, given the prevailing double standard in sexual matters, much more shocking than the stories of the King's mistresses, none the less if either of them ever had a romantic love affair it is likely to have been Henry rather than Eleanor.
As late as 1191 the tomb of Rosamund Clifford — Henry's "Fair Rosamund" , who died in 1176 — was still covered in silk cloth and tended by the nuns of Godstow Priory in accordance with the terms of Henry's benefaction to their nunnery.
The legend of Eleanor is doubly misleading.
It does justice neither to Henry's interest in literature nor to Eleanor's own personality.
For it is clear that she was an extraordinary woman; only not in the manner of legend.
The legend must go — but at the same time we must be careful not to let the queen out with the asses' milk.
When Henry and Eleanor held their Christmas court at Chinon in 1172 whatever tensions there were between them remained hidden from public view.
The King, now reconciled to the church and formally absolved from complicity in Becket's murder, pursued his old path of family politics and territorial expansion.
Since 1171 he had been negotiating with Count Humbert of Maurienne.
His youngest son John was to be betrothed to the Count's daughter and heiress presumptive.
Since Count Humbert's lands controlled all the passes in the Western Alps it was a marriage which opened up intriguing, if uncertain, prospects, and Henry was willing to pay 5000 marks in order to secure it.
In February 1173 he met Humbert at Montferrat in the Auvergne to finalize the details of the betrothal.
The occasion was made even more splendid by the presence of King Alfonso II of Aragon and Count Raymond V of Toulouse, who had asked him to act as an arbitrator in their long-standing quarrel.
Just at the time when, in Rome, Pope Alexander III was preparing to canonize Thomas Becket it seemed that the prestige of Becket's old opponent was reaching still greater heights.
To show the world how many princes felt it worth their while to dance attendance on him, Henry invited them and also the King of Navarre to a court he planned to hold in Limoges at the end of the month.
There, on 25 February 1173, before them all, Count Raymond knelt and did homage for the county of Toulouse, first to Henry II, then to his eldest son Henry, and finally to Richard.
The ceremony seemed designed to express the triumph of the united Angevin family over the old enemy of Toulouse.
But beneath the splendid facade cracks were beginning to weaken the"masonry.
It started when Count Humbert of Maurienne gave his daughter into Henry's custody and asked him what provision he was intending to make for her future husband.
Five-year-old John was, of course, as yet John Lackland.
In Kate Norgate's words, the question "stirred up a trouble which was never again to be laid wholly to rest till the child who was its as yet innocent cause had broken his father's heart" .
Henry replied that John would be given the three castles of Chinon, Loudun and Mirebeau.
This proposal enraged young Henry.
He had done homage for Normandy and Anjou at Montmirail and he had been crowned King of England in 1170.
Yet he had never been assigned any lands from which he might maintain himself and his Queen in their proper estate.
He was now eighteen years old and wanted to be master in his own household.
In November 1 172 he had met his father-in-law on the Norman border and it was believed that Louis VII had urged him to demand what was rightfully his.
The Young King, as he was called, must have known that it would not be easy to persuade his father to give up any of his power and revenues.
The Old King, after all, was not yet forty.
The proposal to transfer Chinon, Loudun and Mirebeau to a mere child was surely just a trick giving Henry II an excuse to keep these three important castles in his own hands for many years to come.
Young Henry, as Count of Anjou, angrily refused  to give his consent to the plan.
Instead he demanded that at least part of his inheritance should be handed over to him at once: either England or Normandy or Anjou.
The Old King would not do it and from then on he and his eldest son could not talk without quarrelling.
Henry II would need to have been an unusually stupid man not to realize that there were bound to be difficult moments in the relationship between him and his heir.
But he is unlikely to have foreseen the next blow.
Count Raymond came to him privately and told him that Eleanor and his other sons were also plotting against him.
Hastily leaving Limoges on the pretext of a hunting party Henry gave instructions that his castles should be put in a state of war-readiness.
He then headed north, taking his eldest son with him.
But at Chinon, while his father slept, the Young King slipped away by night and fled to the court of King Louis.
Amazingly, despite Count Raymond's warning, Henry II had left Richard and Geoffrey in their mother's care.
Presumably he believed that though his wife might join in a little family intrigue against him, she would not want to carry her opposition to the point of war — particularly if that were to involve her in an alliance with her ex-husband.
Whatever his calculations may have been, of one thing we can be sure: he was grievously mistaken.
Eleanor sent Richard and Geoffrey to join their brother at the French King's court while she herself summoned the Poitevins to arms.
It was an astonishing decision.
That a Queen should rebel against the King her husband was something so unbelievable that Henry had not been able to bring himself to take Count Raymond's warning sufficiently seriously.
When Ralph of Diss searched back through ancient and modern history for parallels to the revolt of 1173–4 he found more than thirty examples of sons rebelling against their parents, including some from the recent history of both Anjou and Poitou, but he cites no case of a Queen rebelling against her husband.
In a letter penned on behalf of the Archbishop of Rouen by a famous stylist, Peter of Blois, Eleanor was reminded that it was a wife's duty to submit, a reminder backed up by the threat of ecclesiastical sanctions.
 "For we know that unless you return to your husband you will be the cause of a general ruin." 
Twelfth-century  English historians, writing during Eleanor's own lifetime, were understandably cautious when they came to analyse her role in the revolt.
Roger of Howden seems to suggest that behind Eleanor there stood the figure of a man, her uncle, Ralph de Faye, the seneschal of Poitou.
He was undoubtedly an influential counsellor.
As early as 1166 John de Belmeis, Bishop of Poitiers, writing to Becket, said of Eleanor that "all her trust is in Ralph de Faye" .
He was involved in the most important questions of policy — negotiations for the marriage of royal children: Eleanor in 1170 and John in 1173 But in view of Eleanor of Aquitaine's masterful political activity in later years it seems superfluous to look for a power behind the throne.
If the initiative did not come from their mother it is hard to see either Richard, at fifteen, or Geoffrey, at fourteen, being persuaded to rebel by a man behind the scenes.
It was her own decision, no one else's.
But it has remained as puzzling to modern historians as it was shocking to contemporaries.
Some writers have said that Eleanor was driven to violence by Henry's adulteries, culminating in his open attachment to Rosamund Clifford.
This, again, is to give too much weight to later legends which attribute Rosamund's death to the fury of a jealous Queen who, according to one version, tore the King's mistress's eyes out or, according to another, gave her a choice between poison and the knife.
More recently, it has been argued that her revolt was politically motivated, that it reflected her resentment at being reduced to insignificance by Henry II's own dominant personality.
This is certainly a more plausible general background to the revolt but it does not explain why Eleanor rebelled in 1173 and not at any other time.
Doubtless the timing of the revolt can be partly understood in terms of the flaring up of the Young King's dissatisfaction at Limoges.
But he was a feckless young man and likely to be kept in a state of frustration for a long time to come.
So why did Eleanor decide that this was the moment to precipitate a family crisis and begin what one contemporary poet called "la guerre senz amur" , the war without love?
It may be that there is a clue to this in something else that happened at Limoges.
The homage sworn by Raymond of Toulouse was a great triumph for Henry II, but did Eleanor see it in that light?
As Duchess of Aquitaine she had inherited the ducal  claim to Toulouse, but at Limoges Raymond had not only done homage to the Dukes of Aquitaine, he had also done homage to the Young King.
Did this mean that Aquitaine was going to be permanently subordinated to the ruler of the Anglo-Norman realm?
The possibility must have made Eleanor's ancestors turn in their graves.
Nor can it have been pleasing to the Poitevin nobles.
One of them Hugh of Chauvigny, is reported to have hated all Englishmen.
The death of Earl Patrick of Salisbury was still an episode which aroused harsh feelings on both sides.
The list of Eleanor's vassals who followed her into rebellion is headed by Count William of Angoulême, Geoffrey and Guy of Lusignan and their cousin Geoffrey de Rancon, lord of Taillebourg, and by William, called "the archbishop" , lord of Parthenay.
Since Ralph de Faye was a member of the house of the Viscounts of Cha tellerault this means that with the one exception of the Viscount of Thouars — who had earlier suffered badly as the result of a quarrel with Eleanor — she had been joined by all the leading barons of Poitou and the Angoumois.
But equally striking is the fact that the rest of Aquitaine, including regions as turbulent as La Marche, the Limousin and the whole of Gascony, took virtually no part in the revolt.
In the Limousin we know that the lords were caught up again in yet another round of the long-drawn-out feud between Viscount Aimar V and his uncles.
It is probable that elsewhere, too, local interests took priority over the problems of the Angevin family.
Meanwhile Richard and his brothers had attended a great court held by Louis VII at Paris in the spring of 1173.
There they had sworn not to make peace with their father except with the consent of the King and barons of France.
For Richard this was the year when he came to man 5 estate, for it was about this time that Louis VII knighted him.
A formidable coalition of princes was assembled, William, King of the Scots, and the Counts of Flanders, Boulogne and Blois, all ready to invade Henry's territories and counting upon the support of rebels scattered throughout his dominions.
But in this, the great crisis of his reign, the Old King remained supremely cool, waiting for his enemies to show their hand before committing his own forces in sudden and decisive pounces.
Above all he used his immense cash resources to hire large numbers of mercenaries.
These soldiers were generally known as Brabançons, but sometimes as Navarrese or Basques or Germans, not so much to indicate their precise place of origin as to express the fact that they were foreigners and spoke a language which was not understood.
As professional soldiers they had a great reputation for ruthlessness both in battle and in ravaging the countryside.
With this fearsome military instrument at his disposal Henry waited for the invasion.
In July 1173 Richard and his brothers took part in an attack on eastern Normandy made under the command of Philip of Flanders.
At the siege of Drincourt, however, Philip's brother, Matthew of Boulogne, was wounded by a crossbow bolt.
When he died a few days later Philip called off the invasion.
If this was Richard's first experience of war it bore an ironical similarity to his last.
Other attacks also petered out and by the autumn King Louis and the Angevin princes were sufficiently depressed to put out peace feelers.
At a conference at Gisors Henry offered terms to his sons.
To Richard he offered half the revenues of Aquitaine and control of four castles; similar proposals were put to Henry and Geoffrey.
He was willing to submit these terms to arbitrators to vary as they thought fit, but only on condition that he was to retain full power and jurisdiction.
He was prepared to bargain about money, but not about power.
On Louis VII's advice the three brothers rejected these proposals.
The war continued.
Early in November Henry led his Brabançons in a thrust to the south of Chinon, threatening the lands of Ralph de Faye.
He captured the castles of La Haye, Preuilly and Champigny.
It was probably this advance which persuaded Eleanor that the time had come to join her sons.
Disguised in male clothing she made her way eastwards, but was arrested some said betrayed and sent to her husband.
It may well have been the news of his mother's fate which stirred Richard to take his first independent political action.
Up to this point, still only sixteen years old, he had remained very much a background figure, drawn along in the wake of his elder brother, and both of them overshadowed by their protector, King Louis of France.
But with his mother arrested it was now up to him to take charge of the rebellion in Poitou.
His first move was to threaten La Rochelle.
But the town  remained steadfastly loyal to the Old King and shut its gates against him.
Its citizens presumably believed that their interests would be better served if Henry won, for he stood for the preservation of a single sovereign authority ruling in Poitou, England and Normandy, in other words over both ends of La Rochelle's trade, over wine-growers and wine-drinkers.
But there were many who were jealous of the new town's phenomenal rise and who looked upon it as a sink of iniquity where the nouveaux riches wallowed in the luxury obtained from trade.
If La Rochelle was against Richard then Saintes was for him.
When, in 1150, the citizens of La Rochelle had asked the Bishop of Saintes for permission to build a new parish church to accommodate the growing number of worshippers, they had met with a refusal.
In the end they had to go over the Bishop's head, obtaining the authorization they wanted from the Pope.
The old episcopal city of the Saintonge, proud of its venerable past, its Capitol, its amphitheatre and its Roman walls, looked askance at the bustling intruder and feared that La Rochelle's gain would be its loss.
So successfully indeed did the Bishops of Saintes oppose the claims of their rival that it was not until the seventeenth century that La Rochelle was allowed to have a cathedral of its own.
In these circumstances it was only appropriate that in 1174, while his father occupied Poitiers, Richard should set up his headquarters in Saintes and turn the cathedral into an arms depot.
In seeing the importance of La Rochelle Richard had shown a good, if over-ambitious, grasp of strategy, but he was still no match for his father.
It was not just that the Old King possessed the greater resources — which he did -he was also able to overwhelm his enemies by sheer speed of movement.
He arrived at Saintes while Richard thought he was still celebrating Whitsun at Poitiers and took the city gates by storm.
Richard and a few followers escaped downstream to Geoffrey de Rancon's castle at Taillebourg while the bulk of his troops were driven back into the cathedral, where they held out for a few days.
In the interests of speed and surprise Henry had brought no artillery train with him from Poitiers so Richard was quite safe in the great fortress of Taillebourg, but he had lost his military stores as well as the services of the sixty knights and four hundred archers captured in Saintes.
As a result during the rest  of the summer he could make little headway against the officials whom Henry left in charge of Aquitaine when he once again turned his attention to the north.
Richard struggled stubbornly on, but the effective end of the civil war came on 13 July when William the Lion, King of Scots, was captured at Alnwick, just one day after as numerous chroniclers pointed out — Henry had done public penance for those hasty words which had led to Becket's murder.
The continuing resistance of the young Duke of Aquitaine delayed the progress of peace talks between the Kings of England and France but on 8 September they were able to agree to a truce until Michaelmas (29 September), the terms of which specifically excluded Richard.
Free from all other threats of war Henry could concentrate on subduing Richard.
As his father approached, Richard retreated steadily, never once daring to stand his ground against him.
Angered when he heard that Louis and the Young King had deserted him, the news none the less convinced him that the cause was lost.
On 23 September he entered his father's presence.
Weeping, he threw himself flat on his face at Henry's feet and begged forgiveness.
His father raised him up and gave him the kiss of peace.
Thus everything went smoothly when the peace conference reconvened at Michaelmas at Montlouis, between Tours and Amboise.
Like his brothers Richard agreed to accept rather less than he had been offered the previous autumn: half the revenues of Aquitaine, but this time only two residences, and apparently unfortified ones.
Financially Henry treated his sons generously but he retained full power throughout his dominions.
Moreover the Treaty of Montlouis said not one word about Eleanor.
Her rebellion had been the most damaging of all blows to the Old King's cause and pride; and she would be punished accordingly.
She was to remain Henry's captive for as long as he chose.
DUKE OF AQUITAINE
1174 — 1183
ELEANOR apart, for the rest of the King's subjects the Treaty of Montlouis meant, by and large, a return to the status quo as it was fifteen days before the outbreak of war.
Loyal barons who had lost lands and castles had them restored.
Most of Henry's prisoners were freed without ransom and given their lands back.
But however much he desired peace and, with peace, an opportunity to make good war's heavy drain on his financial resources, there were limits to Henry's clemency.
Rebels might get their lands back but all fortifications which they had raised since the beginning of the war were to be demolished.
In the coming months and years the question of castles was to remain in the forefront of everyone's mind.
The end result of Henry's policy was that ruined castles were to be seen throughout his dominions, visible reminders of the Old King's power and the penalties meted out to rebellious lords.
But it was not just a question of punishment; for those who had fought on the winning side there were rewards to reap.
The town of La Rochelle was granted a "commune" , in other words it was given rights of self-government and allowed to elect a mayor instead of having to put up with being ruled by an official imposed upon it from above.
In addition, in 1174 Henry abolished the right of wreck in England, Poitou and Gascony.
This was the customary right to seize wrecked ships and their cargoes enjoyed by people living on the coast and which was believed to lead to the abuse of "wrecking" .
A privilege detested by merchants everywhere, it was particularly frustrating to those who had to round the dangerous coastline of Brittany with ships full of wine.
Not only was there a relatively high  chance of being wrecked, there was also a good chance of saving the cargo, since.the huge tuns of wine could float and might drift ashore with some 200 gallons unharmed inside each one.
Yet when Henry abolished the right of wreck throughout his dominions he made an exception of Brittany.
It seems that many Breton lords relied heavily upon the profits of wreck to boost their incomes, and to abolish it might have caused yet another rebellion in an area where Angevin control was still fairly fragile.
The upshot of this conflict of interests was a compromise.
Merchants could buy safe-conducts and licences exempting them from the right of wreck from the Duke of Brittany.
Since the first office known to sell these safe-conducts was at La Rochelle, the port that dominated the wine trade, it seems likely that a lobby of La Rochelle merchants played an influential role in shaping these developments.
The Old King and his sons celebrated Christmas 1174 together at Argentan.
Then he sent Richard to Aquitaine with orders which went beyond the terms of the Treaty of Montlouis.
Most castles, it is true, were to be reduced to the state they were in fifteen days before the outbreak of war; but others were to be razed to the ground.
To Henry it may well have seemed a sensible way of killing two birds with one stone — chastising rebels and at the same time providing his warlike second son with useful experience.
But perhaps the irony of the situation also appealed to him.
The Poitevin barons must have felt the way Henry Morgan's old associates were to feel when he was appointed Governor of Jamaica with orders to stamp out piracy.
To help Richard carry out this task Henry gave him full control over the armed forces of Aquitaine and instructed local officials to put their revenues at his disposal.
Henry himself marched into Anjou to carry out a similar policy and sent Geoffrey to do the same in Brittany.
Both sons seem to have succeeded in carrying out their father's orders.
Richard indeed made a considerable impression by capturing Castillon-sur-Agen in August 1175.
It was a strongly-built castle on an excellent defensive site and the garrison of thirty knights was able to hold out against Richard's artillery train for nearly two months, but eventually its lord, Arnald de Boville, was forced to capitulate.
Despite these successes 1176 was not to be a year of peace in
Aquitaine.
By the spring Richard found himself faced by a formidable coalition of enemies.
At its head were the sons of the Count of Angoulême, their half-brother Viscount Aimar of Limoges, Viscount Raymond II of Turenne, whose sister had married Count William of Angoulême, and the lords of Chabanais and Mastac.
To seek help against this league of nobles Richard went to see his father in England in April 1176.
What lay behind this new outbreak?
A few chroniclers report the events of the war but they do not say what caused it.
In so far as modern historians have tried to explain it, it is simply as a continuation of the war of 1173 This however, it was not.
Apart from the sons of the Count of Angoulême the rebels of 1176 were an entirely different group from the rebels of 1173–4.
Whereas in the earlier revolt fighting had centred on the northern parts of the duchy, Poitou and the Saintonge, in 1 176 it was focused further south and east, in the Angoumois and the Limousin.
Indeed when Richard marched against Angoulême he made this move after taking counsel with the barons of Poitou.
We must look elsewhere for an explanation.
Norman and English chroniclers also report another event, apparently unconnected with the war, an event which occurred not in "turbulent Aquitaine" but far away in the quiet countryside of Surrey.
Shortly before Christmas 1175 Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, an illegitimate son of Henry I, died at Chertsey and was buried in Reading Abbey, his father's"foundation.
He left no son, just three daughters.
According to Anglo-Norman custom the estate should have been divided between the daughters.
But Henry II took into his own hands the county of Cornwall and all the Earl's estates in England, Wales and Normandy and kept them to provide for his youngest son John, allowing only a small portion to go to Reginald's daughters.
The Earl had ruled Cornwall almost as an independent principality, separate from the royal administration of the English shires, and Henry was doubtless glad of the opportunity to integrate it into his system of government especially since at this period production of tin from the Cornish mines was booming.
With the twelfth-century expansion of the European economy there was an increasing demand for tin for domestic use in pewter and for ecclesiastical use in bell-metal.
All this concerns Aquitaine because Earl  Reginald's eldest daughter, Sarah, had been given in marriage to Aimar of Limoges while he was a minor in Henry II's custody.
For the Viscount it was an illustrious connection; in Limoges men saw Earl Reginald as a great and influential figure, a man who had helped Henry II to the English throne.
And when it became clear that the Earl would have no sons, it became a marriage which aroused high expectations — expectations which were disappointed when the King took Cornwall for himself.
Up to this point Aimar had remained loyal to the Old King.
He had helped to entertain Henry and a vast gathering of kings and nobles for seven days at Limoges in February 1173 and had held aloof from the revolts of 1168 and 1173–4.
In 1176 he suddenly changed his line.
He went over to opposition and pursued this new policy until his death in 1199.
But it is certain that even in the thirteenth century the Viscounts did not forget their Cornish connection.
In 1175–6 Henry II's obsessive concern for John, revealed again and again in the last sixteen years of his reign, drove Aimar of Limoges to rebellion.
When Richard went to England in April 1176 he clearly found his father ready and able to help.
On his return to Aquitaine he was able to recruit mercenaries on a large scale.
They were much needed since one of the leading rebels, Vulgrin of Angoulême, had not only put his castles in a state of readiness but was able to take the field with a force of Brabançons.
Richard defeated them in a battle between St Maigrin and Bouteville towards the end of May.
Vulgrin's castles still held out but Richard ignored them and turned against Viscount Aimar.
Advancing into the Limousin he captured the castle of Aixe, thus prising open the approach to Limoges along the line of the River Vienne.
Limoges, like many other towns in the twelfth century, was growing up around two distinct nuclei.
On the one hand there was St Stephen's Cathedral and the bishop's palace; locally this centre was known as the city, the Civitas or the urbs.
On the other was the abbey of St Martial and the castle of the Viscount; this was called the citadel, the castrum.
The citadel seems to have been the most populous part; here were the workshops which produced the famous Limoges enamels.
Within the citadel there was constant bickering between abbot, Viscount and towns-people — grown so rich that they obeyed no one, remarked Geoffrey  of Vigeois ruefully — and yet also a sense of being bound together in opposition to their neighbour, the bishop's city.
The two main parts of Limoges were separated geographically and by the fact that each had its own enclosure.
Whenever there was fighting around Limoges one permanent complicating factor was the rivalry between city and citadel.
During the troubles of 1173–4 the inhabitants of the citadel seized the opportunity to turn their enclosure into a proper circuit of walls, a move which was probably aimed against the city rather than against ducal authority, though clearly it was taking advantage of the latter's temporary weakness.
In June 1176 Richard laid siege to Limoges; after a few days resistance Aimar's citadel capitulated.
By the end of the month the Duke was back in Poitiers, where he met his brother Henry.
The Young King had been pressing for permission to go on a pilgrimage to Compostella but Henry II, believing that this was just an excuse to get away from his watchful eye, had instead ordered him to help suppress the rebellion in Aquitaine.
After holding a council with the barons of Poitou, Richard and Henry marched into the county of Angoulême.
Having cleared the field of Vulgrin's troops Richard now intended to strike at the Taillefer castles, presumably accepting the fact that this would drive Vulgrin's father, Count William, to take his son's part.
Châteauneuf, the castle controlling the key bridge across the River Charente west of Angoulême, on the main road from Poitiers to Bordeaux, fell after a fortnight's siege.
At this point Henry packed up and left.
He had been a reluctant ally and may well have resented playing second fiddle to his younger brother.
In any event he never had much stomach for serious campaigning.
Undeterred by the Young King's defection, Richard pressed on.
He captured Moulineuf after a siege of ten days and then turned to Angoulême itself.
Here, gathered within its walls, were the enemies who had so far eluded his grasp: Count William of Angoulême and Vulgrin, Aimar of Limoges, the Viscount of Ventadour and the lord of Chabanais.
Seemingly mustered for a last ditch stand they in fact conceded defeat after only six days.
Count William surrendered all his chief castles, Bouteville, Archiac, Montignac, Lachaise and Merpins, as well as the town of Angoulême.
Richard took hostages from them and then sent them and other members of their league  to England to sue for mercy at his father's feet.
Henry II received them at Winchester on 21 September, but postponed consideration of their case until he himself should come to Normandy.
In the meantime he sent them back to his son in Aquitaine.
The Old King, like his eldest son, sometimes toyed with the idea of going to Compostella.
Moreover in the years 1176–7 he was taking a keen interest in the competing politics of the Spanish kingdoms and he may well have instructed Richard to ensure that the great road south from Bordeaux to the Pyrenees was kept open for travellers of all sorts, pilgrims, traders and couriers.
Richard and his Brabançons carried out this task with an efficiency which must have shattered many observers accustomed to a more leisurely way of doing things.
He celebrated Christmas Day 1176 at Bordeaux.
By 9 January 1177 he had besieged Dax, which had been held against him by the Viscount of Dax and Bigorre, and taken it; he had besieged Bayonne, which the Viscount of Bayonne had held against him, and taken it; he had marched right up to "the Gate of Spain" at Cize and there he had captured and demolished the castle of St Pierre.
This lightning campaign undertaken in the depths of winter while most people were still celebrating Christmas had the desired effect.
The leaders of the Basque and Navarrese communities swore that they would keep the peace and allow pilgrims to pass unmolested.
Then Richard returned to Poitiers and from there, on 2 February, he sent envoys to his father reporting his success and announcing that he had pacified all parts of Aquitaine.
It was an exaggeration.
At the end of the campaign he had dismissed his Brabançons.
No longer paid, they had to live somehow and since they could make a good, professional job of plundering and devastating this was always their preferred solution to the problem of unemployment.
For several months, under the command of William le Clerc, a defrocked priest and a well-known captain of mercenaries, they wrought havoc in the Limousin.
Eventually, stirred by the preaching of Abbot Isambert of St Martial's, the nobles and populace organized a militia to combat them.
Carrying a cross brought back from Jerusalem before them, the "army of peace" caught up with the Brabançons at Malemort, near Brive, and relieved their outraged feelings in an orgy of slaughter.
Some months earlier, while Richard was still in the foothills of the Pyrenees, a crisis had blown up in the rich, flat pasture land of western Berry, the most north-easterly part of Aquitaine.
The Duke's position here was weak since he possessed no lands or castles of his own and he had to rely solely on his rights as the acknowledged overlord.
Strategically it was an important area.
From Bourges Capetian forces could launch a quick strike against Tours and Poitiers.
For this reason Henry II was always on the lookout for excuses and opportunities to intervene in Berry.
In 1170 he had made a bid to capture Bourges itself but withdrew when Louis VII came up with an army.
Then, towards the end of 1176, Ralph of Deols, lord of Châteauroux, died, leaving a three-year-old daughter as his only child.
Henry claimed custody of the child but her kinsmen fortified their castles and refused to hand her over.
This was a rebuff which could not go unpunished, especially since the income of the lord of Deols was reputed to be equal to the ordinary revenues of Normandy.
Henry was busy in England so he at once ordered his eldest son to take an army from Normandy and Anjou and occupy the lordship with all speed.
After some initial success, however, the Young King's campaign ground to a halt and Henry decided that he would have to take a hand himself.
It was time to clarify the confused political situation in Berry.
In June 1177 he sent envoys to Paris bearing demands which were clearly intended to bring matters to a head.
Louis VII was to honour the agreements he had made concerning the marriages of his daughters Margaret and Alice.
He was to hand over the French Vexin (as the remainder of Margaret's dowry) and endow Alice with Bourges.
Louis responded to these totally unjustified demands by arguing that it was Henry who had broken the agreement by keeping Alice in his custody for far too long.
In addition he persuaded a papal legate to publish the fact that he had been instructed by Pope Alexander III to lay all of Henry's dominions under an interdict unless the marriage was celebrated in the near future.
For more than a year Alexander, at the French King's request, had been putting discreet pressure on Henry either to return Alice to her father or marry her to Richard.
Now that the threat of interdict had been made public Henry began to negotiate more  seriously.
In August he crossed to Normandy in force and summoned his sons to a family conference.
By September, after meetings with the legate and King Louis, a new agreement had been reached at Nonancourt.
Problems relating to Châteauroux and other lands in dispute in Berry and Auvergne were referred to a panel of arbitrators; Richard was to marry Alice; finally both Louis and Henry agreed to go on crusade and, in the meantime, made a mutual non-aggression pact.
In three ways these complex diplomatic manoeuvrings had touched Richard closely: as Alice's husband-to-be; as overlord of western Berry and the Auvergne; and finally as a future crusader, for it was probably in Normandy in September 1177 that he first heard a papal legate preach of the perils facing the Christian Kingdom of Jerusalem.
It may have been at this time that the name Saladin began to mean something to him.
After the sealing of the Treaty of Nonancourt it was time for Henry II to carry out the promise made at Winchester last September and deal with William and Vulgrin of Angoulême, Aimar of Limoges and the other defeated rebels.
He sent Richard on ahead while he travelled south through Berry, where once again his eldest son was making heavy weather of the task assigned to him.
The Old King was soon in possession of the heiress of Deols, and sent her to Chinon for safe-keeping; then he took his army to the Limousin.
Richard and he spent about a month here "punishing the rebels as each deserved" .
What this vague phrase meant we are not told except in the cases of Aimar of Limoges and Raymond of Turenne.
Their punishment was certainly a severe one.
They both had to resign their chief fortress, Turenne and the citadel of Limoges, delivering them into the hands of Richard's officers.
There is no direct evidence for Angoulême but we know that in 1199 Count Ademar was still trying to recover lands which had once been held by his father Count William and 1176–7 is the most likely date for their confiscation by the Angevins.
The presence of Henry and his sons, together with their army, made a considerable impression on the Limousin, though it is also clear that in the months between June 1176 and October 1177 Richard had effectively wielded power in this region, quartering his Brabançons on monastic estates as he chose.
In mid-November Henry II returned to Berry for a fruitless conference with Louis VII at Gracay on the subject of their conflicting claims to Auvergne.
Since the barons of Auvergne are reported to have stated that their province belonged of old to the duchy of Aquitaine, the Old King was being remarkably easy-going in allowing the dispute to be referred to another commission of inquiry.
This suggests that he had bigger fish to fry — and indeed he had.
He hurried back to the Limousin and completed a piece of business, negotiations for which must already have been in train.
At his favourite monastery of Grandmont, where in 1170 he had wanted to be buried, he met Count Audebert of La Marche.
La Marche was a huge fief held of the Duke of Aquitaine, but the Counts had always been more or less independent.
Their possessions dominated the roads leading north from Limoges to Poitou and Berry.
Count Audebert had taken part in the rebellion of 1168 and had encouraged the revolt of the townspeople of La Souterraine in 1171, but he had now decided to leave his native soil behind.
His family life had ended in disaster.
He had suspected his wife of having a lover, had killed the man on Easter Day and repudiated his wife.
When, later on, his only son died it was taken to be a sign that he had killed the supposed lover unjustly.
Apart from a daughter who was believed to be barren he had no other near kin living and in a state of acute depression he determined to sell up and go to the Holy Land.
For Henry II this was an opportunity not to be missed, particularly convenient since he had just laid his hands on the lordship of Deols.
So in December 1177 in exchange for 15,000 livres angevines (roughly £4000) and forty pack animals — clearly intended to be used for the long pilgrimage to Jerusalem — Henry acquired the whole county of La Marche.
Since it was believed to be worth over £13,000 it was an amazing bargain, but one which was available only to a purchaser with immense cash reserves.
It transformed the entire structure of power in eastern Aquitaine.
Inevitably it was a transaction which disturbed many of Audebert of La Marche's neighbours, and especially his distant kinsmen, the Lusignans and Taillefers.
But there was nothing they could do.
Henry took the homage of the barons and knights of La Marche and then returned to Angers to celebrate Christmas.
It was one of the greatest feasts  of his reign.
His sons were there and so was a concourse of knights so huge that it reminded men of his Coronation.
Unquestionably there was a great deal to celebrate.
For most of the next year, 1178, Richard's movements are veiled in obscurity.
Only after his father's return to England in July do we possess any report of activity on his part.
This "unusual state of quiescence" was due, it has been suggested, to the restraint placed upon him by Henry's presence on the Continent.
It is much more likely to be no more than a reflection of the fact that almost everything we know about Richard as Duke of Aquitaine comes from an English chronicler, Roger of Howden, and Roger only has information when he has access to the reports sent by Richard to his father, that is to say when Henry is in England.
According to one such report Richard's chief concern in the autumn of 1178 was with his southern frontier.
Arriving at Dax with a large army he found, to his great delight, that the townspeople had captured his old opponent, the Count of Bigorre, and held him in prison.
But then Richard was persuaded to release him by Alfonso II, King of Aragon (1162–96).
Apparently Alfonso came to visit Richard and agreed to stand surety for his friend's behaviour, guaranteeing that he would do nothing against the will of the Duke of Aquitaine or his father.
As a further precaution Richard made the Count of Bigorre surrender Clermont and the castle of Montbron.
The description of the Count as Alfonso's "friend" suggests that there was more to this incident than simply the curbing of an unruly vassal.
Alfonso II, himself a troubadour and patron of troubadours, was in these years bidding fair to become "Emperor of the Pyrenees" .
In 1162 he had succeeded his father as ruler of Aragon and Barcelona.
In 1170 he had persuaded Marie, Viscountess of Bearn, to do homage to him for all her lands — and this included some estates which, theoretically speaking, were within the duchy of Aquitaine.
In 1173 she entered a nunnery, leaving Bearn to be governed in the name of her small son by a regent appointed by Alfonso II.
In the last couple of years the pace of his advance had quickened.
After a long struggle Raymond v of Toulouse had eventually, in 1176, resigned all his rights over Provence; and in 1177 Alfonso had taken over Roussillon.
In March 1178 he had renewed an old alliance with  Castile — an aggressive alliance directed against the little mountain kingdom of Navarre.
In addition he had, by virtue of a marriage alliance, attached the Count of Bigorre to his cause, and — as this incident reveals — Alfonso took the alliance seriously.
With his influence spreading over the Pyrenees,— Bearn, Bigorre, Roussillon and Provence — Alfonso II was a formidable neighbour, a threat to the Dukes of Aquitaine as well as to the Kings of Navarre and Counts of Toulouse.
There can be little doubt that when Richard led his army to Dax it was part of a campaign intended to counter the northward expansion of Aragon.
He then returned to hold his Christmas court at Saintes.
By then it was clear that fresh trouble was brewing in the Angoumois.
It looks as though Count William of Angoulême was already making his preparations for a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, leaving his eldest son Vulgrin as effective head of the family.
Possibly Richard had summoned him to Saintes to do homage and Vulgrin had refused, not willing to accept the losses recently inflicted upon his family.
His resistance was stiffened by an alliance with Geoffrey de Rancon.
Geoffrey held large estates in Poitou and in the Saintonge — as well as an important fief, the lordship of Marcillac, as a vassal of the Counts of Angoulême.
The Rancon family had participated in the revolts of 1168 and 1173–4 and, like the Taillefers, may well have been disturbed by the advance of Angevin power in the valley of the Charente, from Saintes eastwards through Cognac towards Angoulême.
Geoffrey de Rancon's great castles at Taillebourg and Pons were well sited to disrupt communications between Bordeaux, Saintes and La Rochelle; and it was against one of these, Pons, that Richard launched his first attack early in 1179.
But although he had mustered a large army the siege went badly for him.
Evidently Geoffrey de Rancon had anticipated the attack and laid in plenty of supplies.
By Easter week it was clear to Richard that he was making no headway against a well-conducted defence and that in terms of political psychology it was risky to stake his reputation on one big success.
Leaving the larger part of his forces behind to maintain the blockade of Pons he marched north past Cognac and laid siege to Richemont.
After three days the castle capitulated and was demolished.
In the next three weeks the same treatment was handed  out to four more castles: Genzac, Marcillac, Grouville and Anville.
But then, instead of returning to the siege of Pons, he led his army in May 1179 to the enterprise which was to establish him once and for all as an acknowledged expert in the vital art of siege warfare: the capture of Taillebourg.
Taillebourg is situated on the right bank of the River Charente, perched on an outcrop of light-coloured rock.
It still overlooks a bridge and in those days there was also a causeway to take the traveller over the marshy ground beyond.
Since there were no fords and no other bridge, it controlled the only crossing of the Charente between Saintes and Tonnay-Charente.
In contemporary opinion it was an impregnable fortress; indeed Richard himself had taken refuge there five years earlier when driven out of Saintes by his father.
Protected on three sides by a sheer rock face and massively fortified on the fourth, its garrison had every reason to feel confident.
No one or so Ralph of Diss believed — had ever dared to attack it before.
But Richard brought up siege machines and began to bombard the walls, concentrating on the fourth side where a small town nestled at the foot of the citadel.
At the same time he set his troops to ravage the surrounding fields and vineyards.
Partly out of over-confidence and partly as a result of the double pressure of having to sit still under a bombardment while their property was burned and looted under their noses, the garrison made a foray against Richard's camp, placed temptingly close to the walls.
This was precisely what Richard was waiting for.
His men counter-attacked.
After a fierce struggle at the gates they were able to force their way in at the heels of the retreating defenders.
The garrison withdrew into the citadel, leaving the town and the bulk of their supplies to be plundered at will.
Soon afterwards the citadel itself capitulated.
It had taken Richard only three days to capture Taillebourg.
So great an impression did this make that Geoffrey de Rancon at once surrendered Pons.
Richard then dismantled both castles.
Having seen his ally overwhelmed in this startling fashion, Count Vulgrin decided that discretion was the better part of valour.
He handed over the keys to Angoulême and Montignac and their walls too were razed to the ground.
After an arduous five-year apprenticeship in the disciplines of war the twenty-one-year-old  Duke had produced his masterpiece.
At the moment of crisis, in the hand-to-hand fighting at the gates of Taillebourg when the decision could have gone either way, Richard had thrown himself into the thick of the melee.
When he took his news to his father in England he was given a conqueror's welcome.
His demobilized Brabançons celebrated by sacking the suburbs of Bordeaux.
Although in their own eyes the rebels had simply been fighting for what was rightfully theirs, from the point of view of Henry II and Richard they were disturbers of the peace, and as princes maintaining the peace within their dominions, the Angevins could generally rely on the support of the church.
Not always, of course, and at Limoges they had clearly bruised local pride.
In 1178 the canons of St Stephen's had elected as bishop Sebrand Chabot, a man whom they knew would be unacceptable to the King.
As a result they had been driven out of the city by Richard's agents and the cathedral was closed for twenty-one months.
Normally, however, the church, in its desire for peace and undisturbed enjoyment of its own material wealth, could be relied upon to lend the weight of spiritual sanctions in support of the sword of power wielded by princes.
Thus it may well be that the numerous nobles of Aquitaine who went on pilgrimage in the summer of 1179 did so as a penance imposed by the church.
On the other hand they may also have been relieved to leave behind, for a while at least, the sight of their ruined castle-walls, a nagging reminder of the defeats they had suffered.
Led by old Count William of Angoulême and his step-son Aimar of Limoges they left on 7 July, joining Audebert of La Marche on the road to Jerusalem.
Barely a month later Count William died at Messina; and in the next year Audebert ended his days at Constantinople.
For a period of two years from the summer of 1179 to the summer of 1181 we know nothing of Richard's movements.
In part this was due to Henry II's presence on the Continent from April 1180 to July 1181; in part it doubtless reflects the subdued mood of the Angoumois and the Limousin with so many of the wealthiest and most influential nobles away on pilgrimage.
For Richard it seems to have been a period of reconciliation: with Sebrand Chabot, who was allowed to return to his see in April 1180, and with Aimar of  Limoges, who arrived back at Christmas of the same year.
But by far the most important event of that year was the death of King Louis VII on 18 September and the accession of his son Philip II.
Ever since the failure of the revolt of 1173–4 Louis had stopped giving aid and comfort to those who were discontented with Angevin rule.
He had been a sick man, chiefly concerned to ensure the undisputed succession of his son and then end his days in peace.
Philip was to be a very different kind of ruler.
Although only fifteen at the time of his father's death he soon showed himself to be a cunning and unscrupulous politician.
But if his reputation as one of the great Kings of French history is anything to go by, then the means he used were justified by the end, the destruction of the Angevin Empire.
Later on a story was told of his early years as a young and untried king.
At a council meeting of his barons one day he sat apart, chewing a hazel twig and apparently lost to the world.
When challenged to say what was on his mind, he replied that he had been wondering whether it would ever be given to him to make France great again, as it had been in the days of Charlemagne.
To fulfil this ambition he was prepared to go to any lengths, no matter how underhand or devious they might be.
In the end he succeeded, largely because he outlived his enemies.
But in the early stages of his reign, as he sought to establish himself in quarrels with some of his more powerful vassals, Philip relied heavily upon aid from Henry II and his sons, from the family which he was to do so much to tear apart.
For the moment the Angevin dominions remained quiet and the new King of France was too busy elsewhere to go looking for trouble.
Richard's one recorded campaign in Aquitaine in 1181 took him to Gascony.
It seems that the heir to the viscounty of Lomagne, south of Agen, refused to pay him homage.
Richard's reply was to send an army to occupy Lectoure, the chief town of the viscounty, until in mid-August the recalcitrant heir came to heel, did homage and in return was dubbed a knight by his overlord.
But shortly before this there occurred an event the consequences of which were to shatter the peace of Aquitaine.
As usual it concerned a death and a disputed inheritance.
On 29 June 1181 Count Vulgrin of Angoulême died.
His only child was an infant daughter but he also had  two adult brothers, William and Ademar, who clearly expected to obtain possession of the county and be the guardians of their niece.
Richard had other ideas.
Whenever possible he had been forcing the lords of Aquitaine to acknowledge that they held their "honours" , their counties, viscounties and other seigneuries, not as independent lordships but as fiefs, for which they owed the Duke homage.
By doing homage a vassal accepted that his lord had certain rights over him: he might require service and, occasionally, he might intervene directly in the government of the fief.
This was most likely to happen if a lordship was left without an adult male heir.
Then the feudal overlord would seek custody of the heir or heiress, would wish to choose a wife or husband for them and, in the meantime, collect the profits which came from administering their estates.
Just how extensive a lord's rights would be in these circumstances would depend partly upon local custom and partly upon the relative power of lord and vassal.
Thus when Henry II, as overlord, claimed the wardship of the Deols heiress, her relatives put forward a counterclaim: the wardship more properly belonged to them, they said, as her kinsmen.
At first they had been successful in maintaining their "right" — even against the Young King — but when Henry II himself marched into Berry, the balance of power shifted abruptly.
Henry took charge of the girl and then, making further use of his feudal right, gave her in marriage to an English noble, Baldwin de Redvers.
Richard's predecessors had been able to exercise their feudal rights in some parts of their duchy, but not in others.
The nobles of southern Gascony, of the Limousin, of western Berry, of La Marche and Angoulême had, on the whole, remained independent.
In one well-remembered case Eleanor's father, Duke William X, had tried to insist that he should have the marriage of the probable heiress to the Viscount of Limoges, but the nobles of the Limousin, fearing "the Poitevin yoke" , successfully resisted this demand and she was given instead to a Count of Angoulême.
The marriage of Eleanor to Henry II transformed the situation.
Able to call upon the financial and military resources of his whole empire, the new Duke was a political bulldozer possessed of a weight which could flatten opponents and their castles.
In 1156 Henry II had taken young Aimar V of Limoges out of the custody of his  uncles and had arranged his marriage to Sarah of Cornwall.
But like all bulldozers he was ponderous and slow to turn.
Despite his phenomenal energy the sheer size of his dominions inevitably meant that it could be months or even years before he was free to deal with a distant crisis or give his officials the support they needed against a major local potentate.
After 1174, however, Henry hoped that the presence of his sons in different parts of the empire would in some measure provide the mobility, flexibility and speed of response which he alone could not give.
Early in 1177, when commanding his eldest son to cope with the business of Deols, he said that he, when alone, had lost none of his rights and that it would be a disgrace if they were to lose anything now that there were several of them to rule.
The Young King failed to live up to his father's hopes.
He was generous, courteous and chivalrous.
No one attended more tournaments than he did.
Young knights loved him for he gave them pleasure and livelihood.
But in politics and in real war he was a child, incapable of concentrating for long.
Unable to see beyond the short-term gain he went from whim to whim, reacting without thought to whatever gossip he happened to have heard last.
In the summer of 1177, when his wife was pregnant, she left him and returned to her father's court.
Richard by contrast may well have exceeded his father's expectations.
During the years 1175 to 1179 the power of the Duke of Aquitaine had surged to a level never before attained.
La Marche, Limoges and the lordships of the Pyrenees had been brought to recognize his authority.
Even the most powerful of the Duke's vassals, the Counts of Angoulême, who for generations had been accustomed to act as though they were independent princes, had twice conceded defeat, in 1176 and 1179.
The fact that Count Vulgrin, shortly before 1179, had married Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh, lord of Amboise, suggests that the marriage had been arranged to suit the Angevins, for Hugh was a trusted vassal.
A connection like this, to a family from the Touraine, was an abrupt departure from the time-honoured pattern of Angoulême marriage alliances which linked the Counts to the lords of Périgord, the Limousin, La Marche and the Saintonge.
It was Matilda, the only offspring of this marriage, who in 1181–2 became the unwitting cause of what the  chronicler of the Limousin, Geoffrey de Vigeois, called "a great calamity for our country" .
In Richard's view Matilda, Vulgrin's daughter, should inherit the county of Angoulême and he, as Duke and feudal overlord, should have custody of her.
But the inheritance customs of western France held out far greater prospects to the brothers of the dead man than Richard was prepared to allow.
A Duke of Aquitaine in the style of 1176 and 1179 was not going to have much time for customs which reflected the political realities of earlier days.
Naturally this was not how Vulgrin's brothers, William.
and Ademar, saw it.
They claimed the county and when driven out by Richard they fled to their half-brother, Aimar of Limoges.
Here Richard had recently given offence by once again insisting that the walls of St Martial's should be pulled down.
The rebels were soon joined by the Count of Périgord and the Viscounts of Ventadour, Comborn and Turenne, the most prominent members of that network of inter-marriage and cousinage which characterized Limousin and Angoumois society.
Richard's disregard for their cherished customs of inheritance threatened them all, directly or indirectly, and provided a cause to which all could rally in defence of the right order of their world.
The years 1182–3 were to be the maker-break crisis of Richard's rule in Aquitaine, faced as he was by so many enemies.
Characteristically he seized the initiative himself, launching a surprise attack on Puy-St-Front, the Count of Périgord's fortress at Périgueux, on 11 April 1182.
He captured the citadel but he only had a few troops with him and it was clear he couldn't hold it for long, so he pushed on east past Excideuil into the Limousin, driving straight into the heartland of the rebel cause and devastating the country as he went.
This aggressive move suggests that he had already asked for his father's help and was confident that it would soon be forthcoming.
By mid-May the Old King had arrived.
He summoned the leading rebels to a conference at Grandmont.
Presumably at this meeting he heard those charges against Richard which a little later were to reach the ears of some English chroniclers.
Gervase of Canterbury reports that "the great nobles of Aquitaine hated him because of his great cruelty" .
Ralph of Diss  heard that he "oppressed his subjects with unjustified demands and a regime of violence" .
Roger of Howden, as usual, gives a more detailed account.
"He carried off his subjects' wives, daughters and kinswomen by force and made them his concubines; when he had sated his own lust on them he handed them down for his soldiers to enjoy.
He afflicted his people with these and many other wrongs."
But Henry II was not impressed by complaints of this kind.
He and Richard clearly shared the same view of an overlord's feudal rights.
Henry sent a message to his eldest son to come and help and then he joined Richard in the business of subduing the Limousin.
First they systematically attacked and occupied the chief strongholds held by Viscount Aimar and his vassals: Excideuil, St Yrieix and Pierre-Buffière.
Then they turned on Count Élie of Périgord and laid siege to Puy-St-Front.
Here, on 1 July, they were joined by the Young King and such was the overwhelming strength of their combined forces that both Aimar of Limoges and Élie of Périgord decided to sue for peace.
Aimar promised to give no more help to his half-brothers of Angoulême and handed over his first — and third-born sons as hostages.
Élie surrendered his fortress and Richard demolished its walls.
The events of the summer of 1182 show, beyond all doubt, that while they stood united the Angevins were masters of their huge dominions.
A family of princes responding to their father's directives, and pulling together when any one of them was challenged, was an unbeatable instrument of government.
But there were problems.
What would happen when their father died?
Would the Young King step into the Old King's shoes?
Would he then command his younger brothers?
Should they owe allegiance and obedience to him?
Or would they go their separate ways, each ruling an independent principality?
There could be little doubt that Richard and his elder brother would give very different answers to these questions.
Yet somehow, against the pressure of these unavoidable and underlying tensions, Henry Ii had to find ways of preserving family unity, of upholding his system of government.
The immediate problem was to satisfy his eldest son.
As the one who might one day step into his father's shoes he was also the one who stood most in his father's shadow.
Richard had Aquitaine; Geoffrey had  Brittany; but it was the Old King, not the young one, who held Anjou, England and Normandy.
Though in time Henry would succeed to a far greater inheritance than either brother, he did not possess the patience to wait.
He wanted to rule now — and in Aquitaine he thought he saw an opportunity.
The rebels of 1182 had been defeated, but they had weighed up one of their conquerors — and they also saw an opportunity.
The Young King had passed through Limoges and St Yrieix on his way to join his father and brother at Puy-St-Front.
At Limoges he had ostentatiously donated a cloak embroidered with the words Henricus Rex to the monks of St Martial's.
On this and many other occasions he would have been able to gauge the strength of local feeling against Richard's imperious rule.
A new field of activity seemed to be opening up for him if only he had the courage to grasp the nettle.
But however frustrated he was, however jealous of his younger brother's reputation as a successful soldier, it cannot have been an easy decision.
If he went to war against Richard, which side would their father take?
As he edged ever closer to the point of no return, to an open commitment to the rebels, the Young King's life increasingly comes to bear the marks of a man tormented by uncertainty and doubt.
He was not sure of the loyalty of his own household.
The most famous knight in his following, William Marshal, was suspected of being Queen Margaret's lover.
But the Young King was incapable of taking a firm line.
He could neither put a stop to the gossip nor put William on trial.
At Christmas William Marshal, loudly protesting his innocence, left his master's service and rode off in search of fresh tournaments.
Some months earlier, in the autumn of 1182, young Henry had once again asked his father to give him a principality, Normandy, so that he could make proper provision for his own knights.
When Henry II again refused, he stormed off to France, saying that he was going to go to Jerusalem.
Eventually his father persuaded him to return to Normandy but not before Philip of France had learned something of his brother-in-law's troubles and half-formulated schemes.
As the Young King wavered between the three alternatives of remaining dutifully at his father's side, going to Jerusalem, or  marching into Aquitaine, he was certainly tempted by messages from the rebels offering to recognize him as their Duke, but he may also have been egged on by Geoffrey of Brittany.
For Geoffrey, although he seems to have taken no part in suppressing the revolt, had also been in the Limousin during that summer.
On the Feast of St John (24 June) he had met his father at Grandmont "together with certain nobles" — as Geoffrey of Vigeois puts it.
It would be nice to know who these nobles were; or even to know whether the chronicler's choice of phrase was due to ignorance or a desire for brevity or for the sake of discretion.
But, however innocent his presence at Grandmont may have been, we do know that by the winter of early 1183 Geoffrey was playing a very devious game indeed.
It Is not easy to see why.
His eldest brother Henry had cause to feel frustrated, but for a third son Geoffrey of Brittany was extremely well endowed.
Perhaps the answer is as simple as the one given by some contemporary writers.
 "Geoffrey, that son of perdition…that son of iniquity" is how Roger of Howden sums up his character, while Gerald of Wales gives a more elaborate description of a prince "overflowing with words, smooth as oil, possessed, by his syrupy and persuasive eloquence, of the power of dissolving the apparently indissoluble, able to corrupt two kingdoms with his tongue, of tireless endeavour and a hypocrite in everything" .
By the autumn of 1182 war had broken out again in Aquitaine.
The Taillefer brothers were still able to find support within the Angoumois, notably from the lords of Archiac and Chalais.
Encouraged by this, Viscount Aimar decided to hire mercenaries in Gascony and denounce the peace terms so recently agreed.
The Young King's opportunity was getting nearer, but if he were to show his hand at last, he needed an excuse, a justification for the war which would make sense in his father's eyes and just might lead him to condone the attack on Richard.
This justification was provided by the castle of Clairvaux and it is clear that the scheme very nearly worked.
Richard had been rebuilding and strengthening Clairvaux and his motives for doing so have long puzzled historians, since it was a step which could be interpreted as an infringement of his elder brother's rights.
Early in 1183 the Limousin troubadour, Bertrand de Born, anxious to bring the  Young King into the rebel camp, composed a political song, a sirventes, which included the following lines:
Between Poitiers and l'Ile Bouchard and Mirebeau and Loudun and Chinon someone has dared to build a fair castle at Clairvaux, in the midst of the plain.
I should not wish the young King to know about it or see, for he would not find it to his liking; but I fear, so white is the stone, that he cannot fail to see it from Mathefelon.
Despite its geographical inaccuracy the song, politically speaking, was right on target, designed as it was to show that the Duke of Aquitaine was building a castle right in the middle of the lands of the Count of Anjou.
What was Richard doing?
Was he strengthening his border where it faced the great Angevin arsenal and treasury at Chinon, which would one day come into the hands of his feckless elder brother?
Possibly, but the site of Clairvaux suggests an explanation much nearer at hand.
It lay only about six miles west of Châtellerault and documents from the 1130s indicate that the castellan of Clairvaux at that time was a vassal of the Viscount of Châtellerault.
These Viscounts were among the most important barons of Poitou.
Eleanor's father, Duke William X, had married one of their daughters; another member of the family had been William IX's most famous mistress.
Their castle at Châtellerault controlled the strategically vital Tours-Poitiers road at the point where it crossed the River Vienne.
In 1 184 Richard returned to this area, founding a new town and castle at the bridge over the River Creuse at St Rémi de la Haye, about twelve miles on the other side of Châtellerault.
This time it is clear that the new foundation was to the Viscount's detriment and was expected to anger him.
All this suggests that when he started work on Clairvaux Richard anticipated the Viscount's hostility rather than his brother's.
But the problem with Clairvaux was that although it lay in Poitou a Count of Anjou could claim to hold it.
Like the more important castles of Loudun and Mirebeau it was one of the territorial gains made in the late tenth century at the expense of the Count of Poitou.
Unlike these cherished Angevin possessions, however, Clairvaux had been held by relatively unimportant vassals and by the 1130s they seem to have become more closely attached to the Viscounts of  Châtellerault.
If Richard had heard about the old Angevin claim when he began work on a castle within the political orbit of Châtellerault he probably thought it had long since lapsed.
But some incidents in his later career suggest that he was inclined to act first and let his legal advisers sort out the formalities later.
This trait of Richard's gave the Young King some reason to hope that he might be able to win over his father, Henry of Anjou, to an Angevin cause.
Towards the end of 1182 Richard was summoned from his war in the Angoumois to attend his father's Christmas court at Caen.
It was intended as a splendid demonstration of the power and solidarity of the Angevin family, the greatest court ever held in Normandy.
Besides all his sons Henry Ii was accompanied by a daughter, Matilda, and her husband, the greatest of the German princes, Henry the Lion, formerly Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, but now driven into exile and on his way to the shrine at Compostella.
No Norman baron was to hold a court of his own that Christmas; they would all celebrate with the King.
More than a thousand knights jostled in the ducal castle and halls of Caen.
Among the knights who went with Richard was Bertrand de Born.
The middle-aged troubadour was quarrelling with his brother Constantine over the family castle at Hautefort in the border lands between Périgord and the Limousin.
Since the Duke supported Constantine's claim he may well have brought Bertrand to Normandy on the theory that it was safer than leaving him behind to foment trouble.
In a courtly song Bertrand says that only the beauty of the Duchess Matilda prevented him from dying of boredom; her naked body would make night seem like day.
Otherwise he found the Normans a dull crowd, unsophisticated and solemn.
But it is highly unlikely that Bertrand found the trip as boring as his song implies.
The Young King was there and the troubadour had high hopes of him.
Someone had to overturn the present political arrangements in the Limousin if he was ever to lay his hands on Hautefort.
In the next few weeks, as the Angevin court moved south from Caen, the tensions came to the surface and in Bertrand de Born the muddle, the bickering and the bitterness would have found a fascinated observer.
Henry Ii planned to provide a legal framework for the  continuance of his empire by asking both Richard and Geoffrey to do homage to their elder brother; doubtless he also hoped that this clear recognition of his seniority would do something to allay the Young King's sense of frustration.
Geoffrey agreed readily enough.
Brittany had long since been in some way subject to Normandy.
At Le Mans he performed the required homage.
But Richard at first refused, arguing that he was as nobly born as his brother.
Ten years after the court held at Limoges in 1173 Henry II had again raised the spectre of Aquitaine being permanently reduced to a subordinate role in the Angevin Empire.
After a while the Old King persuaded Richard to change his mind.
He agreed to do homage so long as it was spelt out that Aquitaine should belong to him and his heirs for ever.
Now it was the Young King who drew back and, doubtless to their father's immense exasperation, refused to accept Richard's homage.
Homage on these terms was totally incompatible with the engagements he had by now entered into with the rebels.
But without some explanation his refusal to accept Richard's homage must have seemed incomprehensible and so, on 1 January 1183, the whole muddled story was blurted out.
In the words of Roger of Howden,"the young King, of his own accord and under no compulsion, laying his hands on the Holy Gospels in the presence of a large crowd of clerks and laymen, swore that from that day onward and for the rest of his life he would be loyal to King Henry, his father and his lord, and would serve him faithfully.
Moreover since he did not wish to have preying on his mind any malice or grudge by reason of which his father might later be offended, he revealed that he had pledged himself to support the barons of Aquitaine against his brother Richard and said that he had done this because Richard had fortified the castle of Clairvaux though it really belonged to the Angevin patrimony which he should inherit from his father."
The dispute over Clairvaux was easily solved.
Grudgingly but fairly quickly Richard was induced to hand the castle over to his father.
This done it soon became clear that Clairvaux had been no more than a pretext and that the real problems lay elsewhere.
At Angers the Old King called Henry, Richard and Geoffrey together and compelled them to swear a compact of perpetual peace.
But  any oath of peace, if its terms were to be at all realistic, needed to include the Aquitainian rebels.
So it was agreed that they would re-assemble to confirm their peace compact at Mirebeau and that the rebels would be invited to attend this meeting.
Henry II sent Geoffrey to the Limousin to arrange a truce and to ensure that the discontented barons would come to the peace conference.
Geoffrey, however, once on the loose, did nothing of the kind.
Instead he joined the rebels.
The Young King, who clearly knew what Geoffrey was plotting, then suggested that he should follow his brother, again supposedly as a peace-maker.
Moreover he persuaded his father to agree that if the terms imposed on the rebels last summer were not acceptable to them now — as obviously they were not — then they would be granted a fresh hearing in the King's court.
This, of course, was intolerable to Richard.
He had resigned Clairvaux; he had agreed to do homage to his brother; and now it looked as though all the work of 1182 was going to be undone.
As the news of the quarrel between the Old King's sons spread, those who had been defeated last year took fresh courage, while others like Geoffrey of Lusignan, who had previously been too cautious to join the revolt, now decided that their moment had come.
Presumably some of those who were still loyal to Richard kept him informed of the deteriorating political situation, and of the contacts between his brothers and the rebels.
While Henry II talked of peace and allowed first Geoffrey and then Henry to pull the wool over his eyes, Richard's duchy was slipping away from him.
Finally he could contain his frustration no longer.
After an angry scene with his father he left the court without permission and rode in haste to Poitou to fortify his castles and towns.
The Young King meanwhile had obtained Henry I I's leave to go to the Limousin on his mission of peace.
He sent his wife to the court of Philip Augustus and joined Geoffrey at Limoges early in February.
There they were met by Viscount Aimar, who had with him a large force of Gascon routiers under a chief called William Arnald.
The forbidding presence of these mercenaries was sufficient to persuade the inhabitants of the citadel that they too would be well advised to join the revolt.
The abbot of St Martial's, the leader of the 1177 "crusade" against the Brabançons and well known for his  loyalty to the Dukes of Aquitaine, took refuge in the abbey town of La Souterraine.
A second contingent of routiers under William's uncle, Raymond le Brun, was making its way north to reinforce Aimar.
Geoffrey had a fine company of knights with him at Limoges and had also mustered mercenaries in Brittany with orders to attack Poitou from the north-west.
All in all the rebels had assembled a very considerable fighting force.
But Richard was in no mood to sue for peace.
He hunted down the Breton forces, executing all those who fell into his hands and organizing retaliatory raids on Geoffrey's estates.
Then he seized the initiative in a dramatic fashion, just as he had in April 1182.
At the head of a small cavalry force he rode almost non-stop for two days and nights and on 12 February he fell upon Aimar's routiers as they attacked the church of Gorre a dozen miles to the west of Limoges, believing him to be still somewhere beyond Poitiers.
Aimar himself escaped.
Richard's horses were too exhausted for a pursuit to be possible.
But William Arnald was killed and many of his followers captured.
Richard dragged his prisoners as far as Aixe, drowned some in the River Vienne, put others to the sword and blinded the rest.
So far as churchmen like Geoffrey of Vigeois were concerned it was the fate which all routiers deserved.
By now Henry 11 himself was on his way to the Limousin, following his sons in the forlorn hope of finding a peace formula.
Presumably he had already set in motion the machinery which next month would array a large army under his command, but when he approached Limoges he still had only a few men with him.
In the citadel of St Martial everyone's nerves were on edge.
As Henry II drew near, a watchman, mistaking the King's small band for a raiding party organized by the citizens of the episcopal city, sounded the alarm.
The men of St Martial's swarmed out to drive off their enemies.
In the confusion which reigned before one of the Englishmen in the citadel recognized the royal banner, one of Henry's household was wounded and the King himself had a narrow escape.
Henry then withdrew to the relative safety of Richard's stronghold at Aixe.
Here, that same evening, he was visited by the Young King, who tried to explain and excuse what had happened.
But Henry was shocked and angry and would not listen, so his son went back  to his friends in Limoges.
At Aimar's command the inhabitants of St Martial's took an oath of allegiance to the Young King and then prepared to stand siege.
Since the citadel's walls had been razed in I 181, ramparts of earth, stone and wood had to be erected from the fabric of a number of churches which were hastily demolished for the purpose.
Not for another fortnight, however, did Henry and Richard have a force sufficiently large to encircle St Martial's.
For the moment they had to be content to occupy the episcopal city and from there keep a watchful eye on their enemies.
The two Henrys, father and son, spent these last two weeks of "phoney" war in a fruitless series of negotiations, emotional reconciliations, quarrels, scuffles, promises made and broken.
At times the Young King may genuinely have regretted the path he had chosen but he was now in too deep to be able to draw back.
More of his allies had begun to arrive on the scene.
Philip of France had sent a force of Brabançons to help his brother-in-law, the opening shot in a campaign which he was to wage for the next thirty years.
They took St-Léonard-de-Noblat by storm, massacred its inhabitants, and then swept on past Limoges to capture and sack Brantôme.
Yet more mercenary bands, hired by Viscount Aimar and Raymond of Turenne, were devastating the southern Limousin.
Bertrand de Born used the confusion to turn his brother out of Hautefort by some treacherous means or other.
The whole countryside was in uproar.
When their main army arrived on 1 March Henry and Richard made no attempt to chase the widely scattered bands of plundering routiers.
Instead they concentrated all their energies on subduing the rebels' capital, the citadel of St Martial's.
For both sides it was to prove an arduous siege.
Inside the citadel the Young King quickly ran short of money.
He and Aimar had engaged every routier chief who offered his services, fearing that he would go over to Henry II if they didn't.
It was a sensible policy — if they could afford it.
But for obvious reasons his father had cut off the Young King's allowance.
He obtained a "loan" from the burgesses, but this did not last long.
So he was driven to seize the chalices, plate and other treasures which belonged to the shrine of St Martial.
Having emptied the citadel of gold and silver he left Limoges and went off  in search of new sources of pay for his mercenaries.
He plundered Grandmont and then the abbey of La Couronne near Angoulême.
But the citadel, under the command of Geoffrey of Brittany, Viscount Aimar and Geoffrey de Lusignan still held out.
The besieging forces grew discouraged.
Many of them were quartered in tents and they suffered badly from the cold, wet weather.
Some left after only a fortnight and, as time went by, it became increasingly hard to maintain the blockade.
Eventually in late April or early May Henry II decided to raise the siege.
We do not know where he went to next, nor whether Richard was still with him.
The surviving chronicles of south-western France are poor indeed compared with the wealth of history written in England at this date, the golden age of medieval English historiography.
But one thing is clear: although we know so little about it, this was a major crisis.
Neighbouring princes were marching into Aquitaine in order to play their part in what was rapidly developing into a showdown on the scale of 1173–4.
On the Young King's side were Hugh, Duke of Burgundy, and Raymond, Count of Toulouse.
For Raymond, whose county had been held as a fief of Aquitaine since 1173, the replacement of Richard by his elder brother held out the prospect of release from a galling sense of subordination.
On the other hand Raymond's rival in the great struggle for Provence, Alfonso II of Aragon, came in on Richard's side.
On balance, however, it looks as though by May 1183 Henry II and Richard were beginning to lose their grip on the war.
At Limoges the Young King was free to go over to the attack.
Although he was driven away by the defenders of the city of St Stephen's with derisive shouts of "We do not want this man to reign over us" , he was able to capture the castle of Aixe, which was so lightly garrisoned that it had clearly been abandoned by Henry and Richard.
Three days later, on 26 May, the Young King fell ill.
For a little while longer his health held up sufficiently for him to plunder one more shrine, at Rocamadour, and then at Martel, on 11 June, he died.
It was the end of the rebellion.
Although his hesitations had alarmed some of them and although his acute shortage of money remained an embarrassment right up to the end, yet the rebels had  committed themselves to him.
Whatever the origin of the revolt, by early 1183 it had been transformed into a struggle to make him Duke of Aquitaine in place of the "tyrannical" Richard.
Owing to his lack of resources he had always been to some extent a figurehead, but he had become an indispensable one.
He was the justification for the war, particularly in the eyes of neighbouring princes whose intervention might have been decisive but who were understandably not that involved in the quarrel over the succession to Angoulême.
As soon as they heard of his death, Hugh of Burgundy and Raymond of Toulouse returned home.
Like the King in chess the Young King had possessed very little power of his own, yet without him it was impossible to carry on the game.
THE UNCERTAIN INHERITANCE
1183 — 1189
The structure of Angevin rule in Aquitaine had been severely shaken by the Young King's intervention, but once he was gone it was not difficult to pick up the pieces.
On hearing of his death Viscount Aimar and Geoffrey de Lusignan left Limoges in order to accompany his body as far as Grandmont.
As the cortege approached Uzerche on its way north, the chronicler Geoffrey and a few monks from the priory of Vigeois, standing on a hill, watched it go by on the road below.
It was, observed Geoffrey, a fine day — good campaigning weather.
Henry II and Richard seized the opportunity to return to Limoges, to lay siege to Aixe and the citadel.
On 24 June Aimar of Limoges surrendered.
He promised to lend no more support to his half-brothers in Angoulême.
The citadel's newly-built walls were razed to the ground.
Then, while Henry Ii headed back to Anjou, Richard and Alfonso of Aragon besieged Bertrand de Born in Hautefort.
The castle was believed to be impregnable but after seven days it was taken on 6 July and restored to Constantine de Born.
Alfonso then returned to Barcelona, leaving Richard to devastate the estates of the Count of Périgord and his friends.
Eventually all the rebels submitted and accepted peace terms.
This normally meant that some of their castles were demolished and others retained in the King's hand.
Count Geoffrey was punished by being deprived of all his fortresses in Brittany.
But although Angevin rule in Aquitaine was filly restored, Richard's own position remained uncertain.
The revolt had come close to success and it may well have shaken Henry II's confidence in his son's ability to rule Aquitaine.
And if Richard were to resign the duchy then some  interesting prospects would open up.
For the moment, however, the Old King was content merely to resume control of those castles which he had granted to Richard before the outbreak of the war.
Doubtless, at any rate for a while, his son could bear this loss of authority with patience in view of his new position as Henry's chief heir.
At Michaelmas 1183 Henry showed his hand.
He summoned both Richard and John to Normandy and ordered Richard to hand over Aquitaine in return for John's homage.
If Richard was to step into his dead brother's shoes then why should not John — for as yet John was still Lackland — step into Richard's shoes?
It was an easy and natural solution.
But this is not how it seemed to Richard.
He had not worked and fought for eight years in order to give Aquitaine away to someone else.
He asked for two or three days' grace so that he could consult with his friends and when this was granted, he took his leave.
At nightfall he mounted and rode straight for Poitou, pausing only to send an envoy to his father with the message that he would never allow anyone to take his place as Duke of Aquitaine.
To add to Henry's troubles he was constantly being pestered by King Philip's claim that now that the Young King was dead, his widow's marriage portion — Gisors and the other castles of the Norman Vexin — should be returned to France.
Eventually at a conference held on the frontier between Gisors and Trie on 6 December 1183 Philip agreed to let Henry keep the Norman Vexin on condition that he paid Margaret an annual pension of 2700 livres and on the understanding that he granted it to whichever of his sons married Alice.
Since Alice had long since been betrothed to Richard the studied vagueness of the phrase "to whichever of his sons married her" suggests that Henry may have been toying with the idea of marrying her not to Richard but to John.
In this event Philip might well have approved of any plan which would make proper provision for his half-sister and her husband, whether it was Aquitaine or even something more.
At the same conference Henry II did homage to Philip for all his continental possessions.
It looks as though he was deliberately emphasizing the legal basis of his right to order the affairs of Aquitaine.
Throughout the winter of 1183–4 the Old King continued his
efforts to prise Richard away from all or part of Aquitaine, but neither threats nor blandishments had any effect.
At last, in a fit of anger, he gave John permission to invade the duchy and try to take it by force.
Richard, of course, had been preparing for some such move.
He had held his Christmas court at Talmont, north of La Rochelle, and distributed gifts on a lavish scale.
But princely generosity could not buy everyone's loyalty.
It was safer to hire soldiers as well and it is at this time that we first come across the name Mercadier, a name that from now on was to be closely linked with Richard's.
In 1183 Mercadier was just the commander of yet another of the bands of routiers which were busily spreading havoc in the southern Limousin, but in the next fifteen years he became the most famous professional soldier in Europe.
Instead of flitting from one employer to another he remained constant in Richard's service and was with him still at the end at Chalus.
Perhaps this was because Richard paid better than all rival employers, but over so long an association other bonds must have developed.
This is clear from words which Mercadier himself dictated in 1196: "I fought for him strenuously and loyally.
I never opposed his will but was prompt in obedience to his orders.
In consequence of this service I gained his respect and was placed in command of his army."
He first appears acting under Richard's orders in February 1184 when he led a force which sacked Excideuil — a stroke directed against Aimar of Limoges, who was presumably hoping to profit from the quarrel between Henry I]and his son.
In fact the expected invasion of Aquitaine did not materialize until some time after Henry had sailed to England in June.
At the end of that month his officials were able to meet a Portuguese princess at La Rochelle and escort her safely across Poitou.
This delay suggests that he had not intended his angry words to be taken literally, but at least one of his sons was clearly capable of making trouble, while claiming to be doing no more than carrying out his father's wishes.
John was still only sixteen years old soft is probable that the real initiative for the invasion came from the unscrupulous Geoffrey, now apparently restored to his duchy; Richard and Geoffrey had been formally reconciled in the summer of 1183 but the memory of the struggle for Limoges obviously still rankled.
The  two younger brothers carried out raids in Poitou while Richard retaliated with counter-raids against Geoffrey's lands in Brittany.
When news of this war reached Henry Ii in the autumn of 1184. he summoned all three to England.
The fact that all three obeyed the summons shows that the Old King was still in effective control of the whole of his empire.
In December Richard, Geoffrey and John were publicly reconciled at Westminster.
It is clear that throughout the second half of 1184 Henry Ii had been seeking a solution to the problem of the succession.
Immediately on his arrival in England he gave orders for Eleanor's release from custody.
As a result she was present at the important council meetings at the end of the year and it would be surprising if her voice was not heard in the discussions about the future of Aquitaine — all the more so since she could be expected to have some influence over her children, and particularly over Richard.
Henry's mind was still working on the possibility of marrying Alice of France to another of his sons.
He welcomed an embassy from the Emperor, Frederick Barbarossa, and agreed to a proposal for a marriage alliance between Richard and one of the Emperor's daughters.
The princess in question, however, died later that year.
Henry kept Richard and John in England over Christmas, but sent Geoffrey to Normandy "to hold it in custody" .
Was this a veiled threat to Richard?
A reminder that he should not take it for granted that he would in time succeed to England, Normandy and Anjou?
If Richard insisted on keeping Aquitaine, would he have to give up his claim to inherit the rest?
That Henry was now thinking of Richard's keeping his duchy is suggested by the plans he was making to install John as King of Ireland, but what price would the Old King demand in return for this concession?
Richard was alarmed.
Immediately after Christmas he obtained permission to return to Aquitaine and we next hear of him once again at war with Geoffrey.
Henry held Richard responsible for this further outbreak, which was in flagrant defiance of his recent ban.
In April 1185 he crossed to Normandy and began to muster an army but he soon found a more effective means of dealing with his insubordinate but formidable son.
He sent for Eleanor to join him in Normandy and when she arrived, a message went to Richard, requiring him to surrender  Aquitaine to his mother, the lawful duchess.
In view of Richard's affection for his mother, this was a trump card.
He laid down his arms, ordered his castellans to obey Eleanor's commands and returned, like a dutiful son, to his father's court.
But for Richard too this was a triumph: the full rehabilitation of his mother to all her rights as Duchess of Aquitaine.
It could only mean that his own future as Duke was doubly assured.
In the meantime Henry, Eleanor and Richard acted as joint rulers.
On occasions a fortunate, or bemused, beneficiary received no less than three charters each confirming him in the legitimate enjoyment of the same right.
The real power in Aquitaine, in the sense of the power to appoint men or collect and transfer money, lay, of course, with Henry — as it always did when he was on the Continent and chose to exercise it.
But, by the time he returned to England in April 1186, Richard's position as heir-apparent had been further strengthened.
In the previous month Henry and Philip had held another conference at Gisors, confirming the settlement reached in December 1183, but this time, instead of promising that Alice would marry one of his sons, Henry agreed that she should be married to Richard.
Geoffrey of Brittany had no illusions about the significance of this agreement.
Any expectations he may have had of inheriting a larger share of the Angevin Empire were fading fast.
His one hope now lay with Philip and he went to visit him in Paris, the traditional move for all discontented sons of Henry Ii.
The rumour that he used his notoriously smooth tongue to get himself recognized as seneschal of France suggests that he was aiming at Anjou, since this was a title claimed by the Counts of Anjou.
While Geoffrey was intriguing against him in Paris, Richard was occupied with an invasion of Toulouse.
His father had given him a plentiful supply of money and there was considerable justification for the war.
Not only had Count Raymond V supported the Young King in 1183, but early in the next year his son Raymond VI had let some routiers into the Limousin.
They had sacked Peyrat-le-Château and ravaged the surrounding countryside to the east of Limoges, possibly acting in collusion with Viscount Aimar, since it seems to have been in response to this act of aggression that Mercadier struck at Excideuil in February 1184.
Unfortunately, later  in the same year, some months after being hit on the head by a piece of falling masonry, Geoffrey of Vigeois died, and without his chronicle to guide us we are hopelessly ignorant of events in this part of the world.
But it seems probable that in the period 1183–5 the Counts of Toulouse were able to recover much of the territory they had lost in 1159, above all Cahors and the Quercy.
Richard's counter-attack in 1186 seems to have gone very well indeed.
Count Raymond dared not risk battle against Richard's massive army; nor did the pleas for help which he sent to King Philip meet with any response.
Presumably Philip judged that for the moment he had no means of putting pressure on either Henry or Richard which would be both legitimate and effective.
Once again it was an unexpected death which altered the situation.
In a tournament at Paris in August 1186 Duke Geoffrey was trampled to death.
Philip, as overlord of Brittany, at once claimed custody of Geoffrey's two daughters, and threatened to invade Normandy if Henry II did not hand them over.
Having forced the Old King on to the defensive, Philip was able, in subsequent negotiations, to demand that Richard stop his harassment of Toulouse.
In October the two Kings agreed on a truce until January 1187 but whether or not this was supposed to include the war in Toulouse is not clear.
One indication that Richard was still maintaining a more aggressive attitude than his father lies in the fact that when the constable of Gisors killed a French knight in a skirmish which occurred after the truce had been made he thought it wiser to take refuge with Richard.
By February 1187 at the latest, however, Richard had left the south and was in Normandy to welcome his father on his arrival from England.
Two meetings with Philip during the spring resulted in the truce being prolonged until midsummer but otherwise served only to widen the gap between the two sides.
In addition to demanding custody of Brittany, the King of France had yet again raised the question of Alice's marriage and the Norman Vexin.
It looks as though the agreement of March 1186 had failed to make it clear beyond all possibility of argument whether or not the Angevins could keep the Vexin if Alice remained unmarried.
Unquestionably, if either Richard or John had married her, it would have added plausibility to Philip's claim that this vital territory was his  sister's marriage portion and, as such, might one day be returned to France.
If, on the other hand, Henry II wished to maintain that the Vexin belonged of old to Normandy and was therefore his by hereditary right, it was safer not to confuse the issue by marrying Alice to one of his sons.
Whatever the legal rights and wrongs, so long as the Angevins actually held Gisors they were clearly negotiating from a position of strength and could reasonably hope that one day the King of France would be forced to concede their case.
The fate of Alice, more than twenty-five years in the King of England's custody without ever being married, has puzzled modern historians just as much as contemporary ones.
Gossip said that the Old King had seduced her and Richard would not marry his father's mistress.
It may be so, but diplomatic calculation also would have persuaded both of them that it was better if Alice did not marry an Angevin.
Moreover, by simply keeping her in their power they were holding all their options open and preventing Philip from marrying her to someone else and so forging a new alliance.
As a policy it was unscrupulous but probably effective, though certainly not without some disadvantages.
For example, it meant that whenever the King of France wanted to stir up trouble, he always had a legitimate grievance to hand.
The early summer of 1187 was filled with the bustle of preparations for war.
Since Philip was challenging Henry II's right to hold Alice, Brittany and the Vexin it was up to him to take the initiative.
He could choose where to strike while Henry had to disperse his forces in an attempt to guard the whole of his long frontier.
In June Philip made his move.
He marched into Berry.
By prior arrangement the lord of Issoudun and, further north in the Loire valley, the lord of Fréteval opened their castles to his troops.
In Berry, where Angevin and Capetian possessions lay intermingled, it was hard to be loyal to one allegiance only.
This was particularly true of the lord of Issoudun, since he was Robert of Dreux, King Philip's cousin.
Richard and John barred any further advance by holding Châteauroux long enough to permit their father to come up with the main Angevin army and force Philip to raise the siege.
But Philip, his prestige at stake in this first open challenge to the Angevin position, could not afford to retreat.
Instead, on 23 June  he drew up his forces in battle array.
Henry II did likewise.
The scene was all set for a pitched battle.
At the last minute both sides drew back.
It would have been extraordinary had they chosen to fight.
Pitched battles were rare; between kings they were very rare indeed.
In his whole life Henry II never fought a battle; not did Philip until 1214 and although that battle, at Bouvines, turned out to be the victory which crowned his career he did his best to avoid it.
Philip's reluctance to risk battle helps to explain why even so famous a soldier as Richard never fought a battle in Europe, with the possible exception of his "battle" against Vulgrin of Angoulême's mercenaries in 1176 — but that was probably a slaughter rather than a battle.
Warfare was not normally about battles.
It was about laying waste enemy territory, about the pursuit of a retreating army, about sieges.
Most battles indeed occurred as a result of sieges when, as at Châteauroux in June 1187, a besieging army found itself faced by a relieving army.
But even in these circumstances a full-scale pitched battle between two more or less evenly matched armies, with well-armed knights and infantry on both sides, was an extraordinary event.
Battles were, quite simply, far too risky.
In the confusion of battle an accident might decide the issue one way or another and the fortunes of a single day might undo the patient work of months or years.
Though comparatively few knights were actually killed in battle, the prince who committed his cause to battle was also putting himself in jeopardy, since it was always clear that the surest way to win a battle was to capture or kill the opposing commander, as Harold was killed at Hastings.
Most of the time sensible princes deliberately took steps to avoid so chancy a business.
The armies arrayed in the fields outside Châteauroux contained many nobles who knew each other well, who had met at tournaments or on pilgrimages, who were cousins or neighbours.
Even if, for once , the Kings had not been bluffing when they drew up their armies, these men were reluctant to attack each other .
Moreover a papal legate had arrived, sent by Urban III with instructions to settle the quarrels of north-west Europe and prepare men for a crusade.
With his moral support a group of nobles and clergy from both sides tried to work out peace terms.
This proved to be impossible.
For as long as there was an alternative neither Philip nor Henry was prepared to make any concession to the other, and there was, of course, an alternative: not peace, not war, but a truce.
The requirements of the crusade and the tensions of being brought to the brink of battle both pointed to the need for a long, rather than a short truce.
Two years was the period finally agreed upon.
The armies separated and Philip was left in possession of Issoudun and Fréteval.
But that day Philip gained something more significant than temporary control of a couple of lordships.
When he went back to Paris Richard went with him.
 "Philip so honoured him" , wrote Roger of Howden,"that every day they ate at the same table, shared the same dish and a- night the bed did not separate them.
Between the two of them there grew up so great an affection that King Henry was much alarmed and, afraid of what the future might hold in store, he decided to postpone his return to England until he knew what lay behind this sudden friendship."
This does not mean as some modern writers have assumed — that Richard and Philip were having a homosexual affair.
It was common for people of the same sex to share a bed.
For example Henry II and William Marshal did so.
The jongleur who reported this had no fears that his audience would misunderstand him.
He meant to imply that the Old King trusted William, that they were close politically, not sexually.
If men exchanged a kiss it was a gesture of friendship or of peace, not of erotic passion.
It is an elementary mistake to take it for granted that an act which has one symbolic meaning for us today possessed that same meaning eight hundred years ago.
When Richard and Philip rode to Paris together, it was an act not of sex but of political defiance — as Henry II knew only too well.
Gestures of this kind were part of the vocabulary of politics; an astute politician like Philip used them to great effect.
When Geoffrey of Brittany was buried it was said that Philip had been forcibly prevented from throwing himself into the grave to join his friend.
Now in the summer of 1187 Henry sent messenger after messenger to Richard asking him to return and promising to grant him everything that was justly his.
Feigning obedience, Richard left Paris but then turned and swooped on Chinon.
He seized all the coin in the castle treasury and carried it off to spend on re-stocking and repairing the castles of Aquitaine.
Henry's response was to send yet more messengers and at long last he was able to persuade his son to come to see him.
Richard admitted that he had listened to the advice of people who were deliberately trying to sow dissension between them.
Then at Angers he did homage to his father, swearing on the Gospels that he would be faithful to him against all men.
What had caused this sudden breach between father and son?
Why had Richard first of all defended Châteauroux against Philip and then ridden away in his company?
Almost certainly the explanation lies in the highly charged atmosphere of a battlefield on the eve of battle.
Richard seems to have played an important part in the peace and truce talks, and as he went to and fro between the armies his father may have begun to wonder just what these exchanges meant.
Was his son willing to accept terms which he would find unacceptable?
Possibly there were moments when Henry persuaded himself that he was being betrayed.
Moreover, if Richard discussed peace on the assumption that he would be the heir to all his father's dominions then he may well have re-activated very real differences of opinion which had lain dormant since the spring of 1185.
Those nerve-racking hours, with the armies drawn up in battle array in sight of each other, can hardly have been the best of times for a calm discussion of the problem of the succession.
Presumably that is why Philip chose precisely that moment to raise again the spectre which was to haunt the Old King's last years.
At Châteauroux on 23 June 1187 Henry II and Philip had been confronted with the problem of whether or not to commit their forces to battle the most difficult and terrible decision to face an army commander — and they had drawn back.
A few days later, on the morning of 3 July, in a camp at Saffuriya in Galilee another king, the King of Jerusalem, alter a night of doubt and conflicting advice, took the opposite decision.
A powerful Muslim force was besieging his city of Tiberias and he gave the order to advance to its relief knowing full well that by leaving his camp he was risking battle.
He did not reach Tiberias.
Marching in fierce summer heat and unrelentingly harassed by Muslim mounted archers, the army was forced to halt at Hattin, in a waterless region, in the hope of being  able to continue next day.
The Christian soldiers spent a thirsty and sleepless night, their eyes smarting from the smoke which blew into their camp as the enemy systematically set fire to the dry scrub around them.
When morning came the King, Guy of Lusignan, could see what he must have known already.
His exhausted army was completely surrounded.
Inspired by the presence of their most sacred relic, the Holy Cross, the Christian soldiers put up a tremendous fight.
But the outcome of the battle was a foregone conclusion.
On 4 July the army of Jerusalem was annihilated.
Guy of Lusignan and the Holy Cross were captured.
Those Templars and Hospitallers who survived the battle itself were executed immediately afterwards.
As the elite troops of the Christian army these monk-knights could not be allowed to live to fight another day.
With practically all its fighting men either killed or captured, the Kingdom of Jerusalem lay helpless at the feet of the invader.
In an attempt to appease the wrath of God and save Jerusalem itself, the defenders of the Holy City indulged in extraordinary rituals of penance.
Mothers shaved the heads of their daughters and then made them undress to take cold baths in public on the Hill of Calvary.
It was in vain.
On 2 October the Muslim army marched into the city.
The al-Aqsa mosque was restored to Islam.
But it is symptomatic of the greater tolerance of the Muslims that the Jewish community was allowed to return to Jerusalem and four Christian priests were allowed to hold services in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Ever since 1099, when the first crusaders captured the Holy City and massacred the people who lived there, Jews and Muslims alike, the Christians had always treated Jerusalem as though it belonged to them alone.
Guy of Lusignan had been beaten by a greater man.
The Muslim leader was Al-Malik al-Nasir Salah ed-Din Yusuf; in the West he was known as Saladin.
Whereas Guy had only arrived in the Middle East in 1180 and at the time of his defeat had been King of Jerusalem for less than a year, Saladin had ruled Egypt since 1169 and Syria since 1176.
His legendary reputation in the Muslim world as the liberator of Jerusalem has at times obscured the fact that he was an ambitious, skilful and experienced statesman.
He had received his political education in the household of Nur ed-Din, ruler of Syria from 1154 to 1174 and in those years the crusaders' greatest enemy.
From Nur ed-Din Saladin learned to appreciate the importance of jihad, the Holy War against the unbelievers, as the powerful religious force which alone was capable of uniting the divided Muslim world.
Like Nur ed-Din, Saladin became the champion of Islamic orthodoxy and unity, the patron and friend of poets and preachers whose eloquence was pressed into the service of the jihad — and its leader.
Although as a general he may be faulted, in diplomatic skill and political understanding he towered head and shoulders above his Middle Eastern rivals, Muslim and Christian alike.
No man knew better than he the value of a generous gesture.
Guy of Lusignan was by no means the handsome fool he has often been made out to be, but his grip on the crown was precarious and the resources of his kingdom were depleted.
Against the mighty Saladin he had very little chance.
By the end of 1187 only three coastal towns — Tyre, Tripoli and Antioch were left in Christian hands.
Inland a handful of castles still held out.
Many garrisons had surrendered quickly because they knew they could rely on Saladin to keep his word to spare their lives.
Outremer — "the land beyond the sea" — was on the verge of extinction, less than a hundred years alter the men of the First Crusade had called it into life.
Since the failure of the Second Crusade in 1148 the young men of Western Europe had been reluctant to go east, but the news of the disaster at Hattin and the fall of Jerusalem changed all that.
In the autumn Richard took the cross at Tours, in the new cathedral which was rising in place of the old one where, sixty years earlier, his great-grandfather, Fulk V of Anjou, had lain prostrate before the high altar to receive the cross on the way to becoming King of Jerusalem.
Now another Angevin had responded to the call for help.
North of the Alps he was the first prince to announce that he was going on crusade.
He acted in haste, without seeking his father's permission.
As for Philip, the prospect of seeing the man who was supposed to marry his sister go off on crusade for an indefinite period seems to have been too much for him.
Immediately after Christmas, despite the truce, he gathered a large army and threatened to invade unless Henry either returned Gisors or forced Richard to marry Alice.
The two Kings held another  conference on the border between Gisors and Trie on 21 January 1188.
But instead of talking about Gisors, they talked about Jerusalem.
They listened to an impassioned sermon delivered by the Archbishop of Tyre and were moved to take the cross themselves.
According to Roger of Howden, as they did so, the shape of a cross could be seen outlined in the sky above their heads.
As long ago as 1172 Henry II had promised to mount a crusade and ever since then he had done nothing about it — though he had given a good deal of financial aid to the stricken kingdom.
Philip was as reluctant as Henry, but the two Kings were now swept along by the tide of public opinion.
In every way possible preachers and troubadours stirred up enthusiasm.
Men who did not take the cross received gifts of distaff and wool, implying that they were no better than women.
According to Muslim reports, the preachers used visual adds: "Among other things they made a picture showing the Messiah, and an Arab striking him, showing blood on the face of Christ — blessings on Him!— and they said to the crowds: " This is the Messiah, struck by Mahomet the prophet of the Muslims, who has wounded and killed him. "" 
In another picture,
Jerusalem was painted showing the Church of the Resurrection with the Messiah's tomb.
Above the tomb there was a horse, and mounted on it was a Saracen knight who was trampling the tomb, over which his horse was urinating.
This picture was sent abroad to markets and meeting places.
Priests carried it about, groaning "Oh, the shame." 
In this way they raised a huge army, God alone knows how many.
The rewards offered to those who took the cross were considerable.
On the most mundane level, repayment of any debts they owed was postponed until their return; while they were on the crusade their property was taken under the protection of the church.
More important, they were granted a plenary indulgence which freed them from the terrors of purgatory and hell, and held out to them the promise of eternal life in heaven.
In the words of St Bernard of Clairvaux, the most successful saint of the twelfth century, they were being offered an amazing bargain:
O mighty soldier, O man of war, at last you have a cause for which you can fight without endangering your soul; a cause in which to win is  glorious and for which to die is but gain.
Are you a shrewd businessman, quick to see the profits of this world?
If you are, I can offer you a bargain which you cannot afford to miss.
Take the sign of the cross.
At once you will have indulgence for all the sins which you confess with a contrite heart.
The cross is cheap and if you wear it with humility you will find that you have obtained the Kingdom of Heaven.
Unlike his father, Richard was genuinely committed to the crusading cause.
He was a soldier and no war could bring greater prestige than the war against the Saracens, the war in the Holy Land, the emotional centre of the Christian world.
On this battleground no act of bravery, no deed of chivalry, would go unrecorded.
But it would be a mistake to think that Richard was indifferent to the attractions of a plenary indulgence.
While at Messina, en route for the Holy Land, he seems to have been overcome by a sense of the wickedness of his life.
He summoned all the archbishops and bishops who were with him in Sicily and flung himself to the ground at their feet.
Then, naked and holding three scourges in his hands, he confessed his sins.
What these sins were Roger of Howden does not tell us and any guess is bound to be a subjective one, reflecting upon ourselves and upon our age rather than upon Richard's behaviour.
For example the German scholar who wrote a monumental life of Philip Augustus in six volumes and, in the process, came to study Richard's career with great thoroughness, believed that "he had abandoned himself entirely to the pleasures of Messina where the women seemed very seductive to warriors from the North" .
Whatever his sins it is clear that a man subject to such fits of remorse would have been well aware that a crusade was a religious act as well as a great military adventure.
At Beaulieu Abbey near Loches he would have seen the piece of stone from the Holy Sepulchre which his notoriously savage ancestor Count Fulk the Black was believed to have bitten off while kneeling down to pray there on one of his three pilgrimages to Jerusalem.
And to a penitent soldier a crusade was even better than an unarmed pilgrimage.
As the troubadour Pous de Capdeuil put it, "What more can kings desire than the right to save themselves from hell-fire by mighty deeds of arms?" 
Crusades required organization as well as enthusiasm.
At the conference on 21 January it had been agreed that the men of the King  of France should wear red crosses, the men of the King of England white crosses and the men of the Count of Flanders green crosses.
Later that month other decrees were issued at Le Mans, where Richard had joined his father and a host of barons from Anjou, Maine and Touraine.
These included arrangements for the collection of a crusading tax known as the Saladin Tithe, details of the financial privileges to be enjoyed by the crusaders and a set of rules of conduct which they were supposed to observe.
They were not to swear or gamble, and the only women who were to be allowed on crusade were washerwomen of good character (for crusaders were supposed to be neatly, though not ostentatiously dressed).
According to Roger of Howden the fact that crusaders were exempted from paying the Saladin Tithe meant that the publication of the edict of Le Mans was followed by a great rush to take the cross.
Many contemporaries believed that Richard was unwilling to wait until the two Kings had completed their long-drawn-out preparations.
He wanted to go on crusade at once, but his father would not let him.
It is by no means certain that this is true.
Later on Richard was to show beyond all doubt that he recognized the value of careful and methodical preparation.
But what is unquestionably true is that he spent much of I 188 not on the way to the Holy Land but in the castles and camps of south-western France, and that widespread rumour said that his enemies were bribed and incited into action by his own father, determined to keep Richard back until they could go together.
The rumours must have reached Richard's ears — indeed they may have been primarily intended for him.
They possessed a certain plausibility in as much as Richard could not have gone on crusade without first ensuring that his position as his father's heir was fully and publicly recognized in the most formal manner possible, while everything about Henry's policy in the last four years indicated that he was reluctant to make any such announcement.
Even while Richard was attending the crusading conference at Le Mans a rebellion broke out in Aquitaine.
According to one account the signal for revolt was given when Geoffrey de Lusignan killed one of the Duke's closest advisers.
He was then joined by his  old associates, Ademar of Angoulême and Geoffrey de Rancon, and together they ravaged some of Richard's lands.
Ademar had become the undisputed head of the Taillefer family after the death of his brother William a few years earlier.
It looks as though Richard had some time ago given up his insistence that Angoulême should be inherited by Vulgrin's daughter Matilda.
None the less old grievances like the Taillefer claim to La Marche were still outstanding and Richard may have added new ones by demanding a high price in return for agreeing to recognize Ademar as Count.
We only possess one piece of information with which to lend precision to the general statement that Richard went through the rebels' lands with fire and sword, capturing and demolishing their fortresses, and this suggests that Geoffrey de Rancon's castle of Taillebourg was once again at the centre of events.
As in 1179, however, it fell before Richard's onslaught.
The rebels were forced to sue for peace — and they received it, but only on condition that they too took the cross.
In the case of Geoffrey de Lusignan at least, this enforced vow was speedily fulfilled, since he reached Outremer at some date during the summer of 1188.
No sooner was this revolt put down than Richard became involved in a new war with Count Raymond of Toulouse.
The two of them had been at daggers drawn ever since 1183, and in recent months, as incident followed incident, tension had been building up to a new peak.
Raymond was accused of arresting some Aquitainian merchants as they crossed his lands and then either imprisoning, blinding, castrating or killing them.
In the course of one of Richard's retaliatory raids he captured an important man, Peter Seillan, a member of the family which governed the city of Toulouse on the Count's behalf and one of his closest advisers.
Since Richard held Seillan responsible for much of the trouble he refused to release him, either for a ransom or in exchange for prisoners taken by Count Raymond, even though these now included two of King Henry's household knights, who had apparently wandered into the territory of Toulouse on their way back from the shrine of Compostella.
But Raymond was equally intransigent: he refused to free the pilgrims except in return for Peter Seillan.
King Philip travelled south in an attempt to make peace but faced with such  stubbornness on both sides he was forced to return with nothing accomplished.
His irritation at this failure to control his warring vassals was further increased in the spring of 1188 when Richard, no longer distracted by rebellion, launched his Brabançons in a massive attack on Toulouse.
This time it was not a question of skirmishing along the border, but of a major re-occupation of territory lost since 1183.
Within a short space of time Richard had captured no less than seventeen castles and with garrisons installed in Cahors and Moissac was firmly in control of the Quercy.
As his army approached close to the walls of Toulouse itself the townspeople seized the opportunity to emancipate themselves from comital authority.
With his whole political position in western Toulouse crumbling, Raymond again appealed for help to his overlord, King Philip, and this time his appeal was answered.
Arguing that Richard's attack on Toulouse was a breach of the truce of 1187 — which Richard denied — Philip invaded Berry for the second time in twelve months, though he first took care to ascertain that Henry II disclaimed any responsibility for his son's actions and was therefore unlikely to move swiftly to his assistance.
He took with him a full train of siege artillery with sappers and engineers.
On 16 June he captured Châteauroux and this time it fell into his lap so easily that men talked of treason.
A few ducal castles held out, but apart from these the whole of Berry was prepared to recognize Philip's authority.
Further north, and a few miles west of Fréteval, which Philip had held since last June, the lord of Vendôme switched his allegiance to France.
Richard hurried back to the defence of his north-eastern frontier.
His father, shaken by the speed of the collapse and alarmed by the imminent threat to Loches and other key castles in the Angevin heartland, hastily mustered an army in England.
It included a large force of Welsh infantry — soldiers who were soon to win a fearsome reputation for themselves.
Narrowly escaping shipwreck in a tremendous storm in the Channel Henry reached Normandy on 11 July.
On learning of Henry's movements Philip withdrew from Berry in order to defend his border with Normandy.
Thus Richard was free to recover much of the lost terrain unhindered by the presence of a hostile field army.
But the central fortress of Châteauroux itself, under the command of Philip's most  famous knight, William des Barres, resisted all his efforts to capture it.
Indeed in one melee outside the gates Richard was thrown from his horse and rescued only by the strong arm of a sturdy butcher.
In the meantime, however, Henry II had made no attempt to invade France; not relishing the prospect of another confrontation like that at Châteauroux in 1187, he preferred to keep his army encamped within Normandy.
This enabled Philip to seize the initiative again.
Leaving his Norman border in the capable hands of his cousin, the warlike Bishop of Beauvais, he advanced westwards from Vendôme, along the valley of the Loire.
But he was checked at Trou.
Although he captured some knights and burned down the town, he was unable to take the castle.
A castle garrison was sometimes glad to see their town reduced to ashes, reckoning that it simplified the task of defence.
Richard at once countered Philip's thrust by moving into the Loire valley himself.
He captured Les Roches, a fortress halfway between Trou and Vendôme.
Philip then returned to Paris, while Richard, keeping abreast of him, rode on to Normandy.
Only after his son's arrival at his camp did Henry II rouse himself from the passivity of the last month.
He had done little except reiterate his protests against Philip's invasion of his dominions.
But the King of France had shown a contemptuous disregard for Henry's complaints.
At the end of a conference at Gisors in mid-August he had hewn down the famous elm tree which marked the border and was the traditional meeting place of Kings of France and Dukes of Normandy.
In his view peace conferences were a waste of time; the old elm had outlived its usefulness.
Clearly if Henry's protests were to be taken seriously he would have to match his words with deeds.
On 30 August 1188 the Angevin army crossed the border near Pacy-sur-Eure and marched towards Mantes, where Philip was believed to be staying.
Richard was involved in a skirmish with some French knights, among them his old opponent William des Barres, who recognized him by the lion on his shield.
What really happened is anyone's guess but afterwards each accused the other of cheating.
Richard claimed that William des Barres surrendered to him and was released on parole while he went in pursuit of more victims.
This was standard practice, both in tournaments and in war, but the French knight, he said, broke parole and escaped  on a squire's rouncy.
William claimed that Richard cheated by plunging his sword into William's horse when he found that he could not win by fair means.
Despite the conflicting accounts it is clear that Richard had the upper hand and that William des Barres lost his valuable war-horse.
Clashes like this one, between individual knights or groups of knights, often seem to be the main ingredient of medieval war as described by contemporary chroniclers.
It made good sense, of course, for the writers to celebrate the deeds of prowess of their aristocratic patrons.
But such knightly combats, whether chivalrously conducted or not, were in fact only a very small part of war.
As Henry's army advanced towards Mantes it burned and looted everything which lay in its path.
What"this meant is made crystal clear by the description of an army on the march in the Chartson des Lorrains:
The march begins.
Out in front are the scouts and incendiaries.
After them come the foragers whose job it is to collect the spoils and carry them in the great baggage train.
Soon all is in tumult.
The peasants, having just come out to the fields, turn back, uttering loud cries.
The shepherds gather their flocks and drive them towards the neighbouring woods in the hope of saving them.
The incendiaries set the villages on fire and the foragers visit and sack them.
The terrified inhabitants are either burned or led away with their hands tied to be held for ransom.
Everywhere bells ring the alarm; a surge of fear sweeps over the countryside.
Wherever you look you can see helmets glinting in the sun, pennons waving in the breeze, the whole plain covered with horsemen.
Money, cattle, mules and sheep are all seized.
The smoke billows and spreads, flames crackle.
Peasants and shepherds scatter in all directions.
This was the classic method of waging war.
 "This is how war is begun: such is my advice," said Count Philip of Flanders in 1174.
 "First destroy the land." 
That evening, on 30 August 1188, Henry's army returned to Ivry loaded down with plunder.
Next day, having seen his father stirred into action at last, Richard headed back to Berry, burning Vendôme on the way.
The war continued into the autumn but increasingly half-heartedly on both sides.
The needs of harvest and vintage, the expense of keeping large numbers of men in arms and the reluctance of some of the leading French nobles to fight against princes who, like  themselves, had taken the cross, all combined to persuade Philip, despite his dramatic gesture at Gisors, to ask for another peace conference.
Richard and the two Kings met on 7 October at Châtillon-sur-Indre, on the border between Touraine and Berry.
There is no doubt that Philip had an advantage on occasions like this since he alone represented France while the Angevins were represented by two princes whose interests diverged somewhat and whose differences could be, and were, skilfully exploited by the Capetian King.
Philip consistently offered to return his conquests in Berry on condition that Richard's conquests in Toulouse were handed back to count Raymond.
While both Angevins would naturally have liked to get their own way in both regions it is likely that the Quercy meant more to Richard than it did to Henry.
At Châtillon the Old King was apparently willing to accept the proposed exchange and this might explain why Richard rounded on Philip, calling him a "vile recreant" .
Philip, however, seems to have overplayed his hand, demanding that Henry surrender Pacy-sur-Eure as security while the exchange was being carried out and causing the English King to break off the conference in indignation.
So far as Richard was concerned if his father was eventually going to insist that he give up his conquests then it was at least possible that he would get better terms if he approached Philip directly and offered to abide by the judgement of the French court.
Philip would doubtless be gratified by an explicit recognition of his position as overlord of Aquitaine and Toulouse and might well concede something in return.
This, at any rate, was the offer which Richard made to the King of France while the latter was disbanding his mercenaries at Bourges.
Although Richard claimed that he took this initiative in the hope of bringing about peace so that the crusade could get under way, his father objected strongly, presumably on the grounds that the general position of the Angevins would be weakened if they admitted the principle that their disputes could be settled in their overlord's court.
This was the beginning of the final breach between Henry and his son.
Once Richard had begun to negotiate directly with Philip it was relatively easy for the King of France to play upon his fears, and above all on the fear engendered by the common gossip that the Old King wanted to disinherit him  and confer the crown upon John.
Why had John not taken the cross?
Soon Richard and Philip were in agreement and, at the Duke's insistence, a fresh peace conference was arranged.
In order to have peace and Philip's support in his bid to be recognized, once and for all, as heir to the throne, it seems that Richard was at long last ready to marry Alice.
The three men met at Bonsmoulins on 18 November.
Henry II was understandably disconcerted when Richard and Philip arrived together.
The atmosphere was very tense.
On the first day of the conference all parties were able to keep a grip on themselves and talk calmly.
On the second the strain began to tell.
Some sharp words were exchanged.
By the third day they were quarrelling openly and at times so fiercely that the knights standing around went for their swords.
Philip had opened the proceedings by again suggesting an exchange of conquests, but Richard opposed this, arguing that this would mean that he gave up lands, including the Quercy, which brought him an annual revenue of a thousand marks or more, in return for estates in Berry which, though they were fiefs belonging to Aquitaine, were in fact held by other lords and so were of very little direct financial benefit to him.
It is possible that this difference of opinion was pre-arranged and intended simply to minimize the extent of the cooperation between Richard and Philip as a preliminary to the new proposal which the King of France now made and which clearly had been worked out between them.
Philip offered to return all his gains of the last year on one condition: that Henry gave Alice in marriage to Richard and made his barons, both in England and on the Continent, swear an oath of fealty to Richard as heir.
But the Old King rejected this, saying that he refused to act under pressure of this kind.
Finally Richard, in the hearing of all, asked his father if he would recognize him as his heir.
This blunt and simple question was the crux.
Henry remained silent.
 "Now at last" , said Richard, "I must believe what I had always thought was impossible." 
Then he turned to Philip and, going on his knees before him, did homage for Normandy, Aquitaine, Anjou, Maine, Berry and his conquests in Toulouse.
Saving only the fealty which he owed to his father he swore allegiance to Philip against all men.
In other words, in return for this act of homage, the King  of France was prepared to restore all of his gains while permitting Richard to keep all of his.
After this shattering denouement there seemed little more that could be done at Bonsmoulins.
The Kings agreed to meet again in mid-January 1189 and made a truce to last until then.
It may be that Henry II was not plotting to make John his heir.
Certainly, so far as we can see, he took no steps to promote the interests of his younger son, apart from not insisting that he take the cross.
It is not hard to imagine that the Old King was obsessed by the problems that had arisen alter he had recognized young Henry as his heir and was determined not to make the same mistake again.
But in fact it would not have been the same mistake.
Richard was not Henry.
In character he was very different from his dead elder brother.
He was now thirty-one years old and a soldier and politician of great experience.
When entrusted with government he did not make a mess of it; if deprived of his rights he would make a much more serious opponent than the Young King.
In Philip of France moreover he had as Henry II was well aware — an ally vastly different from the Louis VII of the 1170s.
The costs of treating Richard in this fashion were far greater than the gains to be made from keeping him in suspense about his future.
In W. L. Warren's words, "Henry had adopted the tactic of trying to discipline Richard by keeping him in uncertainty and had then become caught in the toils of his own deviousness." 
The tactic worked for a while but it was madness to remain obstinately wedded to it while his son's frustration increased and while men pressed for an end to political uncertainty in order to permit the launching of the crusade.
At last the Old King's touch had deserted him.
As he kept the last Christmas of his life at Saumur, he can hardly have failed to see how many of his barons stayed away, a sure sign that they were preparing to transfer their allegiance to Richard and Philip.
In these cheerless circumstances Henry fell ill and was unable to attend the peace talks in January 1189.
But his enemies believed that the sickness was just another of his delaying tactics and so they renewed the war as soon as the truce expired.
They were at once joined by the Bretons rising in rebellion against the King who had done much to limit their independence.
Henry sent envoy after envoy to  Richard in the hope of calling him back to his side, but not even when he used an ambassador as distinguished as the Archbishop of Canterbury was his son to be persuaded.
Quite simply Richard no longer believed anything his father said.
Henry also sent messengers separately to Philip, presumably in the hope of driving a wedge between the allies, but Richard had instructed one of his most trusted advisers, his chancellor William Longchamp, to remain at the French court and look after his interests.
Not until after Easter was King Henry well enough to attend a conference, but even then nothing was achieved.
Eventually a papal legate, John of Anagni, arrived in northern France on a peace-making mission and he was able to obtain an undertaking from both Kings that they would abide by the decisions of an arbitration panel consisting of himself and four Archbishops, Rheims, Bourges, Rouen and Canterbury.
At Whitsun they all assembled at La Ferté-Bernard in Maine, twenty-five miles north-east of Le Mans.
Both sides came frilly armed and on their guard.
There Philip and Richard laid down three conditions upon which they were prepared to make peace.
Alice should be married to Richard.
Henry should acknowledge Richard as his heir.
John should take the cross.
Richard indeed added that there was no way that he would go to Jerusalem unless his younger brother went with him.
Henry rejected these terms and made a counter-proposal, that Alice should marry John, which he must have known would be unacceptable.
John of Anagni threatened to lay an interdict on France if Philip did not come to terms with Henry, but Philip was unmoved and observed that the legate's money bags were obviously full of English silver.
With that the conference came to an end and Henry withdrew to Le Mans.
But Philip and Richard did not withdraw to the frontier.
Instead they launched a successful surprise attack on La Ferté-Bernard.
Then, in quick succession, other castles to the north-east of Le Mans — Montfort, Maletable, Beaumont and Ballon — were handed over to Richard.
On 12 June, after a feint in the direction of Tours, Richard and Philip suddenly swooped on Le Mans itself.
Henry II fled northwards towards Normandy, abandoning the town in which he was born.
Hard on his heels came the pursuit, and at the head of the pursuers was Richard.
They caught up with Henry's  rearguard, which was under William Marshal's command and, in William's opinion, would have overwhelmed them had not William himself saved the day.
He turned and rode straight at Richard.
Because they had both anticipated, not a fight, but a long, hard ride neither of them was wearing a hauberk and as William levelled his lance Richard suddenly saw the danger he was in.
 "By God's legs" — one of his favourite oaths —"do not kill me, Marshal.
That would be wrong, I am unarmed."
 "No, let the Devil kill you," retorted William, "for I won't." 
Then, adjusting his aim, he ran his lance through Richard's horse.
The story of the Lionheart's narrow escape was told by William Marshal himself and since William never suffered from modesty it may have been improved in the telling.
But that something like this happened is very probable.
Within a few weeks Richard was loading Marshal with honours, lands and responsibility and an incident such as this, combining skill at arms with sound political common sense, could well have impressed him.
At all events the pursuit came to a sudden halt and Henry was able to make good his escape in peace.
But the Old King was far from being at peace.
Instead of pushing on to Normandy to muster an army and then return to Maine in force, he switched direction and went home to die.
With just a handful of followers he rode to Chinon, the castle of his ancestors, and stayed there, ill and exhausted, while Richard and Philip overran Maine and Touraine.
On 3 July Tours itself, the strategic key to the whole empire, fell.
Next day Henry, though in such agony that he could hardly sit on his horse, met Philip and Richard at Ballon and there agreed to the terms which they dictated.
He would pay Philip 20,000 marks and in all things submit to his judgement.
Alice was to be handed over to a guardian nominated by Richard, who would marry her after his return from crusade.
Henry's subjects, both in England and on the Continent, were to swear allegiance to Richard.
The starting date of the crusade was fixed for Lent 1190 when both Kings and Richard were to muster at Vézelay.
If Henry failed to abide by these terms his barons were to transfer their allegiance to Philip and Richard.
According to Gerald of Wales, who gives the most vivid, if not the most reliable, account of these days, Henry was then required to give Richard the kiss of peace.
As he  pretended to do so he hissed in his son's ear, "God grant that I may not die until I have had my revenge on you." 
The conference over, Henry was carried back to Chinon on a litter and there, on 6 July 1189, he died.
He had not obtained his revenge.
Indeed his last hours had been made even more bitter by the news that John had deserted him.
The news of the fall of Le Mans had convinced him that his father's ship was sinking.
From Chinon Henry's body was carried to Fontevraud and laid in the abbey church.
When Richard arrived at Fontevraud he strode directly into the church, saying nothing.
Without showing any sign of emotion he stood for a while at the head of the bier.
Then he turned away.
He was king now and there was work to be done.