

It was getting dark when Alice woke.
She heard Bert's laugh, a deep ho, ho, ho, from the kitchen.
That's not his own laugh, Alice thought.
I wonder what that would be like?
Tee hee hee more likely.
No, he made that laugh up for himself.
Reliable and comfortable.
Manly.
Voices and laughs, we make them up…
Roberta's made-up voice, comfortable.
And that was Pat's quick light voice and her laugh.
Her own laugh?
Perhaps.
So they were both back and that meant that Jasper was too.
Alice was out of her sleeping-bag, and tugging on a sweater, a smile on her face that went with her feelings for Jasper: admiration and wistful love.
But Jasper was not in the kitchen with the other two, who  were glowing, happy, fulfilled, and eating fish and chips.
 "It's all right, Alice," said Pat, pulling out a chair for her.
"They arrested him, but it's not serious.
He'll be in court tomorrow morning at Enfield.
Back here by lunchtime."
 "Unless he's bound over?" asked Bert.
 "He was bound over for two years in Leeds, but that ended last month." 
 "Last month?" said Pat.
Her eyes met Bert's, found no reflection there of what she was thinking — probably against her will, Alice believed; and, so as not to meet Alice's, lowered themselves to the business of eating one golden crisp fatty chip after another.
This was not the first time Alice had caught suggestions that Jasper liked being bound over — needed the edge it put on life.
She said apologetically "Well, he has had to be careful so long, watching every tiny little thing he does, I suppose…" 
She was examining Bert who, she knew, could tell her what she needed to know about the arrest.
Jasper was arrested, but Bert not; that in itself…
Pat pushed over some chips, and Alice primly ate one or two, thinking about cholesterol.
 "How many did they arrest?" 
"Seven.
Three we didn't know.
But the others were John, Clarissa and Charlie.
And Jasper."
 "None of the trade union comrades?" 
 "No." 
A silence.
Then Bert, "They have been fining people twenty-five pounds." 
Alice said automatically, "Then probably Jasper will get fifty pounds." 
"He thought twenty-five.
I gave him twenty so he'd have enough."
Alice, who had been about to get up, ready to leave, said quickly,"He doesn't want me down there?
Who not?
What did he say?"
Pat said, carefully, "He asked me to tell you not to come down." 
"But I've always been there when he's been arrested.
Always.
I've been in court every time."
 "That's what he said," said Bert.
 "Tell Alice not to bother." 
Alice sat thinking so intently that the kitchen, Bert and Pat, even the house around her vanished.
She was down at the scene of the picket.
The van loaded with newspapers appeared in the gates, its sinister gleaming look telling everyone to hate it; the pickets surged forward, shouting; and there was Jasper, as she had seen him so often, his pale face distorted with a look of abstracted and dedicated hate, his reddish crop of gleaming hair.
He was always the first to be arrested, she thought proudly, he was so dedicated, so obviously — even to the police self-sacrificing.
Pure.
But there was something that didn't fit.
She said, "Did you decide not to get arrested for any reason, Bert?" 
Because, if that had been so, one could have expected Jasper too to have returned home.
Bert said, "Jasper found someone down there, someone who might be very useful to us." 
At once the scene fell into shape in Alice's mind.
 "Was he one of the three you didn't know?" 
 "That's it," said Bert.
 "That's it exactly." 
He yawned.
He said,"I hate to have to ask, but could you let me have the twenty pounds?
Jasper said I should ask you."
Alice counted out the money.
She did not let her gaze rise from this task.
Pat said nicely,"That little bundle won't last long at this rate.
 "No." 
Alice was praying: Let Bert go.
Let him go upstairs.
I want to talk to Pat.
She was thinking this so hard that she was not surprised when he stood up and said, "I'm going to drop around to Felicity's and get myself a real bath." 
 "I'll come in a minute," said Pat.
Bert went, and the two women sat on.
Alice asked "What is the name of that man next door?" 
 "Lenin?" said Pat.
Alice gratefully laughed with her, feeling privileged and special in this intimacy with Pat that admitted her into important conspiracy.
Pat went on, "He says his name is Andrew." 
 "Where would you say he was from?" 
"Good question.
 "Ever such an American accent," said Alice.
 "The new world language." 
 "Yes." 
They exchanged looks.
Having said all they needed to on this subject, they left it, and Alice said after a pause,"I went round this afternoon.
To ask them to do something about that mess."
 "Good idea." 
 "What's in all those packages?" 
"Leaflets.
Books.
So it is said."
 "But with the police around all the time?" 
"The packages weren't there the day before yesterday.
And I bet they'll be gone by tomorrow.
Or gone already."
 "Did you actually see the leaflets?" 
"No, but I asked.
That's what he said — Andrew.
Propaganda material."
Again a subject was left behind, by unspoken consent.
Pat said, "I gather Bert thinks this comrade the one Jasper was talking to at Melstead may have some useful leads." 
 "You mean, for the I.R.A.?" 
 "Yes, I think so" 
 "Did you hear anything of what they said?" 
"No.
But Bert was there part of the time."
At this Alice could have asked, What does Bert think of him?
But she did not care what Bert thought.
Pat's assessment, yes.
"What did he look like?
Perhaps I know him,"she asked.
 "He wasn't one of the usual crowd?" 
"I've never seen him before, I'm sure.
Nothing special to report."
"Did Comrade Andrew tell you to go down to the picket?
Did he say anything about Melstead to you?
How many times have you been next door?"
Pat smiled and replied, though she indicated by her manner that there was no reason why she should,"I have been next door twice.
Bert and Jasper have been over much more often.
As for Melstead, I get the impression that Comrade Andrew "and she slightly emphasised the" comrade ", as if Alice would do well to think about it," that Comrade Andrew is not all that keen on  cadres from outside joining the pickets."
Alice said hotly,"Yes, but it is our struggle too.
It is a struggle for all the progressive forces in the country.
Melstead is a focal point for imperialist fascism, and it is not just the business of the Melstead trade unionists."
 "You asked," said Pat.
And then, "In my view, Comrade Andrew has bigger fish to fry." 
A thrill went through Alice, as when someone who has been talking for a lifetime about unicorns suddenly glimpses one.
She looked with tentative excitement at Pat who, it seemed, did not know what she had said.
If she had not been implying that they, the comrades at No. 43 Old Mill Road, had unwittingly come closer to great events, then what did she mean?
But Pat was getting up.
Terminating the discussion.
Alice wanted her to stay.
She could not believe that Pat was ready to go off now, at this thrilling moment when fabulous happenings seemed imminent.
But Pat was stretching her arms about and yawning.
Her smile was luxurious, and as her eyes did briefly meet Alice's, she seemed actually to be tantalising and teasing.
She's so sensual, Alice indignantly thought.
But she said,"I asked — Comrade Andrew, if we can use a room in that house for meetings.
I mean, meetings of the inner group."
"So did we.
He said yes."
Pat smiled, lowered her arms, and then stood looking at Alice, without smiling, saying with her body that she had had enough of Alice, and wanted to go.
 "Where are our new comrades?" 
She was on her way to the door.
 "They are upstairs." 
"I doubt whether we shall see much of them.
Still, they are all right."
She yawned, elaborately, and said,"Too much effort to go chasing out for a bath.
Bert can put up with me as I am".
She went, and Alice sat still until she had heard her go up the stairs, and the closing of her door.
Then she swiftly went out of the house.
It was too early for what she was going to do.
The street, though dark, had the feeling of the end of the day, with cars turning in to park, others leaving for the evening entertainments, a restlessness of lights.
But the traffic was pounding up the main road with the  intensity of daytime.
She dawdled along to look into the garden of 45.
It seemed to her that a start had been made on the rubbish; yes, it had, and some filled sacks stood by the hedge, the plastic gleaming blackly.
She saw two figures bending over a patch towards the back; not far from the pit she and Pat and Jim had dug, though a big hedge stood between.
Were they digging a pit too?
It was very dark back there.
Lights from Joan Robbins's top windows illuminated the higher levels of No. 45, but did not reach the thickets of the overgrown garden.
Alice loitered around for a while, and no one came in or out, and she could not see Comrade Andrew through the downstairs windows, for the curtains were drawn.
She went to the Underground, sat on the train planning what she was going to do, and walked up the big rich tree-lined road where Theresa and Anthony had their home.
She stood on the pavement looking up at the windows of their kitchen on the third floor.
She imagined that they were sitting there on opposite sides of the little table they used when they were alone.
Delicious food.
Her mouth was actually watering as she thought of Theresa's cooking.
If she rang the bell, she would hear Theresa's voice: Darling Alice, is that you?
Do come in.
She would go up, join them in their long comfortable evening, their food.
Her mother might even drop in.
But at this thought rage grasped her and shook her with red-hot hands, so that her eyes went dark and she found herself walking fast up the road, and then along another, and another, walking as though she would explode if she stopped.
She walked for a long time, while the feeling of the streets changed to night.
She directed herself to her father's street.
She walked along it casually.
The lights were on downstairs, every window spilled out light.
Upstairs was a low glow from the room where the babies slept.
Too early.
She walked some more, around and back, past Theresa and Anthony, where kitchen windows were now dark, up to the top of the hill, down and around and into her father's street.
Now the lights were dark downstairs, but on in the bedroom.
An hour or so ago, she had seen a stone of the right size and shape lying on the edge of a garden, and had put it into her pocket.
She looked up and down the quiet street, where the lights made golden leafy spaces in the trees.
A couple, arm-in-arm, came  slowly up from the direction of the Underground.
Old.
An old couple.
They were absorbed in the effort of walking, did not see Alice.
Who went to the end of the street, nevertheless, and came back briskly on the impetus of her need, her decision.
There was now not a soul in the street.
As she reached her father's house she walked straight in at the gate, which she hardly bothered to open quietly, and flung the stone as hard as she could at the glass of the bedroom window.
This movement, the single hard clear line of the throw, with her whole body behind it; and then the complete turn in the swing of the throw, and her hound out to the pavement the speed and force of it, the skill, could never have been deduced from how Alice was, at any other time of the day or night, good-girl Alice, her mother's daughter…
She heard the shattering glass, a scream, her father's shout.
But she was gone, she had run down in the thick tree shadows to a side street, was down that and in the busy main street within sixty seconds after she had thrown the stone.
She was breathing too hard, too noisily she stood looking into a window to slow her breath.
She realised it was crammed full of television sets, and sedately moved to the next, to examine dresses, until she could walk into the Supermarket without anyone remarking her breathing.
There she stayed a good twenty minutes, choosing and rejecting.
She took the loaded wire basket to the outlet, paid, filled her carrier bags, and went homewards by Underground.
Since the stone had left her hand she had scarcely thought about what might be happening in her father's house.
Now, seeing the sober blue gleam from the Police Station she went in.
At the Reception Desk, no one, but she could hear voices from a part of the room that was out of sight.
She rang.
No one came.
She rang again, peremptorily.
A young policewoman came out, took a good look at her, decided to be annoyed, and went back.
Alice rang again.
Now the young woman, as tidy and trim in her dark uniform as Alice in hers jeans and bomber jacket came slowly towards her, an annoyed, decided little face showing that words were being chosen to put Alice in her place.
Alice said,"It might have been an emergency, how were you to know?
As it happens, it isn't.
So you are lucky."
The policewoman's face suddenly suffused with scarlet, she gasped, her eyes widened.
Alice said, "I have come to report on an agreed squat — you know, short-term housing — surely you know…" 
 "At this time of night?" the policewoman said smartly, in an attempt to regain mastery.
 "It can't be much more than eleven," said Alice.
 "I didn't know you had a set time for dealing with housing." 
The policewoman said,"Since you're here, let's do it.
What do you want to report".
Alice spelled it out.
"You people were around — a raid, three nights ago.
You had not understood that it was an agreed tenancy — with the Council.
I explained the situation.
Now I've come to confirm it.
It was agreed at the regular meeting of the Council, today."
 "What's the address." 
 "No. 43 Old Mill Road." 
A little flicker of something showed on the policewoman's face.
 "Wait a minute," she said and disappeared.
Alice listened to voices, male and female.
The policewoman came back, with a man; Alice recognised him as one of those from the other night.
She was disappointed it was not the one who had kicked in the door.
 "Ah, good evening," she addressed him kindly.
 "You remember, you were in 43 Old Mill Road, the other night." 
 "Yes, I remember," he said.
Over his face quivered shades of the sniggers he had just been enjoying with his mates.
"You were the people who had buried who dug a pit…
"Yes.
We buried the faeces that the previous people had left upstairs.
In buckets."
She studied the disgusted, prim, angry faces opposite her.
Male and female.
Two of a kind.
She said,"I really cannot imagine why you should react like this.
People have been burying their excrement in pits for thousands of years.
They do now, over most of the world…"
As this did not seem adequately to reach them,"In this country, we have only generally had waterborne sewage for a hundred years or so.
Much less in some areas."
 "Yes, well, we have it now," said the policewoman smartly.
 "That's right," said the policeman.
"It seems to me we did the responsible and the hygienic thing.
Nature will take care of it soon enough."
 "Well, don't do it again," said the policeman.
 "We won't have any need to, will we?" said Alice sweetly.
"What I came to say was, if you check with the Council, you will have confirmation: No. 43 is now an agreed squat.
An agreed short-term tenancy."
The policewoman reached for a form.
Her colleague went back to join his mates.
Soon there was a burst of loud scandalised laughter.
Then another.
The policewoman, diligently filling in her form, tightened her lips, Alice could not make out whether in criticism or not.
Small things amuse small minds,"said Alice.
The policewoman shot her a look which said that it was not for her to say so, even if she, herself, had been thinking it.
Alice smiled at her, woman to woman.
 "And so," she said,"that's it.
No. 43 is now legal, and in order.
Any more raids and you'll be stepping well over the line.
 "That's for us to say, I think," said the policewoman, with a tight little smile.
 "No," said Alice.
"As it happens, no.
I think not.
There will certainly be no further complaints from the neighbours."
 "Well, we'll have to hope not," and the policewoman retreated to join her own in the back room.
Alice, satisfied, went out, and home, directing herself to pass 45.
No one in the garden now.
But in the deep shade in the angle of the two hedges she could just make out that a pit had been dug.
She could not resist.
For the second time that night she slid silently in at a garden gate.
45 looked deserted; all the windows were dark.
The pit was about four feet deep.
There was a strong sweet earthy smell from the slopes of soil around its edges.
The bottom looked very flat — water?
She bent to make sure.
A case, or carton, something like that, had been placed at the bottom.
She swiftly straightened, looked around.
Consciously enjoying her condition, the sense of danger, of threat, she thought: They will be watching from those curtains or upstairs — I would be, in their position.
What a risky thing to do, though; she turned to examine the strategy of the operation.
No, perhaps it was all right.
Whereas the digging of their own pit on the other side of the hedge could have been observed by the occupants of three houses and by anyone about in Joan Robbins's house, here, two sides were tall hedge, the third the house.
Between here and the gate were shrubs and bushes.
Joan Robbins's upper windows were dark.
Over the road, set back in its own garden, a house; and certainly anyone could see what they liked from the upstairs windows.
Which were still dark; the people had not yet gone upstairs to bed.
She had seen what she needed to see.
She would have liked to stay, the sweet earthy smells and the impetus of risk firing her blood, but she moved, swift as a shadow, to the front door and knocked, gently.
It was opened at once.
By Andrew.
 "I knew you must be watching," she said.
"But I've come to say that I told the police station 43 is an agreed squat.
So they will be quite prepared to accept it when you say you are."
Her pulses were beating, her heart racing, every cell dancing and alert.
She was smiling, she knew; oh, this was the opposite of "her look" , when she felt like this, as if she'd drunk an extra-fine distilled essence of danger, and could have stepped out among the stars or run thirty miles.
She saw the short, powerful figure come out of the dark of the hall, to where she could examine his face in the light from the streetlamps.
It was serious, set in purpose, and the sight of it gave her an agreeable feeling of submission to higher powers.
 "I've buried something — an emergency," he said.
"It will be gone in a day or two.
You understand."
 "Perfectly," smiled Alice.
He hesitated.
Came out further.
She felt powerful hands on her upper arms.
Did she smell spirits?
Vodka?
Whisky.
 "I am asking you to keep it to yourself." 
She nodded.
 "Of course." 
 "I mean, no one else." 
She nodded, thinking that if only one person was to know in 43, nevertheless in this house surely several must?
He said, "I am going to trust you completely, Alice." 
He allowed her his brief tight smile.
"Because I have to.
No one in this house knows but myself.
They have all gone out.
I took the opportunity to — make use of a very convenient cache.
A  temporary cache.
I was going to fill in another layer of earth, and then put in some rubbish."
Alice stood smiling, disappointed in him, if not in her own state; she was still floating.
She thought that what he had said was likely to be either partially or totally untrue, but it was not her concern.
He still gripped her by her upper arms which, however, were on the point of rejecting this persistent, warning masculine pressure.
He seemed to sense this, for his hands dropped.
"I have to say that I have a different opinion of you than of some of the others from your house.
I trust you."
Alice did not say anything.
She simply nodded.
He went indoors, nodding at her, but did not smile.
She was going to have to think it out.
Better, sleep on it
Her elation was going, fast.
She thought: But tomorrow Jasper and I are going out together, and then it would be a whole evening of this fine racing thrilling excitement.
But poor Jasper, no, he would not feel like it, probably, if he had spent the night in the cells.
What was Enfield Police Station like?
She could not remember any reports of it.
From the main road she saw outside No. 43 gate a slight drooping figure.
An odd posture, bent over — it was the girl of this afternoon, and she was going to throw something at the windows of the sitting-room.
A stone!
Alice thought: Throwing underhand, pathetic!— and this scorn refuelled her.
Alive and sparkling, she arrived by the girl, who turned pathetically to face her, with an "Oh" .
 "Better drop that," advised Alice, and the girl did so
In this light she had a washed-out look: colourless hair and face, even lips and eyes.
Whose pupils were enormous, Alice could see.
 "Where's your baby?" hectored Alice.
"My husband is there.
He's drunk,"she said and wailed, then stopped herself.
She was trembling.
Alice said,"Why don't you go to the short-term housing people?
You know, there are people who advise on squats."
 "I did." 
She began weeping, a helpless, fast, hiccuping weeping, like a child who has already wept for hours.
 "Look," said Alice, feeling in herself the beginnings of an all  too familiar weight and drag.
"You have to do something for yourself, you know.
It's no good just waiting for people to do something for you.
You must find a squat for yourself.
Move in.
Take it over.
Then go to the Council…
Stop it,"she raged, as the girl sobbed on.
 "What's the good of that?" 
The girl subdued her weeping, and stood, head bent, before Alice, waiting for her verdict, or sentence.
Oh God, thought Alice.
What's the use?
I know this one Inside out!
She's just like Sarah, in Liverpool, and that poor soul Betty.
An official has just to take one look, and know she'll give in at once.
An official why, there was an official here, in this house; There was Mary Williams.
Alice stood marvelling at this thought: that only a couple of days ago Mary Williams had seemed to hold her own fate Alice's — in her hands; and now Alice had difficulty in even remembering her status.
She felt for Mary, in fact, the fine contempt due to someone or to an institution that has given way too easily.
But Mary could be appealed to on behalf of this — child.
Alice again took in the collapsed look of her, the passivity, and thought: What is the use, she's one of those who…
It was exasperation that was fuelling her now.
 "What is your name?" 
The drooping head came up, the drowned eyes presented themselves, shocked, to Alice.
 "What do you think I'm going to do?" demanded Alice.
 "Go to the police and tell them you were going to throw a stone through our window?" 
And suddenly she began to laugh, while the girl watched her amazed; and took an involuntary step back from this lunatic.
"I've just thought of something.
I know someone in the Council who might perhaps-it is only a perhaps…
The girl had come to life, was leaning forward, her trembling hand tight on Alice's forearm.
 "My name is Monica," she breathed.
 "Monica isn't enough," said Alice, stopping herself from simply walking away out of impatience.
 "I'll have to know your full name, and your address, won't I." 
The girl dropped her hand, and began a dreary groping in her skirts.
From a pocket she produced a purse, into which she peered.
 "Oh never mind," said Alice.
 "Tell me, I'll remember." 
The girl said she was Monica Winters, and the hotel — which Alice knew about, all right— was the such-and-such, and her number, 556.
This figure brought an image with it of concentrated misery, hundreds of couples with small children, each family in one room, no proper amenities, the squalor of it all.
All elation, excitement gone, Alice soberly stood there, appalled.
 "I'll ask this person to write to you," said Alice.
"Meanwhile, if I were you, I'd walk around and have a look at what empty houses you can see.
Take a look at them.
You know.
Nip inside, have a look at the amenities — plumbing and…
She trailed off dismally, knowing that Monica was not capable of flinging up a window in an empty house and climbing in to have a look, and that, very likely, her husband was the same.
 "See you," said Alice, and turned away from the girl and went in, feeling that the 556 — at least— young couples with their spotty, frustrated infants had been presented to her by Fate, as her responsibility.
 "Oh God," she was muttering, as she made herself tea in the empty kitchen.
 "Oh God, what shall I do?" 
She could easily have wept as messily and uselessly as Monica.
Jasper was not here!
She toiled up the stairs, and saw that a light showed on the landing above.
She went up.
Under the door of the room taken by Mary and Reggie a light showed.
She forgot it was midnight and this was a respectable couple.
She knocked.
After stirrings and voices came, "Come in." 
Alice looked in at a scene of comfort.
Furniture, pretty curtains, and a large double bed in which Mary and Reggie lay side by side, reading.
They looked at her over their books with identical wary expressions that said, "Thus far and no further!" 
A wave of incredulous laughter threatened Alice.
She beat it down, while she thought, These two, we'll see nothing of them, they'll be off
She said,"Mary, a girl has just turned up here, she's desperate; she's in Shaftwood Hotel, you know
 "Not in our borough," said Mary instantly.
 "No, but she…" 
 "I know about Shaftwood," said Mary.
Reggie was examining his hand, back and front, apparently with interest.
Alice knew that it was the situation he was examining; he was not used to this informality, to group-living, but he was giving it his consideration.
"Don't we all?
But this girl her name is Monica she looks to me as if she's suicidal, she could do anything."
Mary said, after a pause,"Alice, I'll see what there is tomorrow, but you know that there are hundreds, thousands of them.
 "Oh yes, I know," said Alice, and added, "Good-night," and went downstairs, thinking, I am being silly.
It isn't as if I don't know the type.
If you did find her a place, she'd muck it all up somehow.
Remember Sarah?
I had to find her a flat, move her in, go to the Electricity Board, and then her husband Monica's one of those who need a mother, someone who takes her on An idea came into Alice's head of such beautiful and apt simplicity that she began laughing quietly to herself.
Now she was in their bedroom, Jasper's and hers.
Alone.
His sleeping-bag was a dull blue tangle, and she straightened it.
She thought: It has been lovely, sharing a room with Jasper.
Then she thought: But he's only here because Bert is just through that wall there.
She listened: silence.
Pat and Bert were asleep.
This thought, of why Jasper consented to let her sleep here, instead of going up to another room, or asking her to go, made her mind swirl, as if it — her mind was nauseous.
She sat down on her sleeping-bag, stripped off her sweater, her jeans, pulled on an old-fashioned nightdress in scarlet Viyella which had been her mother's.
She felt comfortable and comforted in it.
Again she began to laugh: her mother liked looking after people!
She was inside the sleeping-bag.
Lights from the traffic fled across the ceiling.
She thought with envy of Jasper in his cell.
He would be with this mysterious new contact of his well, she would bear about it all tomorrow.
He would be here by lunchtime.
Alice slept late.
When she went down to the kitchen eight mugs on the draining-board said that someone had washed up; she was the last.
On the table a note addressed to her: "We're off for the weekend.
Back Sunday night.
Jasper knows."
Pat had signed, Pat and Bert.
Philip was working on the electrical wiring of the top floor with the easy-paced contemplative manner of a workman.
Alice, helpfully squatting by him, thought: This one would never make a boss; he's an employee; he can't work without somebody holding his hand.
Philip was being obliging, feeling that yesterday he had not been.
He talked of all that remained to be done, of how he would do it all, bit by bit; said that first of all the attic should be examined, for so much rain soaking in must have affected the beams.
Alice said she would go up there with him, but first of all she must quickly ring Electricity.
And where was Jim?
He could help in the attics.
Alice was thinking: Jim's so big and strong, Philip isn't; together they'd need half the time.
But Philip said he had asked Jim, only that morning.
Jim was a moody sort of individual, wasn't he, he hadn't liked being asked; in Philip's opinion there was more to Jim than met the eye.
Here Alice and Philip exchanged, with their eyes, feelings about Jim; exactly as people looked but did not speak, apprehensions over Faye — as if something there was too dangerous for words, or at least volatile, to be set off like a risky electronics device by an injudicious combination of sounds.
 "Perhaps I'll have a chat with him," said Alice vaguely, and went downstairs to survey her territory before going to the telephone.
Mary, of course, was at work.
Reggie?
As she wondered, in he came with more boxes of gear.
He looked exultant, as befits a man who has conquered territory, but abashed too, because of all these evidences of concern for the material.
He would have preferred, in short, not to have run into Alice.
But now said that  although he and Mary were already filling a second room with their bits of furniture and stuff, of course they would move it all out at once, if that room were needed by anyone to live in.
 "There's the attic," said Alice.
"Or there will be.
It has to be cleared out."
She waited for him to offer to help clear it, but that did not occur to him.
He went off at once to fetch another load.
Alice thought she would get the business of ringing Electricity over with.
She resented having to run out to the telephone, in the middle of this useful busyness, wasting time over something that was just a routine.
But as soon as she heard Mrs Whitfield's voice she knew she must pay out more of her time and attention to the situation than she thought.
Mrs Whitfield was, if not hostile, stiff with reproach.
She said that in her opinion it would be desirable if Alice came in, as soon as possible.
Alice said she would come now, it was only just down the road, in a bright chatty voice that insisted there was no real problem, nothing wrong.
And put down the receiver gently, in a way that went with the voice.
But she was being attacked by one of her rages.
Her father!
What had he said?
It must have been pretty bad, for Mrs Whitfield to change like this.
She was too angry to run down at once to Electricity, had to calm herself by walking briskly around the streets, postponing thoughts about her father till later.
But she would show him, he needn't think she wouldn't.
In the ante-room at Electricity she smiled and waved to Mrs Whitfield: Here I am, a good girl! but Mrs Whitfield looked away.
Four people went in before Alice.
What a waste of time.
She sat in front of the official, in the large light office, and knew that Mrs Whitfield would not cut off the electricity.
At least, she did not want to.
It was up to Alice.
Who began talking about her father.
He was rich, he owned a printing firm.
Of course he could easily pay the bills if there was need.
But he was, Alice admitted, in a bad phase at the moment.
 "He's had a lot of trouble," breathed Alice, on her face the look of one who compassionately contemplates human misery, absolving it from blame.
And at that moment, it was what she felt.
"The break-up with my mother…then all kinds of problems…his new wife, she's nice, she's a good friend of  mine, but she's not a coper, you know what I mean?
He's got a lot on his back."
She burbled on like this, feeling dismally she was not helping herself, while Mrs Whitfield sat, eyes lowered, pricking out a pattern with the tip of her ballpoint on the top left-hand corner of Alice's form.
 "Your father," she remarked at last,"was quite definite about not being prepared to guarantee payment.
She did not want to look at Alice.
Alice was trying to make her raise her eyes, take her in.
What could Cedric Mellings have said?
She said,"There are ten of us in the house now.
That's a lot of money coming in every week."
 "Yes, but is some of it going to come this way?" 
Mrs Whitfield was too dry to relent, yet.
 "Aren't any of you in work?" 
 "One is." 
She added, on an inspiration,"But she is a Council employee.
She works in Belstrode Road, and she doesn't want to give her address as a squat.
She couldn't find a place, she was desperate."
Mrs Whitfield sighed, said, "Yes, I know how bad things can be." 
But now she raised her eyes and did look, differently, at Alice, the housemate of a Council official who worked at the main office for this area.
She said, "Well, what are we going to do?" 
That was it, she had won!
Alice could hardly prevent herself from openly exulting.
She said humbly,"I have a brother.
He works for Ace Airways.
I'll ask him."
Mrs Whitfield nodded accepting the brother.
 "But he's in Bahrain at the moment." 
Mrs Whitfield sighed.
Not from irritation, but because she knew it was a lie, and felt sorrowful because of Alice.
She had lowered her eyes again.
A second tricky little pattern was appearing beside the first on Alice's form.
She inquired mildly, "And your brother would be prepared to guarantee the electricity bills for ten people?" 
Alice said, "But he would know he wouldn't have to pay them, wouldn't he." 
She hurried on, in case Mrs Whitfield felt obliged actually to answer the question, "But I am sure he'll say yes." 
 "When is he coming back from Bahrain?" 
"In about a month.
But I'll go up and see him about it, talk to  him and explain.
That's where I went wrong with my father.
I should have gone over and explained, instead of just assuming…"
Her voice trembled.
It sounded pathetic, but hot red waves of murder beat inside her.
I'll blow that house of theirs up, she was thinking, I'll kill them.
 "Yes, I do think that would be a good idea," said Mrs Whitfield.
A long pause.
Not because she was undecided; the decision had been made.
She wanted Alice to say something more that would make the situation better, or seem better.
But Alice only sat and waited.
 "Well," said Mrs Whitfield at last, sitting upright inside the corset of her strong short-sleeved brown dress, with her fat upper arms and fat brown forearms, fat hands with the little rings twinkling on them, all disposed regularly about her, her feet — no doubt , though Alice could not see them — placed side by side.
"Well, I'll give you five weeks.
That should be plenty of time to see your brother."
She was not looking at Alice.
 "And I'll need more in the way of a deposit." 
Alice took out a ten-pound note — not enough, she knew, and placed it in front of Mrs Whitfield, who took it up, smoothed it flat, placed it in an old-fashioned cashbox in a drawer, wrote out a receipt.
Then she said, "I'll see you in five weeks," and sighed again.
 "Goodbye," said this kindly decent woman, her distress at the ways of this wicked world written all over her.
Almost certainly in her eyes, too, but she was not looking, would not look, at Alice; only said, "Ask the next one to come in." 
Alice said, nonchalantly, so as not to make too much of it, though she was soft with gratitude and relief,"Thanks.
Bye, then,"and went out.
Five weeks was a lifetime, anything could have — would have — happened.
But she was on a winning streak, a lucky wave; she would nip down to the Gas Board and fix things up.
There, she said No. 43 Old Mill Road was an agreed tenancy, Mary Williams of Belstrode Road would confirm; electricity was being supplied, Mrs Whitfield of the Electricity Board would confirm; and her brother, now in Bahrain, would guarantee payments.
She had waited until this sympathetic-looking man, elderly, fatherly, was free and now she pleaded, "Can we have the gas on now, please, it is so cold…no hot water…it's awful…" 
His concerned, shocked face!
This man could not easily imagine life without hot water, at least not for people like himself and Alice.
A deposit?
She laid down twenty pounds, and fixed on him girlish, friendly eyes.
He took up the money.
Accepted.
But he was unhappy about the situation.
Like Mrs Whitfield at the first interview, he was not sure why he was being compelled by Alice.
 "We do have to have a guarantor," he remarked, as much to himself, and said,"Very well, you said your brother would be back in a month?
Good."
It was done.
Alice went off, demurely grateful.
She was going to have to get some money.
Had to.
Where?
Sobered, she went back home, told Philip that the gas would be on.
If they could lay hands on a second-hand boiler, did he know enough to fix it?
They squatted opposite each other on the top floor, on the landing, in the bright April light, which came, slightly dimmed by dirt, through the window on the stairs.
He was smiling, pleased with her, with this house, with his place in it; ready to go on working.
But, she knew, sorrow and resentment were there, only just subdued; and soon she must find more money for him.
For the boiler.
For new floorboards in the hall in a corner where water had dripped from a leaky pipe.
For…for…for…
She said,"Philip, I know that if you had taken on this job on a business basis you would have had to charge hundreds.
Well, don't worry…but wait a bit.
I'll have it."
He nodded, he smiled, he went on with his work, sitting in a tangle of new black cable like some kind of leprechaun among urban roots.
Frail — you could blow him away, thought Alice.
And where was Jasper?
He had not been in court that morning after all?
Or he had been, had been silly, was bound over again?
Worry, worry, worry; she felt bruised with it.
She sat in a heap at the kitchen table.
She thought, looking at the pleasant room: I'm taking it for granted already!
Forcing herself, she worked for an hour or two on the great heap of stuff purloined from the skips that lay in a corner of the hall; fitting a curtain here, laying a rug there.
Everything needed a good scrub!
Well, she would take down all these curtains when there was time and get them to the launderette, but meanwhile…
She found a nice solid little stool, thrown away only because a leg was loose.
She glued it back in, put the stool in the corner of the kitchen, went out into the garden to the forsythia bush, cut some branches.
The old woman was asleep in her chair under the tree.
Joan Robbins was only a yard away through the fence.
She was glad to see Alice, began talking in a heavy tired voice about how the old woman had her running up and down the stairs, even got her up in the middle of the night.
What was she to do?
She was sick and tired of it.
Alice, familiar with this situation from somewhere in her well-stocked past, knew that there was little that could be done; in fact it would get worse.
She asked whether Mrs Robbins knew about the services available for the old.
Yes, but she didn't like the idea of all these people in and out all day; who were they?
She'd have no check on them.
She went on and on, digging viciously into the soil of her border.
For years the house had been civilised and orderly; she and her husband downstairs, with the garden, Mrs Jackson, a widow, keeping herself to herself, in the flat above.
But now she might just as well be living with Mrs Jackson!.
You'd think she was her daughter!
The old woman certainly seemed to think so.
Alice, with all the time in the world and nothing better to do, stood with the branches of forsythia blazing yellow in her arms, listening and advising.
Surely it would be better to have Home Helps, Meals on Wheels, all that, and a Social Worker to advise and take on responsibility, than have to do it all yourself?
Joan Robbins agreed that perhaps it might, she would think…
With a smile at Alice of real gratitude, neighbourliness, she said that she was glad Alice was there, glad that decent people were in poor No. 43 at last.
Alice went in, stacked the forsythia in a jug on the stool in the corner of the kitchen, sat down.
Where was Jasper?
This was the night they were going spray-painting.
She had  the paint, two cans, in scarlet and black, ready in the corner of the hall.
At the kitchen table, she pencilled slogans on an envelope.
What was the message they wanted to convey: the full message, exact: that was where she must start.
The Use of Supergrasses Unmasks the True Nature of British Democracy.
One Law for England.
Another for Northern Ireland, England's Colony.
That was it.
Possibly they'd find a good space, like a bridge, or a long low wall, to get all that in.
She must work out something shorter.
Supergrasses Threaten Democracy!
No, too abstract.
Supergrasses — unfair!
Supergrasses a shameful Blot on Britain!
Supergrasses — Shame on Us!
She sat still, with the blaze of the forsythia in her eyes.
She shut her eyes, and the yellow blurred and danced on black.
She was smiling, remembering the last time she and Jasper had gone out together.
Only two weeks ago.
In scarlet and black they had written "Support the Women of Greenham Common" on the dull grey-green paint of a bridge two hundred yards from a police station.
She had sprayed, Jasper kept watch, from the other side of the station.
She had finished when she heard his signal, a yell he had perfected to sound like a car hooting.
She had thrust the spray-paint into her carrier-bag.
Not looking back, she strolled along the pavement, thinking that Jasper was sauntering past the police station.
Between him and her, probably two policemen.
But the footsteps that came up beside her were Jasper's — light and urgent.
That meant the police had gone up the other way — but could see them by turning.
Jasper and she stood looking into each other 's faces, alive and tingling and delighted, knowing that anyone looking at them could guess, simply from the waves of energy that danced from them.
Jasper's eyes said, Let's…
She raced back to the smooth green paint that was evenly lit by a streetlamp ten yards away.
The policeman and woman sedately progressed away from them.
Jasper waited where he was.
She took out the red spray and in letters a foot high, began  "Greenham Common Women…" 
She kept her attention half on what she did, half on Jasper, who suddenly raised his arms.
Without looking round she sped towards him, hearing the heavy feet running behind her.
Now she was spitting: Filthy beasts, fascists, pigs, pigs, pigs…
She had come up to Jasper, who caught her wrist in his bony grip, and they ran together up towards the Underground.
But before they reached it, they turned into a side street and then, they hoped before the police reached that street, into another.
They knew someone living in a house there.
But their blood was racing, they were inspired, and she was not surprised that Jasper panted,"Let's chance it…
"
They tore down that street and into a main road that was crowded with people — fish and chip shops, take-aways, a disco, a supermarket, still open.
Again, they could have gone into the supermarket, but they thought the police had had a good look at them, so they sprinted through the crowds who took as little notice as they expected, and across the street just after the lights had changed 50 that the traffic beginning to move, hooted.
Down they went into the Underground.
They had not looked to see whether the police had come into the main road in time to see.
Again, Jasper's eyes demanded they chance it; they walked smartly up out of the Underground on the other side, and saw two policemen — different ones — coming towards them.
Cool and indifferent, Alice and Jasper walked past.
Then down again into the Underground.
They went two stops to where Alice had seen a long low bridge along a main road over railway lines.
By then it was ten, and raining a little.
Here the police station was a good way off.
On the other hand, cars were passing regularly.
On the bridge was already written, in white letters that had run and streaked, "Women are Angry" .
They stood arm-in-arm, back to the traffic, as though looking over the railway lines, and Alice, holding the spray low down, wrote, "We Are All…" which is as far as she could go without having to move.
They moved on a few steps, again stood together, and wrote,"Angry.
Angry about"Another move.
"Ireland.
About Sexism.
About…"
They moved.
Then they heard — their ears alert for the slightest changes in the grind of the traffic — a car slowing just behind them.
They both shot  looks over their shoulders: not a police car.
But two men sat side by side in the front seat, staring.
 "Trident" — Alice finished.
And they walked on, slowly, very close, knowing the car crawled behind.
The intoxication of it, the elation: pleasure.
There was nothing like it!
Now, remembering, Alice craved and longed.
Oh, she did so hope that Jasper would not be late, would not be tired, would want to go out.
He had promised…
…
They had walked, perhaps a hundred and fifty yards.
Luck!
A one-way street!
The car of course did not follow.
At the end of that street, they went back to the bus-stop and to Kilburn where they had worked before.
"NO to Cruise!
NO to Trident!"
No one had so much as noticed them there.
Let down, their elation leaking away, they had decided to give up, and taken a taxi back to Alice's mother's house, where Alice made them both coffee and scrambled eggs.
Now it was six-thirty.
Mary came in, sat briefly with Alice, said she and Reggie were going to the cinema.
She had had a word about this girl, Monica; there was really nothing, nothing at all.
She had done her best, Alice must understand.
 "Never mind," said Alice, "I've thought of something." 
Mary saw the scribbled-over envelope, smiled and said, "Reggie and I are going to the Greenpeace demo tomorrow afternoon." 
 "Good for you," said Alice.
"But it's shocking, it's terrible, the despoliation of our countryside…
 "I know," said Alice.
 "I've been on some of their demos." 
 "You have!" 
Mary was relieved, Alice could see, that they shared this; but Reggie "hallo-ed" from the hall, and with a smile, Mary went.
Where were Roberta and Faye?
Probably, at their Women's Commune place.
Where was Philip?
He might have been thrown out by his girlfriend, but he was going round there still for meals and baths, so Bert had said.
Jim?
Now that was a serious question, where was he?
The smiling face; the jokey mellow voice — but what was going on, really?
Apart from having his home, his place taken over like this.
Worry, worry, Alice sat worrying.
In came Jasper, smiling, jaunty, stepping like a dancer, and at once he said, "Oh lovely -" at the forsythia.
There: people said this and that about him, but no one knew how sensitive he was, how kind.
Now he bent and kissed her cheek; it was a thin papery kiss, but she understood that; understood when — rarely — she simply had to put her arms around him out of an exuberance of love, the instinctive shrinking, as though she held a wraith, something cold and wailing, a lost child.
And he would try to stand up to it, the sudden blast of her love; she could feel a brave little determination to withstand it, and even an intention to return it.
Which of course he could not — not the physical thing; she knew that what she felt as a warmth of affection was experienced by him as a demand for that.
He stood near her, beaming, positively dancing, with the excess of his pride and pleasure.
 "So it was all right." 
 "Thirty pounds." 
 "A lot, surely?" 
 "They knew me," he said with pride.
 "How was the cell?" 
"Oh, not bad.
They fed us — not bad.
But I was with Jack — but it's an alias, you understand!"
 "Yes, of course," she beamed back.
 "What I don't know…" 
 "…won't hurt you." 
He rubbed his hands, and began a light, smart, quick-stepping about the kitchen, to the forsythia which he touched delicately, to the window, and back to her.
She put on the kettle, put coffee into a mug, and stood by the stove, so as to be standing, not sitting, while he moved so electrically and finely about.
"Bert doesn't know either.
Where is he?
Bert?"he asked.
 "But he told you, he's gone for the weekend with Pat." 
 "Oh yes…for the weekend — how long?" 
He was now standing still, threatened, frowning.
 "Sunday night." 
 "Because we're going for a trip," he said.
"He knew we were going, but not so soon.
Jack says…"
 "A fine Irish name," said Alice.
He chuckled, enjoying her teasing him.
 "Well, there are Jacks in Ireland." 
He went on, "And how did you know…but you always do, don't you," he said, with a flash of acid.
 "But where else?" she wailed, humorously, as she always did, when he was surprised by what to her was obvious.
 "You and Bert and Jack are going to Ireland, because Jack is I.R.A.?" 
"In touch.
In contact.
He can arrange a meeting."
 "Well then!" said Alice, handing him a mug of black coffee, and sitting down again.
He stood silent, stilled a moment.
Then he said, "Alice, I've got to have some money." 
Alice thought: Well, that's that — meaning, the end of this delightful friendliness.
She strengthened herself for a fight.
She said, "I gave Bert the money he gave you for your fine." 
 "I've got to have my fare to Dublin." 
 "But you can't have spent your dole money!" 
He hesitated.
He had?
How?
She could never understand what he did with it, where it went — he had not had time for…that other life of his, he had been with Bert, with Jack!
 "I said I'd pay Jack's fare — the fine cleaned him out." 
 "Was he fined thirty pounds too?" 
 "No, fifteen." 
 "I have been spending and spending," said Alice.
 "No one chips in — only a bit here and there." 
She thought: At least Mary and Reggie will pull their weight, at least one can say that of their kind…
To the exact amount, no more, no less.
 "You can't have spent all that," said Jasper.
He looked as though she was deliberately punishing him.
"I saw it.
Hundreds."
 "What do you suppose all this is costing?" 
Now — as she had expected, his hand closed around her wrist, tight and hurtful.
He said, "While you play house and gardens, pouring money away on rubbish, the Cause has to suffer, do without." 
His little blue eyes in the shallow depressions of very white glistening flesh stared into hers, unblinking, as his grasp tightened.
But long ago she had gained immunity from this particular accusation.
Without resisting, leaving her wrist limp in his circle of bone, she looked hard back at him and said,"I see no  reason why you should pay Comrade Jack's fare.
Or expenses.
If he hadn't met you, what would he have done for the fare?"
 "But he's only going over for our sakes — so we can make contact." 
She forced herself to fight him.
"You picked up three weeks' money this week.
You had a hundred and twenty pounds plus.
And I paid your fine.
You can't have spent more than twenty pounds at the most on train fares and snacks."
When she did this, let him know that she made this silent skilled reckoning of what he spent, what he must be doing, he hated her totally, and showed it.
He was white with his hatred.
His thin pink lips, which normally she loved for their delicacy and sensitivity, were stretched in a colourless line, and between them showed sharp discoloured teeth.
He looked like a rat, she thought steadily, knowing that her love for him was not by an atom diminished.
"Why don't you go and get some more from your fucking bloody mother, from her.
Or from your father."
She had not told him exactly where she had got all the money that had been spent so freely around this house, but of course he guessed.
She said steadily,"I shall.
When I feel I can.
But I can't now."
He let go her wrist and stood up.
Now he is going to punish me, he's going to take his things into another room to sleep.
A long silence, while he fidgeted disconsolately about.
 "Let's go out for a meal," he suggested, dolefully.
 "Yes, let's." 
Her spirits swooped up again, although there had been no mention of spray-painting, and he had seen the scribbled slogans on the envelope on the table.
He said, nicely,"I am sorry about not going out painting tonight, Alice.
But what's the sense, I don't want to draw attention to myself just before something important."
 "Quite right, of course," she said.
Thinking that in years of spray-painting, of darting about near the police and taunting them with their nearness, they had been caught only when they wanted to be.
That was the truth of it.
Jasper wanted to talk about the two days down at Melstead, about the pickets, the excitement of it all, the arrest, the night in
the cells — and about Jack.
They went to an Indian restaurant, where he talked and talked, and she listened very carefully, matching what he said with her imaginings of it all.
She paid for the meal.
They went into a pub and he drank his usual white wine, and she, tomato juice.
Back at the house, she waited, tense, to see whether he would take his things up to another room, but he said nothing about it, only slid into his bag with a sigh that assuaged her; it was the sigh of a child finding a safe place.
He had not said anything more about money, but now he started again.
That was why he had not taken his things out.
They argued, steadily, in the dark room, while the lights whirled over the ceiling.
In the end she agreed to give him the money for "Jack's" fare.
She knew that for some reason it was important for Jasper to have it from her.
Essential.
There always had been these moments between them when she had to give way, against reason, against sense: he simply had to win.
She knew that he had a hundred pounds, probably more.
Perhaps even very much more.
Once he had told her, in a mood of taunting cruelty that sometimes overtook him, that he had been saving up quietly all these years, enough money "to be rid of you for ever" .
This did not make any sense that she could see when she thought: but she felt the power of it.
His mother — well Alice wasn't going to get involved even with the thought of all that dreary psychology, but no wonder he had problems with women.
In the morning after their breakfast coffee, he stood silently and balefully near her until she gave him the fare to Dublin.
Then he said that he was going to meet Jack and talk things over.
If he was not back tonight, then he would be tomorrow and if he was late, she must tell Bert that they were going to Ireland on Tuesday, early.
He left.
She thought: Is he going on one of his things then  cottaging, cruising…
She believed not.
He wouldn't risk it, not with his whole soul set on the trip to Ireland.
Was "Jack" then like him?— no, she was sure not.
Talking about Jack, it was how he talked about Bert, how he talked about the men with whom he had this particular relationship: admiring, dependent, you could say passive…but who was it now who set the pace, making Bert go to Ireland, making Jack take them?
No, not simple at all, this younger-brother thing.
She had the whole day.
Alone, you could say.
Philip had climbed up into the attic — she must go up and help him, stand by him, or he would start feeling ill again.
Jim — where was Jim, what was wrong?
He had not been in since yesterday.
Faye and Roberta?
She had heard them come in very late.
Pat said they went to late-night movies, and then on to parties.
Their other life — women.
The close, sweet, bitchy — as far as Alice was concerned — cloying, claustrophobic world of women.
Not for her!
But they were welcome to it.
Let a thousand flowers bloom and all that…
Ten in the morning, and Mary and Reggie were still in bed.
Mary had come down, made mugs of coffee, had taken them up and they lay, no doubt, side by side, in that amazing double bed, which had a proper headboard, and little built-in side tables.
Even the thought of that bed, the life that the bed implied, made Alice feel threatened.
Stuck together for a lifetime in that bed, drinking cups of coffee, looking at people who were not like themselves in that cautious keep-off way.
Where was she going to get money.
Where.
She had to have it.
Had to have money.
Had to.
Sunday.
Good grief, it was only Sunday, six days after she and Jasper had left her mother's — had left home.
She had achieved all that, in such a short time.
Full of energy, she went up to the attic and to Philip, in his white overalls, a brave manikin moving about under the rafters.
There was a horrible smell of rot.
 "Two of these beams ought to be replaced," he said.
"Dry rot.
We'll have the whole house down."
Money.
She had to have money.
Too early to ask Mary and Reggie.
At some point a negotiation would take place.
Already she could see their faces, the faces of the fucking bloody middle class, when the subject of money was on the agenda.
God how she hated them, the middle classes, penny-pinching, doling out their little bits, in their minds always the thought of saving and accumulating, saving — thought Alice, her mouth full of bile, as she stood gazing up at a beam a foot across that looked grey and flaky, with whitey-yellow fibres in it — the dry rot itself, which would lay its creeping arms over all the wood, if it were allowed, then creep down the walls, into the floor below, spread like a disease…
She thought: I've been living like this for years.
How many?
Is it twelve, now?
No, fourteen — no, more…
The work I've done for other people, getting things together, making things happen, sheltering the homeless, getting them fed — and as often as not, paying for it.
Suppose I had put aside a little, even a little , of that money, for myself, what would I have now?
Even if it were only a few hundred pounds, five hundred, six, I wouldn't be standing here sick with worry…
 "How much will it cost to replace those two beams?" 
"The wood, about fifty — second-hand.
Though I could probably find what I need on a skip if we could borrow the car again.
 "As for the labour…" he said with a defiant little laugh.
 "Don't worry," said Alice.
She was thinking: And he'll need help.
He can't possibly shoulder great beams into place, stand about propping up beams; he'll need scaffolding or something.
That means money.
She would go down and ask Mary and Reggie.
On the table a note,"We've gone to the Greenpeace demo.
Love, Reggie and Mary."
His writing.
Love!
She sat at the table and counted what she had left.
She had thirty-five pounds.
She went up again and worked on with Philip, clearing rubbish out of the attics.
Where did it all come from, always rubbish and rubbish, sacks of it again, old clothes, rags most of them, and an old carpet, quite fit for use, more old clothes.
Junk.
Junk?
At the bottom of an old black tin trunk, under cracked and broken shoes, were layers of fine soft material, dresses wrapped in black tissue-paper.
Evening dresses.
She threw them down through the trap door and jumped after them to look.
Well, look at that!
Three really beautiful evening dresses, each individually wrapped in the black tissue-paper.
The early thirties.
One was of black and orange and yellow lace, with gold thread in it.
It had a plain smooth bodice to the hips, then flared out in a lot of little points, like petals.
The metallic smell of the gold lace made her want to sneeze.
Alice stood back away from the trapdoor up into the attic so that she was out of Philip's sight, and took off her sweat shirt.
She slipped the bright dress on over her head.
It would not go down past her hips, and stuck in a thick roll around her waist.
There being no mirror in the house, she could not see what her arms and shoulders looked like, but she saw her sturdy freckled hands fidgeting at the roll of material, and felt that the dress was laying a claim on her, like an impostor demanding to be recognised.
She stripped it angrily off again, and put back the sweat shirt, and with it a feeling of appropriateness and even virtue, as if she had been tempted briefly by the forbidden.
She did not try on the apricot chiffon, with panels of silver beads back and front, some of them loosened, some vanished away as though a bead-eating insect had been at it.
She held the sage green lace with its swirling skirt up against her.
It was tight above, with a pale pink "vee" for modesty in the front, and the back cut down to the coccyx, with another little "vee" there too.
And afternoon dresses, the "New Look" , quite glossy and good.
Who had put them up there, unable to throw them away?
Who had forgotten about them and gone off, leaving all those trunks up there?
She showed the dresses to Philip, who laughed at them, but when she said she would get something for them, quite a lot, shrugged, unwillingly respectful.
She put them in a suitcase and took the bus to Camden Lock, to a shop where her mother, being hard up, had sold some dresses.
She had got over a hundred pounds.
Sunday.
The markets were crammed.
The woman in the shop that sold antique clothes was already busy with a customer who was after a white crepe de Chine 1920s dress that had gold sequins in thick crusty-looking roses all round the hips.
She paid ninety pounds for it.
And it had a stain on the shoulder  which she said she would hide with a gold rose.
Alice went forward with her suitcase, saw the woman's eyes narrow in greed, as she saw what was there.
Alice was determined to get every penny she could.
She bargained closely over each garment, watching the woman's eyes, which gave her away.
They were clever, narrowed eyes, used to poring over small stitches, a tiny rent, the set of a panel of embroidery.
When Alice took out the apricot chiffon with the silver beads, she even sighed and her tongue, which was large and pale, slid over her lips.
For that Alice got sixty pounds, though the woman kept saying a skilled sempstress would have to replace the missing beads, and it would cost — Alice had no idea what it would cost.
Alice smiled politely, nodded, and stood her ground.
She went home with two hundred and fifty pounds, knowing that the woman would sell those clothes for four times that much.
But she was satisfied.
She was not going to tell Jasper.
This meant that loyalty forbade her to tell Philip — who wouldn't have believed her in any case.
She told him she had got a hundred and fifty pounds, gave him a hundred, and heard him sigh a little; such a different sigh from that sharp escape of breath of the woman in the shop.
Like a child like Jasper getting into his sleeping-bag last night, coming home, to safety.
Well, that would keep things going but not for long.
Philip and she spent sixty pounds of it that afternoon on a secondhand gas boiler.
And five pounds for its delivery.
By the end of the week there would be hot water.
Even heat if those radiators which had not been stolen had not suffered by their neglect.
Not that Alice cared about warmth, not even after four years in her mother's warm house.
She had become used to adapting to different temperatures.
Before her mother's house she had gone through a winter in a squat that had no heating at all.
She had simply worn a lot of clothes, and kept moving.
Jasper had complained, had got chilblains, but even he had put up with it; yet that was one of the reasons why he had been pleased to move in to live with her mother's warmth, after a cold winter.
She spent a long evening working with Philip, as his assistant, handing him tools, holding steady the beam of a powerful torch.
She watched his deft slender hands bleached by the light, and knew that this one could have been, should be, some kind of fine and meticulous craftsman, should never have to be wrestling with pipes, floorboards, beams that seemed heavier than he was.
This, the waste of it, fuelled in her the indignation that kept her going, filled her mind with the thoughts that justified everything she did: one day, it would be impossible that fine people like Philip would be misused, kept down, insulted by circumstances; one day — and because of her, Alice, and her comrades things would be different.
At midnight she knew that Jasper would not be coming.
Her heart began a small private wailing, which made her ashamed and which she suppressed.
She cooked bacon and eggs for Philip, and when he had gone up to sleep, waited, not only for Jasper but for Jim too.
Trouble!
She could feel it coming.
Mary and Reggie came in, smiling, and glowing with that special look of the successful demonstrator.
Sitting with Alice, drinking coffee, they told her how hundreds had marched in London against the polluting of a certain stretch of shore.
They left Alice with a little pile of pamphlets and leaflets, and, hearing that hot water would soon be among the amenities of this house, Reggie remarked that they must have a talk about finance.
But tonight they were ready to drop, must sleep.
They went up, very close.
They were going to have sex, Alice knew.
Well, she would stay down here a bit longer, then.
Mary and Reggie came back down, full of smiles, asking about the clothes, the junk, that littered the landing of the top floor.
Alice had forgotten she had meant to tidy up, said she would, tomorrow.
More smiles, and again the two went upstairs.
And if I don't, clear up? thought Alice.
Of course they wouldn't!
It didn't occur to them!
I made the mess, and so I clear up.
Oh yes, I know them, I know those two, I know the middle classes…fuck them all.
But as she sat on there, thinking of all that rubbish, which would have to be parcelled up, and carried down, and put in the garden; and then taken away by the dustmen who would have to be paid, a new thought startled her mind.
She had, on seeing  those exquisite evening dresses, thrown them down through the hatch, and scrambled after them.
But she hadn't finished examining what was in the attics.
There were other cases, trunks, roped bundles up there still.
Why, there might be a lot more antique clothes, a lot more money.
She raced upstairs, forgetting all about Mary and Reggie in their room under part of the attic, and shot up the ladder, which was still in position, for Philip had not finished.
She turned on his heavy-duty torch.
In fact most of the cases had been opened.
But along the edge of the attic, under the low eaves, stood three old-fashioned trunks, of the kind people once took on cruises, "for use on the voyage" .
They were of some kind of fibre, painted glossy chestnut, now dimmed and dulled, with bands of wood to give them strength.
She flung them open, one, two, three, her heart hammering.
Inside the first, newspapers.
Newspapers?
She knelt by the trunk, flinging aside papers, reaching down and down, scrabbling in the corners.
Yellow piles of papers, and that was all.
Why?
What for?
What lunatic.
The second had newspapers covering books.
No special books, no treasures here, only the random collection of some family.
Old, faded books.
The Talisman, with its brown board cover eaten away.
Little Gems From the Bible.
Henty.
She Loved, and Lost…
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre…
Crocheting Made Simple.
A set of Dickens.
She might get a pound or two for that lot.
But there was another trunk.
She opened it prayerfully, saw it was empty except for half-a-dozen old jam-jars rolling around.
A storm of rage shook her.
She was on her feet, kicking the trunks, then flinging books, papers, jars, all around the attic, shouting abuse at the people who had left this rubbish up here.
 "Filthy shits," she was yelling.
"Fascist shits.
I'll kill you, I'll pound you…to pulp…"
The storm went on, and she heard her name being called from below, "Alice, Alice, what's wrong?" 
 "Bloody filthy accumulating middle-class creeps" — and papers, jars, boots, rags went hurtling through the trap around Mary and Reggie.
 "What is wrong, can we help?" 
She saw the two agitated, concerned faces turned upwards, side by side, illuminated by her jerking, wavering torch, and suddenly, she laughed.
She stood above them, and staggered about, laughing.
 "Oh Alice," cried Mary, "Oh Alice," squealed Reggie, and they sounded admonishing, petulant, reproachful, and Alice fell, rolled to the trapdoor edge, caught its edges with her strong hands, swung herself down, to land on her feet by Mary, by Reggie, laughing and pointing at them,"If you could see yourselves, if you could just see…
And she staggered and hooted, among the sordid piles, and kicked shoes and clothes around.
Broken glass scattered.
Mary and Reggie looked at each other, at her, and went hastily into their bedroom.
The sound of that door closing, polite and restrained despite everything, made Alice laugh again.
She collapsed on the floor, among all the rubbish, laughed herself out to silence, and looked up into the attic, to see the torchlight shining there.
It showed the slanting beams of the roof, it showed the two rotten beams which even from down here and in this light looked cheesy.
She climbed up again, and, refusing to look at the dangerous beams, began soberly to close the trunks, tidy up a little.
Was she really going to clear everything out of here?
For what?
For whom?
She put out the light, leaving it exactly where it had been, for Philip.
She left the attic, by he ladder this time, and then kicked all the junk into a great heap along the banisters.
She was making a frightful noise, but what of it.
Do them good, she was thinking.
One day Mary and Reggie will say, Yes, we did try living in a commune, we gave it a fair trial, but we are afraid…
She was shaking with laughter again.
She went downstairs, yelling, sobbing with mirth.
If mirth it was: she heard these sad wails and thought, I'm laughing out of the wrong side of my mouth…
At three in the morning she went forlornly to bed, promising herself to get at least one room painted tomorrow.
This one perhaps.
She knew Jasper would be pleased, even if he did seem to jeer.
With her mind on Jasper, what he was doing, with whom, she slept fitfully, rose many hours before anyone else was likely to, cleared the room of the little that was in it, fetched  up Philip's trestles and the paints and the rollers, rubbed over ceiling and walls with a duster tied around the head of a broom, swept off the floor the resulting films of dust.
It was still only seven o'clock.
Sitting by herself in the kitchen with coffee, looking at the golden forsythia she was aglow with health, energy, accomplishment.
If Jasper had been here she could not have done this, she would have had to adapt her pace to his…sometimes, very seldom, the thought came into her head: If I were alone, if I did not have Jasper to worry about…
Rarely, and this was one of the times, she knew she was tied to him by what seemed like a tight cord of anxiety that vibrated to his needs, never hers; how she was afflicted by him, how he weighed her down.
Supposing she left him?
(For he would never leave her) If she found a place of her own, with other comrades of course— why, she had moved so often, it was nothing, she could do it easily.
Without Jasper.
She sat quietly, her freckled girl's hand just encompassing the big brown mug, as though it had alighted there, her eyes held by the blessed, blissful forsythia that filled the whole kitchen with energy, with pleasure.
Without Jasper.
She began to make uneasy restless little movements, and her breathing became faster, then slowed to a sigh.
How could she live without Jasper?
It was true, what people said, they were like brother and sister.
But supposing…the thought of another man made her give an incredulous little shake of the head.
Not that plenty hadn't come near, to ask, Who Jasper, why not me?
Had said, But he doesn't give you anything.
But he did; he did!
How could she leave him?
She got up slowly from the table, washed up the mug, and stood for some time absolutely still, staring.
She thought: I keep forgetting that time is going on.
She was over thirty.
Well over thirty, in her mid-thirties…
Thirty-six, actually.
If she was going to have a child, ever…no, no; real responsible revolutionaries should not have children.
(But they did)
She flung the whole tangle of thought away from her and ran fast up the stairs as though in the room some delight or pleasure awaited her, not the hard task of painting.
She worked steadily on, until she had finished the first coat.
Ceilings and walls were all fresh white where dirt and dinginess  had been.
Some people would leave it at that; but not Alice: there would be a second coat.
She strode through the newspapers all over the floor, some of them with dates from the thirties, even the war.
 "Second Front!" in big black print slid away under another sheet, and "Attlee Promises…" 
She was not interested in what Attlee or anyone else had promised.
Again in the kitchen, she rested herself, and thought: I'll have finished our room by midday, I could do another.
Well, I'd need help for the sitting-room.
The worst is the girls' room, Faye and Roberta.
I'll just have a quick look now…
She was sure they had not come in, but knocked to make sure.
Silence.
She went in, and because her eyes were on ceilings and walls did not realise at once they were, after all, there, two low huddling mounds, under blankets, shawls and all kinds of bits and pieces of stuffs, mostly flowered.
Roberta, disturbed but not knowing why, had stretched up arms to yawn, then sat up, womanly breasts lolling, and she stared with displeasure at Alice.
Who said, "Sorry, I thought you were out." 
 "Well, we are not!" 
But the look of dislike, which Alice was afraid might be what Roberta did feel for her, was replaced with Roberta's more amiable look, and she sat up, feeling for cigarettes.
From the tense look of the bundle which was Faye, Alice knew she was awake.
She explained reasonably,"I'm painting our room.
I'll have finished in a couple of hours.
I thought I could do yours today, if you like."
At this Faye sat up, flinging aside covers, in one movement, like a swimmer surfacing, and she glared at Alice as she had at poor Monica.
 "No," she said, in a deadly, cold voice.
"You will not paint this room, Alice.
You will not.
You will leave us alone."
 "Faye," said Roberta quietly.
 "It's all right." 
 "No, it's not all right," shrilled Faye.
"You paint your own fucking room, Alice.
Just keep your shitty little hands off us, do you hear?"
Alice, well used to such situations, was standing her ground, was not hurt, or offended, or any of the things she knew Faye wanted her to be.
She was thinking: Full marks to Roberta.
Just  imagine, having to cope with Faye all the time.
 "It's all right, Faye," said Alice.
"Well, of course I won't if you don't want.
But the room is pretty far gone, isn't it."
And she looked with interest at the walls which, in the strong morning light the sun was only just leaving one of them — seemed that they might start sprouting mushrooms.
They sat there side by side, Faye and Roberta, staring at Alice, so unlike Mary and Reggie that Alice was even amused — inside, of course, not letting it show And her heart hurt for the girls.
Mary and Reggie those householders, as Alice contemptuously thought of them — sitting upright in their marriage bed, examining Alice, knew that nothing could ever really threaten them.
But Roberta, for all her handsome, dark solidity, her motherliness, and Faye, like a flimsy chick or little bird huddling there behind Roberta's large shoulder, were vulnerable.
They knew that anything, even Alice, could advance over them like bulldozers, crush them to bits.
 "It's all right," said Alice gently, infinitely pitying.
"Don't worry.
I'm sorry."
And she went out, hearing how Faye's voice shrilled as the door shut, and how Roberta's voice consoled and gentled.
Alice returned to the second coat and her work of balancing on the trestles, and thought for the first time: I'm silly.
They like it.
Roberta, certainly Faye, like living in filth.
She contemplated this idea for some time, steadily laying on a fresh film of white to strengthen the white already there, over her head, one knuckle just touching the ceiling to steady her.
They like it.
They need it.
If they didn't like it, they would have done something about it long ago.
It's easy to get things straight and clean, so if they didn't, they wanted it.
She allowed this thought plenty of time and scope.
But Jim, no, he didn't like it, look how pleased he was when I started clearing up.
He didn't like all those horrible buckets up there, he just doesn't know how to…
Jim, he hasn't got the expertise of the middle class (how often had she heard this at her mother's house); he is helpless, he doesn't know how things work.
But Faye and Roberta — well, they aren't middle class, to put it mildly, but surely they — yes, they would have picked up the  know-how, the expertise, so if they didn't get things straight, it is because they didn't want to.
Imagine wanting to live in that room, that awful room, with walls like dung-heaps, what has happened in there, what has been done in that room?
Well, probably it wasn't Roberta.
Faye: anything wrong, anything pitiful and awful, would have to be Faye, never Roberta.
Probably when Faye had one of those turns of hers all kinds of awful things happening, and then Roberta, coping: Darling Faye, it is all right, don't Faye, please Faye, relax darling…
Alice finished the second coat at midday, washed the roller put the lids on the paint tins, took them to a room upstairs.
While Philip slept, while Mary and Reggie slept, while Roberta and Faye slept (they had not come out of their room) she had painted a whole room.
And done it well, no smears or skimped corners, and the papers were all bundled up ready for the dustbins, which would soon be full again.
Alice cooked herself eggs, drank tea, and washed herself in cold water, standing in the bath.
Alice then, all clean and brushed, and in a nice blouse with the small pink flowers and the neat round collar, walked out of the house and went next door, to No. 45, as though she had been planning to do this all day.
She was sure that Comrade Andrew would not be still in bed, whoever else was.
About two-thirds of the sacks of refuse had gone, and the pit she had seen was as if it had never been, under a litter of dead leaves where a couple of blackbirds foraged.
The door opened to show a young woman who was both tall and slender, and baggy and voluminous, for she wore battledress in khaki and green, similar to one which Alice had seen in an Army Surplus shop not long ago.
 "I am Alice," she said, as the girl said, "You are Alice," and then, "I am Muriel." 
Smiling nicely Muriel stood aside for Alice to enter a hall where not a trace remained of the stacks of pamphlets, or whatever they were.
No. 45 had no carpet on the floor, otherwise the two halls were the same.
There was even a broom leaning in a corner.
 "Can I see Comrade Andrew?" and Muriel replied, disappointingly, "I think he is asleep." 
Seeing Alice's commenting face, Muriel said swiftly,"But he only got back at three this morning, and those Channel boats…
Then, having given this information to which Alice felt she was not entitled, Muriel said, with a look of irritated guilt because of Alice's critical face, that she would go and see.
She went to the door of the room Alice had been in, and lifted her hand as if to knock.
She scratched delicately, not to say intimately, with her forefinger.
The cold and dreadful pain that she never told herself was jealousy went through Alice.
She could have fainted with it Certainly she was dizzy, and when her head cleared Muriel still stood there, complacently smiling, and scratching with that raised forefinger, like a bird's beak.
Yes, she did look like a goose or better still, a gosling, lumpy and unformed; like a German Royal, with a smooth tight bosomy droop in front, and a face with protruding nose and gobbly lips.
Which face was now turning a pleased smile towards Alice.
 "I can hear him now, he's moving." 
Speaking as though Comrade Andrew's moving was in itself evidence of his superiority which she was prepared generously to share with Alice.
The door opened and Comrade Andrew stood there, blinking and red-eyed.
He wore creased trousers and a white T-shirt that needed washing.
Again Alice smelt spirits, and repressed disapproval: he must have been tired, coming in so late.
He smiled at Muriel in a way Alice did not feel inclined to analyse, then saw Alice and nodded familiarly at her, indicating she should enter.
She went into the room, while the man shut the door, smiling at Muriel, to exclude her.
This room had been cleared of all but two of the great packages.
A low folding bed stood against a wall with a single red blanket on it.
It was untidy, but then he had got straight out of the bed to answer the scratching.
There was a pillow without a pillowslip, and the old-fashioned striped ticking looked greasy.
This little scene of the bed was different from the impersonality of the rest of the room, and suggested a rank and even brutal masculinity.
Yawning, not hiding it, them an sat down on an ancient easy chair on one side of the dead fireplace.
She sat opposite in another.
 "I was in France," he said easily.
 "Just a quick trip." 
She found herself looking covertly at the bed, which had so much the air of being from a foreign country.
Or perhaps from some different moral climate, like a war, or a revolution.
He saw her examining the bed.
He was still waking himself up.
Suddenly he rose, went to the bed, tugged up the red blanket to lie straight, hiding the ugly pillow.
He sat down again.
He remarked,"I got rid of what you saw in that hole out there.
It's gone to where it can be of use."
 "Oh, good," said Alice indifferently.
The point was, he might or might not have sent, or taken "it" ; but so what?
She didn't want to know.
"You must be wondering what it was.
Well, all I can say is, it is something of which a very small amount goes a very long way."
A fine contempt was rising in Alice, because of his clumsiness.
She said sternly, "In my view, the less people know about such things, the better." 
Meaning, the less she knew.
His eyes narrowed and grew hard, then he stiffly smiled.
"You're right, comrade.
I suppose I am off guard.
I am a man who needs his sleep.
Seven hours in the twenty-four, or I function less than my best."
Alice nodded, but she was examining him critically.
She was finding him unimpressive.
A stocky, stubby man.
His hair, cut short, was flattened here and there, like an animal's fur when it is out of sorts.
A stale breath came from him, sour, disordered, which was not only because he might have drunk too much.
He should be watching his weight.
"I am glad you dropped in, Comrade Alice.
I have been wanting to talk things over with you."
Here he got up and went to the desk, to look for cigarettes, and stood with his back to her, going through the business of putting one in his mouth and lighting it.
This procedure, during which he seemed to be returning to himself, a quick, efficient, considered series of movements, subdued Alice's criticism.
She thought: Well, for all that, he's the real thing, and she allowed herself to feel confidence in him.
Then began a remarkable conversation which went on for some time; it was getting on for five when she left.
She knew  that he was finding out from her what he needed to know testing her; and that he must know surely that she allowed this, understood that it was happening.
It was a dreamy, thoughtful sort of state that she was in, passive, yet alert, storing up all kinds of impressions and ideas that she would examine later.
He wanted her to sever herself from "all that lot there; you are made of much better stuff than they are" ; and to embark on a career of respectability.
She was to apply for a job in a certain firm, with national importance.
She would get the job because he, Andrew, would see that she did, through contacts that were already established there.
He referred several times to "our network" .
Alice was to work in computers he, Andrew, would arrange for her to have a quick course of training, which would be a sufficient basis on which an intelligent woman like her could build.
Meanwhile she would live in a flat, not a squat, lead an ordinary life, and wait.
Alice listened modestly to all this, her lids kept down.
She was thinking: And who is he?
For whom would I be working?
She had a good idea but did it matter?
The main point was, did she or did she not think that the whole ghastly superstructure should be brought down and got rid of, root and branch, once and for all?
A clean sweep, that was what was needed.
And Alice saw a landscape that had been flattened, was bare and bleak, with perhaps a little wan ash blowing over it.
Yes.
Get rid of the rotten superstructure to make way for better.
For the new.
Did it matter all that much who did the cleansing, the pulling down?
Russia, Cuba, China, old man Cobbley and all, they were welcome as far as she was concerned.
But she said, after a while, in a pause that was there for her to fill, "I can't, Andrew." 
And suddenly, arising from her depths,"A bourgeois life?
You want me to live a middle-class life."
And she sat there laughing at him, sneering, in fact, all alive with the energy of scorn, of contempt.
He sat, facing her, no longer tired now, or stale with sleep, watching her closely.
He smiled gently.
"Comrade Alice, there is nothing wrong with a comfortable life — it depends on what the aim is.
You wouldn't be living like  that because of comfort, because of security "— he seemed to be making an effort to despise these words as much as she did —" but because of your aim.
Our aim."
They stared at each other.
Across a gulf.
Not of ideology, but of temperament, of experience.
She knew, from how he had said, "there is nothing wrong with a comfortable life," that he felt none of the revulsion she did.
On the contrary, he would like such a life.
She knew this about him; how?
She did not know how she knew what she did about people.
She just did.
This man would blow up a city without five seconds' compunction — and she did not criticise him for that — but he would insist on good whisky, eat in good restaurants, like to travel first-class.
He was working-class by origin, she thought; it had come hard to him.
That was why.
It was not for her to criticise him.
She said, definitely,"It's no good, Comrade Andrew.I couldn't do it.
I don't mean the waiting — for orders.
No matter how long it was."
 "I believe you," he said, nodding.
"I wouldn't mind how dangerous.
But I couldn't live like that.
I would go mad."
He nodded, sat silent a little.
Then, sounding for the first time humorous, even whimsical, "But Comrade Alice, I have been getting daily, sometimes hourly, reports of your transformation of that pigsty there." 
The dislike he put into that word was every bit as strong as her parents' could ever have been.
Leaning forward, he took her hand, smiling, and turned it so that it lay, the back upwards, in his strong square hand.
Alice's hand shrank a little, but she made it lie steady.
She did not like being touched, not ever!
Yet it was not so bad, his touch.
The firmness of it — that made it possible.
Along her knuckles, a crust of white paint.
He gently replaced her hand on her knee and said, "You'll have the place like a palace in no time." 
"But you don't understand.
We aren't going to live in that house as they do.
We aren't going to consume, and spend, and go soft and lie awake worrying about our pensions.
We're not like them.
They're disgusting."
Her voice was almost choked with loathing.
Her face twisted with hatred.
There was a long silence, during which he decided to leave  this unpromising subject.
(But, thought Alice, he would not be abandoning it for long!)
He offered her some coffee.
There was a kettle, and mugs and sugar and milk on a tray on the floor.
He quickly, efficiently, made coffee.
Then, he began to talk about all the people in No. 43.
His assessment of them, Alice noted, was the same as hers.
That pleased and flattered her, confirmed her in her belief in herself.
He spoke nicely about Jim, about Philip; but did not linger on questions.
Bert he seemed to dismiss.
Pat he wanted to know more about, where she had worked, her training.
Alice said that she did not know, had not asked.
 "But Comrade Alice," he reproved her in the gentlest way,"it is important.
Very important."
"Why is it?
I haven't had a job since I left university.
I've done all right."
This caused a check or hitch in the flow of their talk; he was suppressing a need to expostulate.
There's a lot of bourgeois about him, she was thinking, but only mildly critical because of her now established respect for him.
Jasper but he simply would not talk about Jasper.
Because, she thought, of her link with him.
But she didn't have to ask: Comrade Andrew did not have much time for Jasper.
Well, he'd see!
Roberta and Faye.
He asked many questions about them, but what interested him was their lesbianism.
Not out of prurience, or anything Alice could dislike; there was a total noncomprehension there.
He simply had no idea of it.
No experience, ever, Alice guessed.
He wanted to know what the women's commune was like that Roberta and Faye frequented.
What the connection was between lesbians and the revolutionary formulations of the political women.
Alice offered pamphlets and books, which she would procure for him.
He nodded, but pressed on: How did women like Faye and Roberta see the relations between men and women after the revolution?
Alice suppressed an impulse to say: Liquidate all men.
She was remembering long and hot arguments with Milly and Helen in Liverpool where she, Alice, had said that their attitude amounted to a contempt for men so total that in effect they suppressed all serious thought about them.
What Alice said was, There are many different formulations in the Women's Movement.
I would say that Faye and Roberta represent an extreme."
Then there were Mary and Reggie; and as she had expected, Comrade Andrew refused to dismiss them as she wanted to.
Precisely what she disliked most about them was what interested him; she knew that he wondered whether they could be persuaded to become sleeping partners in the revolution a phrase which she used and he approved with a dry smile and a nod.
Alice didn't know.
She doubted it.
They were naturally conservers.
(Not that she had anything against Greenpeace.
On the contrary.)
They were in short, bourgeois.
In her view, Andrew should discuss it with them.
She could not answer for them.
This, she knew, cut across the underlying premise of the conversation: that she was willingly acting as his aide in assessing possible recruits.
For something or other.
Not stated.
Understood.
Did they plan No. 43 to take in more members of their squat or commune?
"Why not?
There's plenty of room."
 "I agree, the more the better." 
And so the talk went on, reaching back, for some rather tense minutes, to her childhood.
Alice's mother did not really interest Comrade Andrew, but Cedric Mellings, that was a different matter.
How big was his business?
How many employees?
What were they like?
Alice's brother: Alice decided not to say her brother worked in a top airline firm.
 "Oh, don't waste your time on him," said Alice.
More cups of coffee, and some rather satisfying talk about the state of Britain.
Rotten as a bad apple, and ready for the bulldozers of history.
When Alice said she had to go, because she was expecting Jasper, and stood up, Andrew did too, and seemed to hesitate.
Then he said quickly, for the first time sounding awkward, "You have been with Jasper a long time, haven't you?" 
 "Fifteen years." 
Knowing what was coming, recognising it  from many such moments in the past, she turned to go.
He was beside her, and she felt his arm lightly about her shoulders.
 "Comrade Alice," he said.
 "It's not easy to understand — why you choose such a — relationship." 
The usual ration of affront, resentment, even anger was in her.
But this was Comrade Andrew, and she had decided that what came from him was, had to be, different.
She said,"You don't understand.
No, you don't understand Jasper."
His arm still lay there, so gently that she could not find it a pressure.
He said, gentle, "But Alice, surely you could" Do better was what he wanted to say.
She turned to face him, with a bright, steady smile.
 "It's all right," she said, like a schoolgirl.
 "I love him, you see." 
Incredulity made his smile ironic, patient.
 "Well, Comrade Alice…" 
He allowed it to trail away, in humour.
 "Come in any time," he said.
 "Why don't you come in and see our palace?" 
 "Thanks, I will." 
And so she went home, her mind a dazzle of questions.
She had been going up to admire her newly-painted room, but something took her to Jim's door.
She knocked, heard nothing, went in.
Jim lay on the top of his sleeping-bag, facing her, his eyes open.
 "Are you all right, Jim?" 
No reply.
He looked so dreadful she went to him, knelt, put her hand on his.
It was dry, very hot.
"Jim!
What's wrong?"
 "Ah, hell, what's the point?" came out of him in a choking sob, and he put his arm over his face.
Under the loose sleeve was a red wound that went from elbow to wrist.
Wide.
Nasty.
It seemed filled with red jelly.
 "Jim, what happened?" 
 "I got in a fight." 
The words came out of a sobbing smother of frustration and rage.
 "No leave it, it'll heal, it'll be all right, it is clean." 
He seemed to be fighting with himself as he lay there, banging his fist to his head, clenching up his legs then shooting them out straight.
 "But the police didn't get you." 
"No.
But they will know I was there by now.
There's someone who'll make sure of that!
What's the use?
There's no way you can get out of trouble, you can't get out, what's the use of trying."
 "Did you try for a job?" 
 "Yes, what's the use?" 
And he turned over and lay on his back, arms loose by his side.
She had known it.
There was a certain struggling fury that went with being jobless, and persevering, and being turned down that was different from simply being jobless.
 "What were you trying for?" 
"A printing firm in Southwark.
But I don't know all this new technology, I learned the old printing.
I did a year's course, I thought it would get me somewhere."
"Printing!
You didn't say.
But there must be hundreds of little firms all over the country who still use it for special jobs."
 "Then I must have applied to half of them in the last four years." 
"My father has a printing firm.
A small one.
They do all kinds of things.
Pamphlets and brochures and catalogues."
 "He won't be using the old way for long." 
"I'll write to him.
Who not?
He's supposed to be a fucking socialist."
 "What's the use, I'm black." 
 "Wait, I'm thinking." 
He was still tense and hot and miserable, but, she thought, better.
Like a nun, or his sister, she sat holding his hand, smiling gently down at him.
 "Yes," she said at last.
"I'll write to my father.
I'll do that.
Make him practise what he preaches.
He's had blacks before, anyway."
She could see he was, in spite of himself, beginning to hope again.
 "I'll write it now," she said.
In the rucksack in which she seemed to keep half her life she burrowed and came up with a biro and writing-pad.
Dear Dad,
This is Jim
 "What's your name, Jim?" 
 "Mackenzie." 
 "I have a cousin who married a Mackenzie." 
"My grandfather was Mackenzie.
Trinidad."
 "Then perhaps we are related." 
A small gust of laughter blew through him, and left him smiling.
He sighed, relaxed, turned towards her, put his hand under his cheek.
He would be asleep soon.
She wrote:
This is Jim Mackenzie.
He can't get a job.
He is a printer.
Why don't you give him a job?
You are supposed to be a fucking progressive?
He has been out of work for years.
In the name of the Revolution.
Alice
She neatly folded the letter, put it in a blue envelope, choosing the blue in preference to cream for some reason, and addressed it.
Jim's lids were drowsing.
"Why don't you take this round tomorrow.
Your cut won't show."
She pulled back the sleeve gently.
He did not resist her.
It was a really bad cut which would leave a thick scar.
It needed stitching.
Never mind.
 "I like you, Alice," he stated.
 "You are a really sincere person, you know what I mean?" 
He did not add, "Unlike the others." 
She could have wept, knowing that what he said was true, feeling confirmed and supported.
She stayed near him till he slept, went out into the dark hall, switched on the light with pride and with the knowledge of what that little act meant, what it had cost, would cost; she pressed a tiny switch on the wall, and electrons obediently flowed through cables, because the woman in the Electricity had so ordered it
Money.
Where from?
Standing there, surveying the hall, so pleasant now (though  she knew that really she ought to get carpet foam and do over the carpet which after all had been folded up in the dust of the skip), she saw that Philip had mended the little cupboard under the stairs that the policeman had kicked in.
At this moment, a knock, and with a premonition she went to open the door, a look of authority already on her face.
It was the policewoman she had seen in the police station.
At the gate stood her partner, a young man Alice had not seen before.
 "Good evening," said Alice, "can I help you?" 
She stood with the door open behind her, so that the order of the hall could be properly seen; she saw the policewoman taking it in.
The young policeman was, as Alice was not surprised to see, trying to locate with his eyes the place in the garden these crazies had buried…
 "Does a James Mackenzie live here?" 
 "Yes, he does," said Alice at once.
 "Can I speak to him?" 
 "You could, but he's not here." 
 "When will he be back?" 
"He might not be back tonight.
He's gone to visit friends in Highgate."
 "He wasn't here this weekend, then?" 
 "He was here last night." 
 "He was here all last night?" 
Alice said,"Yes.
Why?"
 "He was here all through the evening?" 
 "Yes, he had supper here and then we spent the evening playing cards." 
There had been the slightest tremor in Alice's voice; she had been going to say, "We all spent the evening" but remembered in time that "all" might not be prepared to stick their necks out for Jim, if "all" could be reached and warned in time.
 "You and he were here?" 
"And a friend of his.
A white boy.
William something or other."
Alice knew that the little hitch in the smoothness had reached the policewoman, even if only subliminally.
But it was all right, she thought; she could tell that from the indecision of the  woman's manner.
Alice yawned, put her hand over her mouth, said, "Sorry, we were up late…" and yawned again, offering the policewoman the right sort of smile.
Who smiled briefly in return, as she again looked carefully into the reassuring hall.
 "Thanks," she said, and went off to the gate, where she and her companion resumed their sharp-eyed stroll around the guilty streets.
Alice glanced quietly into Jim's room.
He was asleep.
She then went into the kitchen and wrote a letter to her mother, which she would have ready for poor Monica Waters, who would certainly be turning up here in the next day or two.
While she was doing this, within a few minutes of each other came Jasper, then Pat and Bert, then Roberta and Faye.
The six sat round the table in the kitchen, with an assortment of take-aways, which they had brought in separately and which they would now consume together: pizzas, and fish and chips, and pies.
Alice made coffee, set around the mugs, and sat at the head of the table.
Her happiness because of this scene was so strong she closed her eyes so that it would not beam out in great mellow streams and betray her to the sternness of the others.
Bert wanted to know about Jack.
Jasper reported.
The glances exchanged by Faye and Roberta told Alice that trouble would ensue.
It did.
Faye demanded, in her pert, pretty way that did nothing to hide her seriousness, why all these plans had been made without a meeting to get everyone's approval?
Pat said she agreed: Jasper had no right to take it on himself…
This, Alice knew, was partly directed at Bert, who had been Jasper's accomplice.
Jasper, and then Bert, said that no one was being committed to anything.
All that was planned was a quick, exploratory trip to Ireland, to meet a representative of the I.R.A., and to offer cooperation with a group here.
 "A group of what?" demanded Faye, showing her pretty little teeth.
 "Yes," said Pat, though with a little edge of humour that told  Alice it would be all right, "are we still committing all the vast resources of the C.C.U., or only ourselves?" 
Alice saw that Roberta would have laughed at this, had Faye's mood permitted it.
Bert, because he wanted to reinstate himself with Pat, took command and, his white teeth showing in the thickets of his beard while he offered a steady, responsible, forceful smile said,"I can appreciate the comrades' reservations.
But in the nature of things… "and here he twisted his red lips to signal and to share with them the perspectives of this operation" certain approaches have to be tentative and even apparently, ad hoc.
After all, the meeting with Jack was fortuitous.
It was chance, and became productive, thanks to Comrade Jasper.
It was he who made the first approaches…"
Alice could see that it was not going to be easy for any of them to admit obligation to Jasper, even though he was being correctly impersonal, sitting somewhat to one side of the scene waiting for their approval, the image of a responsible cadre.
But just then there was a sound in the hall, the door to outside shut, and Jasper, jumping up to look, reported it was Philip going down the street.
The fact he had not come into the kitchen meant he felt unwanted, and this brought Faye in with,"And there is no place we can talk in this house now.
Alice has seen to that."
Pat said quickly, "Well, we can go to 45 But surely it is all right for a few minutes here." 
"And then Jim will come in.
Who not?"demanded Faye sweetly.
 "Oh Jim," we can say, "we are just having a little chat about the I.R.A." 
"Or Mary and Reggie, said Roberta, allying herself with Faye out of love.
Actually as the others knew, she agreed with them, did not need the furious condemnation that Faye had to use as a fuel to keep going.
 "Why don't we just agree, quickly, now, to one or two basics," said Pat.
 "There isn't very much to discuss, is there?" 
 "No," said Faye.
 "I'm serious about it, if no one else is." 
And with petulant little movements of her lips and eyes, she challenged them; then reached for a cigarette, and lit it, and blew out thick smoke in irritation.
And, to support her, came sounds from the hall: Mary and Reggie who, full of talk and laughter, opened the door of the kitchen and were silent.
With no reason not to come in — since it was the spirit of the house that people should sit around the kitchen table talking — they seemed to sense a unity, to know they were not wanted.
Smiling politely, they said, "Oh, we were just…" 
And, in spite of cries of invitation that they should stay, from Alice, from Pat, went off up the stairs.
 "Brilliant," said Faye.
 "I agree," said Pat.
"That wasn't good.
Well, I suggest someone nips over next door to see if we can borrow a room — that is, if it is felt that we need actually to discuss anything more."
 "I need to discuss a good deal," said Faye.
Jasper went, was gone it seemed only for a minute, came back to say that they would be welcome.
He returned to 45 at once.
Then Alice went, and Bert and Pat.
Then Faye and Roberta.
The goose-girl admitted them, indicating a room at the top of the stairs — the same as that which in their house was inhabited by Jasper and Alice.
It had been a nursery, and had lambs, ducks, Mickey Mouses, humorous dinosaurs, coy robots, witches on broomsticks and the other necessities of the middle-class child's bedroom.
 "Christ," said Faye violently, "what utter bloody shit," and she even held out her pretty hands, clawed to show slender nails painted bright red, as if she would scratch the pictures off the walls.
She smiled however, if you could call it a smile.
It turned out that after all, there was nothing much more to be said.
What was evident was that they had all expected Comrade Andrew to join them, even Alice, who knew he disapproved.
Of what, exactly, she wondered now?
Of the I.R.A.?
No, of course not.
Of working with the I.R.A.?
How could he?
Then, it must be of them, this group, approaching the Irish comrades in this way.
Or this group.
Period.
But, not of her, Alice.
He approved of her.
Secretly warmed, supported, by this thought, which she could share with no one at all, Alice sat reticent, watching the "meeting" develop, seeing  on Jasper's and Bert's faces how they longed to hear steps, hear a knock, hear, "May I join you, comrades?" 
But, nothing.
It was reiterated that Bert and Jasper would make the trip purely as a reconnaissance.
They could find out what kind of support the Irish comrades would accept.
This being found somewhat lukewarm, somewhat unsatisfying and unsatisfactory, the formulation was amended and became: that Bert and Jasper were empowered by those present to offer support to the Irish revolutionaries, and ask to be given concrete tasks.
They did not linger.
No one was comfortable in this former nursery, that had the ghosts of privileged children — of loved children?— so strongly in it.
Quickly they finished, and left, severally going back to No. 43.
Roberta and Faye went away to the pictures.
They liked violent, even pornographic films, and there was one at the local cinema.
The four found Mary and Reggie in the kitchen, eating properly off plates.
The mess of pizza fragments, uneaten chips, beer-cans, papers, had been swept into the litter bin.
Mary and Reggie said, "Do sit down and join us," but just as the six had repelled Mary and Reggie, so now did Mary and Reggie seem surrounded by an invisible current: Keep off.
Well, thought Alice, they are probably still sulky about last night.
I did go too far I suppose.
Well, let them.
With many smiles and good-nights, the four went upstairs and another meeting took place in the newly-painted room, where they sat on the floor, and discussed the new problem posed by Faye and Roberta, who did not like Comrade Andrew's role in their affairs.
That was why they had hoped he would drop in to the meeting next door.
 "Who was Comrade Andrew?" they wanted to know.
By the time the four had finished critically discussing the two women, they were a warm, close unit, comrades to the death.
And yet Alice kept thinking that Pat, no matter how committed she sounded now, did not really stand by Bert.
The attractive lively girl, affectionate and easy with Bert after their weekend away together, presumably alone, did not convince Alice.
Glossy cherry lips and shining  cheeks would be pressed to Bert's sensual red lips, and then doubtless all those white teeth would clash and nip, all that bushy black hair of Bert's…but nevertheless, thought Alice, nevertheless…
And Pat very much did not like Bert going with Jasper to Ireland.
She did not like Jasper.
This wasn't a unit at all, only seemed like one, and Alice sat inwardly separated, thinking that Pat probably felt the same.
The smell of paint was very strong.
Soon Jasper said he couldn't sleep in it and went upstairs.
His tone was such that Alice did not dare to go with him.
She went down into the sitting-room for the night.
She slept badly, often waking to listen so that she would not his going in the morning.
She heard the two men come down the stairs and go into the kitchen.
She followed them; felt herself already excluded not wanted.
It was only six, a fresh sunny chilly late-spring morning.
It seemed to Alice that Jasper hardly saw her as he went off.
He waved to her from the gate, where she stood like any housewife seeing off her man.
She went back to her sleeping-bag, with the feeling that a lot of time had to be got through before Jasper came home to her.
But the days pleasantly went by.
Pat was infinitely available to Alice, helping with painting and cleaning; between them the two women accomplished miracles, dingy caves being transformed one after another to fresh and lively rooms.
Pat was funny and sweet, agreeable, entertaining.
Alice opened and expanded in this normality, this ease, and thought again how much of her time was spent with a tightened heart and grim expectation of another put-down from Jasper.
Yet, while she enjoyed it all, liked Pat, felt she had never been so happy, she was thinking: Yes, but this is how people behave when they have decided to go away: in a sense she has already left.
Philip, affectionately supported by the two women, got the hot water system working.
Everyone had a celebratory bath.
Even Faye did, when encouraged by Roberta.
Philip went back on to the roof and finished the tiling.
He replaced floors, fallen plaster, mended the machineries of lavatory cisterns and, borrowing the car from next door, got new piping to replace old.
He found a thrown-away central heating panel or two, and there was real heating.
He located two great beams of good timber lying on a waste lot half a mile away, but could not lift them.
They would have to wait for Bert and Jasper to help him.
Between Alice and Mary and Reggie took place the accounting session which would bring in a regular contribution to the household.
Mary, who of course knew exactly what would have to be paid, had already worked out her and Reggie's shares.
It was very little.
Electricity, gas?
With ten in the house what could that come to?
An assessment was made.
Water?
The Water Board had not yet caught up with them.
It seemed this was as far as the couple had thought; as though that would be it.
Alice said drily that this and this and this had been brought in.
 "Yes, but from the skips," said Mary sharply, betraying that she had not omitted to notice what was being brought in.
This was taking place at the kitchen table.
Reggie and Mary opposite each other, so amiable and self-assured; Alice sitting at the head of that table, waiting for what would come her way.
She knew already.
She could see in Mary's eyes a gleam that meant she was calculating, not what she might owe to Alice, but what she was accumulating, of course at the moment only in imagination, for the purchase of their flat, or house.
Alice said, "We've paid for the gas boiler, for a lot of cable, for tools, for wood, for glass." 
She did not expect very much.
Rightly.
Glances flew back and forth between Reggie and Mary, and a sum of twenty pounds was offered and accepted.
No mention was made of Philip's work.
Alice could positively hear the thought: but of course he wouldn't do it if he weren't going to live here.
Smiling, even demure, Alice accepted the tea that Mary offered to prepare out of guilt, of course; and looked at the  other two and thought: God how I hate you people.
How I hate your mean, scrimping, grabbing, greedy guts.
Because she knew she swelled and paled, in the grip of her look, she smiled even more and then invited them to start talking about their plans for their future home, which they did at once, and ceased to notice her.
Jim took the letter to Cedric Mellings, and came back limp and weepy with happiness.
He could start tomorrow.
By chance someone was leaving.
By chance Jim would suit Cedric Mellings very well.
Jim could look forward, too, to training in the new technical mysteries.
Alice said sharply,"Guilty conscience.
That lot — it's all guilt with them."
Jim said,"He's very nice, Alice.
He was very nice to me."
They were in the kitchen.
Jim, seated, or perched on his chair, could not settle, but got up and stumbled about, laughing helplessly, or sat and laid his head on the table and laughed, sounding as if he wept, then in an excess of happiness and gratitude, banged his two fists on either side of his head, which banging turned into a little sharp jubilant rhythm.
Then he sat up and flung wide his arms in the same movement, his eyes rolling, his black face smiling wide, white teeth showing.
One arm was very fat because of the bandage under his jersey sleeve.
Alice, with a thousand terrible things to say about her father, kept them back, because she loved Jim, loved his helplessness, his vulnerability, and her own part in alleviating these wounds; because she knew this man, or boy he was twenty-two — was really sweet, had a sweet gentle warmth in him; and she knew that a spell of happiness, of success, would transform him.
She could imagine how he would be, earning money, taking command of his life.
She could see him clearly: Jim as he was now, but filled out with confidence and new skills.
Therefore she said not one more word about her shitty father, but only listened, sharing in what she knew was a moment in his life he could never forget.
Then she took him out to supper to celebrate, Philip and Pat joining in, and the evening became one of those when the participants have to pause, to say to themselves: Yes, this is me, it really is me Happiness sat with them at the table in the  Seashell Fish'n'Chips; they could not stop smiling, or Jim from laughing and sighing.
When he said, "I can't believe this is me, man," they looked at each other, unable to bear that they could not express what they felt for him, but they could laugh, and — it was Pat who sat next to him — stroke or pat him, or embrace him.
The other people in the restaurant, who might at other times have had stringent thoughts about race, or about white women publicly embracing black men (or at least, not with such total lack of self-consciousness), were subdued — it could be seen from faces that showed tendencies to laugh too without reason to the demand of the occasion, which was for a total and uncritical abandon to happiness.
The four went back to No. 43, in a close tender group, Jim as king, as victor, and, unwilling that the evening should be lost, they sat on around the kitchen table, sentinelled by the yellow forsythia, and could not bear to part.
Alice was already thinking: Yes, tonight you'd think we'll all be friends for life, we could never harm each other, but it could all change, just like that!
Oh she knew, she had seen it all.
Her heart could have ached, could have dragged her down, but she did not let it, was keeping that lump of a heart on a short cruel chain like a dangerous dog.
A postcard showing the Wicklow Mountains arrived from Jasper, with the message: Wish you were here!
Knowing exactly the freakish mood he had been in, her face assumed that smile the thought of Jasper so often evoked: modest, wistful and admiring, as if his vagaries of genius would for ever be beyond her.
She kept the card to herself because she knew others would not understand.
Coming early downstairs long before the others, she had seen it lying on the floor inside the door.
Jim went off for his first day at work in a mood of tender incredulity, still unable to stop smiling.
Pat, instead of joining Alice in their scrubbing and painting, went off to "a friend" , came back saying that Bert had telephoned a message.
All was well, and they would be back soon.
What are they doing for money? was Alice's thought, kept to herself.
She also thought: When Bert comes back, Pat will not be here.
She could read this, from Pat's face.
But she kept that to herself too.
That evening a knock — furtive and hasty, telling Alice who it was — brought her out to find Monica on the path near the gate, not outside the door, for the girl had been afraid that Faye might open the door.
But, seeing Alice, she approached swiftly, her hungry eyes on Alice's face.
Faye was in the kitchen with Roberta, so Alice shut the door quietly behind her and went with Monica out to the road, and along it to where they were hidden by the healthy bushes of Joan Robbins's garden.
 "Did you hear of anything?" 
Monica asked, already sullen and hopeless, apparently seeing from Alice's face that there was no news.
She looked puffy and pale.
Her hair straggled greasily.
From her came such a whiff of defeat that Alice had to force herself to stand up to it.
 "There's nothing to hope from the Council," said Alice, and seeing a sneer, or snarl, of Well, of course not! persisted, "But I've thought of something else." 
She asked Monica to stay where she was, sneaked back into the house as though she were guilty of something, came out again with the letter she had written to her mother.
Monica had drifted half-way back to the main road, apparently expecting Alice not to reappear.
 "Did you think I was not coming back?" she scolded.
 "Really, if you are going to expect the worst then that is what you'll get." 
A weak, conscious smile.
"Take this to this address.
And take your baby with you."
"But it's too late.
God knows it is hard enough to get him off to sleep in that place and he's asleep now."
"Go tomorrow.
It's my mother.
She likes babies.
She likes looking after people."
The doubt on Monica's face did not in any way diminish the total confidence Alice felt.
Look what she had achieved with Jim!
No, she was on a crest of ability and luck, and she could make no mistakes.
She felt that her mother would be good to poor Monica.
She said briskly,"It's all right, Monica.
Well, it's worth trying, isn't it?"
Peering down dubiously at the envelope, Monica departed to the bus-stop in the main road, and Alice went in to join the  others around the table.
She had prepared a large stew, or thick soup, her speciality, brought to perfection in years of communal living.
How many people had joked that Alice could feed crowds out of it!
Like the Bible's loaves and two fishes.
How many had come into this squat or that, asking, "Any of your soup left, Alice?" and then sat breaking bread into it, handing back their plates for more.
No dietary deficiencies in people who lived on her soup!
And in times when there had been very little money, it had kept them going, Jasper and her, for months.
Alice slid back into her place, saying, to their querying, ready for any emergency looks, "It's all right, it was nothing." 
Roberta and Faye, Mary and Reggie, Philip and Jim, Pat and Alice, sat around all evening, compelled into being a family by the magic of that soup, and the red wine that Reggie had contributed, and the good bread, healthy wholemeal, and the frivolous white that Faye insisted on.
This was another evening of pleasure, and Jim was full of tales about Alice's father, and the others working with him, twelve or more, and how lucky Alice was to have such a father while Alice smiled and kept a lock on her tongue.
Next morning Alice was alone in the house, when there was a tumult of thudding knocks on the door, and a voice screamed, "Come out, you come out of there, come out!" 
Alice went out to Monica, who was transformed by fury, ready to kill, as Alice could see.
The child in the pushchair, poor ugly little thing, grizzled steadily.
"Why did you do that?
Who did you send me there?
What have I done to you?"
And Monica began kicking out at Alice's legs, and beating about with her arms.
"What is the matter?
What happened.
Didn't she take you in?"
 "There's no one there," screeched Monica.
 "Why did you send me there?" 
"Well, she's only out shopping, isn't she?
She'll be back."
Monica stopped screeching, her limbs stopped their flailing, and she stared, appalled, at Alice.
 "It's an empty house," she said.
"No one there.
There's a For Sale notice up."
 "You went to the wrong house," said Alice, vaguely.
She was, indeed, struck by something, a thought, or a memory: cases on  a kitchen table, filled with crockery wrapped in newspaper.
She stared at Monica, who stared at her.
 "There's a mistake," said Alice, who was as pale as Monica, and as breathless by now.
 "Something's wrong." 
 "It's you who's wrong," said Monica, with a sudden ugly laugh.
She still stared at Alice, as if unable to believe what she saw.
"Why did you do this to me?
What for?
You get some kind of a kick out of it, I suppose.
You're evil,"she pronounced.
 "You are all evil and mad in this house." 
And bursting into wails, she went running off, pushing and jolting the pushchair so that the child wailed too.
The two went noisily to the bus-stop, leaving Alice on the doorstep, stunned, and staring without seeing at the letter she had written to her mother, thrust into her hand by Monica.
Dear Mum,
This is Monica.
She is living with her baby in one of those ghastly hotels, you know.
Well, if you don't you fucking well ought to know.
Why don't you take her in?
It's the least you can do.
You've got three empty rooms now.
Monica and her baby are living in one shitty room, with no place she can cook or anything.
Your daughter Alice
P.S. And there is a husband, too
She went in, and sat on the bottom step of the staircase.
Sat there for a long time, her mind blank.
Then she began a curious movement, rubbing her hand over her face, as though feeling for something or wanting something.
It was a quite hard movement, dragging the flesh this way and that, and it went on for some time, perhaps ten minutes.
A task she had to perform, a necessity; an observer could have thought she had been ordered to do this, to sit on that step with her fingers pushing her flesh about over her face.
Then she methodically collected her bag, and went off to the Underground, walked up the streets to her mother's house, and stood outside it looking at the "For Sale" sign.
She could not take it in.
Using her key she briskly admitted herself.
But inside it  was as if something had sucked out furniture, leaving the spirit of the house intact.
The cooker was in the kitchen, though the refrigerator was gone.
Curtains hung pleasantly in the windows, and it seemed that if she turned her head away and back, then the table might reappear where she had sat, where she had served her soup to her mother, sometimes to her mother's guests.
The rest of the house was the same.
In the bedrooms were the curtains she had known all her life, and the fitted carpets remained, but beds and cupboards had been spirited away.
Alice went up to her room, and squatted down in the corner where her bed had been, the narrow white bed she had slept in since she was ten years old.
On the window was a blue-and-red peacock she had stencilled there on a wet afternoon when the garden was blanked out with grey rain.
A 1980 calendar hung on a wall; she had kept it because she liked the picture: Manet's "The Bar at the Folies-Bergère" She identified with that girl who stared out, trapped by bottles, tangerines, mirrors, the counter, a wall of people with ugly faces.
In the garden there was sunlight, and cats on a lawn that needed cutting.
She went downstairs, like a sleepwalker.
Then, in a frenzy, having come awake, furious, betrayed, deadly, she tore down curtains from room after room, bundled them, and staggered out of the house, forgetting to lock the door, hardly able to walk under the load.
She saw a woman looking from a window and thought: So what, they are mine, aren't they?
She managed to reach the corner, staggering.
She stopped a taxi, returned in it to the house, made it wait while she ran in to drag down any other curtains that remained.
Then she was driven back to the squat, where she spent all afternoon putting up her curtains where none had been, or replacing curtains for which she had no feeling.
Anyway, these curtains were a thousand times better than the ones off the skips; lovely, real linen or silk or thick velvet, lined and interlined, fringed and tasselled.
How dare her mother give these away without even asking her, Alice?
When she went into the kitchen, Philip was there, and she knew from his manner that he had something to say.
It was that he had had printed a leaflet, which he was taking  to hotels, restaurants, shops, advertising his firm: Philip Fowler, Builder and Decorator; that he had to get real work, soon; that he thought he had contributed more than his share to this house, which was now in working order.
If "they" wanted him to do any more, then he insisted on being paid; no, of course not at the proper rates, but enough to make it worth it.
The things that still needed to be done here were: Guttering to be replaced.
Also a section of exterior drainpipe.
(He advised that this should be done soon, because the wall was badly soaked, and they were asking for dry rot.)
The cold water tank in the attic was almost rusted through.
In his opinion it might burst, flooding the house at any moment.
The window sills were rotten on the top floor, and were letting in rain.
And of course there was the question of the two rotten beams in the attic.
He laid before Alice a list of these necessities in order of urgency, the water tank being first.
Money.
She would have to get some.
She sat a long time by herself, looking at the forsythia.
It was wilting.
Brilliant yellow petals lay on the floor.
She went out, cut more branches, threw the dying ones away, and sat on through the afternoon, thinking.
Where was her mother, for a start?
Did she imagine she could run away from Alice, just like that?
Was she mad?
Well, she must be, not telling Alice and Jasper here somewhere deep in her mind a thought began tugging and nagging, that her mother had told her.
Well, if so, not so that Alice could take it in.
Could she get some money from her mother?
Not if she had just moved.
With all that expense.
Besides, she probably hadn't got over being angry; she needed time to cool down.
How about Theresa and Anthony?
Over this, Alice thought long and intently.
Theresa would slip her another fifty pounds.
But it wasn't enough.
What was the good of fifty pounds?
She had got the forty odd due to her that week from Social Security, and it melted away on things Philip needed.
She thought that if she went there while the maid was cleaning, Theresa and Anthony out at work, she could nick the netsukes if she was quick and clever, and the  maid would not notice.
But the thought did not stay with her; affection drove it off.
Theresa had been so good to her always, she could not do that to Theresa.
Anthony was another matter.
If it was only Anthony: she would take anything she could get from him!
Zoe Devlin?
But for some reason Alice would not go on with that thought.
She felt sick, as if Zoe had quarrelled so horribly with her, as well as with her mother.
Perhaps she could actually pick out a suitable house and rob it?
Clearly, she was not without talents in that direction.
She felt confident that she could succeed.
But to become a thief, a real thief that was a step away from herself.
How could she describe herself as a revolutionary, a serious person, if she were a thief?
Besides, if she were caught, it would be bad for the Cause.
No.
Besides, she had always been honest, had never stolen anything, not even as a child.
She had not gone through that period of nicking things out of her mother's handbag, her father's pockets, the way some small children did.
Never.
She could imagine herself choosing a likely house, watching for its inhabitants to be out, gliding into it, getting her hands around valuables — after all, she did know what was valuable and what wasn't.
She wasn't one of these poor deprived kids who slipped in through an open window or an inadequately locked door and then did not know better than to steal a television or a video.
But she could not really see herself with whatever it was: vase, or rug or necklace, trying to sell it.
No, that was out.
She had to have money.
Look at all these people, taking and taking though Jim had said proudly last night that now he would contribute properly; he would pay his way, Alice needn't think that he wouldn't.
The only place she could think of was her father's.
Not his house, it was too early to try that again.
The firm.
She sat, eyes shut, visualising the inside of the building that housed C. Mellings, Printers and Stationers.
The safe in her father's office upstairs had cheques in it, but she did not want cheques.
Downstairs, in the little stationery shop at the back which her father had started in a small way as a trial, and which had  become so successful that sometimes he joked it financed everything else, was a safe full of cash.
But only in the day when the shop was full of people.
Every night the cash was carried upstairs to the other safe.
Next morning it was taken to the bank.
How was she to get that money?
She did not know the combination of the safe, and did not propose to turn professional with explosives, or whatever they used.
No, she needed something else; she needed cheek.
It was Friday.
They did better business downstairs on Friday than on any other day.
The shop closed at five, and then the money was taken straight upstairs to be counted.
It stayed in the safe until Monday morning.
On Friday evenings her father often went home early, because he and Jane and the infants liked to drive into Kent, where they had friends.
A real, typical, bourgeois arrangement: Cedric and Jane stayed weekends with the Boults; the Boults would use Cedric's and Jane's house for trips into London.
Nothing like this had ever happened while Cedric still lived with Dorothy!
Of course not.
Her mother was too full of mine and thine, you couldn't see her sharing her house with another family.
For some reason, this business of the weekends, the visiting Boults, always made Alice weak with anger.
But, with luck, her father would have left at three.
To reach her father's business, she had to go two stops on the Underground further than for her father's house, or her mother's well, where her mother had been.
She walked, deliberately not thinking too much, into the stationer's where she was greeted, the boss's daughter.
She walked through the shop, saying she wanted to see her father, then upstairs to the office floor.
People were tidying their desks, for the weekend.
She said Hello, and How are you, and went into her father's office where the secretary, Jill, sat in her father's chair, counting money from the till downstairs.
 "Oh he's gone then," said Alice, and sat down.
Jill, counting, leafed through ten-pound notes, smiled, nodded, her mouth moving to indicate that she could not stop.
Alice smiled and nodded, and got up to stand at the window, looking out.
Indolent and privileged, daughter of the Establishment, she leaned on the sill, watching the goings-on in the street, and listened to the sounds of paper sliding on paper.
Should she say her father had agreed she should have some money?
If she did, Jill could not say no; and then, on Monday, her father being told, would not give her away, would not say: My daughter is a thief.
She was about to say: He said I could have five hundred pounds.
But then it happened, the incredible, miraculous luck that now she expected, since it happened so easily and often: the telephone rang in the next room.
Jill counted on.
The telephone rang and rang.
 "Oh, flick it," muttered Jill daintily, for she was the kind of good girl favoured by her father as secretary, and she ran next door to the telephone.
Alice saw on the desk that there was a white canvas bag in which stacks of notes had already been put.
She slid her hand in, took out a thick wad, then another, put them inside her jacket, and again leaned, her back to the room, at the window.
Jill returned, saying that it was Mrs Mellings, for her father, and it took Alice some moments to realise that this must be her mother, not the new Mrs Mellings, who at this moment would be already on her way to the pleasures of a weekend in Kent.
She did not want to ask: Do you know her address?— thus betraying herself; but she asked, idly, "Where was she ringing from?" 
Jill again did not reply, as she was counting, but at last said,"From home.
Well, I suppose so.
She was not noticing anything.
Alice waited until Jill stood up, with three white canvas bags, notes and cheques and coins separately, and put them into the safe.
 "Oh well, I'll be off," Alice said.
 "I'll tell your father you were here," said Jill.
When Alice arrived home, she counted what she had.
It was a thousand pounds.
At once she thought: I could have taken two thousand, three — it would come to the same thing.
In any case, when they know the money has gone, when they remember I was here, they'll know it was me.
Who not be hung for a sheep as for a lamb.
Well, it would have to do.
Alice thought for some time, where to put it.
She was not going to tell Jasper.
At last she zipped open her sleeping-bag, slid the two packs of notes into it, and thought that only the nastiest luck would bring anyone to touch it, to find what she had.
Friday night.
Jasper and Bert had been gone for ten days.
They said they would come at the weekend.
Thinking: Pat, where's Pat? she went down to the kitchen, and found Pat, with her jacket on, a scarf, and her bright scarlet canvas holdall.
She was scribbling a note, but stopped when she saw Alice, with a smile that was both severe and weak, telling Alice that Pat had not wanted to face the business of goodbyes, and would now hurry through them.
 "I'm off, Alice," she said, quickly, hardly allowing her eyes to meet Alice's.
 "You're through with Bert?" 
Tears filled Pat's eyes.
She turned away.
"Some time I've got to break it.
I've got to.
 "Well, it's not for any outsider to say," remarked Alice.
Her heart was sick with loss, surprising her.
It seemed she had become fond of Pat.
"I've got to, Alice.
Please understand.
It's not Bert.
I mean, I love him.
But it's the politics."
 "You mean, you don't agree with our line about the I.R.A.?" 
"No, no, not that.
I don't have any confidence in Bert."
At least, she did not say, as well , "or in Jasper" .
She said,"Here is my address.
I'm not fading out.
I mean, I don't want to make any dramatic breaks, that kind of thing.
I'll be working in my own way — the same sort of thing, but what I see as rather more — serious."
 "Serious," said Alice.
 "Yes," she insisted.
"Serious, Alice.
I don't see this tripping over to Ireland, on the word of somebody called Jack."
She sounded disgusted and fed up, and the word "Jack" was blown away like fluff.
"It's all so damned amateur.
I don't go along with it."
 "1 thought you'd be off." 
Pat swiftly turned away.
It was because she was crying.
"We've been together a long time Her voice went thick and inarticulate.
 "Never mind," said Alice dolefully.
"I do mind.
And I mind about leaving you, Alice."
The two women embraced, weeping.
 "I'll be back," said Pat.
"You were talking about a C.C.U. Congress.
I'll be back for that.
And for all I know, I won't be  able to stand breaking with Bert.
I did try, once before."
She went out, running, to leave her emotion behind.
The two men came back on Sunday night.
Alice knew at once they had failed.
Jasper had a limp look, and Bert was morose even before he re d the letter Pat had left for him.
She made supper for Jasper, who at once went up to his sleeping-bag on the top floor.
Bert said he was tired, but she followed him, and found him standing alone in the room he had shared with Pat.
She went in, and, though he was not thinking of Ireland, said,"I want to ask some questions.
Jasper's sometimes funny when he has had a disappointment."
 "So am I," said Bert, but softened and, standing where he was, hands dangling down, said, "We didn't get anywhere." 
 "Yes, but why?" 
She was thinking that rejection brought out the best in Bert.
Without his easy affability, the constant gleam of his white teeth amid red lips and dark beard, he seemed sober and responsible.
He shook his head, said,"How do I know?
We were simply told, No."
She was not going to leave until he told her, and at last he did go on, while she listened carefully, to make a picture for herself she could trust.
 "Jack" , in Dublin, had been to bars and meeting-places, had made inquiries, had met this man and then that, reporting back to Bert and Jasper that things were going on as they should.
Then, Bert and Jasper — but not Jack, a fact which had to give her food for thought — met a certain comrade in a certain private house in a suburb.
There they had been questioned for a long time, in a way which — Alice could see, watching Bert's face as he told the tale — had not only impressed but sobered the two.
Frightened them, judged Alice, pleased this had been so, for she did feel that Jasper was sometimes a bit too casual about things.
Towards the end of this encounter, or interview, a second  man had come in, and sat without saying a word, listening.
Bert said with a short laugh and a shake of the head,"He was a bit of a character, that one.
Wouldn't like to get across him."
At last, the man who had done all the talking said that while he, speaking for the I.R.A., was grateful for the support offered, they Bert and Jasper — must realise that the I.R.A.
did not operate like an ordinary political organisation, and recruitment was done very carefully, and to specific requirements.
Jasper had cut in to say that of course he understood this: "Everyone did." 
Then the comrade had repeated, word for word, what he had just said.
He went on to say that it was helpful to the Republican cause to have allies and supporters in the oppressing country itself, and that Jasper, Bert, "and your friends" could play a useful part, changing public opinion, providing information.
They could be supplied, for instance, with pamphlets and leaflets.
Jasper had apparently become excited and expostulatory, and made a long speech about fascist imperialism.
To this speech both men, the talking man and the silent one, listened without comment, and without expression.
Then the silent man simply walked out of the room, with a nod and a smile.
The smile apparently had impressed Bert and Jasper.
 "He did smile, in the end," Bert repeated, with the ruefulness that was the note, or tone, of his account.
You could even say that Bert was embarrassed.
For him and for Jasper?
For Jasper?
Alice hoped it was not on account of Jasper though, clearly, to make that emotional speech had not been to clever.
Alice would have liked to go on, but Bert said,"Look, I've had enough for today.
This business with Pat…"
 "I'm sorry," said Alice.
 "And I know she is." 
 "Thanks," he said, drily, "oh, thanks!" and began stripping off his jersey, as though she were already gone.
Alice decided to sleep in the sitting-room again, because to choose herself a room would be a final separation.
Just as she was settling in, Jim appeared.
He had spent the weekend jubilantly with friends.
These were friends not seen for a long time, visited now because there was something to celebrate.
She saw that already, after only three days, there was an alertness and competence coming into Jim; he had been dulled and slowed by unemployment.
Well, of course!— everyone knew that, but to see the results so soon…
Delighted about Jim, apprehensive for Jasper, Alice lay for a long time awake in the silent room.
On this side of the house the traffic from the main road could not be heard.
She knew that neither Jasper nor Bert would be up early, but made herself get up in time to join Jim for tea and cornflakes.
She thought she was rather like a mother, making sure a child had eaten before going off to school, did not scruple to say,"Are you sure you've had enough?
There's no canteen there, you know.
You'd better take some sandwiches."
And he, like a son with an indulged mother,"Don't worry, Alice.
I'm all right."
Then in came Philip, and the question of the new water tank was discussed.
Rather, a good second-hand one.
Did Alice have any idea what a new one would cost?
No, but she could guess!
Philip would go this morning to his source for such things, talk it over; if one was available, did she want him to buy it, and if so, did she have the money?
She empowered him to get the tank, the section of drainpipe, the guttering.
Quickly in and out of the sitting-room she slid three hundred pounds from out of her sleeping-bag, not wanting Philip to know how much was there — but only because she did not want anyone to know.
A disconcerting, even shameful thought had taken possession.
It was that when this final list of necessities had been bought, she should put some money into the post office.
For herself.
Money no one should know about.
She should have, surely, a little put away?
Yes, she would open a new post office account, and not tell Jasper.
Philip and Jim were out.
Roberta and Faye were asleep or at their women's place.
Mary and Reggie had gone away for the weekend, and would not be back until evening.
Bert and Jasper slept, or were very silent, in their respective rooms.
Alice sat on at the end of the table, in the quiet kitchen.
The cat, absent for days, reappeared on the windowsill, was let in, accepted cornflakes and milk, carefully licked up every little smear from the dish, miaowed, and went away again.
Alice was full of woe.
This business of the I.R.A.
had been  Jasper's impetus for months.
Long before the dramatic exit from her mother's, it had been the I.R.A…the I.R.A…every day.
She had not at first taken it seriously.
But then had had to.
Now all that had collapsed.
Distributing pamphlets and leaflets was not going to satisfy Jasper.
Nor, she was sure, Bert, whom she had seen yesterday for the first time as a potentially responsible comrade.
Never once had it crossed Jasper's or Bert's mind that they might be refused.
Would not be found good enough.
The I.R.A.
had not taken Jasper and Bert seriously?
Making herself examine this thought, slowly and properly turning it around in her mind, recreating the scene which she could see so vividly of Jasper and Bert with the two I.R.A., she had to admit that Jasper and Bert had made a bad impression.
Well, it could happen!
It did happen, with Jasper, all the time.
Another possibility was that they, Jasper and Bert and the others — herself included — would be tested.
Yes, that could be it.
An eye would be kept on them, without their knowing.
(Comrade Andrew had appeared powerfully before Alice, and she smiled at the image.)
But certainly Jasper and Bert had not thought this; and the Irish comrades had not given them anything specific to do.
This meant Alice faced it — a bad few days with Jasper.
She would not be seeing much of him.
He would be gone from here, perhaps returning briefly at nights for some food, then off again.
Once, in a very bad patch, Jasper had been like that for weeks, over a month, and she had lived in terror for the knock of the police at the door, and news about Jasper she had been dreading since she had first met him.
When he was like that he was not careful about much.
The only hope was his link with Bert.
Steadying.
Bert might save the situation without ever knowing that one existed.
A couple of hours passed, her spirits sinking lower, and then Philip came in, pleased, to say that his chum at the yard with contacts where demolition work was going on, had all that 43 needed, and it was in a van outside.
But Philip had spent the three hundred pounds, and needed money to pay for delivery.
Just as he was saying all this, while he and she went across the hall, Jasper appeared, running lightly down the stairs.
Alice  stood still to watch him, her heart lifting.
She always forgot, when she had not seen him for some time, how he affected her.
That lightness of his, each step as though he might take off altogether!— and then, how he stood there, at the foot of the stairs, straight and slender; you'd think he was from another world, he was so pale and fine, with his glistening cropped hair…but he was scowling most horribly.
Under his gaze she had to go to the sitting-room where she had slept, while he knew why she went and knelt by the sleeping-bag, which was only just out of his line of sight.
She was risking that he might come in; and she had the disconnected breathless out-of-control feeling that was fatal with Jasper.
He would realise she had come here for money.
What was she to do?
She quickly thrust what remained of the one package, together with the fat whole package down her shirt where it was visible.
She put on a jacket, though he would know why she had the jacket on, and went out, under his cold furious dissecting gaze.
Bert had appeared on the stairs, looking tired and demoralised.
What a contrast, Jasper and Bert: one like an avenging angel — the thought came compulsively into her mind — the other so brought down and weakened.
Philip said cheerfully to the two men, "Could you give me a hand?" 
Jasper did not move.
Bert did not move.
Ashamed for them, Alice said, "I'll come," and ran out with Philip.
The driver, Philip and she wrestled with the tank.
It was heavy, and large, "The size of a small skip!" she joked, and they got it out of the van and up the path and into the house.
There the driver said his responsibility ended.
Philip ran out to fetch the guttering and the pipe and came in again.
Bert and Jasper were in the kitchen and the door was shut against her.
She went straight in and said to them, "For shit's sake, can't you help us take the things up the stairs?" 
They had been communicating disapproval, anger, behind that closed door.
Now Jasper said,"Alice you've gone crazy, do you know that?
What do you think you are doing?
What is all that junk?"
She made herself stand up to him,"The water tank up there is rotten, it's rusting.
Do you want God knows how many gallons of water cascading down all over us?"
 "I don't care," said Jasper.
 "If it does we'll just move on, as we  always do." 
This cold cruel treachery reached her guts, made her eyes go dark.
When she recovered she was holding on to the edge of the table for balance.
She looked at him, ignoring Bert, who was putting on the kettle, cutting bread,"You know you like a decent place, somewhere nice.
Of course you do…"
 "Oh bullshit," he said, melodramatic because she was destroying the image he liked to present to Bert.
"Well, I'm not having anything to do with it.
And what is it costing?
What have we spent this time?"
His little blue bright eyes, hard and round, that seemed this morning to be protruding out of the shallow creamy lakes around them, were full of hate for her.
She knew what she had to expect, the moment they were alone.
She appealed to Bert,"Please help.
Philip and I can't manage.
I mean, look at Philip!"
Slowly, with no change of expression, Bert buttered bread, then sat down.
Then, glancing up and seeing her face, unexpectedly got up, as quick and full of energy as he had just been lethargic (but it was the energy of anger) and came out with her into the hall, where Philip, frail as a leaf, was standing by the great dark-grey water tank.
Without a word, Bert bent and lifted, leaving Alice and Philip to fit themselves in, and banging and bumping, because he was so angry, the white teeth now showing between red lips stretched in a grimace of effort, the tank was raced upstairs, with much damage to the banisters.
On the top floor, Bert simply dumped the tank, and ran down again.
Philip and she heard the kitchen door slam again, excluding both of them.
She looked apologetically at Philip.
He was not looking at her.
The tank had to go at the end of the little landing.
The existing tank was in the attic.
There was no way this tank could get through the trapdoor into the attic.
Mystery!
How did the first builders think a new tank would get itself up there, when the original tank, presumably put in before the roof went on, reached its natural end?
They could only have believed that tanks had eternal lives.
But the distance from where the tank now sat blocking the way at the head of the stairs, and where it had to be, at the end of the landing, was too great for them to shift it.
Alice saw Philip distressed, ashamed, vulnerable.
 "You wait," she said.
She marched down the stairs, and saw Jasper coming out of the sitting-room where, of course, he had been searching for her money.
Standing on the bottom step she said, not knowing she was going to,"I've had enough, Jasper.
If you can't help with a little thing like this, when I do so much then I'm quitting."
Just as though he had not been going to walk past into the kitchen, he wheeled, and pounded up the stairs in front of her.
When she got there, he was moving the tank with Philip to where it had to go.
Here was the other Jasper, quick, intelligent, resourceful.
For Philip said that board, thick papers,"something, should be put under the tank to raise it, because of some tricky protruding pipes, and Jasper, seeing the stacks of newspaper that had come down from the attic, swiftly gathered them up and built them, while he knelt there beside it, into an eighteen-inch-high platform.
Alice could see that though he slid the papers into place so swiftly, he was dealing to one side, as in a card game, newspapers with headlines of interest: The Jarrow Marchers…
Hitler Invades…
The Battle of El Alamein…
If the Irish comrades could see him now! thought Alice, watching this deft, swift, accomplished work; and then how he, with Philip and herself, lifted the great tank, as if it weighed nothing, on to the top of the papers…
He had not looked at her.
She was half-fainting with the power of her beating heart.
Oh, it was a dangerous thing, to threaten Jasper.
Suppose he left her?
Oh no, he would not, she knew that absolutely.
He could not.
He ran off down the stairs, without a smile or a look, and she was left again with Philip.
Who was distressed.
By the atmosphere he had been in which, she knew, was pure poison.
She knew he was thinking: If I had not put so much of myself into this house, perhaps I'd leave.
Besides, he was upset about Pat going.
She left Philip to his labours, thinking that this time she had given him the money for the materials but none for his labour.
Almost, she went back up the stairs to give him what she had…
She took a few steps down…
Almost went back up, hesitated then — luck being on her side — she did.
She gave him  what was left of the already denuded packet: only two hundred pounds, it was true, and nothing like what it should be.
And went down into the kitchen, whose door she boldly opened, not caring that it had been shut to bar her out.
Bert had gone.
Jasper was waiting for her.
 "Where did you get that money?" 
 "It's not your money, so shut up," she said.
 "You are making us all sick," he said.
"We all think you've gone rotten.
All you care about is your comfort.
 "Too bad," she said, sitting down.
In the bright mid-morning light he looked, standing there, rather commonplace and even ugly — so thought Alice, who a few moments before had been melting in a familiar ecstasy of admiration for him.
He was staring at her midriff.
The jacket, hastily put on, was open.
At the front, inside the thick cotton shirt, was the flat protuberance of the packet.
For a moment she feared he would simply step over, grab her wrist, pull out the money.
He did not, but went to stand at the window, looking out.
He said, "You needn't think I'm just going to give up, that I'm just going to take their word for it!" 
It took a moment for it to penetrate; he was talking about his rejection by the Irish comrades.
She said companionably,"No, of course not.
She believed, and with what a lightening and easing of her poor heart, that now could begin the real, the responsible, discussion she loved so much to have with Jasper.
But the door opened and she looked up to see Jim.
Who at first she thought was not Jim.
The brown glossy skin was ashy and rough, and his eyes stared.
 "What's wrong, what is wrong?" 
And she went to him.
He shook her off.
 "They gave me the sack." 
 "Oh no," she said at once, decisively.
 "Oh no, he couldn't have." 
He stood, breathing in, breathing out in a big gasp, breathing in.
A loud painful sound.
 "They said I stole money." 
 "Oh no," said Alice.
And then again, but differently, "Oh no." 
Meanwhile Jasper stood taking all this in.
 "What's the point?" demanded Jim, of the heavens, not of her, and it sounded histrionic, but was not; for the question had behind it his whole life.
Then he did look properly at Alice, seeing her, and said,"Well, thanks Alice, I know you tried.
But there's no point."
And he went stumbling out, crying.
She went after him.
"Wait.
You wait.
I'm going right over there.
I'll fix it, you'll see."
He shook his head, went into his room, shut the door.
Alice remained outside, thinking.
Jasper appeared from the kitchen.
He was grinning complicity, even congratulation.
The whole truth of course he had not sussed out, for who could possibly imagine that luck of hers, which had caused the telephone to ring at precisely the right moment.
But he had grasped, being so quick, the bones of it.
She said, "I'm going over to my father." 
 "You'd better not go over with that on you," he said, looking at her middle.
He spoke nicely, like a comrade at a tricky moment.
Without thinking, as though there were nothing else she could do, she slipped her hand in under her thick shirt.
The package of notes had got caught in the waist-band of her jeans, and she stood fumbling.
Her fingers were sliding over the satiny warmth of her skin, and in a sweet intimate flash of reminder, or of warning, her body (her secret breathing body which she ignored for nearly all of her time, trying to forget it) came to life and spoke to her.
Her fingers were tingling with the warm smoothness, and she stood there looking puzzled or undecided, the packet of notes loose in her hand.
She looked as if she were trying to remember something.
Jasper neatly took the packet from her and it disappeared into the heart pocket of his bomber jacket.
 "I'm going to my father's," she said again, slowly, still puzzling over that message from her buried self, that sang in her fingertips and up her arm.
She went slowly down the path to the gate, turned into the main road for the Underground, still dream-walking, still caught in a web of intimations, reminders, promptings.
She even put her seduced fingers to her nose and sniffed them, seeming even more puzzled and dismayed.
She understood she was standing on the pavement with people walking past, the  traffic rushing up and down had been standing there, stock-still, for how long?
She could not help glancing back at No. 43, in case Jasper was spying on her.
He was.
She caught a glimpse of his paleness at the window of the bathroom on the first floor.
But he at once disappeared.
Her energies came back to her in a rush, with the thought that now, having all that money, Jasper would be off somewhere, and if she wanted to catch him, she must hurry.
At C. Mellings, Printers and Stationers she went straight through the shop and upstairs, and into her father's room.
He sat behind the big desk, and Jill the secretary sat at her table opposite him across the room.
Alice stood in front of her father and said,"Why did you sack Jim?
Who did you?
That was a shitty bloody fascist thing to do.
It was only because he's black, that's all."
Cedric Mellings, on seeing his daughter, had gone red, had gone pale.
Now he sat forward, weight on his forearms, hands clenched.
 "What are you doing here?" he asked.
"What?
Because you sacked Jim, how dare you do it?
It was unfair!"
And Alice kicked the front of the desk, hard, several times.
"I gave Jim Mackenzie a job, because it has always been our policy to employ blacks, Indians, anyone.
We have always operated a non-racial policy here.
As you know very well.
But I should have known better than to accept anyone recommended by you."
His voice was now low and bitter, and he looked ill.
"Just go away Alice.
Just get out, will you, I've had all I can take of you."
 "Will you listen," she shrieked.
"Jim didn't take that money.
I took it.
How can you be so stupid?"
This last she addressed to Jill.
"I was in this office, wasn't I?
Are you blind or stupid or something?"
Jill stood up and papers, biros, went flying.
She stared, as pale as her employer, and dumb.
 "Don't speak to Jill like that," said Cedric Mellings.
 "How dare you just come in here and what do you mean, you took the money, how could you" Here he put his head into his hands and groaned.
Jill made a sick sort of noise and went out to the lavatory.
Alice sat down in the chair opposite her father's and waited for him to recover.
 "You took that money?" he asked at last.
"Well, of course I took it.
I was here, wasn't I?
Didn't Jill tell you.
"It didn't cross my mind.
And it didn't hers.
Who should it?"
Now he sat back, eyes closed, trying to pull himself together.
His hands trembled, lying on the desk.
Seeing this Alice felt a little spurt of triumph, then pity.
She was glad of this opportunity to look at him unobserved.
She had always thought of her father as attractive, even handsome, though she knew not everyone did.
Her mother, for instance, had been wont to call him "Sand man" in critical moods.
Cedric was a solid, tending-to-fat man, pale of skin, lightly freckled, with short fair hair that looked reddish in some lights.
His eyes were blue.
Alice was really rather proud of his story, his career.
Cedric Mellings was the youngest of several children.
The family came from near Newcastle.
There were Scottish connections.
Cedric's grandfather was a clergyman.
His father was a journalist and far from rich.
All the children had had to work hard to become educated, and launched.
Cedric had been just too young for the war, and for this he had never forgiven Fate.
Unlike his brothers he did not seem able to get himself together; wasted his time at university, married very young, came to London, did this job and that; wrote a book that was noticed but made no money, then another, a jaunty and irreverent account of a journalist's career in the provinces.
This was based on his father's life and it did well enough to bring in five thousand pounds.
This was a lot of money in the mid-fifties.
He saw — Dorothy advising and supporting him — that this was a chance that might not recur.
He bought a small printing firm that had gone bankrupt, and because of contacts in the Labour Party and all kinds of left-wing political groups, soon had a bread-and-butter basis of pamphlets, brochures, tracts, leaflets, and then a couple of small newspapers.
The firm flourished with the good times of the sixties and Cedric started  the stationer's as a speculation, but it at once did well.
The family thankfully left the small shabby flat in Stockwell, and bought a comfortable house in Hampstead.
Good times! that was what they all remembered of the sixties, the golden age when everything came so easily.
Times of easy friendships, jobs, opportunities, money; people dropping in and out, long family meals around an enormous table in the big kitchen, achievements at school, parties, holidays all over the Continent.
Cedric Mellings had an affair or two, and then, so did Dorothy Mellings.
Shocks, storms, rages, accusations; long family discussions, the children much involved, things patched up and smoothed over, the family united.
But by then the children were growing, growing up, grown, going, going, gone
Alice up North, back to her father's territory though at first she did not see this.
And then, Cedric Mellings and Dorothy Mellings were alone in the too-large house.
Which did not cease to be full of visitors coming and going, eating and drinking.
Cedric fell in love with Jane.
He went off to live with her.
Dorothy remained in the large house.
All gone.
Blown away, and gone, the good times, the easy jobs, even, it seemed, the accomplishment, the friends, affection, money.
Cedric and Dorothy had seemed a centre, even an essential one; so many well-known people had been in and out with their politics, books, causes, marches for this and that, demonstrations.
There had seemed to be a shine or gloss on Cedric and Dorothy, an aura or atmosphere about them, of success, of confidence.
But then…what had happened to all that?
Cedric with Jane was a very different matter!
For one thing, a much smaller house, because after all, C. Mellings, Printers and Stationers had to support two establishments; Cedric's and Jane's house did not have that elusive but unmistakable atmosphere of ease, of success.
Dorothy, left in the bigger house, alone for a time and then, later, with Alice and Jasper, seemed to have fewer friends.
Certainly those who came for a meal with Dorothy Mellings — while Alice was there, with Jasper — tended to come in ones or twos, mostly women, perhaps  needing Dorothy's advice, or even to borrow money; divorced friends — so many of the couples that had been to the Mellings's in the good days had split up.
Or a couple, who talked a lot about how things had been, and how they weren't the same now.
If Dorothy gave a party, and it was only a small party, it was an effort, and she appeared to be tired of it all, to have forgotten how, in the sixties and early seventies, parties just happened.
They took the house over and sucked in people from everywhere and telephones rang with careless invitations and orders to wine merchants and grocers.
Whereas, for a time, Cedric Mellings was the ugly duckling of the family turned swan — for who else of his siblings lived this glittering glamorous life?— now there was a shabby-duckling quality again.
Anyway, what had it all amounted to? scorned Alice, triumphantly examining that too-pale, anxious, strained face, with beads of sweat on the forehead: printing fucking garbage for this or that bloody faction in the fascist bloody Labour Party, printing dish-water newspapers for bloody liberals and revisionists, sucking up to shitty politicians on the make and bourgeois trash anyway doomed to be swept into the dustbins of history?
It had all been rubbish, all of it.
What Alice could not forgive herself was that she had been taken in by it all well, she had had the sense to get out in time, and meet people who could lead her on the right path…
At last Cedric Mellings sighed, opened his eyes and, having thought out his position, leaned forward, and without looking at Alice but keeping his eyes down, said,"Very well, you took the money, if you say so.
I am sorry about that young man.
Tell him to come back and — I am sure we can make it all right.
Now, as for you, Alice.
I suppose it will be a surprise to you, you live in such a dream-world, but that thousand pounds is not a sum that the firm can afford to lose.
We are suffering from the recession too, you know.
It is touch and go — we might have to fold.
The printing firm, not the stationer's."
He let out the incredulous, admiring little snort of laughter he usually did when mentioning the stationer's: "Greeting cards!
That's the thing.
And of course, the sweets and chocolates and all that sort of rubbish."
Now he did look at Alice, and was able to sustain the look, though it was evident it was a strain, keeping his eyes on his daughter's eyes; he simply did not understand what he was seeing.
 "I suppose it is no good asking you to return the money?" he almost pleaded.
At this Alice laughed.
The laugh acknowledged, even admiringly, some sort of necessity that Cedric, poor fool, could not begin to understand.
He, however, nodded, having understood.
He said,"I suppose that Jasper of yours has already got it.
Well, I know it is no use saying anything to you about him.
You have a blind spot of some kind.
But you must understand this: you are not having any more money from me.
I see no reason why I should support that — well, let that go.
I am very pushed for money, Alice — do you understand that?
And it's not just this thousand.
A few days ago, some hooligan or other walked into our bedroom, mine and Jane's — and lifted"Suddenly, as the thought struck him, he jerked back in his chair, as if he had been given a minor electric shock, and stared at Alice, his jaw literally dropping.
Until this moment, that theft had not been connected with Alice.
She merely smiled, admitting nothing, but knowing that she need not bother with denials.
Again he had been shocked to the heart, could not speak, sat struggling to order his thoughts.
He was breathing shallowly, in quick gasps.
Then he fumbled for a cigarette, lit it clumsily, and sat drawing in smoke as if it were a narcotic.
At last he said,"Alice, I don't know…now you are a thief?
Is that it?
Is that how you live?
I don't understand."
Putting out the cigarette again, as though stubbing Alice out of existence, he said, "I thought it was some hooligan, these kids who come into a house on an impulse" It was at this point that the next thought hit him, and again he sat staring.
 "Was that you?" he asked blankly.
 "Did you throw that stone?" 
He knew it was; it was not a question.
He said,"That stone missed little Deborah by six inches.
There was glass everywhere — Jane got a splinter in her leg
He shook his head, like a dog with pain in its ears.
 "You are of course quite right in your calculations," he said.
"You worked it all out.
You decided I would not go to the police, because you  are my daughter.
I won't this time.
But next time, I shall.
As far as I am concerned, you've become some sort of wild animal.
You are beyond ordinary judgment."
Alice stood up.
She did not feel pain, at this casting-off; she felt that she had been cast off, abandoned, long ago.
She said, "What is my mother's address?" 
This query took some time to reach Cedric.
He had to give himself time for the thought to reach him.
He said, "Have you lost her address, then?" 
"I never had it.
She just left, didn't she?
Just left our house, just abandoned it."
Alice's voice was all furious accusation.
"What are you talking about?
She's been going to move for months."
 "Because you won't support her," she shrieked.
"Because I won't support bums like you and Jasper.
 "Well, what is her address?" 
"Find it out yourself.
The next thing, I suppose, you'll be stealing from poor Dorothy and throwing stones through her windows."
But this came out in a stumbling, heavy voice; he still could hardly believe it all.
Alice went out of his office and along a passage to the general office at the end.
To the girl there in charge of the files, she said: "What is my mother's address?
Dorothy Mellings, what is her address?"
This girl had not of course been told of the scandal of the boss's daughter, and she willingly went to the tall cabinet, found the card, read it to Alice who memorised it and ran out.
She passed Jill who stared at her, almost pleadingly, as if Alice were a murderer, or thug, who could attack her.
Alice ran through the stationer's where idiots bought magazines about gracious living, romantic or adventure novels, and pretty cards saying: For a Special Friend, Love on your Birthday, or I'm thinking of You.
Or boxes of writing paper with daffodils or roses on them.
Or…just shit and rubbish.
Alice went to a cafe in Finchley Road, and sat for a long time quietly by herself over strong coffee.
She needed to think.
She decided that the link with Bert was unlikely to hold Jasper back from one of his binges; that she would have to sit it out; that Bert was almost certainly going after Pat; that the best  thing she could do was to organise a Congress of the C.C.U. for as soon as possible.
The work for this would ferment in the house the right kind of feeling, atmosphere, to do away with the nastiness of the last day or so.
She had just saved the situation with Jim.
But Philip, a gentle and even timid soul, would leave if something were not done.
When she got home, the door into Jim's room was open, and all his things gone.
This really did hit her, hard.
She wailed, standing there, looking in at the room that had nothing left of him.
Not his musical instruments drums, guitar, accordion.
Not his sleeping-bag, or his clothes, or his record-player…nothing.
Jim had been blown out of this room as though he had never been.
She did not have any addresses of friends, or family.
She stood in the open door, fists up on either side of her head, banging it, banging it hard, and wailing,"No, no, no, oh no…
Feet running down the stairs; Faye stood there, indignant, outraged: "Whatever is the matter?" she called.
 "Jim — he's gone, he's gone." 
 "Good riddance," said Faye, smartly, laughing.
"We didn't want him anyway.
Looking up, Alice could see, above Faye, Philip, whose face said that he heard this as — no doubt Faye wanted him to.
But she saw, too, Roberta, who came swiftly to Faye, and seized her two arms, and pulled her back out of sight.
Her face was grave and shocked hurt because of Faye.
Roberta's low urgent voice, Faye's tittering, high laugh.
A door slammed.
Roberta came running down, grasped Alice, stood rocking the sobbing girl, "There, there, there…" 
 "It's my fault," sobbed Alice.
"Mine.
I did it.
It's because of me."
"There, there, there.
Never mind."
She took Alice to the sitting-room, and made her get inside the sleeping-bag.
She fetched her a tumbler of whisky, bade her drink, sleep, forget it.
Hysterical Alice, like the so-often hysterical Faye, was being doped into harmlessness.
She slept until evening.
Then she found, in the kitchen, Roberta and Faye, Mary and Reggie.
Jasper was not there.
Bert had gone to see whether he could persuade Pat to join him.
Alice, sitting down, said, "I think we should organise a C.C.U. Congress." 
 "Another democratic decision?" said Faye, laughing.
 "I'm suggesting it," said Alice.
"I'm putting it forward.
 "" And I'm in favour,"said Roberta.
"There are all kinds of members we have never met.
A new branch, new groups — we should meet."
 "It sounds a good idea," said Reggie in a judicial way; one who would always welcome congresses, discussions, any manifestations of the democratic process.
"Yes, I agree, said Mary.
"I've been thinking, it might be just the kind of Political party I've been looking for.
I've no time for the big bureaucratic parties, anyway."
 "When?" said Faye.
 "Soon," said Alice.
"The sooner the better.
The Party has grown quite fast.
We need to consolidate and formulate policies now."
General agreement, though Faye came in only because Roberta did.
Five days, five nights followed, without Jasper.
Bert returned, unfulfilled, and with a gaunt bitter look to him that Alice continued to feel as an improvement Bert asked where Jasper was; Alice, as usual covering up, said that Jasper had decided to visit a brother.
Bert, who had after all spent a fair bit of time with Jasper, was surprised that a brother had never been mentioned.
Alice said that Jasper did visit his brother, who was his only "viable relative" .
This phrase caused Bert to look oddly, but she said he had a shitty family, and the brother was the only decent person in it.
Jasper's visits to his brother did in fact happen, if rarely.
Bert, Alice was pleased to see, missed Jasper, tended to be at  a loose end.
But they were in a phase of intense activity, for the Congress was to be the weekend after next, in this house, No.43.
Message-sending and letter-writing went on, and they were always running up to the telephone booths at the station.
Alice undertook most of this; but Bert visited the branch in South London to make sure everyone would be inspired to come.
No. 45 was asked whether people wished to attend, if not as members or potential members, as delegates or observers.
Observers, Alice knew, there would certainly be; and was not surprised when goose-girl Muriel said she would attend.
Comrade Andrew said he would have liked to be present, only he would be away.
Both houses could be used as dormitories, if No. 43 proved inadequate.
Alice undertook to provide filling but cheap food.
For once some contributions to her funds were assured, since delegates would be charged a small fee for their food and lodging.
After discussion this was set at £2 a head for the weekend.
Alice also said it would be a good thing if all the rubbish remaining in No. 45 were to be disposed of, for it gave such a bad impression.
As nothing was done, she borrowed the car and made several trips, Philip assisting, to the rubbish dumps.
Philip's misgivings, his hurt over Jim, were being assuaged by the Congress, and the happy atmosphere that was leading up to it.
Bert repeatedly visited No. 45 during those five days.
He was seeing Comrade Andrew, as Alice knew, for she, too, visited Comrade Andrew who seemed to want to talk about Bert, making no secret of his plan for him, which was that he should follow the path of job, flat, security and respectability.
And "special training" , unspecified but understood.
Alice rather wondered at the choice of Bert; why had Andrew changed his mind about him?
She herself would not rely much on him.
Too easily led, for instance!
Was there anything else that Bert discussed with Andrew?
Alice was anxious to know, for if the I.R.A.
wouldn't have Bert and Jasper (and, by extension, the rest of them, Alice included) then something else of the kind would certainly make its appearance.
They all wanted to be of use, to serve!
Alice probed Andrew, but he was either not  giving anything away, or was ignorant of Bert's and Jasper's alternative ideas.
Alice probed Bert; but, it seemed, he was waiting for Jasper to "formulate a commitment appropriate to our resources" .
Again Alice was thinking: So much for easy Impressions! in this case, and she knew that many people thought this way, that Jasper was Bert's hanger-on, his disciple.
Jasper had several times mentioned Muriel, and this could have given Alice a clue, if her dislike of Muriel did not always rise promptly in her, preventing her from hearing what she might have done.
Muriel, said Jasper, was leaving No. 45 She was going to begin work.
 "Real work," he emphasised, with a proud but discreet smile, inviting Alice with his eyes and his manner to understand him.
But what she needed to hear from him was that he found Muriel as off-putting as she did: he certainly didn't like her, Alice knew that.
 "Comrade Andrew has fixed it all up, you know, the training and everything." 
His respect for Andrew clearly made what he felt about Muriel unimportant.
Alice even tried to find out from Muriel what Jasper's plans might be, but as soon as Muriel heard Jasper's name, she said briskly that in her opinion Andrew was "basically" a sound and useful cadre.
This seemed to Alice thoroughly off the point.
Was it said, she wondered, because of her Alice's — occasional doubts over Andrew?
These doubts, hard to pin down, because reason easily disposed of them all, crystallised around the fact that Comrade Andrew too often smelled of drink; she could not bring herself to criticise him for his partiality to the goose-girl, because she had learned so long ago and so thoroughly simply to switch off in this area.
People had to have all this sex, she knew that; they had to have it with surprising people and in sometimes surprising ways.
Just because Comrade Andrew was what he was, did that mean he had taken a vow of celibacy?
No!
All the same…
Bottles of whisky and vodka stood on the mantelpiece of his room, often replaced.
There was another girl, Caroline, who, it appeared, lived at No. 45, though she was not much seen.
Alice would have liked to talk to her, for she felt drawn to her in some kind of kinship; but Caroline did not feel this, it seemed.
At any rate, she  remained aloof.
She was a short, rather plump woman, or girl, for she was in her early twenties; dark, not unattractive, who gave the impression of smiling a lot.
Perhaps it was this easy smile that drew Alice, although her eyes, never off guard, were like hard little brown buttons.
Yet the general impression was of good nature, wanting to please.
Caroline, said the goose-girl crisply, was not prepared to follow Comrade Andrew's prescriptions towards becoming a really useful cadre, but had (Muriel thought, and therefore Andrew must think) tendencies towards liberal idealism.
Caroline had a friend called Jocelin who visited No. 45, and who it seemed might even decide to live there.
She, unlike Caroline, was off-putting.
A stocky, even heavy woman, with straight blonde hair that was parted in the middle and otherwise unregulated, she padded about with firm, deliberate steps, not looking much at anyone, not smiling easily as Caroline did, only nodding indifferently when Alice caught a glimpse of her through a door or coming efficiently through the hall.
There were also two young men who lived in No. 45, who had not actually been seen by Alice.
The goose-girl said that Andrew was "working on them" apparently with success.
They were from the North of England, working-class, unemployed but it was thought only temporarily.
These four, Caroline, Jocelin, Paul and Edward, refused to attend the C. C.U. Congress, but would come to the party afterwards, on Saturday night.
There would be, in short, a good many observers around that weekend; and, as far as Alice was concerned, why not?