

Background
A sign of the times
The project which is evaluated in this report is in many respects a sign of the times.
It reflects a number of trends which are clearly visible in the organisation, management and resourcing of education in the UK.
It is clearly related to developments in pedagogy and technology, and is concerned with aspects of the curriculum which are especially topical.
In linking the resourcing of the school library to specific curriculum developments, and in making grants only to those schools whose plans comply with specified criteria, the local authority has acted in the same way as such central government agencies as the Department of Education and Science (DES) and the Manpower Services Commission (MSC).
We may note these principles at work in the system of Education Support Grants made by the DES to local authorities for particular curriculum developments, and for which Local Education Authorities (LEAs) must bid, and the recently announced funding arrangements for inservice and staff development across the UK.
Such initiatives clearly reflect the desire to ensure that central government priorities are adopted and that local authorities make optimum use of the resources which they are given.
These same principles seem to underpin the Essex Secondary Schools Education/Library (ESSE/L) Project at the local authority level.
In terms of developments in curricula and pedagogy, a number of trends with which the project is in sympathy may be identified.
The first of these is the promise of resource-based learning (RBL), which, though unfulfilled in the majority of the curriculum in most schools, has none the less had some influence on the pattern of work.
With the emphasis on learning as an active process, through engagement with a variety of learning resources and materials, the principles of RBL have found their way into schools wherever projector enquiry-based work, worksheets etc. have been adopted.
The organisation of entire courses using the multi-media facilities of a school-based resource centre is, however, still a pipe dream in most cases.
Obviously, the growth of information technology has increased awareness of the potential of integrating traditional library services with educational technology, but in most schools significant large-scale developments are yet to take place.
As Beswick (1977) notes, such a development requires no less than a revolution in most people's perception of a library from that of "storehouse to learning centre" .
As we shall see, this kind of change in perception is implied in the ESSE/L Project, albeit on a more modest scale.
RBL, of course, entails a facility on the part of the learners in the location, processing and presentation of information of an order quite different from that of the traditional chalk-and-talk lesson, and requires intellectual skills whose sophistication is not to be underestimated.
As Marland (1977) observes:
We award the highest academic accolade to a student who can see a question, focus it into an enquiry, trace sources, find relevant information in those sources, collate the information, reorganise that information in a way that meets the question posed, and write up the reorganised material as a report.
To those who achieve that pinnacle of scholarship we award a Ph.D.
This same process is the one we have adopted as the main teaching method for the less academic and less well motivated school pupil.
(Marland, 1977)
That most schools give at least lip-service to the importance of this fact is obvious in the development of courses variously titled "study skills" , "library skills" , "information skills" and so on.
Precisely what is included in such courses, and the exact relationship between these different labels, is, however, another matter.
As Irving (1985) sums up:
No single word accurately represents the conceptual basis for the skills in question but information skills at least allows for flexibility.
It is a broad term incorporating a range of subordinate or prerequisite skills, those associated with reading, writing, searching, retrieving, organising, processing, thinking, analysing and presenting.
Above all it includes the skill of formulating questions and hypotheses.
(Irving, 1985)
We shall return to the question of labels later, but for the moment we may note that the ESSE/L Project has clear implications for developing information-handling skills, even if in more narrow forms such as study or library skills.
The importance of these skills, the degree to which they are neglected, and the appreciation of courses designed for their development are noted in a number of research reports.
Not least amongst these reports are those of Brake (1980), Rudduck and Hopkins (1984), Hounsell and Martin (1983) and Tabberer and Allman (1983), all of which argue the need to promote the acquisition of a broad range of  information-handling skills in line with both the growth of information technology and the increasing emphasis on self-directed learning.
A further trend in curricular organisation at large, and one which has made the ESSE/L Project particularly timely, is the emphasis given to approaches involving the whole school and across-the-curriculum approaches.
The promotion of language across the curriculum in the wake of the Bullock Report (1975) has been followed by proposals for pastoral care across the curriculum (Marland, 1980), and most importantly in the present context, for a coordinated whole-school approach to study skills (Irving and Snape, 1979).
In relating the enhancement of library provision to overall policies for curriculum development, the ESSE/L Project is another move in an established direction.
With regard to the quality of actual provision in school libraries, the level of understanding of libraries and the use to which they are put, and the adequacy of resourcing across the country, give cause for much concern.
Her Majesty's Inspectors (HMI) have indicated their dissatisfaction with the levels of resourcing in numerous published reports of school inspections (see LISC Report, 1984) and in their major reports on both primary and secondary education (HMI, 1982 and 1979).
The Essex project
The background to the Essex initiative is described in the first annual report for 1981–1982 (Taylor, 1983) as follows:
In 1979, a major reorganisation of the County Library Service for Young People and Education in Essex provided the opportunity for effecting considerable improvements in services to the County's schools in consultation with the Education Department.
Increased finance, additional staff and the integration of public and educational library services on a divisional basis contributed to these developments.
By 1980, close links between library staff, headteachers, teachers and the County advisory services had been forged and there was promising evidence of a general enhancement, particularly at primary level, in terms of book provision, book awareness and links between the promotion of literacy in school and its reflection in a wider community context.
With regard to the specific needs of secondary schools, however, the situation was necessarily more complex.
In defining such  need, senior staff of the Schools Library Service, with the agreement of the Education Department, drew upon their regular liaison visits to secondary schools to compile a County picture of current library provision.
Not surprisingly, this picture reflected the patchiness of provision and the lack of integration of resources with educational objectives noted in such recent national surveys as Aspects of Secondary Education,(1979).
While acknowledging that there were some schools which had built up a good range of resources and had successfully integrated their school library with the teaching and learning taking place in the school, it appeared at this time that many demonstrated one or all of the following basic problems:
Low status in the eyes of the headmaster and senior staff
No overall policy for learning resource provision and little coordination of the existing resources
Insufficient funding
Out-of-date, unattractive, sometimes inappropriate book stock
Use of the library as a teaching space inhibiting continuous access to its resources
Deficiencies in accommodation and equipment
Inadequate staffing and lack of expertise
There was also a development in many schools of resource centres, sometimes quite separately from the school library, under a Head of Resources.
With regard to the deployment of books and other learning resources throughout the school and their role in pupil's learning it also appeared that:
Most schools held a wide variety of materials dispersed around different areas of the building.
The educational "return" on the capital invested might be increased if all materials were at least identified and access to them coordinated.
Some schools had not related their spending sufficiently closely to the needs of the curriculum or to the reading levels of their pupils.
Some had perhaps over-emphasised the needs of the Sixth Form at the expense of other pupils.
This had led to uneven and sometimes inappropriate collections of resources.
There appeared to be no consensus among schools regarding either the role of the school library or its relationship with the resource centre.
There was, however, published evidence to suggest that library and resource centre provision should be combined, at least in management terms, even if it was not always possible to bring them together physically.
In terms of finance, it was noted that the current level of library capitation (1980) produced a book fund of £527 (plus £1.13 per sixth form pupil) for a school of 900 pupils.
Those schools which had built up a good resource collection appeared to have allocated additional capitation to the school library or to have raised extra funds from other sources.
(Taylor, 1983)
This is a rather depressing picture, especially of the secondary school situation, but is by no means unique.
In the light of a detailed analysis of HMI reports, the authors of the LISC Report conclude that:
These circumstances are mirrored all over the country and are linked with the lack of a firm policy framework at school, local authority and national level.
(LISC Report, 1984)
They go on to stress that the low level of resourcing cannot take all the blame for this state of affairs, since the attitudes and policies of the schools themselves are crucially important.
As the National Association of Inspectors and Educational Advisors put it:
The disparity of provision partly reflects the lack of understanding by teachers of the purpose of a school library, and ways in which it should be used in the curriculum, so that it is still regarded as a peripheral concern, a room open for pupils in the lunch hour and for English lessons for children to borrow books.
(Quoted in LISC Report, 1984) Against this background the ESSE/L Project is particularly to be welcomed, not only as an attempt to improve provision in the county but as a potential model for other authorities to follow in attempting to correct a generally unsatisfactory situation.
The ESSE/L Project
Aims and development
In 1980–81 the County Librarian and his staff, in cooperation with the Principal and Senior Education Officers, the Chief Inspector and the Principal Secondary Inspector, generated an experimental project for funding specific library developments in selected secondary schools.
Briefly, the aim was to encourage particular schools to develop and implement learning resources plans, and to bring library provision and use more closely into touch with curriculum planning and innovation within the schools.
Examples of good practice thus produced could then be an ingredient in a rolling programme of motivation and expansion in school library provision.
As part of this programme it was considered that:
a high priority should be the development and coordination of a core of information, expertise and practical experience to support the inservice development of secondary teachers with regard to library management and the utilisation of learning resources across the curriculum.
(Taylor, 1983) The resourcing of the project is described in the first-year report as follows:
It was proposed by the Principal Education Officer (Schools) that £70,000 would be made available from the Schools Branch budget, representing £35,000 from the sum normally allocated to the School Library Services and £35,000 from central funding for replacement purposes.
This sum would be available for the development of school libraries and learning resource provision in a selected number of secondary schools to be approved each year…
It was decided that the Project would operate at two separate and distinct levels.
Eight schools would be selected, subject to defined criteria, as major project schools.
These schools would be eligible for funds of £5,000 each…
Eight further schools would be selected as minor project schools, each eligible for funds of up to £2,000 for the improvement and replacement of book stock…
A contingency reserve of £14,000 would be held as a topping-up fund, to be deployed as necessary as the project developed.
(Taylor, 1983) In practice, rather larger sums of £6,000 and £2,500 respectively were allocated, with the contingency fund being correspondingly reduced.
This funding was dispersed by adding appropriate sums to the School Library Service allocations, where they were "spent" by schools submitting orders to their Divisional Library Resource Centres in the usual way.
Guided by the general aim of the project, these arrangements were directed towards the attainment of a number of objectives which the report summarises as follows:
To encourage schools to define their objectives for the school library in terms of the curriculum and the educational benefit anticipated for their pupils, including the development of reading and learning skills.
To improve secondary school library provision and the quality of book selection.
To provide a stimulus for schools to make the best possible use of all the available learning resources inside and outside the school — money, people, space, equipment and learning materials — in meeting their objectives.
To create a core of schools where good practice embodying these concepts could be seen in operation so that the inservice and information potential could subsequently be tapped for the benefit of all schools.
To coordinate and make available in schools the services and expertise of the County Inspectorate, the Visual and Aural Aids Service and the County Library.
(Taylor, 1983)
Eight Major and eight Minor Project schools were selected in 1981/82 and in 1984/85, and 15 Major and 16 Minor in 1982/84 (an allocation for two years being administered in 1982).
In 1985/86 six Major and six Minor schools have now been agreed.
The precise criteria and procedures whereby schools were included in the project are discussed at length elsewhere in this report, but we may note that a set of  guidelines for school participation was drawn up and developed by the Project Coordinating Team (see Appendix 3) and that these gave direction to schools as they established library committees and developed their plans.
Schools made formal written proposals, including spending plans and a rationale, and these provided the basis for consideration by the Project Coordinating Team which was charged with the task of developing project guidelines, selecting and liaising with schools, allocating the funds and monitoring the evolution of the project.
The functions and performance of the Coordinating Team are discussed in Chapter 4.
Linked with the development of the project in schools were plans for initiating and extending local authority inservice provision, as a means of disseminating good practice derived from the experience of selected schools, and to guide schools about to enter the project.
To this end an Inservice Panel was created with the task of planning and organising appropriate activities and synchronising these with the county's existing inservice programme.
The work of this panel is evaluated in Chapter 7.
Towards evaluation
During 1983, with a year of the project accomplished, the Coordinating Team began to consider the desirability of thoroughly evaluating the initiative.
Some internal evaluation was already under way and this is reported in two annual reports (Taylor, 1983,1985), and at least one independent review was in progress, though on a very limited scale (Bald, 1984).
However, the team considered that some independent assessment was desirable and appropriate where a project of this magnitude was involved.
It duly approached the Educational Research Centre of the Essex Institute of Higher Education with the suggestion that a proposal for funding be made to the British Library Research and Development Department (BLR&DD).
An application for the sum of £24,800 was subsequently presented and approved, the evaluation to run from April 1984 to August 1986.
The research reported here is the result of that proposal.
The major aim of the research was described in the proposal as:
to evaluate the effects of the Essex Secondary Schools Library Project by determining the degree to which the stated objectives of the Project are being achieved in selected schools.
(Proposal document) These project objectives were set out in the first project report (Taylor, 1983) and are quoted in Section 2.1.
The proposal document went on to say that this evaluation would require analysis of:
(a) school plans for the use of the Project grants (submitted before schools were selected) and a comparison with actual programmes/ patterns of investment;
(b) the institutional arrangements made by schools in order to implement their plans: the management structure of the school library, its relationship to the senior management structure of the school and to curriculum planning activities;
(c) effects of the Project on the role and status of school librarians/ teacher-librarians within their schools;
(d) changes in the attitudes of teachers towards the function and utilisation of the library in response to the Project, and especially in respect of curriculum development;
(e) the role of user-education in the developing links between library provision and curriculum development.
(Proposal document)
and identified three further research aims as follows:
The research also aims to illuminate the processes by which the ESSE/L Project was implemented by the Project team, to identify some of the conditions conducive to success in such projects, and to identify sources of resistance to such innovations.
The research further aims to establish some examples of "good practice" in respect both of the planning and implementation of such schemes by appropriate authorities, and the development of library services within secondary schools…
Finally, the research aims to generate insights into the initial and inservice training needs of teachers in respect of the relationship between curriculum design and the organisation of library provision.
(Proposal document)
Despite some variation in emphasis and detail in the light of experience, these aims and objectives remained the foci for the evaluation.
Methodology
The style of evaluation adopted for this research is most appropriately described in Parlett and Hamilton's terms as illuminative evaluation:
Illuminative Evaluation is not a standard methodological package but a general research strategy.
It aims to be both adaptable and eclectic.
The choice of research tactics follows not from research doctrine, but from decisions in each case as to the best available techniques: the problem defines the methods used, not vice versa.
Equally, no method (with its own built-in limitations) is used exclusively or in isolation; different techniques are combined to throw light on a common problem.
Besides viewing the problem from a number of angles, this "triangulation" approach also facilitates the cross-checking of otherwise tentative findings.
(Parlett and Hamilton, 1972)
Certainly, we have been eclectic in adopting strategies and techniques ranging from a geographical analysis of the distribution of participating schools to a qualitative study of library use in one school, and from formal tape-recorded interviews with senior staff in schools to non-participant observation of children's use of the library.
However, as is typical of much illuminative evaluation, our approach owes much more to the interpretive paradigm in the social sciences than to the paradigm of positivism with which it is supposedly in eternal conflict (Dawe, 1970; Gorbutt, 1972; Ford, 1975).
In so far as it is difficult to state educational objectives in terms of measurable outcomes — and we suggest that in the case of the stated objectives of the ESSE/L Project this is particularly true — a positivist approach to appraising the project according to some simple notion of "value for money" was simply impossible.
Nor could outcomes be retrospectively measured against stated objectives, since the project was still in progress and would, in any event, be having an effect long after any official end to the programme.
In any case, as the statement of our objectives in the last section shows, we were particularly concerned with the processes and practices by which the project was implemented and enacted.
Good practice is, after all, good practice, and this inevitably focuses attention upon the  observation of day-today activities and the texture of the environment in which the project is set.
It is with precisely such phenomena that the methodology of the interpretive paradigm is concerned, and without them any conclusions drawn about the final product will be partial and uninformative.
Our evaluation therefore owes much to the assumptions, concepts and procedures of the "new sociology of education" of the early seventies, inspired as it was by the social phenomenology of Alfred Schutz (1964) and Berger and  Luckmann (1967), and the Symbolic Interactionism of G H Mead (1934) and Erving Goffman (1959).
Thus, we were concerned throughout to interpret the process and practices of the project in terms of the perspectives, situational definitions and shared meanings of a wide range of actors.
We were concerned with the networks of interaction through which the project plan became an institutionalised reality, which then exerted influence upon the evolving roles of the participants.
Moreover, we were mindful of the phenomenological principle of the significance of "multiple realities" (Schutz, 1964) and the distinction between the perceptions and descriptions of the participants (actors' "first order accounts" ) and subsequent interpretations made by the researchers (second-order theorising).
Thus our chosen methods involved both a careful observation and recording of firsthand experience and the development of second-order models.
It is sometimes argued that a full-blooded commitment to phenomenological principles entails a retreat into relativism in which the researcher is denied any grounds upon which to choose between alternative accounts of the same situation.
Our phenomenology is tempered by the sceptical positivism of Jack Douglas's (1976) model of investigative social research.
In this model the strategies of the researcher are compared with those of the private detective and investigative journalist in his attempt to get "beneath the surface" of the apparent reality (Fletcher, 1974).
This gave our evaluation a "critical edge" in which the observed realities were measured against the stated aims of the project and could be perceived as a contrast between the ideal and the actual.
Put rather more strongly, this evaluation was in the tradition of the critical sociology of education of Sharp and Green (1975), M F D Young and his colleagues (Young, 1971), and others whose work has been characterised by the significance they attach to the distinction between rhetoric and reality.
This "rhetoric-reality" distinction is a feature of much evaluation, and in library research has been productive for, amongst others, those involved in the LASS Project, who write of "the traditional rhetoric of sixth-form responsibility and independence" (Hopkins and Rudduck, 1984) which they contrast with "the realities of sixth-form teaching and learning" .
Their study identifies a "central tension [which]seems to exist in" A "level work between the familiar and taken-for-granted authority of the teacher and the textbook and the rhetoric of independent study at sixth-form level" (Ruddock, 1983).
This distinction is also an important part of the perspective adopted in previous studies undertaken by the Educational Research Centre (Best et al., 1983).
Methods
(a) Data collection
We may think of the evaluation as having four foci:
(1) The Major Project in schools
(2) The Minor Project in schools
(3) The management and coordination of the project
(4) The inservice and staff development activities associated with the project
and as employing five distinct methods:
(1) Participant observation of lessons, meetings, staff development conferences, and library use
(2) Semi-structured interviews with a variety of actors
(3) Group discussions with pupils
(4) The interpretive analysis of project proposal documents and reports
(5) Informal and unstructured data collection through casual observation, "chats" and other occasions when we "picked things up" .
A substantial proportion of time and effort was devoted to the study of a sample of six Major Project schools.
In consultation with the Project Coordinating Team, six schools were selected for study in some depth, two from each of the first three years of the project.
This, we  hoped, would permit us to see the various stages of the project in operation from the time when a school began to plan its proposal to the time when the materials purchased with project funds were already in use.
The selection of schools was also made in order to study the project in a variety of social settings and administrative areas, and with the avowed purpose of identifying and recording instances of good practice.
Four Minor Project schools were also selected for study, albeit on a more limited scale.
In both sets of schools, interviews were held with a variety of staff, usually (but not always) beginning with the headteacher and key staff involved in the project.
These interviews were fairly open-ended but always loosely structured around a number of key questions.
Interviewers invariably had a list of questions in front of them, but only in exceptional circumstances were these made known in advance to the interviewee, and they were never rigidly adhered to.
As the interview progressed, we simply ignored, varied, developed or substituted questions as appropriate.
In all but a few cases interviews were taped.
In exceptional cases proceedings were noted by hand and recorded verbally by the researcher upon return to base.
No interviews were held with individual children, though some data were collected through chats with individuals in the library.
Rather, groups of from four to six youngsters from the first and second years of several project schools were engaged in tape-recorded discussion, usually in a section of the library or an empty neighbouring classroom.
Interviews were also held with all members of the Project Coordinating Team, all the Principal Librarians: Children's and Schools (PLCS)— formerly Divisional Children and Schools Librarians — some of their assistants, senior Education Department staff, and participants in inservice events.
The style of these interviews was similar to those described above.
In-school observations included lunchtime library use, lessons in library skills, study skills, and a variety of curricular subjects, library committee meetings, library-focused events such as a book week, and visits by PLCS to project schools.
Other observations included meetings of the Project Coordinating Team, the Inservice Panel, a number of inservice events, trips to library suppliers and book exhibitions at the County Library Headquarters.
Finally, towards the end of the evaluation, a number of visits were made to interview and observe in schools outside our sample, simply  to provide some comparative experience against which our depth studies could be set.
Recorded interviews and reports of observations were transcribed verbatim and checked for accuracy before analysis.
A system of key words and issues was devised to index these reports, and this facilitated their use in the production of working papers described below.
Details of the interviews and observations completed are given in Appendix 1.
(b) Data analysis
It was part of the research design that data collection and data analysis should go hand in hand through a process of what has been called "retroduction" (Ford, 1975; Best et al 1979) in which data analysis progressively focuses subsequent fieldwork.
The evaluators selected particular areas of interest for analysis and these became the subjects of a number of working papers in which tentative models were constructed and explanations offered.
These were then discussed at regular meetings in which subsequent data collection would be planned.
These working papers and the discussions to which they gave rise may be perceived as the semi-processed materials from which this report has been produced.
In all 21 working papers were produced (see Appendix 2).
Curriculum change and development
A paradigm
In order to appreciate the achievements of the ESSE/L Project, it is necessary first to locate the project in the context of a general theory or model of curriculum development.
To this end, we shall describe the nature and scope of possible curriculum change, and of the relationship between enhanced library provision and curriculum development, in terms of five dimensions:
(1) the epistemological assumptions underlying curriculum models and the pedagogical imperatives which these entail
(2) the locus of change
(3) perspectives on the relationships between changes in different facets of the curriculum, and the cause-effect connections which provide possible motives for changing particular elements
(4) the form which curriculum development takes (or does not take)
(5) the relationship between enhanced library provision resulting from the project and more or less independent developments in the curriculum.
Epistemology and pedagogy
It is part of the conventional wisdom of educational theory, that educational realities may be ordered according to a set of polar types to which particular instances or individuals come more or less near.
Thus we can list Bernstein's (1971) collection and integrated knowledge codes, the formal traditional and informal progressive child-centred ideologies employed by Holt (1969), Sharp and Green (1975), Bennett (1976) and others, Williamson's (1980) distinction between "product" teacher and "process" teacher, Esland's (1971) psychometric and epistemological models of pedagogy and the widely accepted distinction between objectives and process models of curriculum theory (see, for example, Stenhouse, 1975).
In each case one pole of the continuum is depicted as conservative and the other as radical, and this has often been related to overt political positions.
This is typified by the extreme positions of the Black Paperites and the neo-Marxist  Freeschoolers and Deschoolers.
The degree to which the ESSE/L Project can be seen to be radical either as an initiative, or in its actual impact in schools, depends on how close it comes to one or other of these doctrines.
We may describe these polar positions as thinking of education either as fixed states or as processes.
The fixed-state model conceives of knowledge as a body of facts which have an objective reality over and above any human knowing of them.
It is therefore possible to organise knowledge into sets of propositions which, because they have distinctive foci or fields of application, may be identified as separate subjects or disciplines.
The curriculum is viewed as a collection of these bodies of knowledge, and as having a content which can be transmitted to the learner.
The learner is seen as a passive recipient of this knowledge, so that didactic methods of teaching and a transmission model of the teaching-learning relationship are a natural consequence.
The learner is seen as in one of two fixed states also: as the ignorant or uneducated recipient prior to the insertion of knowledge, and as the educated person or product of the school.
Thus both knowledge and the learner are viewed as discrete entities which happen to be in one or another state of being, rather than as sets of dynamic and unstable processes.
The curriculum already exists and is external and objective to both teacher and pupil, and their interaction is designed simply to bring the learner to that state of knowledge at which the teacher has already arrived.
The process model denies the validity of a concept of knowledge independent of the subjective processes of the "knowers" .
Knowing is seen as a subjective experience in which the content of that which is known is subject to manifold possible interpretations.
The learner is by no means a passive "empty bucket" into which a body of objective facts may be poured, but is very much an active agent in the process of knowing.
It is the subjective consciousness of the individual learner which perceives and construes the world, and this includes all those parts of the world which are presented for the learner to experience through the curriculum.
Learning is therefore seen as experiential, so that the content of the curriculum will consist in a range of activities which present the learner with opportunities for knowing.
The appropriate pedagogical practices will therefore be those which are sometimes called heuristic pedagogies, involving activity methods, enquiry methods, the "questioning curriculum" , group discussion and RBL.
Skills (rather than facts) will be emphasised, and individual engagement in the world prized rather than some one-way transmission.
An educated person in this model is not one who has arrived at a state of knowledge but one who is embarked upon a never-ending developmental process of becoming.
While for analytical (and polemical) purposes these ideal types serve a useful purpose, it is arguable that states and processes are so conceptually and practically interdependent as to make naive any description or explanation of education exclusively in terms of one rather than the other.
It may be true that concepts and factual propositions are subject to change and have no consequences until engaged by someone's mind, but it is also true that some transmission of knowing does take place, and that a facility with, or mastery of, those concepts and propositions is necessary to further development.
If this were not the case, human energies would be endlessly employed in rediscovering the wheel and, indeed, every other mental, physical and emotional discovery ever made.
Moreover, it is arguable that the initiation into a framework of related concepts, methods and values (sometimes called a paradigm) is essential before the intellectual processes of (say) geography are possible.
Equally, while bodies of knowledge seem to exist before the advent of each generation, it is only through what Berger and Luckmann have called the "social construction of reality" that this knowledge is sustained.
It is through such activities and practices as those which characterise pupil-teacher interaction in the classroom that school knowledge is daily negotiated and reproduced.
The locus of change
Change can come about in educational institutions without the change necessarily centring on the curriculum in the first instance, although the curriculum may subsequently be affected.
The introduction of extra-curricular activities is one such change.
As we shall see later, some schools defined the use of the library for leisure reading in these terms.
Some aspects of schools may be changed in order to facilitate curricular and/or extra-curricular activities, without this being perceived as curriculum change per se.
Thus, some schools saw the refurbishment of the library as a prerequisite for the kinds of curriculum development to which their proposal for the project was firmly linked.
We may think here of schools' attempts to improve buildings and equipment in order to accommodate proposed changes in the content or process of teaching.
Some schools saw the development of study skills in a similar fashion, perceiving skills as a prerequisite for satisfactory engagement with subject content or learning experiences.
Some change is perceived as being effected within the curriculum itself, however conceived, as in the case of the introduction of new subjects  to the timetable.
However, to distinguish changes perceived in this way from extra-curricular or infrastructural developments begs the question of what constitutes "the curriculum" in the first place.
For the teacher who favours the process model, a development like study skills or reading for leisure would hardly be seen as extra to the curriculum, and for some, even the enhancement of the physical environment cannot be divorced from those learning experiences in which education consists: that is to say, "the medium is the message" (McLuhan cited in Postman and Weingarter, 1971).
For others, the medium is most certainly not the message, and the curriculum is more narrowly defined as that collection of bodies of knowledge which make up the subjects on the school timetable.
In what follows we shall see that both these concepts of the curriculum, and several intermediate positions, are entertained by teachers in our sample schools, and so caution needs to be exercised.
None the less, for purposes of analysis we shall employ the terms curricular, extracurricular and infrastructural developments to distinguish various loci of change.
Perspectives on curriculum change
How schools conceive the curriculum will affect not only the scope of changes entertained, but also the way they perceive the relationship between changes in different elements of the curriculum.
From the discussion of epistemology and pedagogy above, we may think of teacher perspectives as entailing one of the following ideal-type attitudes:
(1) A change in the content of the curriculum is justified because it is the content which is intrinsically worth while and any improvement in content is ipso facto an improvement in education; i.e. we change subject content for its own sake.
(2) A change in the process of teaching and learning, regardless of the subject content, is justified because it is these processes which are intrinsic to personal development and any improvement is ipso facto an improvement in education; i.e. we change the process for its own sake.
(3) A change in the processes of teaching and learning is justified because it is believed to enable the more effective transmission and reception of the content of the curriculum; i.e. we change process as instrumental in acquiring knowledge of content.
(4) A change in the "content" or "subject" of the learning experience is  justified because it enriches the learning experience or makes these experiences more meaningful and thus more developmental; i.e. we change content as instrumental in making the processes more effective.
(5) Because of the interdependence of process and content, the curriculum developments to be favoured are those which synchronise changes in focus with changes in activities and are responsive to the effects of the interplay between them.
(6) No change is acceptable since the status quo is considered to be the best situation that is possible at this time and under these circumstances.
Clearly these perspectives are not restricted to teacher responses to innovations proposed by others, but can also be used to explain why particular changes are promoted or envisaged in the first place.
The form of curriculum change
Bearing in mind the three loci of change described in Section 3.3 (curricular, extra-curricular and infrastructural), we suggest that change or its absence can occur through a number of different processes.
We shall label these according to the scale and means as follows:
(1) Revolution
By this we mean a change which is so wide-reaching and so fundamental in its effects as to constitute a dramatic alteration of the status quo.
(2) Development
By this we mean a less dramatic and less fundamental change, which is positively evaluated as an improvement on the status quo.
Development might be achieved by one or more of three means:
(a)
augmenting the status quo;
(b)
the integration, coordination or synchronisation of elements of the status quo;
(c)
the substitution of new elements for some of the existing elements of the status quo;
(3) Conservation
By this we mean the maintenance of the status quo as a conscious policy based upon a set of values which are promoted by or embodied in the status quo.
(4) Stagnation
The maintenance of the status quo by default; that is to say through apathy, impotence or ignorance.
From these categories we can deduce a number of possible types of change or stasis to which an initiative like the ESSE/L Project may be related, whether directly or indirectly.
We shall see below how different schools have been involved in one or more of these types of situation, but for the present two illustrations should suffice to demonstrate the potential of this classification.
At the time of the evaluation School A had already embarked upon curriculum integration in an integrated studies (IS) programme in the first year, curriculum augmentation by the addition to the curriculum of study skills for years 1–5, and was debating infrastructural integration through the physical relocation of the library in the suite of rooms already accommodating the audio-visual resource centre.
In School E, a policy of infrastructural substitution entailed the conversion of a classroom to a lower-school library and the adaptation of furniture to the new purpose; there was also extra-curricular augmentation in the innovation of a "book week" with competitions and a visiting celebrity, curriculum integration through the development of topic work, and curriculum substitution in the re-writing of the science syllabus to incorporate the replacement of much didacticism with more enquiry-based methods.
Three further points need to be made at this juncture.
The first is to reiterate that what is included in the categories being used to describe curricular and extra-curricular developments depends upon the breadth of definition of the curriculum.
The second is that curriculum integration, augmentation and substitution may refer to one or other or both of process and content, depending upon one's perspective on curriculum change and the epistemological and pedagogical assumptions underpinning it.
The third is rather more significant and relates to the moral dimension of change.
While both radicals and conservatives might agree about most of the categories, they may well disagree about what is or is not  "developmental" .
What is a development for one may be seen as a decline, a retrograde step, or sheer decadence by the other.
The relationship between the ESSE/L Project and change in the schools
As noted in Chapter 2, the annual reports and guidelines of the project make clear the intention that library provision be enhanced in programmes directly related to the curriculum development plans of the school concerned.
In reality, the project was implemented in schools in which a variety of curricular, extra-curricular and infrastructural changes were already taking place.
In some cases the project proposal set out to extend, accelerate or supplement changes already in motion, but in others the project was designed to initiate quite new developments.
In yet others, the proposal for project involvement was the result of, or was entailed in, prior developments of one sort or another.
And finally, the project sometimes coincided with, but remained essentially independent of, other developments.
Curricular changes as such were by no means the only developments to which the project was related.
As the examples of Schools A and E above demonstrate, extra-curricular and infrastructural developments were very much part of the environment within which the project was implemented.
Elsewhere, coincidental developments included integration in craft, design, technology (CDT) and environmental studies, Schools Council initiatives in history and science, Guidelines for Review and Internal Development of Schools (GRIDS), library refurbishment and the development of compensatory programmes in language and reading.
The precise relationships between the ESSE/L Project and other developments taking place varied considerably from school to school, and this will be demonstrated in the discussion of Major and Minor Projects in Chapters 5 and 6 below.
However, the range of possible relationships is summarised in Figure 2.
Before considering the shape of the project in the schools themselves, let us first consider the way in which the project as a whole was organised and coordinated.
The organisation and co-ordination of the project
Stages of the project
The logic of the ESSE/L Project may be observed in the three functional stages which people identified when describing their experience to us.
The first stage is the planning stage, in which the school develops its curriculum plan within which the project grant is to be used.
This plan is usually referred to as the "report" , since it is a report of the conclusion reached by the school's library or curriculum development committee, but is more properly thought of as the proposal made by the school to the project coordinating committee in respect of the way in which it proposes that a project grant be used.
We shall use the word "proposal" to describe this throughout.
Stage 2 is the selection, ordering and acquisition of book and non-book material purchased through the project grant, up to and including the utilisation of those resources by the children themselves.
Stage 3 represents subsequent developments resulting from the project grant and includes inservice and staff-development activities, the publicising and promotion of good practice coming out of the project, and any other spin-off effects.
Structure
In order to implement and oversee the project as a whole, a Project Coordinating Team was established which consisted of the Principal Adviser for Educational Resources, the Assistant County Librarian; Education and Special Services (formerly the Principal Assistant Librarian: Young People and Education (PAL:YPE), the Senior County Inspector (English), and the Tutor in Charge, County Language and Reading Centre, Essex Institute (Brentwood).
Within the committee, each member took responsibility for the committee's work in certain Major Project schools, and thus provided a link between the committee and those who were implementing the project on the ground.
A key role in the functioning of the project, especially in the Minor Project schools, was that of the five Divisional Children and Schools Librarians (DCSLs).
(Although these are now retitled Principal  Librarians, Children and Schools, we shall refer to them throughout as DCSLs.)
This role is an important one in the county's educational library provision, and as the administrative channel through which all ordering of materials passes, is pivotal to the project.
One other committee brought into existence as part of the project structure is the Inservice Panel, which is charged with the responsibility of developing staff-development and inservice activities and of articulating these with the county's existing inservice training (INSET) programme.
The way in which each of these parts of the structure functions within the project is described below.
The Project Coordinating Team
No formal statement of the terms of reference for the team has come to light, and in the early days clear mechanisms for the operation of the project were not always discernible.
The perceptions of the functioning of the project in its early years seem to have varied considerably from one member to another, but a clear and shared view has developed since then.
As one member put it:
over the years, the Team itself has got much closer in terms of its common aims and objectives…[now]we're much more confident about what it is trying to achieve.
(Working Paper (WP) 16)
From interviews with team-members, the following de facto terms of reference were distilled:
(a) to meet half-termly
(b) to receive recommendations from appropriate persons, including Area Education Officers, County Inspectorate and (predominantly) County Library staff (DCSLs)
(c) to consider potential schools for inclusion in the Project
(d) to make recommendations of schools for inclusion to the Principal Education Officer and the Chief County Inspector
(e) to make initial contact with schools selected and follow up as appropriate
(f) to consider submissions/proposal documents from schools and advise appropriately, deferring where necessary
(g) to coordinate the work of link persons
(h) to receive progress reports from members and review the progress of the Project in schools selected in the past
(i) to oversee the work of the Project in the schools through link persons and DCSLs
(j) to plan and seek support for subsequent years of the Project
(k) to review and report progress of the Project in public documents to
(i) superiors in County
(ii) the schools
(iii) the world at large Many of the team's functions are carried out through its individual members' work, either in the performance of their county roles (for example as Inspector or PAL:YPE) or in their roles as link persons.
County roles take members into schools in their day-to-day work, and for some of the team's functions (especially the selection of schools for recommendation for inclusion in the project) the project role is being played at the same time.
As a link person, each member of the team is allocated two Major Project schools each year, and takes a particular interest in these schools, acting as the main mediator between the team and staff responsible for the project in each school.
This involves the link person visiting each school from three to five times at appropriate stages of the project.
One team member summarised the link person role as follows:
(a) visiting the school, talking to the Head and senior staff, making sure that there are no misunderstandings about the intentions of the Project
(b) attending the school to address a staff meeting or talk to the library committee
(c) liaising with and comparing notes with DCSLs on schools' progress
(d) attending Team meetings twice per term to:
report progress in link schools
participate in review of progress in Project schools
participate in selection of schools for recommendation to Principal Education Officer and Chief County Inspector
(e) providing a "second opinion" by visiting other members' link schools with them
(f) participating in inservice activities and attending the INSET panel (although formal membership of this is problematic).
Within the team, formal status differentials were not entirely clear to the evaluators, not least because the bureaucratic structures of the education and library services are not exactly comparable, nor are the scales of pay representative of comparable scales of responsibility.
However, the Assistant County Librarian: Education and Special Services (ACL:E&SS) convened and chaired the meetings and, as the library specialist, tended to represent the project to higher levels of the county structure, albeit sometimes in the company of the Senior English Inspector.
Thus she describes the role as including:
meeting with the Education Department and Senior English Inspector once a year to account (financially) for what we are doing and to try to bargain for what we might get next year…
In her formal county role, she also oversees and directs the performance of the DCSLs in the project, a significant duty since the responsibility for the Minor Project is largely delegated to them.
No doubt part of the de facto authority enjoyed by this person is due to the fact that her predecessor provided much of the vision and dedication which lay behind the original initiative.
This, plus the fact that the role entailed involving the County Librarian and "selling the project" to the DCSLs, meant that the ACL:E&SS covered the spectrum from working politically with senior management of the education service to the coordination of those who implemented the  project at the nuts and bolts level.
Within the team meetings which we observed, questions of status were rarely visible.
Our impressions are of a team in which decisions are reached by consensus and with the minimum of tension.
Members feel that the team has evolved a spirit of participation and common concerns.
The procedures by which the team functions will be discussed in Section 4.7 below.
The role of the DCSL
There are five DCSLs in the county, each based in one of the five library divisions.
As the person through whom all orders for purchases from project grants must pass, this is clearly a key position in the project's structure.
As part of his or her normal role in the county, each DCSL visits every school in the division at least once a term, and the project gives an added dimension to these visits.
In Stage 1 of the project the DCSL recommends or nominates schools for inclusion in the project team's selection process for each "wave" .
In Stage 2, the role divides according to the status of each school.
Once the project team has approved a school's Major Project proposal, the DCSL visits the school to advise on the organisation and purchasing of the resources, and (in effect) the spending of the money.
Although some liaison takes place with the school's link person, the DCSLs tend to perform these functions independently.
In Minor Project schools, no link person is designated, and this means that the DCSLs have considerable autonomy in working with the schools, though they are expected to liaise with the project team through the regular monthly meetings of library staff which the ACL:E&SS holds.
In Stage 3, there is an expectation that the DCSLs will be involved in following up the project in their schools.
One might expect this to include advisory visits, aid with the development of study skills and so on, and to some extent this does happen.
However, the DCSLs report that lack of time is a crucial factor hindering the further development of the library initiative in project schools, and comment on the difficulty of sustaining momentum once the monies have been spent.
It seems that in some areas schools lost interest in the DCSL visits once the books were on the shelves.
The DCSL role in inservice activities at county level is also vague.
Although all DCSLs have attended INSET events, and two are members of the Inservice Panel, expectations of them are unclear.
This is almost certainly due in part to an ambiguity inherent in the role itself.
Structurally, and in terms of day-to-day duties, the DCSL is very much part of the library service.
Functionally, the role is clearly  educational.
To be involved in inservice activities for teachers would therefore exacerbate a tension which DCSLs already feel.
In fact only one DCSL has a teaching qualification, but this has not stopped others from becoming fully involved in curricular discussions in project schools.
How far this is appropriate is something on which DCSLs themselves do not agree.
For example, while one said she:
would try and get a lot more searching questions about how the curriculum was being developed in the school, what exactly was happening, what really was going to be the attitude of the Head to RBL in the future…
another argued:
that we should not have been asked to comment on…the way the curriculum would be affected by these materials and how the school itself would be looking at its way of using them, other than perhaps information skills where we could help them with commercial publications to give them some ideas.
However, they are agreed on the fact that their major contribution is in Stage 2, where both the decisions and implementation of spending plans are under way.
Generally speaking, DCSLs advised on availability, choice and the mechanics of acquisition, down to and including the precise way in which order forms were to be completed, but in at least one case the DCSL involved herself more fully in the policy-making deliberations of the school library committee.
Rather less visibly, DCSLs sometimes exercised considerable influence on the course of the project through two channels.
The first of these was the mechanism by which considerable weight was given by the Project Coordinating Team to the DCSL recommendations of schools for inclusion in the project (a point we shall return to below).
The second was through the exercise of individual discretion in the processing of schools' orders.
While DCSLs do not appear actually to veto specific requests, the advice they give on the relative quality of alternative publications — through direct comment to the teacher responsible for submitting the school's list — can be persuasive.
As one DCSL put it:
I think we have got a bit more confident as the Project has gone on and said to them: well really, you ought not to be buying this.
The Inservice Panel
In June 1983 a meeting was held to consider the development of a planning group to take the initiative in establishing appropriate inservice activities to arise from and extend the work of the ESSE/L Project.
The precise status and terms of reference of this committee remain obscure.
It is variably described as:
The Secondary School Education/Library Inservice Panel The Inservice Planning Group The Inservice Subcommittee The Inservice Advisory Panel The Secondary School Education Learning Project Inservice Panel.
The precise membership seems never to have been defined, though it has always included members of the county advisory staff, members of the Project Coordinating Team, teachers from project and non-project schools, teachers' centre wardens, and DCSLs.
Even the evaluators appear on the minutes as members present, without their role being specified!
At least two attempts have been made to specify the terms of reference of the panel, and on at least two occasions the membership has been reviewed specifically to bring in more active participants and give more clear direction to its efforts.
It is not easy to describe the functioning of a committee which is clearly very much in the process of finding its role.
However, we have observed its functions to include the following:
(1) the proposal and planning of one-day and half.day inservice conferences for inclusion in the county's inservice programme
(2) the production of lists of resources and information packages for schools, e.g. the DCSLs compiled a list of study skills booklets and a guide to the Dewey classification system
(3) the dissemination of information, including the results of individual school initiatives, e.g. a video tape on "Using a library" produced by a sixth-form college
(4) the consideration and development of a network for staff development arising from the project
(5) the clarification of such key issues as the meaning of "study skills" (6) the review and evaluation of the inservice events held to date, and the potential of other inservice developments for the work of the panel
(7) the consideration of liaison between the project and other provision, such as the county courses on microcomputers.
The panel meetings are currently convened by the ACL: E&SS but this role has been performed by others in the past.
The detailed functioning of the panel is the subject of further discussion in Chapter 7, but we may note that the minutes of its meetings reflect a considerable involvement of at least one DCSL in key initiatives.
In-school structures
A prerequisite for a school's involvement in the project is the setting up of a library resources committee to undertake the detailed development of the proposal and its associated spending plans.
The constitution and composition of this committee vary from school to school, as does its relationship with other parts of the school's bureaucracy (curriculum and resource sub-committees, senior management team etc.).
In each case, however, the committee has reflected the general thrust of the school's project plan, as well as being seen as representative at some level or other of the variety of interest groups within the school curriculum.
As already indicated, the function of these committees is to plan and oversee the form taken by the project within the school in question.
Though initial approaches from the link person and/or the DCSL may be to the head or the head's senior nominee, it is to the library committee that the objectives and function of the project in the school are most often spelled out.
Processes
The procedures involved in the project may be summarised as follows:
(1) The Project Coordinating Team receives recommendations for specific schools to be included in or excluded from the project for the coming year.
The team members are themselves significant contributors to the discussion, drawing on their own first-hand experience as they play their county roles, but written reports are received from Area School Inspectors, Area Education Officers and DCSLs, and comments from such people are also reported verbally by members of the project team.
(2) The Project Coordinating Team considers the various recommendations and reaches agreement about a list of schools for involvement in the Major or Minor Project, and these are proposed to the Chief County Inspector and Principal Education Officer.
(3) The Principal Education Officer either accepts the lists proposed or refers particular schools back for exclusion or substitution, on the basis of expert knowledge about factors of which the project team could not have been aware.
(4) Schools are notified by the County Librarian of their selection for consideration in the project, and in Major Project schools this is accompanied by a visit to the school by the link person who explains the mechanics of the project to senior staff.
A list of guidelines is also issued to each school.
A copy of these is included in Appendix 3, but we may note that they include a statement of aims and objectives, a list of members of the Coordinating Team, a structure for the school's policy proposal (including a spending plan), some notes on how schools might go about developing their proposal and certain limits within which the money must be spent.
Amongst the conditions to which the school's attention is drawn are:
the proportion of grant which can be spent on book (80%) and non-book (20%) materials;
 "immediate establishment of a Project coordinating group, or library committee led by a member of the senior management team" ;
that "the withdrawal of the library from the timetable as a general teaching room is strongly recommended" .
(5) Schools establish library committees as described in the previous section and these, in the light of the guidelines, thrash out a coordinated policy for utilising the expected grant in a plan for developing some aspect or aspects of the curriculum.
The report of these deliberations is then submitted to the Coordinating Team.
During the preparation of the proposal, key members of staff are encouraged to visit schools where the project is already in action in order to gain ideas and learn from the experience of others.
(6) A regular item on the agenda of the project team meetings is the review and assessment of the progress of the proposal in each  Major Project school.
Link persons speak to each proposal from their unique experience of it, and advise the team on appropriate future action.
This often entails the link person making a number of additional visits to the school.
(7) While the proposal is being developed, schools are visited by the DCSLs, who describe and explain the procedures for ordering and acquiring the chosen materials.
(8) Stage 1 of the project ends when the project team approves the proposal and the school is officially informed of this by the County Librarian.
(9) In Stage 2, schools are assisted in putting together their orders by the organisation of book displays at the county library and visits to library suppliers' showrooms in London.
Schools typically send three or four staff to one or two of these events and these are met or accompanied by the appropriate DCSL.
Schools actually place orders on the showroom visits and are invoiced directly for these.
All other orders (including those arising from the displays at the county library) are made on the appropriate forms through the DCSL.
(10) Throughout Stages 1 and 2, DCSLs may be involved in advising schools, librarians, or library committees on practical matters, from suggesting trends in library layout (for schools relocating or refurbishing their libraries in anticipation of, or as a result of, receiving a project grant) to advising on precise requirements of order forms, the need to "weed" old stock to make space for the new acquisitions, and the desirability or updating or devising a new catalogue.
(11) During Stage 2, staff from the project schools attend inservice conferences of various types.
Some of these are specifically for project schools and focus on the variety of learning materials available in particular curriculum areas as recommended by county advisers.
Others are more broadly conceived and are designed to serve a wider audience interested in aspects of RBL, study skills, information handling, and so on.
(12) In principle (though in practice the degree to which this happens is questionable) schools continue to develop and extend their coordinated planning of curriculum initiatives and library enhancement.
Meanwhile the Inservice Panel devises and executes staff-development activities and explores infrastructural  initiatives (for example, networking) designed to facilitate the communication of good practice, the sharing of ideas and the peer support which characterise a commitment to extending the professionalism of teachers throughout the county.
Packages of material and resources of various kinds which have developed in association with, though not necessarily directly from, the project are produced and made available.
Selection of schools
Where a limited amount of money is available for allocation amongst competing demands, attention is bound to be focused on the procedures by which recipients are selected and others excluded.
Certainly headteachers in schools not included in the project entertained doubts about the openness and justice of the procedures employed, and this seems to be linked to their ignorance of the principles and processes of the project.
Since the project did not and does not operate on the basis of a general, public advertisement for schools to make bids for a share of a specified sum, the rules of the game are not common knowledge.
Though not strictly competitive, the selection of schools inevitably involves comparisons according to a range of formal and informal criteria, and since funds have until recently always been less than sufficient to serve all deserving cases, an element of competition is inescapable.
Thus, it was not surprising to find one headteacher expressing some annoyance that the schools were selected by procedures which were not open to public scrutiny and claiming that a competition was only fair if all potential entrants knew in advance that the "race" was to take place and the rules under which it would be run.
Hearing of the project only through the "headteachers' grapevine" , some heads (understandably enough) perceived the selection of schools as achieved by "back-door" methods including the collusion and patronage of the inspectorate.
In reality a number of formal principles are employed in deciding on the support for, and recommendation of, schools for inclusion in the project.
Some of these appear to have been applied as important criteria from the beginning, while others have grown into a body of case law".
In interviews with team members and our observation of four team meetings (all of which included selection procedures), the following principles have been identified:
(1) that there should be fair distribution between geographical areas, so that, in any year, where possible one school should be included from each of the eight (now six) educational administrative areas  (2) that in any year, project schools should comprise a mix of schools in terms of the degree to which educational initiatives of one sort or another have been taken, the socioeconomic environment, philosophies of grouping, pedagogy etc.
(3) that in any year there should be where possible an equal number of Major and Minor awards
(4) that there should be visible within each school key individuals who are likely to be reliable and innovative leaders for the project and who show some affinity with and understanding of the aims and the principles behind the project (e.g. an enlightened head, a vigorous teacher-librarian, or a sympathetic head of English)
(5) that the spending plans submitted should fall within the guidelines described earlier in that the money should not be spent on sets of textbooks, nor for the furnishing or decoration of premises, and that no more than 20% should be allocated to non-book resources
(6) that the spending plans should be realistic in the impact they will make in any particular curriculum area (e.g that the money should not be so thinly spread across departments as to be unlikely to influence significantly the work of any one of them)
(7) that the proposals should satisfy some notion of "value for money considering, for example, the number of children likely to benefit (thus, proposals concentrating on" A"level curricula were not favoured because of the small number of students involved).
A number of other values appear to play a part, although these are less overt.
Underlying the principle of geographical distribution is more than merely a notion of fairness or equity, for it seems that to exclude any administrative area might be to risk offending the divisional authorities in a way which would be unhelpful to the project as a whole.
This equity was not always easily achieved, however, since the organisation and philosophy of schooling in some divisions was somewhat at odds with the values embraced by the project.
For example, the retention of selective schools characterised by traditional pedagogy and an elitist view of the curriculum means that some schools are less likely than others to be able to meet the expectations of a project founded on essentially comprehensive principles.
When pressed on this, one member of the team assured us that schools were by no means excluded from consideration on these grounds, but we may speculate that members' own positions regarding comprehensive  reorganisation will have played some part.
Our own observations suggest that the team also entertained some notion of compensation or positive discrimination which necessarily worked against the interests of some schools.
A school enjoying high status compared with its neighbours, located in a solid middle-class area, housed in relatively new buildings and already in receipt of other resources (e.g. Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI)) would be felt to have so much going for it already as to be less sympathetically considered than other schools.
However, our own observations show that once invited to submit a proposal, a school's case is subject to the same criteria as any other, and that these criteria are fairly rigorously applied.
Of course, political and other values and prejudices must be at work in the minds of others who are active in shaping the implementation of the project.
In their deliberations, we observed project team members feeding in written recommendations and comments from Area Education Officers, DCSLs and (less often) members of the county inspectorate.
On occasions, verbal reports of discussions in other places (e.g. at inspectorate meetings) were all that was available.
Some of these recommendations were brief and the reasoning behind them not explained.
We may only conjecture about the degree to which these subjective assessments were influenced by prior experience of the school in other contexts, the existence of good or bad relations between the reporter and the staff of the school, and the personal prejudices and preferences of the individual concerned.
Nor was it always clear on what basis the Principal Education Officer and Chief Inspector on occasions referred back the proposals of the project team.
In some cases this appears to have been due to privileged access to knowledge not yet available to those lower down the hierarchy, as in cases where plans were in preparation for the closure, merging or reorganisation of schools being proposed.
In other cases it seems that some assessment was made, at a high level, of the general condition of a school, so that it was considered inappropriate for project status.
In exceptional cases, schools may have been included in the project without all the usual procedures having been followed with quite the normal rigour.
We observed that sometimes a sentiment attributed to a powerful senior member of the county bureaucracy was accepted as sufficient grounds for considering a school more sympathetically (or more critically) than would otherwise be the case.
While the fears of some that deals had been done are not justified by our data, in at least one school senior staff claim to have received a Minor Project grant as a retrospective reward.
Here it was suggested that the school's investment in areas subsequently utilised by the county for its own particular purposes (including staff development) became the basis for reacting angrily to the school's exclusion from the project.
A minor grant was then made.
Whatever the truth of this, this particular school's proposal document is a remarkably slim and relatively uninformative basis for granting the award.
Finally it is important to note the relative influence of different people in the decision-making process.
As already noted, the library service, the educational administration and the inspectorate all make inputs, but the relative weight they carry is not necessarily what one would expect.
Thus, the views of the inspectorate are under-represented, especially when one considers that, except for relatively informal verbal comments through the Senior English Inspector, the General Inspectors for each school make no input at all, while all five DCSLs make lengthy written recommendations which are reinforced by the chairmanship of the ACL:E&SS.
Recommendations are also sought from the Area Education Officers, although these do not appear always to be forthcoming.
Interestingly, towards the end of our period of observation the project team resolved to improve the quality and quantity of information received from Inspectors and Area Education Officers and a pro-forma for this purpose was proposed.
The Major Project
Overview
As described in Chapter 2, the greater part of the funding in any year was given to a number of Major Project schools (usually £6,000 to each of eight schools), and at the time of writing 36 schools have received such a grant and another five have been proposed for the current financial year.
While we do not wish to give the impression that the Minor Project is insignificant, the Major Project is clearly recognised as the most powerful thrust of the ESSE/L Project.
This is evidenced by the greater time and effort devoted to the selection of schools by the Coordinating Team, by the absence of the link person role for Minor Project schools, and by the scale of the development implied by the larger sums involved.
For these reasons, the evaluators chose to focus specially on the Major Project.
In October 1984 we analysed the proposal documents from all the 23 Major Project schools in existence at that date, for whom documentation was readily available.
In doing so, we were particularly interested in the degree to which the proposals conformed to an evolving set of guidelines, and seemed likely to accord with the stated objectives of the project.
We were interested to see how far proposals were concentrated on particular aspects of the curriculum (as opposed to an across-the-curriculum approach), how much participation there had been in arriving at the proposal, whether information-handling skills were recognised, and so on.
This provided not only an overview of the stated intentions of Major Project schools but also some kind of check that the six schools chosen as the focus for our study were in these terms not atypical.
Nineteen of the 23 Major Project schools of that time contained clear statements of aims to enhance the curriculum as a whole, although many schools went on to identify particular subjects or departments which required attention first.
As for the other four schools, the absence of a clear commitment does not mean that proposals were exclusively concentrated on a narrow aspect of the curriculum, but rather that their concern for the whole curriculum was either implied or assumed.
Proposal documents inevitably employed statements of broad aim couched in general terms and expressed in a way thought to meet the Coordinating Team's expectations.
Like the teachers reported by Keddie (1971), the authors of the proposals responded to educationalist questions with educationalist answers, and in the latter years of the project, proposals have clearly been influenced by the growing refinement of the guidelines.
Proposals typically contained statements of commitment to the development of  the individual child, acknowledgement of the central position of the library and its resources in the curriculum provision of the school, and a willingness to establish an appropriate administrative and physical infrastructure for the successful implementation of the project.
Typical statements of intent included: to encourage in pupils an understanding of the interrelatedness of knowledge to ameliorate the compartmentalisation of the subject-centred curriculum (School L)
to encourage the development of the individual through discovery, achievement or escapism (School E)
[that]the library should be the centre of intellectual and social life of the school for both staff and pupils (School M)
to establish the library as the pivotal resource space in which there are well defined areas for supplying specific needs (School N)
Statements about infrastructural developments highlighted a number of weaknesses in existing provision, including the poor geographical location of the library building, the problem of split-site provision, the difficulties involved in freeing the library from timetabling for subject lessons, and the poor decoration and furnishing of the rooms themselves.
In some cases these features were associated with an atmosphere that was unwelcoming and on occasions "oppressive and unstimulating" .
In line with the preference for heuristic pedagogies associated with RBL and a child-centred progressive ideology, all the proposals concerned themselves with information-handling skills of one sort or another.
Schools seemed to be at very different stages of development and sophistication here, with some proposals incorporating details of taxonomies of the skills to be developed, while others made general statements of intent about ill-defined programmes of study or library skills.
In some schools, at any rate, this seems to have performed a rhetorical function in conforming to the guidelines, rather than producing a realistic statement of an established and developing provision.
The aspects of the curriculum which received specific attention (albeit  in the context of an expressed concern for the whole curriculum) varied from school to school.
According to the ESSE/L Project first-year report, those areas which received funding were:(i) curriculum areas with a strong immediate claim to enrich library resources
(ii) curriculum areas with well develop plans for a shift towards greater resource-based learning
(iii) potentially exciting new ventures for which the Project itself had provided the necessary stimulus
(iv) improvements in basic needs i.e. fiction and general reference material.
Existing curriculum areas featured in proposals included the humanities, science, history, remedial work, research-based exams (Mode 3 GCE/CSE), basic studies, and home economics.
Indeed, no accepted curriculum subject has not featured somewhere in the proposal documents.
Specific new curriculum developments identified in the proposals included initiatives in community education, applied science, geography, sociology, health education, child care and history, social education, the Schools Council history project, European studies and study skills courses.
Most schools accepted a need to enhance basic provision of fiction and general reference material and in at least one school the development of a sound base in children's fiction was a priority.
Schools varied in their concern for a number of other issues.
Thus, while virtually all schools wished to increase access to a better-stocked library in a way which would stimulate RBL, only 14 of the schools specified existing or intended extension activities in their plans, while nine made reference to the need to establish or develop display areas, and a similar number expressed a commitment to associated inservice developments.
However, all the 23 schools included the development of recreational reading and a desire to exploit the resources of outside agencies, such as museums, in their documentation.
The proposals of the six schools selected as the focus for our evaluation are representative of the range of proposals reviewed, and the evaluators are satisfied that the picture which emerges from this sample is true to the general flavour and direction of the Major Project  as a whole.
However, each school is unique, and the sample illustrates the diverse and idiosyncratic shapes taken by the project in different institutions.
The schools selected varied substantially in their degree of consensus about the concept of education and the pedagogy appropriate to it, and about the form which the project-related curriculum development was to take.
They also varied with respect to the loci of changes envisaged, and the relationship between the project initiatives and the past, current and proposed developments in the school's curricular, extra-curricular and infrastructural dimensions.
Moreover, the developments in any school must be seen in the context not only of the perspectives on curriculum change of key individuals but also of the personal aims, philosophies and motivations of the people concerned.
There are several consequences of this complexity and they include the following:(1) It is difficult to distinguish those events which are the result of the project from those which are the result of other events contemporary with the project.
(2) It is difficult to know how far the success of the project should be attributed to the project itself and how far it should be attributed to those events which preceded it and provided an environment in which the project could flourish (or wither).
(3) It is difficult to determine the precise relationship between actors' aims, objectives, philosophies or perspectives on the one hand, and their activities vis-a-vis the project on the other: did the project "work" because of receptive, supportive or innovative minds, or did the project cause the development of particular frames of mind?
Only a detailed and carefully chronicled narrative could do justice to the subtle complexities of the project in each school.
Indeed, a full account of the project in any one school might comprise a substantial case study in the tradition of Elizabeth Richardson's (1973) report of Nailsea School, or Sharp and Green's (1975) account of a child-centred infant school.
Such a task is clearly beyond the scope of this report, but it may be instructive to describe two schools in some depth.
A brief account of the project in each of the other four Major Project schools in the sample is included in Appendix 4.
School F
The context
School F is in a new town and was opened in purpose-built premises in  1959 as an 11–18 comprehensive.
Some time before the inception of the project, the area in which the school is located was subject to a reorganisation in which the sixth form was lost to a newly created tertiary college.
Although the reorganisation was technically scheduled from January 1982, the head reports that the period of most tension and unsettlement for most staff was from January 1981 until the middle of the summer vacation following.
The proposal document records that the library at that time was much in need of improvement.
For example: The library furniture in 1981 was that which was provided on the opening of the school.
As no form of updating had taken place the room was in need of considerable physical repair…much of the stock dated back to the school's opening and was therefore unsuitable for the pupils and curriculum of today.
(Proposal document)
In the year preceding School F's invitation to participate, the head led a campaign to improve the physical environment in what appears to have been a concerted effort to convince the local authority of the high priority given by the school to its library.
With finance coming partly from the Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) and partly from capitation, the library was gutted, refurbished and painted during the summer holidays, the labour being provided by teachers, fifth-form and sixth-form pupil librarians, the caretaker and a parent who was a builder.
The head estimates that: overall we must have put something like £2000 into the library in terms of pure cash and obviously almost the equivalent in terms of hours of time given.
Both the head and the DCSL freely acknowledged that these developments were undertaken in the light of knowledge that a library project existed, and that schools might stand a better chance of securing a grant if they could show evidence of commitment to enhanced library provision.
In fact some evidence of commitment already existed, since the head, who claims to have wanted to improve the library and to link this to the introduction of study skills, had already approached the governing body to seek county support for redecoration.
On hearing from a parent that: something was going on in terms of a library project, he proceeded to put everything into action and got the support of the governing body…saying that we wanted to do something with our library.
We obviously put in a few more details…
And could they give us  any suggestions — any positive help.
The refurbishment of the library served an important political function in convincing influential individuals of the school's serious intent where the library was concerned.
Thus, amongst those invited to the wine-and-cheese evening to celebrate there-opening of the library were the school governors, two members of the Project Coordinating Team and the DCSL.
It would be wrong, however, to suggest that this infrastructural augmentation was no more than window-dressing.
The head and key staff (including a senior teacher, then acting deputy head, and a teacher-librarian already in post) were already in discussion about the obvious inadequacies of the existing stock and premises.
However that may be, a member of the Coordinating Team visited the school shortly afterwards, and explained the principles of the Major and Minor Projects to the head, suggesting that he developed his ideas a little more specifically.
The head reports that the school was then invited to submit a proposal.
The committee
Although a library committee of some sort existed before the project invitation, the head reports that: It was no more than three of four people who were simply monitoring the use of the library and keeping an eye on the books that we needed and the way children used the library.
As a direct result of the project, a much larger committee was established, where membership comprised a much wider representation of the staff as a whole.
Membership was determined by invitation through either the senior teacher or the librarian, and was based on a desire to create a body in which a variety of subjects and levels of seniority were combined.
The committee consisted of: a senior teacher, then acting second deputy head, who chaired the meetings, represented a subject department and provided a link with the senior management team;
the teacher-librarian (who would act as coordinator for the Project);
a representative of mathematics and computing;
a modern linguist with an interest in drama;
the head of the creative studies faculty;
a historian new to the staff;
the Basic Studies Coordinator for Years land 2, who had already been involved in cataloguing and layout of the library;
the head of English
a head of a pastoral division and member of the geography department (also involved in social education in the Upper School);
a teacher with an interest in 16 + prevocational courses;
an RE teacher with a responsibility for less able pupils;
a probationer history teacher also involved in teaching basic studies.
At about this time, a small working party (sometimes referred to as the "Resources Committee" ) was set up with two apparent functions.
The first of these was to look at the school with a wider concept of resources than that with which the library project was concerned, and the second was to feed into the library committee a relatively independent group's view of appropriate resource proposals.
This working party appears to have remained an ad hoc body with a finite life, rather than a major standing committee in the school management structure.
Impressions of the functioning of the library committee vary.
While one interviewee described it as meeting monthly (at least in the early stages of the project), the chairperson recalled it meeting in full committee on only a handful of occasions, with the bulk of the work being undertaken by individual members in liaison with the academic and pastoral divisions they represented.
The drafting of the proposal document was undertaken by the chairperson and the librarian (as designated coordinator of the project), who met informally and frequently.
These two key members appear to have acted on behalf of, and in the name of, the committee by negotiating  contributions to specific sections of the proposal with the representatives of the sectional interests.
As the proposal document took shape it was taken back to faculties in draft form for verification.
Between June 1983 and November 1984, the membership of the committee changed, with some members leaving the school altogether.
These changes had become somewhat academic, however, when the evaluators arrived, by which time the committee's activities had been suspended.
This was attributed to four main factors: the chairperson had been promoted to another school; the librarian/coordinator had been promoted to a complex and demanding pastoral role; the reorganisation of secondary schools had imposed strains to which the activities of a library committee were an unwelcome addition; and finally, the fact that the project purchases were now completed, with the books already finding their way on to the library shelves, appeared to be seen as an indication that the committee's work had been completed.
However, in January 1985 a new librarian was appointed and senior staff expressed hope that, industrial action permitting, the committee would be reconvened in due course.
While the reorganisation of the schools in the area acted as some kind of distraction, staff to whom we spoke were confident that committee members maintained their commitment and interest in the library project throughout a difficult period.
The industrial action must also have had an effect, although senior staff suggested that union activity was not particularly strong, and was felt mainly as a restriction on communication.
In fact, an evaluator was able to observe one meeting of the library committee.
There were six staff present including the Project Coordinator, the new teacher-librarian, the head, representatives of basic studies, maths and science, and a social education teacher who had been designated as holding an implementation of policy post (or "10p posts" as they were commonly called).
A small number of these posts had been created recently by the head in a conscious attempt to institutionalise the motivation of curricular and related developments.
The agenda included a discussion of a rota to set up displays in the library, policy on the acquisition of periodicals and an intended course on information retrieval to be related to the library skills already incorporated in the basic studies programme.
The recently reestablished library club was described and the possibility of a book club considered.
The proposal
The final proposal document is a collation and coordination of individual papers presented by faculties.
Significantly, it opens with two photographs of the newly refurbished library in summer 1983, complete with carpets and handsome modern furniture.
This is followed by a description of the shortcomings of provision at that time, a statement of aims and objectives and a projection for how these were to be achieved against the background of the staff, PTA and governing body involvement described earlier, and the investment of £5,000 from 1982/83 capitation in refurbishing.
All this is described in the document as Stage I of the school's library development plan, the aims and objectives of which are given as follows: Aims and objectives of the initial improvement scheme (Stage 1) 1.
To develop a library tradition at [School F]to attract both pupils and staff.
2.
To modernise and refurbish the library, hence creating a pleasant working atmosphere.
3.
To create a code of behaviour in the correct use of the library.
4.
To develop a programme of study skills appropriate to each pupil and geared to fit the changing study needs throughout their school career.
5.
To develop inservice training for staff.
6.
To encourage individual pupil use in their non-timetabled school day.
7.
To develop the library as a major central resource.
8.
To improve and enhance existing book stocks.
Sifting out unsuitable material and replacing with new and relevant stock.
9.
To increase a regular use of the County exchange service and enlist the advice and guidance of County library staff.
10.
To make available necessary staffing to facilitate the above aims.
The proposal document describes the system of formal and informal meetings initiated by the library committee and comments that: views of all teachers were encouraged and the feedback showed responses from all subject areas.
The process of consultation and negotiation was not entirely smooth, since teachers did not all share the same understanding of the form of library use favoured by the project and, indeed, the school's own library committee.
Thus, some teachers wanted subject books to be more accessible for their own teaching, as in the case of teachers who wished to be able to take out boxes of books for use in their own departments.
Others saw the project initially as an opportunity to buy more textbooks relevant to their particular teaching skills.
We may imagine a measure of disappointment when these requests were vetoed by the committee, and it is clear that some re-education of staff must have been necessary in arriving at appropriate submissions.
During this time the headteacher and librarian visited two schools with project experience in order to gain further insights into the way in which their proposal might be developed.
It was also at about this time that further investment was made from the school's capitation, with a teletext receiver being installed.
In the proposal this was described as "intended to supplement the training and use of information skills" and was linked to "introductory lessons in use of the library" which pupils were already receiving.
The proposal went on to argue that the development of library skills would be a natural consequence of project involvement since it would involve "more practice in the skills of retrieval" .
The proposal also indicated an intention to devote one corner of the library to a display area, in which departments or faculties would be able to mount exhibitions related directly to the topics or themes of project-work.
The proposal document is surprisingly vague about the relationship between enhanced library stock and curriculum provision, when one considers the importance attached to this as the major principle underpinning the project.
In the short section headed "Links with the curriculum" , the proposal simply says: The contacts made by the committee must be cemented by regular discussion within subject areas to create awareness of the library resources in the eyes of the pupils.
Several departments  suggested producing study guides directing pupils to suitable books for topics and projects.
Bibliographies should be encouraged in pupils' work to be able to monitor the impact and effective use of the library.
Leisure reading should also be encouraged by discussions during class and "follow up" work in normal lessons.
Together with the use of the display area it is hoped pupils will be encouraged to use the library as a source of information for homework and classwork on a regular basis and that staff will see it as an important adjunct to their departmental resources.
If space permits it has been suggested that some departmental stocks of general reading books should be kept centrally, however this would be reviewed periodically as our long term aims for the library are achieved.
Whether or not such a statement reflects an adequate level of planning and depth of thought about curriculum development depends on the quality of the deliberations of the faculties and departments, and the coordination of the various submissions made to the committee.
The proposal document includes examples of documents received "as feedback from members of the library committee on the curriculum needs of their departments" (Proposal document, Appendix I).
One, from the second year basic studies team who teach a programme bringing together English, history and geography in a thematic syllabus, includes lists of themes in each of these subjects.
Preference is expressed for paperback fiction for all ability levels, and for books on local history and geography and such history topics as exploration and discovery, the slave trade and the colonisation of America.
Another is from the English department and makes a fairly predictable case for enhancing the fiction provision in order to "encourage the reading habit and to extend reading for pleasure…" 
It is argued that this will necessitate a fiction section which: should comprise books of fantasy and ordinary life.
It should relate to the present as well as to the past and the future.
It should reflect a common interest among workers by hand and brain.
The third, from the history department, is more explicit and distinguishes between general reading matter which would make  "browsing…a broadening experience in itself for the children" and teacher resources (including teaching packs and reference books) which would not only stimulate improved pedagogy in the new "evidence-based course" , but also permit teachers to foster pupils' library use by example.
The proposal goes on to list specific topics in this course for years 3–5, for which the project grant would be especially useful.
Spending plan
In the light of the kinds of departmental submission noted above, the library committee established a number of priorities which, despite the departmental and faculty contributions, collected needs together under general heads as follows:(a) Stands, microfiche, book covering materials, display material, magazine folders (max. £1,000)
(b) Fiction (paperbacks)(£1,000)
(c) Theme/topic books (£1,850)
(d) Photographs, art work, posters (£200)
(e) Reference (£1,000)
(f) Staff section (£150)
The Project Coordinating Team did not find this plan entirely acceptable, since the project did not permit the development of specifically "staff" resources nor the spending of money on some of the infrastructural resources under the first heading, and as a result the chairperson telephoned the school and explored alternative distributions.
In the end, figures were agreed of £1, 200 for general reference, a similar amount for fiction, and £400 for photographs, art work and posters, with a larger figure of £2,500 for non-fiction related to themes and topics.
From comments made, it seems that the allocation of such a large figure to the last heading was justified by the importance given to the topic approach, emphasised by submissions of the basic studies and history departments appended to the proposal.
The appropriate DCSL was informed of the new figures agreed on, and was then empowered to process the resultant orders.
In fact, most of the spending was  completed upon a general visit to library booksellers' warehouses in London, where thematic material was first selected, along with mostly paperback fiction, and the remainder spent in a fairly unstructured way until the money ran out.
It was at this stage that the role of the DCSL became particularly important.
Unlike at least one of her peers, the DCSL within whose division this school falls does not usually become involved until after the proposal has been submitted, although this depends to some extent on the quality of past and existing relationships with schools.
In this case, the DCSL exercised some kind of influence at the point of selection and provided some help with cataloguing and processing of the new resources once purchased.
In accompanying school staff to the warehouses she was in a position to offer some advice, and in processing actual orders she did appear to exercise a tempering influence.
In one case she "stalled" an order for multiple copies of a book, although this seems subsequently to have been allowed to pass.
Observation in other schools suggests that the DCSL would normally be more active earlier in the project and indeed would provide some inservice sessions for staff in the school, although her confidence in the training and expertise of the teacher-librarian may have made this inappropriate here.
Some outcomes
Accounts given by individuals are inevitably selective in content and emphasis, and as we noted in Chapter 3, the attribution of change to particular policies or causal factors is always difficult.
We do need to note the complexity of the context in which the project operated in School F to appreciate this difficulty.
Not only was the functioning of the library committee curtailed by industrial action — as it was in every school studied but the many attitudinal and motivational effects of the reorganisation of secondary schooling in the area as a whole must have been significant in shaping the perspectives and actions of those taking up the project challenge.
Moreover, much development of the infrastructure was already taking place in the school (not only the library refurbishment, the display area and the installation of teletext, but also the designation of "10p posts" and a standing commitment to the role of teacher-librarian on the staffing establishment).
Change within the curriculum itself was also under way.
Here, curriculum integration in, for example, humanities and basic studies, and curriculum augmentation (in the form of the advent of library and study skills) were already conceived.
The ESSE/L Project seems to be most accurately described in this school as supplementing  a measure of curriculum reform already embarked on, as well as initiating some new thinking about curricular and extra-curricular provision.
Interviews with the head, senior staff, teacher-librarians and members of the library committee disclose a large measure of agreement that the use made of the library by many of the departments and courses has increased substantially in the period covered by the project.
Mention is made of greater use by science, music, geography, computer studies, history, English and home economics.
Children described to the interviewers how they had been referred to the library to find information on Inuits and Eskimos in basic studies, Scott of the Antarctic in history, and Alexander Fleming in science, while one child described how: In RE sometimes Miss asks us to go and find out (like) some information and also in literacy (like) there are some people who write letters backwards and Miss asks us to go back and see if we could find any.
(Interview transcript)
This picture was confirmed by the DCSL, who described her impression as follows: The library is extremely well used and my experience of sitting in there during the school day is that they have also achieved very good curriculum use as well, they have managed to overcome what another school, I think, is having problems with…
When I am sitting up there working with the librarian, pupils will come trotting in with little notes from teachers saying "I have been sent in to ask for books on…" and off they will go for that lesson which is what she wanted, so they have achieved it.
As for the project's general direction towards RBL and the thematic and investigative pedagogies this entails, the head and library staff shared a strong commitment to such a philosophy.
This contributed to the fertility of the ground in which the project was to be sown.
The fact that these values were linked with a conspicuous material investment in the library premises clearly corresponded to one criterion which the Coordinating Team took into account; namely, that a school is not only interested in developing heuristic pedagogies but also willing to put some money and energy into the library as the appropriate central facility.
The project seems certain to have supplemented and accelerated a  number of cross-curricular developments, not least by bringing departmental representatives together on the library committee and raising staff awareness of curricular innovation and pedagogical reforms.
On this point, the head considers the project-inspired developments to have "taken off" at a pace which he had never envisaged: I think it's been the instigator for a lot of cross-curriculum things which I didn't really anticipate; I thought it might have been instigator for the sort of subject-based problems that would either stimulate something in the subject or the subject could actually move to the library and it's obviously worked faster on the cross-curriculum aspect.
In fact there are times when I'm not sure I'm in control of what's developed in them!
Moreover, the curriculum was augmented by at least one thing directly attributable to the project, and this was the development of study skills, which according to the head was: one spin-off effect that I didn't envisage, I didn't realise that would come so quickly afterwards…
That's something which has developed so quickly that it's almost ahead of us (as it were) in terms of planning.
It would be wrong, however, to rely exclusively on the accounts of the teachers to whom we spoke, and it is worth noting that the evaluators' observations temper this picture of dynamism and progressiveness.
While we did observe an active and enthusiastic first-year readers' club in action, and a considerable number of children using the library during lunch hours, there were indications of a conservative element at work.
Library lessons taught library layout, the Dewey Decimal Classification, the index, and the contents page in ways which were not dissimilar from library lessons of 20 years ago, and it is interesting to note that absolute silence is the requirement at all times.
The Project Coordinating Team's commitment to whole-school involvement in curriculum-related library planning was paralleled by the involvement of faculty, departmental and pastoral representatives on the library committee.
As we have seen, the degree to which this entailed the active participation of staff across the curriculum depended upon the quality of liaison and feedback to the committee itself.
However, the evaluators found no reason to doubt that a degree of participation compatible with the philosophy of the project had in  fact taken place.
Moreover, notwithstanding the different degrees to which individual teachers appeared to have taken on board the implications for progressive pedagogies, we believe that a substantial improvement in teachers' awareness of the potential of the library as a central resource, and of the development of information-handling skills entailed therein, was a real consequence of the project in this school.
Neither the fact that the school has a record of managing and presenting a favourable public image, nor the apparent shortfall between the observed reality and the claims of senior staff, should detract too much from this conclusion.
School A
Background
The school is an 11–16 mixed comprehensive in pleasant buildings, with a catchment area incorporating a broad range of socio-economic status groups.
The evaluators' initial impression was of a school with a fairly traditional outlook but one in which facilities were enviable.
As well as a suite of connected rooms to serve an integrated team teaching humanities, adjacent to an impressively equipped learning-resources centre, the school boasted a spacious library with office space, a small non-book resources room, and a soft-seated reading area.
Connected to the main library was a hexagonal room which for some time housed the school's paperback bookshop.
This was later designated by the library committee as a "reference room and a base for non-book resources" (Proposal document).
For the duration of the evaluation this space remained undeveloped, and although minimally used as a work area by some children, its main function was that of storage for an embryonic collection of newspaper cuttings.
The initial impetus to the Coordinating Team's invitation to the school to participate in the project seems to have come from two sources.
The first of these was the existence of an IS syllabus in the first year, in which pupils were required to seek out material on a range of topics amongst which the civilisation of antiquity appears to have featured heavily.
According to one commentator, the IS staff themselves appear to have considered their project-based approach to have been the only piece of real teaching going on.
Whatever the truth of this, the DCSL reports that the IS project topics imposed unprecedented demands upon the local branch of the county library, which simply could not cater for their requirements.
This general picture of IS demand is confirmed by records kept in the school library, which show children referred to the school library in IS lessons between November 1983 and July 1984 to account for almost 80% of the  referrals logged.
As the DCSL recalls, the IS coordinator defended the demands made on the local library on the grounds that: If we had a decent school library I wouldn't need to do it.
Our school's library doesn't relate to what we need at all.
This, she reports, was "sending the local library mad" , but since there was no way that a small branch library could be converted into "an adequate resource centre to plunder" , some in-school development was a necessary alternative.
Surprisingly, the other avenue available — use of the County Topic Loan Service — does not seem to have been explored in any systematic way, even though parties of children were taken to the divisional library on at least one occasion.
One popular explanation of the school's project involvement is as a natural consequence of a perceived need to provide adequate resources for this IS work.
Another impetus came from early visits to the school by the then PAL:YPE and the Senior County Inspector for Learning Resources.
In October 1981 — the second month of the project's operation — these two members of the Coordinating Team presented the possibility of project involvement to a select group of staff comprising "the head, the head of IS/director of studies and the teacher/manager of the library" .
The good impression made on the visitors by the school and its senior staff on that and other occasions enabled the Coordinating Team to invite the school's participation with some confidence.
As the PAL:YPE recalls, this impression was based on a combination of physical environment, staff vision, and an existing commitment to an infrastructure including a permanent part-time library assistant: School A I was impressed with, because they too had already started to talk about resource-based learning and they already had as far as I remember…(now my memory is fairly vague now because it is quite a long time ago)…but as far as I remember they had a Headmaster, who was extremely interested, very keen indeed, and they had a committee already set up, I think to look into this.
They had good accommodation.
Above all they had a sort of study area.
A rather attractive hexagonal room that went off the main library which seemed sort of ideal for study purposes, or teaching purposes that were associated with the library.
I think they also had a part-time assistant, technical assistant, in that library who was an enormous asset in helping with the staffing.
And they were very, very prepared to look at different department's  needs, and to have a very wide-ranging staff discussion on what the curriculum needs were, and to buy the books accordingly, and then to move on to how they should use them.
They also acquired a very enthusiastic Deputy Headmaster who was very, very keen as far as I remember.
He was new and he joined after the project submission had gone in, but at a stage where it needed to be implemented and he sewed on to the thing straight away.
Against this background this school became one of the very first to be invited to generate and submit a proposal document to the Coordinating Team.
The committee
Bearing in mind the evolving nature of the project itself with regard to guidelines on the format of proposals, the need for detailed spending plans and so on, it is natural enough that the shape and membership of the library committees in the first wave of schools were initially rather vague, the committees developing into more clearly constituted bodies as project development got under way .
The DCSL (who, interestingly enough, was an active member of the library committee throughout the period of the project) reports its beginnings in: what was very much a very small group in the school…a certain group of people who were keen for something like this to happen…
and with: the Integrated Studies block taking the lead.
When formally constituted to meet the project expectations, the committee consisted of: the Director of Studies/IS Coordinator; the head of audio-visual and learning resources; the teacher-librarian; a deputy head representing the senior management team; teachers representing science, humanities and English.
A new deputy head to take up an appointment in January 1982 was earmarked to chair and lead the committee, and on the proposal of the head, members of the committee who were also members of the existing curriculum committee would be responsible for reporting on the project development.
The committee was to be re-elected every two years and was to meet monthly, with termly open meetings at which all members of staff could be present.
The somewhat chequered career of this committee is discussed further below.
The process
If the picture in School F was complex, the picture in School A was even more so, with a large number of interrelated factors at work.
It is also true to say that there was relatively less consensus about the precise relationship between causes and outcomes.
Accounts vary in the emphasis they give to events and the order in which events happened.
The head of department, for example, depicted the library project as something which had to be seen as a specific development in the context of a GRIDS exercise in which the broad range of curricular provision came under consideration.
Amongst the curricular areas identified as in need of attention was the school library, so that the project "came along like money from heaven" .
The deputy head, who accepted supervision of the project-related library development as part of his role on appointment, chose to emphasise key elements of his own educational philosophy in describing his perception of the project.
Indeed, it is extremely difficult to separate the school's initiative in the library project from his concern for a broadly conceived study skills curriculum — in effect, a commitment to developing RBL as a significant dimension of the school's pedagogical effort.
Seeing the promotion of the library as only part of the general thrust of his work in "promoting the curriculum" , his accounts to the evaluators roamed broadly over the wide remit of a senior member of staff.
Others also emphasised the study skills dimension of the library plan, but meant something much narrower by it.
Indeed, the nature, organisation and teaching of library skills became the subject of fiery debate, both within and outside the library committee.
As the deputy head commented rather ruefully: I'm not sure what I thought were study skills was what they thought were study skills.
In particular, he seems to have clashed with the IS lobby, with its own project-related concept of study skills and its conviction that it alone  had the knowledge and experience in this field.
From the head's point of view, the library had been underfunded for some time with an annual capitation of some £860, supplemented (not always willingly) by a 5% levy on the capitation of each department.
The possibility of a project grant therefore immediately interested him.
It also presented him with a number of problems.
The school at that time had no librarian and he considered the expertise necessary for implementing the project to be lacking.
He felt that bringing departments together to work towards a whole-school approach was going to be difficult and would be further complicated by the fact that some heads of department had unrealistic expectations of what the project might achieve.
He was also troubled by problems of accommodation, since both the main library space and the hexagonal annexe were then used for class teaching.
None the less he was confident that the choice of the library as a focus for development was a wise one.
Under the chairmanship of the new deputy head, the committee set about thrashing out the proposal.
As already noted, this was not always a smooth process, not least because this newcomer challenged the rather modest conception which the existing committee had already established.
Like the head, he saw the lack of a librarian as a serious deficiency and gave priority to the securing of someone to "manage" the library (and assume responsibility for the part-time assistant).
While the committee directed its attention to the generation of a project proposal, it was also much concerned with undertaking infrastructural developments conceived as part of a much wider curricular reform.
Led by the deputy head, a number of assaults were mounted upon the unsatisfactory situation.
Three cloakroom areas were turned into small classrooms to release the library from timetabling for subject lessons, a scheme was devised for staff supervision of the library at all times, and a system of parent volunteers was instituted to help the library assistant.
By September 1982 the school could witness what was in effect the opening of a new library, staffed from a number of sources and constituting a pleasant and accessible learning environment.
Throughout that year the committee met as a whole only every two or three months, and it seems that much of the running was made by the deputy head, who described how he visited every department to explain the new arrangements and what the library could do for them.
Relations were sometimes strained and occasionally explosive, and a picture emerged for the evaluators of a fair degree of conflict between  the committee and its chairman.
An additional factor was the advent of an "executive officer" or "library manager" , for the library.
Having held a senior position in another school, the newcomer was in a position to add status to the library venture as well as filling the gap in management which both the head and deputy had identified.
From January 1983 he became an active member of the library committee but described his role as an "executive" or "coordinator" of what the committee decided as policy.
At the time of the evaluation, he had numerous other teaching duties but taught five hours of library/study skills per week and was observed to visit the library on numerous occasions throughout the day.
Subsequent developments which further complicate the picture include the augmenting of the curriculum with an evolving programme of personal and social development (PSD) and the arrival of a new teacher armed with a study skills programme which he had experienced in his previous institution.
The generation of the project proposal was thus one part of a volatile and multifaceted institutional development.
The proposal
The document that finally emerged in the name of the committee was considerably longer than that of School F, and was very formally set out.
Somewhat pompously beginning with quotations from Milton, Johnson, Matthew Arnold and the Book of Common Prayer, it then lists the membership of the library/resources committee.
This is followed by sections outlining the purpose and background of the proposal, the constitution of the committee and some broad policies and general aims for the centre.
The latter are worth noting as typical of the general philosophy claimed by many schools to underpin their project involvement:
4.
Aims
(i) As a central aim, which shall be dominant over the aims of any single specialist subject, we wish to produce young people who will have a ready inclination to use books and other resources throughout life, not merely during their school years, and for a whole range of purposes: pleasure, information, self-motivated study, continuing education and sheer interest in life.
(ii) To encourage subject departments to inspire pupils with an interest in their subject to use the Library/Resource Centre to further their knowledge of the subject and to enable them to use the skills of the subject, in particular by finding its concepts meaningful for the whole of life.
Pupils must be persuaded to turn naturally to books and other resources and hence appreciate the cardinal importance of the Library/Resource Centre and libraries in general.
(Proposal document, p 2)
The precise objectives outlined emphasise the intention to raise the awareness of and inspire the communication of information to "the WHOLE STAFF" (Proposal document), and "to be constantly aware of the BALANCE OF STOCK held within the Library Resource Centre to ensure a suitable coverage of all subject areas" .
Other objectives include "promotion of correct library behaviour" , coordinating the library's work with that of county providers and ensuring "that staff are helped to relate Dewey Decimal Classification Numbers to those subject areas which they might require pupils to research or refer to" (Proposal document).
The implementation of these and other objectives is to be achieved by a number of courses of action, including keeping under constant review forms from subject areas informing the library of current topics and themes for research, ensuring "that staff queries received prompt response from the management committee" and training staff in the use of the microfiche reader.
Somewhat surprisingly, given the avowed centrality of curriculum development in the project, "linking the centre closely to the curriculum of the school" appears only as the last in a long list of implementation steps.
The elaboration of the curriculum link then contributes the bulk of the remainder of the document.
The relationship between the library and the subjects on the curriculum is embodied in the principle that all subjects require information skills and must therefore accept responsibility for children's "learning how to learn" , with the library as the main resource whereby this skill may be applied.
Arguing that "developing information skills in isolation is nonsense" , the proposal goes on to predict the development of an information skills course to be related directly to such courses as environmental studies and social education.
An across-the-curriculum approach, comparable to that which characterises the English department's syllabus, is suggested as an important goal.
An outline of the proposed information skills course is then provided.
In common with the proposal of School F, subject  departments in this school were expected to identify needs determined by the themes or topics by which their teaching would be organised.
By contrast, however, a broadly conceived information skills course was presented as essential for topic work rather than as a facilitator of the separate work of subject departments.
It is the evaluators' belief that the impressive rhetoric contained in this part of the proposal describes an ideal which the school could not realistically be expected to achieve, without an across-the-board change amounting to a curriculum revolution.
This is not to say that the school made no advances in this area.
In fact each department submitted a list of important topics and noted those in which library resources were deficient, and it was these which gave substance to the final spending plan.
The stock of fiction (especially paperback) was also to be increased.
Finally, the proposal includes flow diagrams to illustrate the relationship between subject disciplines, project loans, the library/resources centre, the microfiche and the information skills course, and steps to be followed on the analysis and determination of needs in the non-fiction stock.
Developments
The proposal was approved by the Project Coordinating Team and the school embarked upon its spending plan.
At this time, the practice of taking representatives to the library suppliers in London and of mounting exhibitions at the County Library Headquarters had not yet begun, but appropriate staff visited the divisional library where they were advised on selection by the DCSL.
Some books were purchased at the divisional library and these were augmented by orders based on individual teachers' specialist knowledge and individual visits, undertaken on their own initiative to bookshops in various places.
The coordination of orders within the school was undertaken by the newly appointed "library manager" and at the divisional library by the DCSL and her staff in the normal way.
By the time the evaluation began all the stock purchased under the project had found its way on to the shelves.
As a school involved in the very first year of the project, School A provides an opportunity to observe a school's involvement in Stage 3 of the project; that is to say, the development of INSET provision, the further development of library facilities and curriculum innovation, and other by-products of the project.
On the first of these there must inevitably have been some continuation of the raising of teacher-awareness initiated by the involvement of teachers in the library committee and in making submissions to it for inclusion in the proposal.
We know, for instance, that the deputy head  continued to employ "normative-re-educative" strategies (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1969) as well as more pragmatic means of pecking away at what he considered to be reactionary views amongst some staff.
The evaluators found no evidence of systematic inservice activities to follow up the project in the school itself, although at this time of industrial action such events were conspicuous by their absence in all the schools studied.
However, the deputy head himself became active as a member of the INSET panel set up by the project, and was involved in the planning and presentation of a number of inservice day-conferences and workshops in the county's calendar.
He was seen by members of the panel (and by some members of the Project Coordinating Team) as something of an expert in the area of study skills.
In this capacity he produced at least one paper on study skills which is most notable for its adherence to the conventions of academe.
Within the school, a reconstituted library committee began to meet in October 1984, after the suspension of its predecessor a year before.
This suspension was justified by senior staff on the grounds that in producing grandiose schemes for the further development of the infrastructure it was neglecting the more important area of study skills and its pivotal role in articulating library resources with the curriculum.
It was hoped that with some membership changes, and in the interim some re-education of individuals, the new committee would be more realistic in its concern with opportunities for immediate developments.
In fact, the two meetings we observed were concerned with a number of issues more or less closely related to the concerns of the project.
For example, the "library manager" reminded members of the procedures for ordering library stock, and reported arrangements for attending book exhibitions at County Library Headquarters and at the divisional library, while other members broached the subject of the need to develop audio-visual facilities within the school.
The proceedings were dominated by the developing study skills programme within the school, and it was this which the evaluators were assured was the major thrust of the school's post-project library development.
For some members of staff, study skills was what the ESSE/L Project was really all about.
As one teacher put it: Oh, the aim of the Project initially from my point of view was to get pupils from the beginning of the first year to have the ability to actually look up information for themselves…
In fact, the emphasis on "looking things up" typifies the narrow model  of study skills which essentially reduces to library skills.
This was indeed what was sought by the IS team in the first place, and was a concept to which they clung tenaciously for some time.
As we have seen, a broadening of library skills to "study skills" was a goal for the new deputy head, and both the proposal document and the minutes of the reconstituted committee are evidence of his relative success.
In the autumn of 1984, the evaluators could witness nothing more than a library skills lesson offered under the heading of IS and taught in one of its allocated periods.
During that term, the deputy head was pushing the committee to expand this work in the direction of his vision of study skills across the curriculum and for the whole age range.
It should be noted that this concept of study skills was still not as broad as the full-blown information skills approach nominated in the proposal document, and was seen as achievable by one of a number of means which the committee considered.
These included the possibility of building study skills systematically into a PSD course to be extended to cover years 1–5, the possibility of extending the IS provision to include study skills in years 1–3, and the possibility of a new, totally free-standing study skills course.
In the light of discussion, a working party was set up to explore these options.
After involvement in a humanities conference, the Director of Studies/ IS Coordinator set about a campaign to raise the visibility of some of the more basic skills, including punctuation, precis, and comprehension.
Subsequently he invoked HMI publications on English and history (5–16) to advocate concentration on the skills involved in the use of dictionaries, "graphicacy" , non-verbal communication and the like.
As noted earlier, it was around this time that the appointment of a new teacher led to the consideration of a comprehensive study skills package from another school.
Even before this teacher took up his post, the study skills working party was focusing its attention on the potential of the package he brought with him, and the subsequent development of study skills in the school incorporated much of his scheme.
By September 1985, this course was actually running for each year, and definitive work-books in study skills and library skills were produced for every child in the first and second years.
Further changes to the infrastructure were also a feature of the post-project era, and again it was the deputy head who appeared to be a driving force.
Arguing that the separation of learning resources into the library on the one hand and the audio-visual centre on the other was a nonsense, he began planning a move of the library from its purpose-built rooms to part of the open-plan IS area adjacent to the audio-visual resource centre.
This infrastructural integration would, he hoped, stimulate a comparable integration of curriculum areas utilising the combined facilities, for which the developing IS and PSD courses would set the scene.
Evaluation by staff
Given the complex of factors involved, teachers in this school found it difficult to distinguish the library project per se from the overall development of the library on the one hand and the development of study skills on the other.
But however the relationship between these was seen, staff generally agreed that the developments in this aspect of the school's provision were substantial and were in a direction of which they approved.
A representative assessment is that given by the library manager: I would say that one of the biggest advantages was the fact that senior management…from the Head down, from the very word go, were after making it a success…one thing we have got is a greater awareness from a greater number of staff, because they come in here to supervise and help [and]get involved…but I think the biggest advantage has been the fact that time devoted to…library skills for all the first year…[has]been extended to an hour a week…
The fact that the library was actually resurrected from its very sorry state now means that there is a far firmer base in the school for teaching children study skills, how to use libraries, how to retrieve information, how to in fact produce coherent project work as opposed to just copying chunks out of books.
The actual study skills part is running in tandem with the library Project, and we are beginning to see already…, in the third year for example[where]they did have library skills [and it's apparent from what members of staff are saying]that…in areas where they are expected to research themselves that there has been a big improvement.
He went on to say that the use of non-book resources was one aspect in which hoped-for developments had not taken place, and this is typical of the awareness that, despite general satisfaction with the project, there were limits to its success.
Thus, another teacher observed that "I think the Project has been successful in encouraging people to use the library…" but went on to say that the designated reference room had not as yet become a reality.
An interesting feature of this school's approach was that it set about evaluating library use by monitoring  the numbers of children referred by different departments.
We analysed these data ourselves, and found that many subject departments sent individuals or small groups to the library in connection with subject or project work, while others seem to have brought whole classes down from time to time.
It must be acknowledged, however, that the library appears to have been sometimes used to make sure that children whose teachers were absent or engaged in other pursuits were supervised.
This should not detract from the fact that several departments were making legitimate use of the improved facilities, though as one teacher noted there were subjects such as business studies where the potential had yet to be recognised.
Interestingly, at least two teachers interviewed pointed out that the very success of the project and associated developments highlighted the continuing room for improvement.
The IS coordinator, for example, suggested that: the only problem is that it's developing too fast.
We need more teachers, we need more space, we need more time…if you've seen the library at lunchtime it's just a mass of people swarming around and eventually the over.popularity works against its correct function.
So we need more space and we think we'll get it.
As the person to whom the original impetus was often attributed, it is worth noting that he was able to distinguish the project investment from associated developments, pointing out with approval that: about 20% of the library Project money has been spent on…stuff that I have asked for quite specifically in terms of expeditions and integrated studies…
We gave [the library manager]an enormous list of requirements and he has met most of them…and I think we've got to be reasonably satisfied because the rest of the school have got to have their whack as well.
Finally, some staff realised the knock-on effects of the developments to that date, and of the predicted integration of the library and the audio-visual resources area.
As the head of science put it: I think once it gets off the ground and we have got the library and the integrated studies and study skills teaching in a central resource area for the whole school, I think then, people are going to have to start seriously appraising the way they teach and I think that can only be a good thing.
So it is a major curriculum initiative itself and I am hoping it is going to have a knock-on effect and get people to consider the way they teach fairly radically.
Summary
The penultimate chapter in this book will be concerned with arriving at generalisations about the functioning and effectiveness of the project as a whole, but it is appropriate at this point to identify a number of interesting features of the Major Project as illustrated by these two schools, and to indicate some issues that require further thought.
5.4.1 In both schools, we have noted the important contribution made to curriculum-related library development by the philosophies and policies of the staff involved.
In this, nothing is more important than a core of energetic teachers with an interest and commitment to such related trends as those of RBL, study skills, information handling and integrated thematic approaches.
If the head and staff in senior management positions share these values and espouse a general philosophy of education which not only accommodates but also underpins such developments, then this is auspicious indeed.
Policy must of course be converted into practice; in both these schools overall spending policy and staffing priorities were significant expressions of commitment by the heads, and this can only have strengthened the resolve of those members of staff who served on the library committees and immersed themselves in the day-to-day business of winning a place in the project.
In both schools, key individuals were observed to adopt management strategies which were designed to improve the chances of the scheme's success.
In one school this included conspicuous investment and a public relations exercise; in the other, a strategy of persuasion, re-education and manipulation of available individuals and structures.
5.4.2 In both schools this combination of policy and staff commitment resulted in substantial improvements to the infrastructure in both physical facilities and personnel.
In both schools the conversion of depressed and under-utilised premises into business-like, welcoming and tasteful accommodation not only gave visible recognition to the library but must also have increased the attraction of the library and thus encouraged the utilisation of the materials purchased under the project.
In both schools, the investment in furniture, fittings, and decoration, and no less importantly in teacher-librarians, was substantial, and as the head of School A argued, may well have more than matched the project grant.
One issue to which we would draw attention at this stage is the effect of injecting a specific sum of money from another source on the deployment of the school's capitation and  the way it is already supplemented by, for example, the PTA.
5.4.3 The support of parents and other members of the community generally can be an important factor in its own right.
In more than one school which we studied, parental involvement in the decoration and adaptation of library premises was important in placing the project in context, and in several others, parent volunteers assisted in running the library and meeting some of the increased demand to which the project gave rise.
Whether or not an effective school library should depend on voluntary labour and charity remains a specific instance of a wider political issue which schools across the nation face daily.
5.4.4 A further aspect of all the schools studied which was illustrated by these two schools was the relationship between the project and trends towards curriculum integration (in such subjects as humanities and basic studies) and the augmentation of the curriculum with such subjects as PSD and, of course, study skills.
Here, the relationship between curriculum reform and enhanced library provision is two-way: topic methodology in IS both requires, and results from, an enhanced provision of source materials, with study skills providing an essential link between the two.
In School A in particular, this relationship seems to have been grasped and its implications at least explored, whereas in School F the interest in study skills which the project seems to have generated came as something of a surprise, even to the head.
5.4.5 The precise meaning of, and relationship between, study skills, library skills and information skills is an issue in its own right.
In both schools discussed above, these terms were used sometimes interchangeably, sometimes quite precisely to distinguish different orders of activity, and sometimes with a vagueness which suggested little or no thought about what each might convey.
Clearly, there is a connection between these terms and the varying degrees of progressiveness of one's educational philosophy, as discussed in Chapter 3, and we suggest that clarification of these terms would not only aid the implementation of specific curriculum innovations but also help schools to clarify their broad educational position.
5.4.6 These two schools are good examples of the way in which the project's aim of whole-school involvement was translated into practice by Major Project schools generally.
Departmental submissions developed in liaison with committee members and/or communicated to the committee by departmental representatives  provided a picture of the "nitty-gritty needs" which the committee then processed into a coordinated final plan.
As in many of the schools studied, staff in both these schools were satisfied that greater teacher awareness of the library and appreciation of the work of other departments were amongst the outcomes.
Even where those committees were turbulent affairs (as was sometimes true in School A), the mechanism required by the project guidelines seems to have been both necessary and relatively successful.
However, our impression is that committees in the Major Project schools were usually more participatory and less dominated by key senior staff than the examples of these two schools might suggest.
5.4.7 Both schools illustrate the fact that developments in Stage 3 of the project can be seen to be of potentially greater significance than the immediate effects of securing and expending a Major grant.
As we saw in Section 5.3 particularly, the establishment of a genuinely across-the-curriculum study skills programme is one possibility, and further infrastructural changes were also often considered in the wake of the project.
In School A, this took the form of a plan to relocate the library, but in other project schools plans focused on such things as the development of a video network, the creation of display areas and the development of a careers room as part of the library complex.
As succinctly put by School A's IS coordinator the achievements of the project have created the demand for yet further changes.
5.4.8 Finally, an interesting issue is raised by the activities of the DCSLs in the two schools described above.
This is the degree to which the DCSL should be involved with the curriculum planning process as opposed to playing a more restricted role as an adviser and facilitator with a particular technical expertise.
Whereas the DCSL for School F limited her actions to the latter function, her colleague in School A (and the other schools in her division) played a much more active role with, and sometimes in, the library committee itself, so much so that she was occasionally described by teachers as the "leading light" in the formulation of the proposal.
We shall return to this role in the next chapter, where the structure and functioning of the Minor Project are described.
For the moment we may note that the success of the Major Project within a school cannot be attributed exclusively to the staff therein.
County library staff and indeed, members of the coordinating committee, may well play a critical role.
The Minor Project
Background
The ESSE/L Project was designed to operate at two distinct levels of funding, Minor award schools receiving less than half the allocation offered to Major Project schools.
The criteria shared by members of the Project Coordinating Team and DCSLs for selecting schools in one or other category were as follows.
Minor award schools were categorised as those which had already achieved some success in terms of library/resource awareness within the school, and appropriate developments in library provision, even though they might still be underfunded for meeting those aspirations.
They were schools, therefore, where progress in matching library provision to curriculum need had already begun, and where it was hoped that this impetus could be further developed through participation in the project and a grant in the region of £2,500.
Major award schools, on the other hand, started from a conspicuously lower threshold of library provision and use.
As we have seen, they were identified for participation on a number of grounds.
These included the initiation of recent curriculum developments with resource implications, and the presence of management and leadership of sufficient quality to achieve significant curriculum change and to establish new practices in library management and provision.
In Minor award schools this management dimension was less significant, the smaller award confirming such positive trends as a good librarian, a history of sound internal funding, the enthusiasm of a core of teachers and at least one or two departments committed to aspects of resource-assisted learning.
The annual recommendations of the Project Coordinating Team concerning which schools should be invited to participate, and at what level, were informed by detailed advice from DCSLs, the Area Education Officers, and, as the project progressed, by the views of relevant secondary inspectors.
It is not surprising that in practice it was sometimes difficult to keep to the logical distinctions described above.
Interviews revealed a number of factors which may have contributed to this:
(1) Uncertainty over the timescale of the project
Although the general intention was that the ESSE/L Project would be a rolling programme, there was never a guarantee that the Education Department would fund the project for more than  a year at a time (with the exception of 1983–84, when two years were funded).
This meant that the project came under review every year.
At least one DCSL admitted to recommending the most "deserving" schools early in the project to ensure that they were funded.
Retrospectively, therefore, some Minors might well have become later candidates for Major status.
(As the project has developed, the Coordinating Team has had more confidence in "delaying" a Major award to a school by a year to give it time for further consolidation.)
(2) Low thresholds at the start of the project
Since one of the functions of the project was to stimulate library awareness and development among all schools, and since as the project progressed more schools made active attempts to achieve necessary thresholds for inclusion, it follows that in the early years, appropriate schools were sometimes hard to find.
As one DCSL put it:
In the early stages we started off with perhaps Minor schools which could almost have been Major ones, because you were just trying to find any school that had got some kind of life, or interest, or things happening…really in many ways it was rather a matter of chance because of the way it happened at the time.
(3) Smaller reservoirs of Minors as the project progressed
As the project progressed, it was also harder to find schools which fitted the original criteria for Minors, e.g. one library division had been fortunate in finding Majors, but began to find it difficult to identify, for Minor recommendation, "schools which have had a degree of interest and success for some years" .
This may explain the kind of contradictory evidence about Minor schools highlighted by another DCSL's comment that "some Minors were chosen because they needed support but couldn't cope with a Major" .
(4) Large numbers of traditional schools in one division
One DCSL felt that a high proportion of the schools in her division were relatively conservative and unaspiring in terms of RBL reflecting the traditional aspirations of middle-class parents and a grammar-school.type curriculum.
On these grounds she would have preferred to give all selected schools £4,000 rather than select generally mediocre candidates into two categories.
(5) Lack of knowledge about the strengths/weaknesses of senior management and curriculum development in the schools
This factor was identified by a number of DCSLs and, particularly  in the earlier stages of the project where there was very little participation in the selection process by the inspectorate, was felt to have compromised their judgement of project "status" :
Even now we do have the problem that our perception of schools is largely the contact we have had with the librarians or some of the staff.
It is not until they get accepted into the Project that we find the problem emerging that perhaps senior staff are not supportive.
(6) Interventions in the recommendation procedure by "external" agencies
Two DCSLs mentioned schools which had been included as Minors for "political" reasons.
Neither had achieved any of the thresholds necessary for such an award, and in the views of the DCSLs neither had gained anything positive from their token participation.
(7) The need to reward "advanced" schools
One school had been a major spearhead of RBL in the county for many years and had invested considerable thought, enterprise and resources in library provision and study skills.
The Minor award was an acknowledgement of this, though technically the school had achieved the project's aims without the "need" for participation at either level.
In practice, however, there is little evidence that Minor award schools were visibly disenchanted by their smaller funding.
In several cases, internal funding was still so low that even £2,000 was equal to four or five years' library capitation.
A few schools used the Minor award to take on "major" challenges, while two were successful in receiving additional project funds in a subsequent year, presumably an acknowledgement that the initial diagnosis of their need was only partially informed.
Apart from these cases, however, no additional project funds have been made available to Minor award schools, though several have made informal representations in the hope that extra funds may become available.
The administration and supervision of the Minor project are undertaken by DCSLs, unsupported by the Project Coordinating Team, whose efforts are reserved for the more substantial Major Project.
DCSLs are, however, accompanied on their first visit by their Divisional Librarian, thus involving a senior professional colleague, and adding status to the enterprise.
Schools are given the same written guidelines as in the Major Project, but it is made clear that only a short proposal document is required to accompany the school's spending  plan.
The status of a library committee in the Minor Project remains somewhat unclear.
Most DCSLs recommend the establishment of such a committee where none exists, and more than half the Minor proposals mention such a team.
However, since this is not a prerequisite for acceptance on the Minor Project, some schools did not form one, and several of those which were formed appear to have lapsed following the completion of the school's spending phase.
Each school's proposal is read by the DCSL, Divisional Librarian and the ACL:E&SS, and accepted or sent back for further refinement as required.
In general, DCSLs attempt to complete the proposal and book selection phases in Minor schools as quickly and effectively as possible, in the knowledge that similar processes in their Major schools are likely to be more lengthy, complex and demanding of staff time and resources.
An analysis of Minor Project proposals confirms that documentation is in general short — no more than two or three sides of A4 and the scope of current library awareness and the use reflected in them reveals that a higher proportion of Minor than of Major award schools claim to have already established library skills programmes.
The proposal documents also indicate that selected schools have made positive attempts to improve the provision for their school library and its links with the curriculum, though all reflect continued dissatisfaction with the relative paucity of stock.
Most expressed the wish to extend supervised library access beyond lunchtimes and after-school sessions, and two had plans to relocate the library entirely.
The sample
Four Minor Project schools were selected for closer investigation by the evaluation team and visited over a period of one or two days.
The experience of each will be drawn upon to illuminate the summary conclusions at the end of this chapter.
It should be emphasised that the smallness of the sample and the brief time spent in data collection are not indicative of the priority of the Minor Project in the eyes of the investigators, but merely reflect the limited time available for this aspect of evaluation.
The criteria which governed the selection of the four schools included the following:(1) they were among schools identified by DCSLs as ones where the project had achieved some impact;
(2) they were representative of different phases of the project (years of funding);
(3) they were drawn from different library divisions and included two divisions whose schools had not been represented in the Major Project evaluation sample;
(4) they represented an apparent range and individuality of response in those curriculum areas which each school had supported.
To illustrate some of the practical implications of, and outcomes from, participation in the Minor Project, one of the schools will be presented as a case study.
This school cannot be regarded as typical, partly because each school and each project is unique, but also because the practical results of the staff energy and imagination which find a focus in the project seemed greater and more far-reaching here than in most other Minor award schools.
That apart, however, the strengths and weaknesses identified by members of the library committee in the implementation of the school's library/resource policy have much in common with themes identified in the other three schools, and these will be drawn upon to inform the final section of this chapter.
School G
School G is a mixed 11–18 comprehensive with 1,500 pupils on its roll.
It is situated in a new town and has a high proportion of pupils from the lower socio-economic status groups.
Prior to its involvement in the ESSE/L Project, School G had already developed its library resources and had nurtured some significant resource-assisted curriculum initiatives.
In his own words, the head had "always made a substantial allocation of money from capitation to the library in addition to that which was designated" library "" , but he felt that this designated sum was "never sufficient" .
He considered the opportunity to participate in the project to have tied in well with curriculum trends he had been supporting across the school: This was something I very much wanted to encourage because I have a worry that in spite of everything one does in schools to make children aware of library facilities and how to use them, I think quite a lot of children may still leave school without personally having experienced the whole process of needing to find something out, going to a person who can tell them where to look, going, looking, finding it, and then using it.
And I think that is the basic thing that every child needs to know, because  essentially it is going to be the process of finding out when they leave school, and I think it is also a method of working which is becoming increasingly effective and popular across subjects.
He had also demonstrated this commitment by appointing a dually qualified teacher-librarian as a Scale One probationer in charge of the library.
Propitious curriculum developments, which will be referred to in detail later, included the restructuring of the lower-school IS curriculum to achieve more primary/secondary continuity and more project-based learning, and regular library-based learning activities pioneered by the science department.
Both the science and history departments were tending towards RBL approaches in support of a developing middle-school syllabus, and the issue of study skills had been recently debated in several forums across the school.
The timeliness of the Minor award in these terms was noted by the head of history: The project came along at the time when we were thinking about cross-curricular developments anyway, and the school had been concerned about the particular pattern of study skills and how they could be extended and coordinated.
This was an aspect of policy that was very much under discussion.
One of the outcomes of this was the establishment of a working party to investigate the place of active tutorial work.
All these developments concur with selection of the school for a Minor Project award.
In the DCSL's words: In School G's case that was the reason why.
They were well funded…they had a good library area with lots of money, a chartered librarian (which is unusual), and were very supported by the rest of the staff through the school.
The committee
Some members of the school first heard about the ESSE/L Project "on the grapevine" through contacts with one of the Major Project schools, and through the school librarian's contact with the DCSL.
When subsequently the school was invited to participate, the head convened an informal working party of the head of English, the librarian and some others, and together they produced an explanatory paper for heads of department.
The matter was then taken to the heads of department meeting, following which department heads made wide-ranging  suggestions in writing for using the grant allocation.
A library committee of 18 members was then constituted to consider these suggestions.
Chaired by the head of English, and consisting of the librarian and heads of all departments or their representatives, its terms of reference were to make recommendations to the head on the best ways to spend the money, to formulate a project proposal, and to oversee all subsequent matters of library policy.
Although all departments were represented, only a third of the members were departmental heads.
Busy heads of department like the head of IS sent representatives, although, in this case, he clearly remained in a strong position to influence subsequent developments.
The committee met as often as necessary (at least monthly) up to the start of industrial action, but at critical stages more regularly, and against a background of considerable informal consultation.
Meetings were minuted and records forwarded to the head for report to heads of department.
The proposal document, which is extensive by Minor Project standards, clearly reflects a strong team approach.
The first part summarises committee discussions, while the proposed developments were compiled by five members and edited by the chairman.
The proposal
While the head was not "unduly influential" in the proceedings of the library committee, he had: wanted from the beginning that the grant should not simply bump up one particular subject area…
I was concerned that it should be a resource for as many children as possible, and that it should be interdisciplinary.
The committee shared these sentiments and adopted as the major focus for its library proposal the theme "The Challenge of Change" .
This gave the project a visible identity within the school and provided a focus for the curricular aspirations of a number of key departmental representatives (particularly the heads of history and IS).
The original concept was coined in discussions between the head of history, the head of IS and the head of maths.
History teaching had been developing along lines which made more use of reference and local source material, while IS, which involved history, science, geography, and religious education (RE), had been concerned with providing greater primary/secondary continuity in the first-year curriculum, and with developing, through an interdisciplinary base, essential learning skills.
The Challenge project would provide further resources for each development, and a new interdisciplinary theme through which a wide  range of subject departments could make contributions to pupils' learning.
I thought the whole local area is something that is undergoing change all the time.
It is the fastest growing part of the town.
The children who are coming up from the primary schools to secondary schools are going through a change themselves, and it would be such a broad area that we could integrate Science, English, Maths and everything under that sort of umbrella.
(Head of IS)
Other departmental proposals were considered: They were all valid in their own right, but…too narrow, and we felt that they were ones which we would have to attempt to deal with out of capitation.
(Head of history)
A focus upon changing aspects of a rapidly developing local community embracing social, technological and ecological perspectives had a number of advantages in the eyes of the library committee:(1) they wanted to begin something that was ongoing and to which resources could be added;
(2) they wanted something sufficiently flexible yet focused so that "it could be expanded by whatever input people wanted to put in t" ;
(3) they wanted to support pupils and teachers in focusing interdisciplinary learning upon charting and interpreting changes in their own living environment.
In establishing the Challenge of Change, the library project gave birth to a new curriculum departure in the school; as the library committee chairman described it, this was "a real radical move…in curriculum terms" .
While £2,200 of the project funds were allocated to the main theme, £300 was reserved for use by the science department, whose pioneering work in integrating study skills within lower-school science teaching was acknowledged as an important base to build upon.
Science staff also spent other money as part of their contribution to the general Challenge topic.
Effects on two key curriculum areas
The impact of the project may be exemplified by the experience of two curriculum areas, described principally through the eyes of the teachers responsible for them.
The teachers are the coordinator of IS and the head of science.
(1) Integrated studies
Over the previous two years the lower-school IS work had been restructured to incorporate new elements and an increased use of project work.
In support of this, the coordinator had been making extensive use of the County Topic Loan Service, the school library and the adjacent community library.
He saw the Challenge materials as particularly useful for the individual resource-based projects which first-year children were encouraged to develop over several weeks in the summer term: Up to half term they really are very much guided as to the work they do, but as we get to know them better, and as teachers become more confident about letting them maybe work on longer pieces…and go out and get resources themselves, they can go towards more pupil-centred learning.
They will be doing a project to do with the community and how that has changed over time.
He had tried out such individual projects himself the previous year when the resources first arrived, and the results were encouraging, so he was extending it: "having got more resources they were no longer all fighting over one or two books" .
He had hoped that the project would foster greater continuity between children's experience of learning in primary school, and their experience in the comprehensive: I want to get away from[a didactic approach], to the pupils taking more responsibility for work they produce and being more autonomous in the way that they do it and hoping to create more responsibility in them rather than them seeking the teacher all the time for information; and thinking that all knowledge and information and values have to be teacher judged…
and had recently written in collaboration with the new librarian, the head of lower school, and the second in department, some study skills booklets for use by children in the library: The study skills…came in really last year.
The Head of Science is keen on it.
I was keen on it…
We decided we wouldn't overlap  what we wanted to do.
One [booklet]was connected with getting books out of the library, the other was connected with how you use these books for projects.
These booklets and associated worksheets were used in conjunction with class visits where the librarian gave an introduction to the library.
It was further recognised that project-related work in the library also brought benefits in terms of teacher/pupil interaction and support: you have the opportunity to get closer to them as well…to help them better because you can go round small groups and talk at length while others are getting on with something that you know they are interested in.
You also get to know them on a personal basis too…
Some of the problems related to the project which were identified through IS included:(a) The dichotomy in IS between teaching and testing specific learning skills as a foundation for other subjects, and fostering holistic, personal development among pupils.
(b) The problem of sustaining pupils' independent use of the library after library induction, since it was only manned for 60% of the time, and often there was no one there to mediate between pupils' needs and the resources.
(c) The cumbersome nature of the permission slip system, frustrating flexible or spontaneous use of the school or local libraries.
(d) Unsuccessful attempts to persuade other teachers to give up a reserve lesson in order to supervise the library.
(e) The problems children experienced in locating the Challenge of Change books.
The IS coordinator would have liked them shelved separately, whereas other colleagues and the previous librarian had insisted on their integration into the book stock, as in a "real" library.
(The books are all identified by a blue sticker.)
The objections of his colleagues clearly frustrated him: Children in this area are not used to reading and handling books.
They need somehow to be motivated…
If they found access to the books was easier I am sure they would use them much more.
I think that the hurdles that they have got to get over to get books are a barrier…the children have to go  through the whole Dewey decimal system which is complicated.
So I am trying to get the new librarian to push all those books into one section…and maybe we could have a trolley and push that around and have it in the lower school…
You would think that I was asking for the earth to be changed but I'm not really.
(2) Science
The head of science had come to the library committee with a prior interest in language and science.
His particular desire had been to widen pupils' science learning from a mainly laboratory and experimental base towards other methods of enquiry.
One way of achieving this was to "encourage the use of the library in every aspect of science teaching" .
He had successfully used commercial worksheets which helped pupils to develop specific library skills in years 1 and 2.
Because of their success, some of these worksheets on general library skills had now been subsumed within IS teaching, leaving science to concentrate upon science-specific activities: Where we thought we could make a contribution was specifically linking subject-specific library work sheets into our own science teaching.
So when they are doing a piece of work on the senses they would do this worksheet as part of that either as homework in the school library or in the local library, or as part of a classroom exercise with the teacher and the librarian present…
We didn't see these worksheets as just to be doled out, but as positive steps to increasing children's awareness of the library and how to use it.
Higher up the school, this work broadened from "library" into "study" skills — summary, pictorial "modelling" etc.
Science teachers had been very responsive to these library-based developments, despite the fact that industrial action had prevented their proper introduction, discussion and evaluation.
The department was now hoping to integrate relevant library skills worksheets fully into the lower-school course structure by including them within the science-course booklets, and supplementing them with "home-grown" activities where necessary.
It was clear from the responses of other staff members that the science department's experience in this area was regarded as a valuable springboard for wider developments across the curriculum.
The library committee had found other staff very responsive to such ideas and a staff workshop had been planned, although industrial action had prevented it taking place.
As well as its contribution to study skills, the science curriculum for years 3–5 contributed to the Challenge of Change theme in the form of biological surveys (e.g. comparisons of a field over passing years, investigations of pollution at the town tip, and classifications of flora and fauna in a local creek).
In interview, the head of science offered these illuminating insights into the way the library project had stimulated book awareness and book selection among staff in his department: A lot of the time teachers didn't know what was available and said "The science shelf is over there" , but they hadn't actually looked at the titles of the books before…they were quite pleasantly surprised.
I am showing my ignorance.
A lot of the books I was asking for [from project funds]were already in the library.
When I was looking through the catalogues for what to buy I was very impressed with some of the newer books.
It was certainly an eye-opener.
That was a spin-off.
I was trying to educate the children and what we have done is actually in science, educated the staff.
He now realised that he needed to redefine his criteria for book selection to include material of broader interest than merely that which would fit in with his teaching: You buy your library books with a different set of criteria than the sort you use when you are trying to choose a textbook, and I had to restrain myself and think: "Well, I wouldn't like this, but maybe there is somebody who would.
Maybe somebody would come to the library and that might be the spur that they need".
Effects on library management and use
The librarian had found the advent of the school's library committee a big help, giving the library added status within the school.
The fact that the committee was not merely an hierarchical instrument of management, but represented all departments and a range of statuses, was also felt to be an advantage: Very luckily we've got quite a few Scale 1 younger teachers, people with new ideas, possibly…and it's taken up, quite well…it's quite respected now.
People will come up to members of the library committee within the school and talk about library issues.
The librarian had also found the committee helpful in a number of ways by going beyond the narrow terms of the funding itself.
There were several"things that I couldn't change on my own.
I needed backing", and this was provided by the committee.
Some of the issues addressed by the committee included:(1) supervision of the library by other staff to help pupils, and prevent further losses (as yet unresolved);
(2) promoting the library to colleagues who were under-using it;
(3) coordinating topic-loan procedures and liaison with county library;
(4) investigating computer-assisted library procedures.
The processes of stock selection had forced many staff to look at what was already on the shelves and what new material was available.
This had been "valuable" .
All staff had been invited to submit book lists through their heads of department, but often these lists had too much textbook-type material, and there was inevitable overlap between lists.
The librarian had, therefore, found it necessary to edit the list quite heavily.
However, since there had been open and vigorous debate about what everyone wanted, it had been possible for her to exercise considerable discretion on the department's behalf when ordering, or selecting at book suppliers.
It would appear that edited departmental lists only accounted for £800 or so of the total allocation.
The librarian selected the remaining titles and filled in all the order forms.
Clearly the school was fortunate in having this quality of professional support, and in common with many other schools these facts throw a question mark over the staff's ability to match informed and enthusiastic curriculum debate with commensurate knowledge of available books and learning resources.
With the support of the committee, the librarian had attempted to keep track of books specifically purchased with the project funds by asking users to mark "P" against titles consulted or borrowed.
The books had also been classified and marked according to readability bands from 1–5 to help pupils to choose their books themselves.
The issue of readability had been discussed at an open library committee meeting attended by other staff, where a computer programme for reading-level assessment had been demonstrated.
This had aroused considerable interest.
The librarian listed the following as some of the improvements in library use to which the project had contributed:(1) improved general use in the past year during lesson time, particularly in IS and history;
(2) improved staff interest in and promotion of the library, and greater awareness by colleagues of which books were on the shelves:
More children are coming back to the library to work because teachers give the initial push by bringing them…
Teachers are coming to look at the shelves and tying it up with what they do in class.
(3) improvement in the number of County Topic Loans requested (now 10 per term);
(4) greater awareness of readability levels and general appropriateness of books to children's needs, interests and independent use;
(5) greater staff interest in issues of library funding and management (e.g. the function of the Resource Centre, relations with the public library, computerised issue systems).
However, these improvements have drawn attention to a number of shortcomings which also require attention.
Problems identified by the librarian and other members of the library committee included:(1) inappropriate and inflexible shelving, making it difficult to shelve books in Dewey order;
(2) staffing levels not allowing library supervision for more than half the week: So $8,000 to $10,000 of books are not secure and are there for anyone to take;
(3) shelves getting "chaotic" when the librarian is away:
These kinds of problems lead to difficulties in keeping everything indexed and in the right order, and that is obviously going to make the whole thing farcical sometimes from the children's point of view.
They are doing the right things to find a book, but the book isn't where it should be.
(4) the smallness of the library space in relation to the school's size.
Thirty children actively engaged in RBL activities fill the library of a school of 1,500 children and 80 staff.
General comments upon School G
Among the six staff spoken to at length, the library project was clearly a "living" entity, an important focus for significant lower-school curriculum development, and a vital catalyst for debate about, and wider school involvement in, study skills.
This core of library committee members was most impressive in its enthusiastic team spirit, practical commitment to library matters, and knowledge and understanding of each other 's departmental practices and aspirations.
We are persuaded to think that some of these qualities must also have been shared by a wider spectrum of staff.
Since the inception of the project in the school, and until the hardening of industrial action, the library committee had remained an active forum for policy debate and staff development on library-related matters, including study skills.
Until the industrial action frustrated plans for more formal INSET workshops, the open nature of the school's formal consultative procedures, and the vigour and commitment of key individuals, seems to have spread discussion of library matters and project-involvement widely across the school.
Prior to the moratorium on meetings, the committee had highlighted the following issues as meriting urgent attention:(1) the need for "more information about what other departments could get out of the resources now that there was considerable potential" ;
(2) the need for "more information about how the material was being used" ;
(3) the need for "inservice training to make people aware, generate interest, and to help people change" , particularly in relation to study skills.
Many of the benefits and new directions associated with, or assisted by, the project are implicit in the above account of one school's experience.
The concluding section of this chapter draws upon the experience of all four sample schools and on the perceptions of DCSLs to summarise the impact of the project upon Minor award schools.
This will highlight some of the key issues raised during evaluation which relate to the effectiveness or otherwise of the schools' attempts to achieve a practical realisation of their project proposals.
Summary and some conclusions
Grounds for participation
In all the schools studied, project awards were made in response to an appropriate set of circumstances and events.
Prior to project involvement there was a tradition of generous library funding in two of the four schools, and in all four there were keen, imaginative teacher-librarians who subsequently played a major part in developing and sustaining the school's library policy.
Initiatives aimed at addressing the needs of pupils in terms of independent learning and study skills were already evident in all four schools, and three of the four had developed (or were in the process of developing) reasonably spacious and attractive library areas.
In these terms, each of the schools investigated generally complied with the Coordinating Team's criteria for inclusion in the Minor Project.
Unusually, one of the schools had been in receipt of two Minor awards in successive years.
This was a split-site school undergoing library refurbishment and innovative infrastructural developments in terms of curriculum review and management.
The two awards were seemingly an acknowledgement of the specific problems met in adequately resolving the problem of the two sites.
The project grant
Representatives from two schools commented that the Minor award was not enough to revitalise the whole school.
The committee in School G felt that the grant was sufficiently significant to focus the minds of participants, yet small enough to force animated and mutually informing debate about book use and priorities.
However, since the grant only purchased a few hundred books, these tended to"disappear once distributed around the shelves.
Library committees
At the time of their initial participation, only two schools (G and H) formed a committee of the type which is a prerequisite for inclusion in the Major Project.
In the remaining two, the librarians dealt directly with departments, in one case working closely with the head of English who exercised general library supervision.
Aspects of the project were also generally discussed by existing teams such as subject departments or head of department meetings.
In three of the schools the project proposals and spending plans were the product of consultation and debate; in the fourth, the teacher-librarian merely allocated sums to departments reflecting her perceptions of likely use.
In one school, the formulation of the library proposal became subsumed within an active ad hoc lower-school curriculum development committee led by an energetic and inspirational coordinator.
The Scale 2 teacher-librarian was part of this committee, which took on the ambitious brief of integrating a spiral of library and learning skills within the lower-school curriculum.
These developments coincided with major library refurbishment and the incorporation of impressive computer-assisted learning facilities within the library.
Significantly, however, with the departure of the coordinator, and the subsequent formalisation of the committee as a board of studies under the head of the lower school, the librarian was left out and had to revert to resourcing and managing the library through individual negotiation.
Study skills initiatives had similarly floundered somewhat, though this was partly attributable to teacher action (seep 86 below).
The project's lack of a distinct identity in this school seemed the cause of some confusion.
Key members of staff seemed ignorant of precisely how much funding had been received and the librarian herself, while delighted by additional funds, was unaware that the school had participated in a county project.
It would appear, therefore, that without the support of a permanent committee several of the Minor Project initiatives were rather narrowly based in terms of key personnel.
It was acknowledged by the schools that this narrowness was precarious, given staff mobility.
Only one school evaluated had formed and retained a permanent library committee.
Several DCSLs, commenting on Minor Project schools in general, observed that a number of committees had lapsed since their initial involvement in the project, and that those which had operated without the benefit of a committee were the weaker for it.
Given the fact that schools selected for a Minor award were being encouraged to develop existing good practice, it is, perhaps, surprising that the formation of a permanent library committee, as in the case of the Major Project, was not made a prerequisite for their participation.
The Minor Project and the curriculum
Three of the schools had clearly used the project to identify, and provide a richer resource base for, curriculum areas already committed to a degree of RBL and/or subject departments with a history of library involvement and use.
In the fourth, teaching throughout the school was highly traditional and the new head was keen to use the project in support of entirely new moves towards the establishment of interdisciplinary and local studies in the lower school.
In another school the project became subsumed within a major review  of the lower-school curriculum, and, as we have seen above, in School G the project gave birth to a completely new initiative, providing a mutual focus for the distinct aspirations of a number of departments and a shared resource base for more closely integrated interdisciplinary work.
Study skills and library skills
Informants in all the schools perceived the project as having provoked more general awareness of study skills as an issue, and as having stimulated the need for some kind of response.
In all four schools specific study and library skills initiatives had been born out of, or given impetus by, the project.
However, in three of the four these had become principally identified with one department or even with one person — the teacher-librarian.
Again the narrowness of this both as a "servicing" model, and in its precarious dependency upon one or two enthusiasts, was acknowledged in the schools.
Only in School G was there evidence of study skills genuinely permeating the lower-school curriculum, though again this initiative was very much identified with a dynamic coordinator of IS who has since left the school.
The library committee, however, is committed to a future agenda where study skills have a high priority, and there is already a considerable legacy of booklets and supportive material in the school to assure a measure of continuity.
Given that science is often thought of as a laboratory-based activity, rather than as a "bookish" subject, it is interesting to note that in three of the four schools, science departments had pioneered activities to develop basic library and information retrieval skills as part of their lower-school curriculum.
Library use and awareness
In all four schools, participation in the project had made a range of departments and a number of individual teachers look closely at their existing library resources for the purposes of stock editing and selection.
For some this was an entirely new experience, and it was felt within the schools that there was now a greater awareness among a significant proportion of staff of what was available on the shelves, and of the appropriateness and readability of book material.
In all schools studied, there was a greater voluntary use by pupils, and more teachers were directing pupils to the library for purposes of retrieval and research, and in all schools, informants acknowledged an increased awareness of county library services with the use of the County Topic  Loan Service also increasing since project involvement.
In each of the schools, the library was clearly still high on the agenda for forward planning and review.
For example, some two years after initial involvement, one head was considering whether to levy 10% from the capitation of each department for library provision, hoping that such a move would involve more departments in enquiry-based learning.
In another school, the committee had a detailed agenda for further development which would go into operation once the teachers' dispute was resolved.
In yet another, complete relocation of the library was under way under new leadership.
Here the new head had recently approached the teacher-librarian in the hope that the school might become involved in the ESSE/L Project, apparently unaware that it had received a Minor award three or so years before.
In the fourth school, the upper-school library was now being refurbished.
Library management
The dually qualified Scale 1 librarian at School G acknowledged the moral support provided by a committee, though, clearly, much of the detailed management fell directly on her shoulders.
The year after project involvement, her free periods were extended to accommodate more of this work, and when she left the school her post was readvertised as a Scale 2.
In schools where there was no committee, librarians seemed to have reverted to traditional allegiances (e.g. with the English department) and were "going it alone" as before, though undoubtedly in a rather more fertile and responsive climate, and in some cases with a slightly enhanced allocation of free periods.
Several of the detailed library management problems identified by School G were echoed in other schools.
All had attempted (with different degrees of success) to develop a rota of staff to allow wider, supervised, library access to pupils.
All four heads took the unprompted view that there was a desperate need for professional library staff in secondary schools.
This need was powerfully articulated during each visit, as, for example, by the head of School G: I think that every school library should have a qualified off-the-staff school librarian.
We happen to have this year (she is leaving) a lady who is a qualified teacher and a qualified librarian.
She is a fairly rare bird.
But even if they are qualified and on your establishment we cannot but insist that they have a substantial teaching load as well, and I really don't think that is any way to  run a library…
I think all the staff ought to be able to rely (as they can in colleges of FE) on this full-time professional service, particularly where there are nearly 1500 customers and 80 members of staff.
Certainly there should be an academic library committee on which the librarian sits to discuss its operational use and stocking, but for the mechanical organisation of a busy library it is absolutely essential that there should be a qualified librarian off the teaching establishment in every major secondary school…and I'm sure everyone thinks the same.
The head saw a possible solution in a more flexible points allocation for ancillary assistance than that which was LEA policy, but recognised that it was principally a matter of lack of finance.
Nevertheless: If a teacher has, himself, to go down into the library with the whole class, or if you can only afford a third of a teacher to be in the library at certain times, then you are quite simply restricting the amount of work that can go on.
What one wants is a major library award of whatever it would cost to put a qualified librarian in.
Inservice and advisory support for schools
Only one school (School G) has begun some voluntary school-focused INSET in support of the project and its aims.
The schools appeared unaware of the county inservice programme run in support of the Major Project, and were, presumably, not advised of these conferences.
Again, this seems surprising, given the "official" designation of the schools as ones where evident good practice was being further nurtured.
Several DCSLs were concerned that the project design provided no mechanism for sustaining impetus once the project award had been spent.
They themselves had insufficient time to offer this kind of support, as their energies were fully focused upon "new" project schools, and as in the case of the Major Project, the evaluators conclude that this is a key issue for projects of this type.
Other issues
The schools selected for evaluation were among those identified by DCSLs as having made interesting and effective use of a Minor award.
Commenting upon their total experience of Minor award schools, DCSLs also noted that a few schools had misconstrued the long-term intentions of the project and had cut library capitation in years following external funding.
Similarly some DCSLs had lost contact with the school's senior management team once funding was complete, reverting again to seeing only the teacher-librarian.
In the view of one DCSL, some of these teacher-librarians had become demoralised by the "side-effects" of the project — being expected to do more for less, unsupported by adequate free time or clerical help.
Clearly, there is a need in projects of this type to locate the award in the context of a clear school policy on library resourcing, particularly in respect of staffing.
The relative effects of "Major" and "Minor" funding
What can be said about the outcomes of the Minor Project, and how might its effectiveness be weighed against the expensive Major scheme?
We have already noted that the Minor schools were not obliged to establish library committees, that their proposal documents were slim, and that no "link-person" role was adopted by the Coordinating Committee in respect of Minor Project schools.
But these facts are not indicative of a significantly lower priority, nor necessarily of a substantially more modest achievement.
We concur with the DCSLs who felt that Major award schools had put more thinking into their documentation and that the larger funding had made a greater impact on provision, management and the physical organisation and appearance of the library.
However, it could equally be argued that the visibility of change and development in these schools was attributable to their lower starting thresholds.
The Major schools' involvement in project-related INSET, and their commitment towards a developmental study skills policy, also made the Major Project distinctive.
However, what seems more important than the type of award is the quality of the school's approach to the grant, whatever its size or designation.
In the words of one DCSL: I think the benefit comes from how they tackle it rather than the amount of money.
And those that have tackled it well, whether they had a Minor or Major award, have got more out of it.
It is arguable that the scale and pattern of grants might more reasonably have been based on the status quo in individual schools, to avoid an invidious distinction between the two "classes" of award.
This is a view which is elaborated in the final chapter.
Inservice training in the ESSE/L Project
Background
The implications of the project for the INSET of teachers in county schools were always acknowledged as of considerable importance.
From quite early on, the way in which project experience might enhance, and be articulated with, the existing programme of inservice provision overseen and coordinated from the county Education Centre was a regular item of discussion by the Coordinating Team.
As a result, an Inservice Panel was established in June 1983, and it has been through this body that project-related INSET development can be traced.
As noted in pp 30–31, the life of this committee is not easy to chart for a number of reasons, and this has made it difficult to determine precisely what has been achieved and to what extent this is attributable to the project.
It is worth describing in some detail the evolution of the Inservice Panel, since it is the evaluators' judgement that a number of lessons might be learnt from its somewhat chequered career.
The panel
Although set up fairly soon after the coordinating committee, the Inservice Panel got off to rather a slow start, with its early meetings being characterised by fairly unstructured discussion of how it might function and what it might aim to achieve.
At least one senior member, who for a time was delegated the task of convening its meetings, considered the panel to have been of little relevance in the first year or so: because the books were not on the shelves, so there wasn't a great need for finding ways of stimulating the use of this material.
This may partly account for an apparent lack of impetus from the start.
At that time, the panel consisted of senior advisory staff, a teachers' centre warden, a tutor in charge of a reading and language centre, a DCSL, the Senior English Inspector, three teachers from Major Project schools and a primary-school teacher.
The group seems to have been given only the most broad and general of aims.
The panel apparently chose not to have a permanent chairman on two grounds: first because it was believed that subgroups would quickly emerge to focus on particular issues and events and that these would evolve their own arrangements, and secondly to avoid the possibility of particular individuals dominating proceedings.
At that time the senior inservice adviser was to convene the meetings (though this was soon delegated to others and "some sort of rotating role" would be devised to fill the chair.
It is the evaluators' impression that the responsibility for producing agendas, convening and chairing meetings, and producing and circulating minutes has most often fallen to the Principal Adviser for Educational Resources and the ACL:E&SS but has remained throughout an area of uncertainty and indecision.
For example, for a short time the role of chairperson was delegated to a DCSL, and it was subsequently acknowledged that this was inappropriate, given the status and function of that position in the library service.
In interviews with a number of panel members filling various roles in the project, and including members of the coordinating committee, it was generally acknowledged that the panel was often less than well chaired, with a fairly universal feeling that it lacked direction and a clear sense of purpose.
As noted earlier, a number of attempts have been made to overcome the problems of those early days On more than one occasion "new blood" has been introduced in the form of teachers and others who were thought by the panel to have something to offer in fields with which the project was concerned.
Most recently these additions have included deputy heads known to be active in researching and developing study skills and packs of INSET resources concerned with information skills and project work.
(Ironically, but also significantly, one is from a school which has never received a project grant and the other from a school which received a retrospective Minor grant some time before the deputy head herself took up her post.)
With regard to terms of reference, both the panel and some of its members in an individual capacity have attempted to prescribe or distil a workable set of aims and objectives.
These have varied in their emphasis and precision, but in November 1984 the panel accepted the following:
To organise Courses both at County and Local levels
1.
(a) County Courses
To organise two County courses per annum directly relevant to the Project (in the first year to concentrate on study skills and management of the Project)
(b) Local Courses
Courses to be organised on a regional basis through the teachers' centres.
School-based and, finally, faculty or departmental to be organised.
To Channel Information
(a) To act as a central collecting point for information on developments in order to use in courses.
(b) To link schools into other schools' good practice.
Within a month, yet another statement was accepted as follows:
Aims
The Committee aims:
1.
To promote effective use of libraries as a whole school resource for study and recreation.
2.
To promote effective approaches to learning in relation to the above.
Some Specific Objectives
1.
To increase teachers' awareness of the issues involved in the above Aims through County INSET, the production of development materials and the establishment of an information and support network.
2.
To encourage schools to develop departmental and whole school policies for the promotion of effective learning/study skills.
3.
To prepare information and review materials to assist in the evaluation and development of school and departmental effective learning policies.
4.
To explore the feasibility and value of County-endorsed, criterion-referenced Certificates in Library and Study Skills for award for pupils in secondary schools.
This demonstrates not only a continuing uncertainty about the precise objectives but also a change in emphasis away from the provision of courses towards other forms of dissemination, of which more will be said below.
Neither the membership of this panel, nor its relationship to the Coordinating Team, has ever been sufficiently clear to its members.
We observed one very tense episode in which some panel members believed that in the act of creation the panel had been granted independence from the coordinating committee.
Others believed the panel to be constituted on a representative basis, so that the coordinating committee was entitled to no more than one seat on the panel that it had created, while others appear to have seen the panel as relating more to the county inservice activities than to the project itself.
At the time of writing, the coordinating committee is giving its attention to future INSET developments in which the panel may be involved.
Some achievements
Against this background, the evaluators found it difficult to establish a clear picture of exactly what the panel achieved.
With constantly changing membership, chairmanship and recording practices, it is impossible to discern a clear linear development of its thought and resolutions, though its discussions have ranged far and wide through such issues as:(1) the desirability of RBL
(2) study skills across the curriculum
(3) the planning and evaluating of county courses, both central and local
(4) the possibility of creating networks for information and skill exchanges
(5) the relative ignorance of teachers as to available materials and the means by which they might be acquired through the project and other county services
(6) the relationship between project-related INSET and other innovations such as TVEI and the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE).
From these deliberations (and sometimes it seems in spite of them) a number of developments have been noted.
Courses and conferences
The evaluators have identified eight events which are attributable mainly if not exclusively to the project and its panel.
These include a major conference in July 1982 for representatives from each of the Major Project schools at that date, courses on study skills in fourth-year and fifth-year project work, half-day courses on study skills in relation to science for prospective Major Project schools, and two open courses on effective learning and study skills.
Clearly, the degree to which these events were focused on specific curriculum areas and on the library project varied.
The evaluators observed one course which was devoted to showing teachers from prospective Major Project schools a variety of worksheets, project books and software on which they might choose to spend some of their grant, and another in which nationally known figures (Royston McHugh from the Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) and Ron Mitson from the Abraham Moss Centre) sought to inspire a good attendance with the philosophy of a more broadly conceived RBL.
Discussion groups and question/answer sessions were valuable features of both events.
While not wishing to generalise too much from these two events, the evaluators have received a generally positive response from a number of sources questioned about their perception of the events related to the project to date.
This applies particularly to the most recent one-day course, which included a contribution from Philip Waterhouse (coordinator of the Self-supported Study Project) and some workshops run by teacher-members of the Inservice Panel and employing staff-development materials either developed by themselves or derived from elsewhere.
The teachers' industrial action has limited this particular development, and the evaluators know of seven events which were either postponed or cancelled during the two years of the evaluation; it is also probably the case that attendance at those events that did run was less than it would have been in happier times.
However, it was the evaluators' impression that the dispute coincided with a certain demoralisation amongst panel members which had more to do with the disorganisation and instability of the panel itself.
Networking
A development which seems likely to bear fruit was the creation of a  working party from within the panel.
This was charged with the task of exploring the possibility of a network of schools, teachers, library specialists and others with a concern for developing practice in relation to the use of libraries, study skills, active methods of learning, and whole-school and departmental "effective learning" policies (notes from Working Party 3 March 1986).
This working party is considering the resourcing and coordination of such a network and how it might be related to the role of the inspectorate, the advisory service and the library service.
An initial report was presented to the Inservice Panel and accepted in principle.
At the time of writing we cannot predict the outcome of this initiative but believe that it is being seriously considered by the coordinating committee in its review of project-related INSET.
Materials
Another way in which staff development relating to the project aims might be enhanced is through the production, collation and dissemination of materials of various kinds.
Although their precise connection with the deliberations of the panel is sometimes obscure, a number of resources have been discussed and, it seems, disseminated with the panel's encouragement.
These include a booklet on the Dewey system for use in libraries by staff and students, a study skills booklet for teachers and a user-education video tape produced by a sixth-form college.
The panel also undertook a questionnaire survey of the status quo in study skills throughout the county, and in the light of its results has discussed the dissemination of materials from other authorities (e.g. the ILEA Effective Learning package), and two panel members have been requested to coordinate their individual efforts to produce INSET packages for school-based work.
Some of these materials were tried out effectively at the most recent course described above.
Staff development intrinsic to the project
In this chapter we have concentrated on the officially designated inservice development identified with the Inservice Panel set up by the Project Coordinating Team.
It is necessary to remind ourselves that involvement in the project constituted a significant staff-development exercise in its own right.
Not only did many teachers in many schools meet in library committees to discuss for the first time their common interests and sometimes contrasting perspectives with other members of subject departments across the school; they also, for the first time, were forced to consider seriously the pedagogy implied by their present use or misuse of the resources already on offer or their failure to use them.
Trips to project exhibitions of library resources and visits to  library suppliers' showrooms were a revelation for some teachers as to the variety and sophistication of recent publications in their area of the curriculum.
Moreover, for many teachers, the services of divisional libraries, the project loan service and so on were opened to them as never before.
Finally, project involvement has had knock-on effects in introducing many teachers to the notion of study skills and information-handling skills, in cross-fertilisation of ideas by visits to other project schools, and, finally, in the cascade effect of departmental representatives on library committees returning to their colleagues with the insights gained from their project experience.
We would like to focus particularly on two points at this stage.
The first is the role played by DCSLs in educating staff about the mechanics of ordering and stocking and the range and variety of materials available.
As noted in an earlier chapter, some DCSLs negotiated a broader role than did others, but we were impressed with the clarity and economy of their expositions to school staff.
We wish to note the potential of specialist library staff for the INSET of teachers more generally, and to pose the question of how this potential might be developed and exploited.
The second point is that the potential of visits to project schools could be realised in a number of ways.
As pointed out earlier, some schools did visit project schools in order to gain insights of use in planning their own proposals, and some were subsequently visited by yet other schools.
So far as we are aware this process was not formally instituted, nor have such visits been mounted once a school has achieved project status.
It is arguable that the promotion of such visits to schools with identifiable good practice, to include exchange visits to share expertise, would be a sound development in any future project-related inservice programme.
Summary
In this chapter we have tried to convey something of the complexity of the events which are associated with the INSET developments originally conceived as an essential part of the ESSE/L Project aims, and also something of the achievements to which these events have led.
The picture which emerges is a mixed one indeed: on the one hand, the creation of a committee structure which defies all the rules of good management and administration, and on the other, a number of actual or potential outcomes of considerable value.
Cynics might hastily conclude that the canons of "good committee practice" are neither sufficient nor necessary conditions for meaningful INSET to take  place, but a better interpretation in our view is that the potential for such developments was to some extent wasted precisely because the structure, purpose and status of the panel were so confused.
The evaluators' impression of the panel's work is of a number of talented and committed individuals, representing several interest groups within education and the library services but sharing a common interest in developing effective learning, who have managed to achieve much in the absence of a really effective committee.
Characterised by confusion over aims and changes of membership, the panel made a number of false starts and fresh starts with the injection of new blood to try to give more direction to its work.
The crucial importance of the functions of convening and chairing meetings seems to have been overlooked by those who set it up, or else these duties were delegated to people who did their best in adverse circumstances but who may well have been inappropriate choices.
Moreover, the effects of industrial action on members' attendance exacerbated the situation, and it is arguable that in times of adversity such bodies need stronger leadership and clearer terms of reference than this panel ever enjoyed.
With hindsight it is arguable that the relationship between the panel, the coordinating committee and those in positions of authority for inservice provision in the county should have been much more precisely defined.
As it was, some time was also wasted by internal bickering over the status of the panel and the right of some members to be on it.
In this regard, the presence of members of the coordinating committee was resented by some members, even though it was a member of that team who eventually filled the vacuum and gave some sort of leadership.
Despite these inauspicious circumstances, a number of relatively successful courses and conferences have resulted from the creation of the panel, and there are interesting developments afoot in the creation of a network and the preparation and dissemination of INSET practices and materials.
These are to be applauded.
If the project is to be judged a success in the long term, it must be seen not only to have engaged children and staff in project schools in new ways of perceiving and using libraries, but also to have created a viable and dynamic framework for the further development and dissemination of good practice.
It is the evaluators' conclusion that the creation of such a framework may well be imminent, but through the period of the evaluation itself the existing arrangements cannot be said to have been adequate.
Summative evaluation
Introduction
In this report we have attempted to evaluate a major initiative in the promotion of curriculum-related library provision in secondary schools in one local authority.
While the focus of our endeavour must necessarily be the degree to which the project has achieved its own stated objectives, the evaluators have felt free to go beyond the limits which those objectives described.
There are several reasons for this.
First, the sequence of developments to which such an initiative gives rise cannot be predicted with accuracy, and a project such as the ESSE/L Project can well have unintended consequences which, though not stated as objectives, deserve evaluative comment.
Secondly, to limit the evaluation to the measurement of outcomes against objectives is to take the objectives as "given" and as above evaluation themselves.
This is in our view unacceptable.
Thirdly, the stated objectives of such a project are not necessarily a true representation of the motives of those who designed and implemented it.
Just as project schools may have specified objectives in their proposals in order to win a grant, so the initiators of the project may themselves have chosen to word the project aims in a particular way in order to win funding in the first place.
Fourthly, whatever the truth of the last statement, project objectives are underpinned by certain values and assumptions entailed in a particular educational ideology, and these, too, ought not to be unrecognised by any thorough evaluation.
Finally, an evaluation which was constrained to look at stated objectives alone would forego opportunities to develop theoretical and empirical models which have general application over and above the particular initiative under scrutiny.
This report has therefore left until the end the question of the degree to which the ESSE/L Project has achieved the targets it has set itself, and has roamed widely across the experiences of those involved both directly and indirectly with the project.
We have tried to convey something of the complexity and texture of the environment within which the project was conceived and developed, and through detailed case studies of three schools to illustrate the project in action.
We have also described at some length the structures and procedures for the administration of the project and its inservice outcomes, and have dwelt in some detail on the processes of the selection and monitoring of schools involved.
Throughout, we have drawn on the records of accounts and observations amassed through our fieldwork and ordered  through working papers to illustrate the argument, and where appropriate to make evaluative comments along the way.
In order to put our account in context, we have provided a number of theoretical models relating to curriculum development and innovation which, we suggest, are a useful outcome of our work, whatever their utility in evaluating the Essex project.
It is now necessary to draw some of these strands together and reach some general conclusions about the merit of the Essex project, and to derive from them some prescriptions for action for anyone seeking to enhance library provision in similar ways.
Aims and objectives
As noted in Chapter 1, the project set out to enhance school library provision in the light of both the county's own survey of secondary provision and a number of national reports.
Chapter 2 identified the five specific objectives of the project: 1.
To encourage schools to define their objectives for the school library in terms of the curriculum and the educational benefit anticipated for their pupils, including the development of reading and learning skills.
2.
To improve secondary school library provision and the quality of book selection.
3.
To provide a stimulus for schools to make the best possible use of all the available learning resources inside and outside the school money, people, space, equipment and learning materials — in meeting their objectives.
4.
To create a core of schools where good practice embodying these concepts could be seen in operation so that the inservice and information potential could subsequently be tapped for the benefit of all schools.
5.
To coordinate and make available to schools the services and expertise of the County Inspectorate, the Visual and Aural Aids Service and the County Library.
The rationale for these objectives lay not only in the inadequacies which were acknowledged to exist in the secondary schools surveyed, but more fundamentally in the educational philosophy which prevailed  with the significant actors at that time.
Thus, there was a commitment to more individualised learning and a more meaningful curriculum experience through pupil-centred and investigative learning methods, and to a more relevant and coordinated curriculum achievable through greater planning and, where appropriate, novel arrangements for the integration and synthesis of subjects.
Within this perspective, the need to develop in every child a facility with skills of study, library use and information handling was clearly significant, as was some ideal of a fully integrated, centralised resources centre which would provide a hub for the wide range of activities comprising the curriculum.
That these are components of a broadly progressive approach to education embraced by the Coordinating Team is both unsurprising and perfectly appropriate.
Within the stated objectives there were clearly a number of more specific targets, many of which have been noted and discussed at length throughout this report.
They include the targets set out in the guidelines issued to project schools, more or less explicitly in the process of selecting schools, and of course, implicitly in the objectives specified in the successful proposals which schools made.
There were, however, rather less overt objectives in some people's minds.
Thus, for at least one member of the coordinating committee the project was but one stage in a long-term plan for radically heightening both the performance and the visibility of the school library service.
This member clearly intended the project to create a demand for the services of professionally trained librarians in project schools, in the hope that this would in time become a reality.
It is in the light of these aims and objectives, both official and unofficial, that the project must now be assessed.
Structures
The pursuit of such objectives required the establishment of appropriate structures for the coordination of the project as a whole, for the implementation of the project in each school, and for the planned provision of the inservice activities to which it was to lead.
To these ends a Coordinating Team, an Inservice Panel, and a school library/ resources committee were established as key bodies in making the project possible.
Within these structures a number of crucial roles were identified: the link person, the DCSL, the school librarian and the chairperson of the school library committee.
It is our view that this structure is an appropriate one for a project of this kind, following as it does the dictum that, "if you want something to happen you have to institutionalise it" .
Amongst its strengths are the bringing together, on what is the executive committee for the project itself, of a range of appropriate expertise, including members of the inspectorate, the audio-visual resources centre, the library service and a tutor specialising in language and reading.
In each school the library committee provided a forum in which a wide range of subject teachers were not only permitted to involve themselves, but to some extent obliged to participate in formulating specific curriculum/library plans.
We saw in Chapters 4 and 5 just how effective both the coordinating committee and the schools' library committees could be as bodies which handled the nuts and bolts of the project and converted aims and objectives into a reality.
This is not to say that the picture is perfect.
In some schools, the library committee did not meet as frequently as it might have; nor was it always as open and participatory as might have been hoped, and in at least one school the committee was subverted and eventually dissolved by senior staff.
In addition, the deliberations of these committees were of course hampered and sometimes halted by teachers' industrial action.
In the final analysis, however, these committees not only performed an important manifest function in coordinating and producing coherent plans for project involvement, but also some valuable latent functions.
These include a raising of awareness amongst staff of the potential of the library as a resource and of more progressive pedagogies generally, an increasing understanding of the aims and practices of other departments, and an exploration of the potential for whole-school curriculum planning.
It was through the work of the library committees that the first of the project's stated objectives was most clearly achieved, and we have seen how the proposal documents embodied clearly defined objectives which did relate the development of the library to the curriculum experience of the children.
In producing these plans, two other objectives were also at least partly achieved.
First, the committees necessarily gave attention to the physical environment and organisation of the library buildings, to the space, equipment, and people already available inside and outside the school.
In several schools, plans for rationalising the location and use of library and learning resources space were amongst the outcomes of committee deliberations.
In a way this was a bringing together of audio-visual aids and library services at the school level corresponding to the coordination of these county services suggested in the fifth objective.
This was further manifested in the attendance of members of the Coordinating Team and of the DCSLs at some library committee meetings.
Both objectives 3 and 5 were therefore to some extent achieved through the committee structure.
We conclude that a  standing committee for library and resources should be a feature of the structure of every secondary school and that its membership should be such as to permit some cascade effect on the development of resources, syllabuses and teaching methods throughout a school.
We have seen that the Coordinating Team evolved an effective mode of working and a clear understanding of its own objectives and procedures, and was characterised by a committed and business-like approach to its tasks.
Whether or not the membership of this committee was ideal in terms of the range of expertise and representation of interest groups is a matter of conjecture.
Certainly, the bringing together of the ACL:E&SS, a senior inspector and Principal Adviser for Educational Resources on such a team makes splendid sense and in itself promotes the fifth of the project's objectives.
The addition of a language and reading specialist is also clearly appropriate.
However, it is arguable that representatives of subject areas not so conventionally identified with the notion of a school library (e.g. art, science, and computer studies) might have helped to break the stereotypical view of school libraries as the preserve of the English department and provided the team with some refreshingly different perspectives.
However that may be, we suggest that it is more important to have committed members than representative ones, and in this regard our evaluation of the Coordinating Team is very positive.
The weak link in the structure is the Inservice Panel, not because such a committee is unnecessary but because the panel lacked a clarity of purpose, clear terms of reference and appropriate leadership.
Structurally, we conclude that this crucial committee needed also to be related unambiguously and directly to both the Project Coordinating Team and the administration of the county inservice department.
The project as process
Inevitably, the way in which the project has functioned has evolved in the light of experience and changing circumstances.
Although the initiators had a reasonably clear idea of what they wished to achieve and of the means by which this might be pursued, the fine detail could only be thrashed out as the project proceeded.
Amongst the things which were developed, refined and altered were the guidelines to be followed, the criteria for selection, the precision required (in respect of spending plans etc.) and the amounts allocated to schools.
The procedures by which the project is carried out at present are  summarised in Sections 4.7 and 4.8 and exemplified in the Major and Minor Project schools described in Chapters 5 and 6.
While the evaluators consider that these procedures comprise a rational and effective method of operation, there are a number of interesting questions which have emerged from the evaluation.
The first has to do with the tension between the need to have clear guidelines and objectives to give direction to the project, and the need to permit room for flexibility and discretion.
We might imagine a project in which a coordinating team was actually hampered by rules of procedure which became such a straitjacket of red tape that, for example, otherwise admirable proposals might be unacceptable on a technicality.
Conversely, the Coordinating Team might well have found itself constrained to accept a proposal which met all the technical criteria yet for other reasons would not be deemed appropriate for project involvement.
In this respect, recommendations by the team were subject to approval by senior county staff who sometimes had inside information which could affect the final decision.
The precise nature of these latter decisions was not open to evaluation, but the principle that not everything can be foreseen and that no formal statement of criteria could anticipate every eventuality is one which a project like this needs to recognise.
A similar tension existed between the need to create a set of standard expectations of schools participating in the project and the uniqueness and idiosyncrasies of each institution.
An underlying principle of the project was that each school must be free to develop its own proposal and curriculum plan in the light of its own particular setting, needs, and history, and that this was not only practically desirable but also essential if the professional autonomy of the school staff was to be respected.
As we have seen, some rules were firmly established and adhered to, as, for example, the limit of 20% on non-book resources.
Other guidelines were rather less stringently imposed so that, for example , team members would sometimes "turn a blind eye" on detail in spending plans if the general thrust of the proposal seemed to be appropriate for the school concerned.
Clearly, there were points at which the link person or the DCSL could exercise considerable power over a school's proposal, but it is the evaluators' impression that this power was not abused.
One "rule" which the team adhered to until very near the end of the evaluation concerned the number and size of grants made in any year.
This meant that schools received standard sums as either Major or Minor awards, regardless of differences in the scale of need between schools in either category.
It is the evaluators' opinion that a greater  flexibility in the number and size of grants would be desirable and that this might be achieved if the standard awards were replaced by a sliding scale with lower and upper limits.
We conclude that a project such as this needs to strike the right balance between, on the one hand setting criteria and a code of practice which wills structure and direct developments in participating institutions, and, on the other, permitting each institution appropriate independence and room for initiative and discretion.
Similarly those coordinating such a project need to strike a balance between their own rules of procedure and the need to be free to exercise their discretion in the face of unforeseen circumstances.
It is our view that this balance was generally achieved in the Essex project.
That is not to say that the quality of information upon which decisions were made and discretion exercised was always adequate.
Towards the end of the evaluation, the Coordinating Team itself acknowledged a patchiness in the pattern of recommendations, with some roles being less visible in shaping decisions than was desirable.
The team resolved to produce a pro-forma to encourage a comprehensive response to requests for recommended schools from, for example, Area Education Officers.
Without denigrating the work of the Coordinating Team, it is the evaluators' belief that decisions will be made on better grounds than they have been if something like this proposal becomes a reality.
A further consequence of a rather haphazard system of acquiring information for the recommendation of schools was a suspicion on the part of some headteachers that the invitation to participate was based on personal contacts and the preferences and prejudices of, for example, the local inspector.
A sense of injustice therefore existed in some schools which, for whatever reasons, were not among the chosen few.
On this issue, those responsible for the project were in a difficult position indeed.
Since it was never the intention that the project should be run as an open competition for "challenge funding" , details of the procedures for participation and selection were never publicised.
To have done so would only have raised expectations and created disappointment without necessarily allaying the suspicions concerning the objectivity of an inevitably subjective selection procedure.
And although it was always the hope that the county would continue to fund the project, and that every secondary school would eventually receive a grant of one sort or another, uncertainty meant that no guarantee could be given to disappointed schools as to their inclusion in a subsequent wave.
The evaluators could see no easy way out of this particular problem, but note that a guarantee to the Coordinating Team of at least medium-term funding would be an  advantage.
We suggest that an authority embarking on a project of this kind needs to give serious consideration to the time-scale for guaranteed funding and the relative merits of schemes which are openly competitive and those based on selection and sponsorship.
Book selection and purchase
In Sections 4.4 and 4.7 we described the way in which schools set about spending their project grants and the key role played by the DCSLs in advising schools on the "weeding" of existing stock, the range of available books and materials, and the mechanics of ordering, cataloguing and shelving their acquisitions.
The evaluators were convinced that the opportunities for schools to benefit from the expertise and efforts of the DCSLs were considerably enhanced by the project.
We were also impressed with the raising of teachers' awareness through visits to library suppliers and book exhibitions and the replacement of "buying blind" through catalogues with a system of actually browsing and handling the available alternatives before making a choice.
The evaluators conclude that the second of the project's stated objectives: to improve secondary school library provision and the quality of book selection
has been achieved and that organisation and execution of this part of the ESSE/L Project is an example of good practice which we highly recommend other schools and other authorities to adopt.
The take-up in schools
Of course, getting the books on the shelves is no great achievement if they are not then used in the appropriate ways by teachers and pupils.
Indeed, this is the acid test of the success of the project in achieving its over-arching aim of improving the education of our children.
In our interviews with teachers we were anxious to hear about the way in which they used the library and the project acquisitions and to establish their impressions of use made by their colleagues.
We also observed a number of lessons in library skills, study skills, basic studies and IS which had been identified by staff as "to do with the library" , and the use made of the library at various times of the day (including lunch-hours).
Further, we invited teachers to show us where, on the shelves, the project acquisitions were located and to describe to us how these were used.
Finally, we discussed with individual pupils using the library and with groups of children extracted from lessons their  perspectives on the library and how they used it.
From this, it is possible to make some statements about the take-up of the project at grass-roots level.
However, the evaluators are not satisfied that they have built up a picture of library use which permits them to be confident in drawing firm conclusions about the project's success in these terms.
To some extent, this must be a reflection on the methodology which we adopted, concentrating as we did on interviewing key actors and observing the development, processing, and implementation of proposals rather than focusing on, for example, the teaching methods of individual teachers or the reading habits of individual pupils.
It is also a reflection on the failure in many cases of the schools themselves to monitor the use made of project resources in the day-to-day business of teaching.
While some schools did evaluate in committee the development of the library in the context of the project — and it is clear that developments in pedagogy were attributed at least partly to the project — we were not made aware of any which specifically monitored the number of times children and teachers borrowed or read books purchased specifically with project funds.
One school did, however, keep a record of which children and classes were brought or sent to the library and in which subjects, but these were not analysed (until the evaluators analysed them!) and again did not discriminate between use of project and use of non-project purchases.
Our inconclusiveness on this point also reflects the failure of the Coordinating Team to build into the project design an automatic and mandatory procedure for measuring take-up.
While it is true that self-evaluation was officially a requirement of participating schools, and that at least one school undertook some evaluation which it broadened to a development of its original project proposal into a statement of library policy for the school as a whole, specific requirements for precise and quantitative monitoring were absent.
Perhaps it is simply the case that this is very difficult to get at by methods which are feasible.
What methods would be necessary?
Perhaps the observation of particular teachers over a prolonged period combined with the charting of individual pupils' learning experiences — including visits to the library — and the ways in which they did or did not use project-purchased resources would achieve this end, but there are clearly practical and methodological objections to such activities.
Not least amongst these would be the inevitable Hawthorne effect on the teaching methods employed and, perhaps, the unacceptable intrusion upon the child's educational experience.
Be that as it may, it is arguable that projects of the ESSE/L kind need to have clear policies, guidelines and requirements for evaluation from the outset by the schools, the project  team, and external evaluators.
Notwithstanding the inconclusiveness of our findings, some comments are appropriate if only to raise questions that deserve further consideration.
As the evaluation of both the Major and Minor Projects shows, teachers in project schools did argue with force that the use made of the library by both teachers and pupils had increased in volume and changed in kind.
In particular, teacher-librarians could describe how some subject areas were making greater use of the library for project-based or topic-based work, and could describe how the library was booked, sometimes on a regular basis, by departments using it in this way.
They could also describe children being sent individually or in small groups, to forage for information on particular topics, and in the case of the school which monitored library use, the school could demonstrate that the range of subjects thus represented was considerable.
Our own observations suggest that libraries, refurbished and sometimes reopened in anticipation of, or as a result of, a project grant, were popular places at lunchtimes and breaks, though as much for doing unrelated homework and/or sheltering from the weather as for specific use of the resources.
We did also observe libraries in which quiet reading was demanded and in which leisure reading was being promoted.
While project money spent on fiction and topical non-fiction may have encouraged this use, we were unable to determine the degree to which this was so.
What we did not see were any examples of pupil-centred enquiry methods being employed by teachers and using materials specifically purchased for this purpose with project funds, as predicted in the proposal documents.
We were most often directed to library skills and study skills lessons in which children were being taught rather unimaginatively a range of things from the Dewey Decimal Classification to the use of the full stop!
However, we did see sets of study skills booklets acquired through the project (in one case being used in library lessons), and in another school project work originating in tutorial periods was being developed in study skills lessons with a view to using specific project purchases.
In yet another school we observed science lessons using a topic approach in the library and were reliably informed that the proposed project purchase in this subject was precisely for this kind of use.
This is certainly encouraging but has to be tempered by impressions gained by other methods.
For example in one school we asked the head of French to show us on the shelves the books she had ordered under the project.
This she was able to do, but the evaluators found that many of the books had never been opened and that most of them bore no issue  dates, even though it was three years since their acquisition.
Typically, project acquisitions could not be distinguished on the shelves or if they could, most of the people we asked could not show us which they were.
This does not mean, of course, that the books should have been concentrated or displayed in one location, although some teachers desired this as a way of focusing attention on the library and its new books.
Nor does it mean that the project acquisitions were not used.
But it must be said that in some cases the DCSL who had overseen the ordering was uncertain as to where in the school the books had ended up, let alone their frequency of use.
Finally, we must be concerned by the fact that in at least one school (see Chapter 5) the senior member of staff whose demand for IS resources was widely believed to have instigated the original project initiative could not himself describe how he used the project acquisitions in his own work.
The evaluators must conclude that something like the input of resources which characterised the Essex project is a necessary condition for improving library provision and associated resources (Objective 3) and to facilitate reforms in pedagogy, but that it is by no means a sufficient condition for significant change.
Library organisation
The project has undoubtedly had some effect on the organisation and running of the libraries themselves.
Although it is again not possible to attribute developments definitely and exclusively to the project, the project must take at least some of the credit for the business-like way in which some school libraries now operate.
In one school in particular, the appointment of a part-time library assistant, the designation of a senior member of staff as librarian, the creation of a team of pupil monitors and a rota of parent volunteers comprise an excellent basis for sound library practice.
The advent of professionally trained full-time librarians is still awaited, but a number of project schools were well served by head teachers who resolved to designate and remunerate teachers for library responsibilities.
(Both Major and Minor project schools described in Chapters 5 and 6 fall into this category.)
Elsewhere, library responsibility could mean no more than an extra "free" period on top of an otherwise full teaching timetable, and this is clearly a serious constraint on project-related developments, even without the effects of industrial action on lunchtime and after-school working.
We conclude that the appointment of teachers with library training and/or the designation of teachers responsible for library development is to be welcomed.
While the ideal perhaps remains the appointment of  full-time professional librarians with a dual teaching qualification, at present this is for most schools in most LEAs a pipe dream.
We further conclude that the creation of teams of interested teachers, parent volunteers and responsible children is good practice which ought to be more widely adopted.
After the money runs out
It is clear from the foregoing summary that the project has been successful in achieving in some measure most of the objectives it set itself.
However, it is debatable whether or not those objectives can continue to be achieved in the future.
This is not a question of whether the project can be funded indefinitely so much as a question of whether the initiatives in particular schools can maintain momentum once the project grant has been spent.
It was an objective of the project that such good practices as having a library and resources committee, the more informed selection of books, and the development of study skills programmes should continue and grow, and it is fair to ask whether or not this has been the case.
The evaluators found that in some schools library committees had become moribund, and although this was often blamed on industrial action, some people did seem to have lost interest once they had received and spent their grant.
In other schools, committees continued to meet and enthusiastic individuals and groups pursued such issues as study skills programmes and the integration of the library and learning resources units as natural consequences of project involvement.
As indicated earlier, the project does not seem to have built in as strong a mechanism for evaluation as it might, and it is not easy to determine the degree to which the project philosophy is alive and well in the project schools of three or four years ago.
Nor do the complications of the industrial action help.
It does seem to us that the impetus is lost if the library committee is either unable or unwilling to continue its work or if key individuals in the project subsequently leave the school.
We noted one case in particular where both the librarian and the mastermind of the project left the school and the responsibility was passed from one reluctant staff member to another, whilst the formerly encouraging head became preoccupied with falling rolls and an imminent merger.
One part of the project was of course specifically concerned with creating a core of schools and the dissemination of good practice derived from them in the inservice education and training of teachers  (Objective 4).
We have already seen that the committee structure devised for this purpose was in many ways unsatisfactory but that some useful and interesting inservice activities did result from the project.
Moreover, the emerging plans for creating networks for the promotion and dissemination of study skills and other project-related developments give promise of a healthy future.
The experiences of some project schools have clearly been fed into INSET provision through the expertise of particular individuals, and the inputs from Coordinating Team members and DCSLs were also enhanced by project involvement.
That the project schools provide potential examples of good practice is also clear, but it does seem that potential here is yet to be realized.
Teachers from non-project schools are as influential (or more influential) on the panel than are those from project schools, and there seems little in the way of visits made to successful project schools to observe good practice.
(Visits seem only to take place at the stage of formulating proposals.)
The evaluators conclude that while the evaluation has shown how INSET and staff development can be enriched by a project like the Essex scheme, for a variety of reasons the development of this area has been disappointing.
We recommend that future project initiatives of this kind should give much more thought to the structures and procedures, both within project schools and at the level of overall planning and coordination which are required to ensure that initiatives are not confined to a particular time period or grant, and that the inservice implications of good practice resulting from the project are capitalised upon.
This cannot be divorced from the earlier points made about monitoring and evaluating the project, and it is arguable that a programme of long-term follow-up visits and meetings is necessary for this purpose.
It might also be true that an arrangement in which supplementary grants were made in the light of positive evaluation would be an effective incentive for schools to maintain momentum and involve themselves fully in inservice activities.
Study skills and whole-school policies
The development of study skills was implicitly or explicitly part of every proposal made for inclusion in the ESSE/L Project, and as we have seen, the major thrust of recent inservice developments has been in this area.
The case studies presented in Chapters 5 and 6 illustrate some of the forms which study skills have taken and the place which their development has occupied in the evolving project.
We would like to make a number of observations about this aspect of our evaluation.
The first is that the form which study skills development has typically  taken in project schools is by no means at the radical end of the spectrum in terms of the different ideologies of education which we described in Chapter 3.
Rather than adopting a full-blooded process model in which the content of the curriculum might be indistinguishable from the activity of enquiry, schools have tended to see the teaching of a separate study skills course (albeit sometimes under another name), which then facilitates the accessing of content for existing curriculum subjects, as the appropriate path to follow.
In one of the schools reported above, the development was something of a "transplant" of an existing study skills programme from another school, and it remains to be seen how well this can be accommodated with IS and PSD in the ways envisaged.
It is our view that a lack of consensus about the nature of study skills and their appropriate organisation and delivery has characterised the project from beginning to end.
Not least, participants at all levels have failed to establish clearly in their own minds the definition of, and relationship between, such concepts as "study skills" , "library skills" , "information-handling skills" and "RBL" .
As a result, the deliberations of library committees and the Inservice Panel have often included debates held at cross purposes.
Even in the Coordinating Team, the development of such skills has tended to be accepted as self-evidently a good thing rather than debated or interpreted in a systematic way.
These observations have a particular point since it is arguable that a study skills "tail" is in danger of wagging a library project "dog" in at least some schools, and in the work of the Inservice Panel.
While this is in accord with the development of learning skills specified in the second part of Objective 1, it could deflect attention from the central concern of linking library enhancement to curriculum development across the board.
It is our conclusion that project objectives are in part being achieved through the growing interest in study skills to which the project has contributed but that the whole area of the relationship between information skills and the curriculum requires much more debate and thought both within the project and in the world of education generally.
We must note another source of ambiguity about the degree to which the project resulted in whole-school involvement.
For some teachers in some schools, the guidelines requiring whole-school involvement meant participation by representatives of all curriculum areas on the library committee.
For others it meant something comparable to an across-the-curriculum approach to the teaching of study skills.
For yet others it implied a radical ideal of RBL as the context of thematic or topic-based project work which characterises a whole new concept of  teaching.
As for the first of these concepts, we have seen that to a considerable extent in most schools the project achieved the objective of broadly based participation in devising curriculum-related library plans.
With regard to the second, as noted above, teaching study skills across the curriculum has had some impact on thinking but has not been typical of the action taken by project schools.
The third concept we take to be well in advance of what is practically possible at the moment, though the long-term impact of the project and of such innovations as GCSE remains a matter of conjecture.
Other issues
Finally, the evaluation has thrown up a number of other questions to which we wish to draw attention.
First, much has been said about the immediate effects of industrial action on the process of the project.
There may well be long-term effects which will be felt in any subsequent attempt to float such a project.
The Essex project was, after all, mounted on an assumption of an existing perspective of the professional teacher whose sense of duty and/or good will made attendance at committee meetings, the lunchtime opening of the library and so on, reasonable expectations.
It is by no means certain that a newly conceived "teachers' contract" , will include such a notion We raise the question whether the long-term effects of teachers' industrial action might render impracticable future projects in the ESSE/L Project mould.
The second issue is to do with other existing roles and job specifications.
We have noted repeatedly the extremely valuable contribution made by the DCSLs, have pointed to the under-representation of the inspectorate and the advisory service in the project's implementation, and have indicated the lack of coordination and initiative in the inservice phase of the project.
We must ask the question whether or not the way these important roles are currently defined and enacted in this authority and elsewhere is appropriate to the work which a venture like the ESSE/L Project seems to require.
This is not to criticise any individual or group, but rather to highlight potential problems as, for example, where the involvement of individuals might be interpreted by others as exceeding their authority.
What is needed is a clarification of roles so that the considerable potential which the evaluators have observed is fully exploited within such initiatives.
A third concern is with the unintended consequences of focusing such  a project upon a particular age-range or sector.
It is arguable that this is a practical necessity given limited time and resources, but it is also arguable that a discontinuity in teaching methods and learning experiences is likely to result.
Study skills again provides a case in point, where a secondary school introducing study skills may misread the level of sophistication of information-handling in some of its feeder primary schools, with the result that some children may find themselves (to use Rosemary Webb's (1985) term) being "de-skilled" at 11 +.
It also appears that divisions of labour between primary and secondary responsibilities in both the education department and the library service might produce yet further discontinuity in the organization and delivery of the curriculum.
We suggest that the practice of some other projects (for example Essex Education Support Grant Mathematics Project) of making innovations in "Units" of secondary and feeder primary schools deserves serious consideration in planning future projects in library provision and study skills.
Last, while not wishing to prescribe a particular pattern of operation, we were fascinated by the whole business of the micro-politics of change within project schools, In particular, the management of innovation through the institution of committees, the control of agendas, the persuasion of individuals and (putting it bluntly) the Machiavellian manipulation of situations were features of the project in action.
We suggest that students of education management and the sociology of the curriculum would find the implications of projects in the ESSE/L Project mould a fruitful area of study.
Conclusion
At the end of the day an evaluation on this scale, of a project of this importance, undertaken within an environment so complex and bedevilled by industrial action, is bound to leave many questions unanswered.
It is also bound to find extremely difficult the making of final judgements which are confidently held and just to all concerned.
However, some summing-up seems necessary.
In the evaluators' view, the county is to be congratulated on undertaking a project of this type in an attempt to overcome some of the inadequacies that characterise school library provision and curriculum planning within and beyond Essex.
The project has caused schools to give priority consideration to their libraries, to invest their own time, resources, and energy in bringing their institution to the threshold of project involvement, to establish appropriate committees, and to undertake the difficult business of planning and producing a proposal.
It has brought together expertise in pedagogy, learning resources, library provision and a range of curriculum subjects both at county level and in each school, and this has inevitably been an occasion of staff development and awareness-raising for all those involved.
Despite its limitations, the project has done something to open up the question of study skills, develop inservice structures and practices, create a core of schools where good practice has been established and from which it might be disseminated, and has clearly improved secondary school library provision through (amongst other things) the quality of book selection.
The degree to which any particular development is exclusively attributable to the project remains a moot point, but in our view this is less important than the degree to which the project complemented and extended existing and coincidental developments, and in this respect the project has been most successful.
We recommend the ESSE/L Project as a most valuable experience for those involved, as an example of good practice in educational innovation and the promotion of curricular change, and as a model from which other initiatives have a great deal to learn.