

Poor spellers
There are two main reasons for not being able to spell:
weak visual memory
weak auditory analysis.
The most common reason is weak visual memory.
A good speller
1
Hears a new word and can associate the sounds with the right letters.
2
Can break a word into its parts, and knows how to write the parts down.
3
Probably sees an image of the word in his mind, and "reads it off" as he spells.
A poor speller
1
With weak visual memory:
(a)
Has a fairly clear idea of which symbol represents which sound.
(b)
Doesn't remember how the word should look, and gets confused when he tries to write it down.
(c)
Is not necessarily a poor reader.
His spelling errors will be recognisable as the intended word — cof for cough; entad for entered.
2
With weak auditory analysis:
(a)
Can't say which letter symbols represent which sound.
(b)
Can't hear what the constituent sounds of a word are.
(c)
Makes random and arbitrary guesses.
(d)
Is probably a poor reader, too.
His spelling errors may be unrecognisable as the intended word — girf for giraffe; michm for making; negys for needle.
Before you begin teaching, decide in which group your pupils belong.
Ask first:
Is he a good or potentially good speller (that is, only rarely makes mistakes, or can see afterwards that misspellings are wrong)?
If no — has he a weak visual memory?
If no — has he weak auditory analysis?
Pupils who are potentially good spellers don't need teaching; just keep an eye on them, and teach them to proof-read their writing.
You can find out what kind of speller a pupil is firstly, by the very simple checklist above and secondly, by detailed analysis which pinpoints the weak points.
(For analysis see pages 30–42.)
What goes wrong?
With most misspellings, there are patterns of error.
Watch for them, and you can teach more effectively.
Some things cause difficulty to everyone, whether they're poor or good at spelling:
Some vowel combination: ie-ei is the best known, but also iou and other complex combinations.
Unusual words using y as a vowel: rhythm, hymn.
 "Impossible" words: fuchsia, diphtheria, diarrhoea, eczema.
Kinds of error
1 The initial letter
If children make mistakes in the first consonant or initial blend, and are older than seven, they need immediate help with reading, and especially with phonic training.
Don't try to teach them spelling: they can't read yet.
2 Phonic alternatives
A very common error, with two main forms:
(a) The speller, not sure about the way to write a particular sound, chooses a form which is wrong here but correct in a different spelling context: nessessary (as in lesson) hows (house)(as in how).
(b) The speller may produce a form which is not possible in normal English spelling patterns: au (how) perfikt (-kt is not an English pattern; -ct is) whrite (write).
Both errors suggest weak visual memory: the second is more serious than the first.
The basic spelling strategies (pages 9–11) need to be applied.
3 Prefixes and suffixes
These cause trouble because often the speller does not recognise that words can be made up of different bits brought together.
So he doesn't recognise the effect of things like: dis- in- mis- additions which work by adding on to existing words, thus: disappear misspell inlay.
Suffixes tend to cause difficulty, especially when the words to which the suffix is to be added end in vowels or l:
Everyone can get confused, because the pronunciation of the word rarely indicates which suffix is the correct one.
So we have very common errors, like these:
appearence
The pronunciation doesn't distinguish between -ance and -ence (see "unstressed syllables" below).
makeing
The speller is confused about whether the e stays or goes.
lovley
The -e has become attracted to the -ly; the speller is seeing the word as a whole, instead of as love + ly
One cure if pupils have this difficulty is to syllabify (see page 14).
Another, more useful in the log run, is to draw attention to prefixes and suffixes as being separate bits of words.
4 The unstressed syllable
Most misspellings in words of more than one syllable have been found by research to occur in the unstressed syllable, especially in the vowel.
This is because in English the vowel sound in the unstressed syllable almost always sounds the same — like the -er in butter when people talk.
Although the spelling may be very different in the different words, the sound is more or less the same.
So spellers who rely on sound (that is, spellers with a weak visual memory) often make mistakes.
Thus:
butter
picture
different
constant
similar
The final syllables in these words all have a similar sound when the words are said normally.
A similar problem is the consonant that sometimes seems to disappear in pronunciation: often (is pronounced offen) Christmas (is pronounced Chrissmas).
In both cases, the simplest teaching strategy is to pronounce words normally, but then to add a pronunciation that, though incorrect, stresses the spelling: of-ten, con-stant.
5 Single for double, double for single
The second most common error after the unstressed syllable: shining becomes shinning dropped becomes droped furry becomes fury later becomes latter.
Because the error often produces a different word altogether the misspeller ought to recognise his mistake: so this again suggests poor visual memory.
Teaching should draw attention to the effect on the vowel of the single or double letter combination; but this error also involves the effect of the e-marker (see Glossary).
When the pupil's errors have been analysed, approach the teaching very largely in the order: initial letters — phonic alternatives — prefixes, suffixes — unstressed syllables — single/double.
There is no point in teaching prefixes if the child is making errors in the initial consonant; and if he's uncertain about the relationship of sound to symbol, and is producing lots of phonic alternatives, then that must be solved before anything else is approached.
These five points do not cover all possible errors, but most spelling mistakes fall into one or more of these groups.
There is sometimes more than one reason for an error, though: always find out if an error is a real mistake that needs your attention, or simply a slip of the pen that the writer would correct on re-reading.
 "Slips of the pen" happen more often than we might suppose and certainly do not necessarily indicate carelessness, idleness or ignorance.
They are, in part, inevitable in writing, especially when the writer is thinking hard, and may be missed when the piece is proof-read, because we expect the words to be correct, and read them as though they were.
A different reader will spot them quickly, and newspapers and publishers employ people one of whose jobs it is to pick out the "literals" (slips) made by writers, typists and typesetters: readers do not necessarily assume that the editor or journalist can't spell if they find a printing error.
A teacher has to be conscious of the different between an error and a slip.
Basic spelling strategy "A" 
Develop this approach as the heart of any teaching you do: it stresses the visual and auditory side of spelling for the pupil, and also helps him to understand how the patterns of spelling work.
It can operate for the whole class, or for individuals, and can be used whatever basic approach to teaching spelling you prefer.
1
Write the word, on the board or on paper, perfectly legibly.
2
Pronounce the word clearly and distinctly, using your normal voice.
If you have a regional accent, do not attempt to change it to standard English.
Draw attention, if necessary, to the fact that words may not be pronounced the way their spelling suggest they will sound.
3
The child pronounces the word.
Make sure he has pronounced it distinctly.
Do not correct any regional accent he may have.
4
Give him time to look at the word.
Draw his attention particularly to any difficult parts, by underlining, or merely pointing.
5
Ask the child to write the word himself from memory.
He must not copy it letter by letter; erase or cover the original word.
6
The child now turns the paper over, or covers his first attempt, if it was right, and writes it again from memory.
7
If he made a mistake, repeat stages 2–4.
8
Make sure he uses the word again soon in his writing, but naturally.
This strategy stresses the following points:
1
The learner sees the word written correctly.
2
An association is made between its appearance and its sound.
Visual and auditory aspects are combined.
3
He makes his own connection between visual and auditory by saying the word.
4
He learns to analyse and recognise possible danger points.
5
Visual memory is emphasised and worked.
Use a variant of this strategy in normal teaching.
If children ask for words during writing, follow the pattern below based on the strategy.
Do not write the word in his own spelling book for him to copy: copying does not teach correct spelling.
(See also "Corrections" , page 18.)
Instead:
1
Always ask him to have a go first, so that children come to you with a word already written.
This will give you a clearer idea of the kinds of problem the individual children have; and anyway, it may be right!
2
Keep a word book of your own, on your desk.
3
When a child wants a word, write in your book.
4
The child studies it, memorises it and writes it on his paper from memory.
This reinforces visual memory again.
If the same words keep reappearing (and they probably will) prepare Language Master cards (see page 15) or a file-card system for the pupils to refer to.
The necessary conditions for learning to spell properly are:
1
The child must be shown the word in print, and at the same time hear it pronounced.
2
He must be allowed to fix it in his mind before he has to write it.
3
He should be encouraged and allowed to write it slowly enough to write it correctly.
4
He should be encouraged to visualise the word and to "read it off" from the image in his head.
5
The word must be written often.
A note on time
It may appear that putting this strategy into practice will take more time than the conventional practice of writing words in the children's own spelling books.
You might think, therefore, that this strategy is unrealistic, given the demands on time in the classroom.
However, consider these points:
1
Letting the children have a go first can save time, because they may be right.
2
Writing the words in your book provides you with a ready-made store of words which you know your pupils have difficulty with, and from which you can construct a teaching programme.
In addition, if you want to choose words for a spelling test, your book provides them for you.
3
The saving on paper is great.
4
The children are producing their own spelling dictionary which is freely available to the whole class.
5
It avoids one of the most familiar classroom situations in the primary school — the child who comes to you for a word which is already written down higher up the page.
6
It means the teacher only has to write a word once, in the teacher's book, instead of thirty-plus times, once in each child's book.
Dictionaries
With pupils at a more advanced stage of learning, encourage and demonstrate the use of dictionary (see Appendix 3).
As a matter of course, all teachers should have a good dictionary available in the classroom, and should take time to show pupils how to use it.
By "good" , I mean a dictionary like the Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary, or the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary.
Learning how to use "real" dictionaries is a most important part of a child's reference and research skills.
Do remember, though, that if you don't know the spelling of the beginning of a word, it is extremely difficult to find it in a dictionary.
Basic spelling strategy "B" 
It is most important that the pupil, especially if he has difficulty with spelling, should see you as a sympathetic helper who wants him to learn, and not as an examiner who only tells him he's wrong.
Helping the pupil to help himself
The pupil can be given his own strategy to follow which will help him to learn.
Tell him that to become better at spelling, he should do these things:
1
Look at the word; say if to yourself.
2
If you have difficulties with spelling, trace the word with your finger.
(Sometimes you can write the word on a blackboard, and ask the child to rub it out by tracing over the letters with his finger.)
3
See if it looks the way it sounds.
4
Underline, or write in a different colour, the bit of the word that causes the difficulty: cf. strategy "A" , number 4 (page 9).
5
Shut your eyes: see if you can see the word in your head.
If you can't, say the word to yourself, and see if the sound reminds you of how it looks.
6
If that doesn't work, look again at the word, and say it in a way that will remind you of how it is spelled: say Wed-nes-day; clim-bed, and pronounce the bits separately; but remember how the word really sounds.
7
Cover the word: write it from memory.
Try to see the word in your head as you're writing.
8
If you can't remember it, don't copy it: look at it again, and try again to write it from memory.
9
Check back to see if you've got it right.
If you haven't, do it again.
10
Later in the day, write the word again, from memory.
If you're not sure about it, look it up before you try.
I have written it out at this length for you, the teacher.
Obviously, it will need to be presented more simply to your pupils.
The important stages are 1 — 7 — 8 — 9: so you can reduce the strategy to Look — cover — remember — write
If you introduce the pupil to this strategy, you are teaching him how to learn.
The teacher's job is not to correct mistakes the pupil has already made, but to help him not to make that mistake next time.
Discovering which words to teach
In all cases, the principle is the same: the child's errors are collected and analysed by grouping them into families.
Of the four different methods suggested below, the first is the best.
Ideally, you should treat each child as an individual, with his own list of words to be learnt; but that's impossible when you have another thirty children in the class.
So any word list for teaching must be a compromise.
Remember that if a child can spell successfully most words when he's writing, it's a waste of your time to be teaching him: teach the ones who need it.
Method 1
Examine the children's writing and collect 100 spelling errors.
It's best to use the work of three or four children spanning the ability range; but children of less than nine may not write much, and so you probably need more than three or four children's work to make up the 100.
Classify the errors as suggested in Analysis (pages 30–42) and prepare a teaching strategy to deal with the patterns of error revealed.
Method 2
Make a separate list of your own of the words children ask for while they are writing.
This is a very good indication of what they really want to spell.
You could, if certain words occur very frequently, prepare Language Master cards, or a wall sheet for those words (see page 15).
Your word book (page 9) is a good source for these words, of course.
This won't tell you where they would make a mistake if they tried to spell it themselves; so you need to add it to the collection of words from writing as in Method 1.
Draw the pupils' attention to the parts of the word that cause the trouble (see Basic strategies "A" and "B" ).
Method 3
Administer the Schonell spelling test or any other spelling test or list (see Appendix 3) in the way recommended, by dictation to the children.
Collect in, and analyse the first ten or fifteen errors.
Method 4
Use the various spelling lists published e.g. Schonell's Essential Spelling List (in Essentials in Teaching and Testing Spelling.
Macmillan) or Arvidson's Test Words (in  Learning to Spell, Wheaton).
Dictate the chosen list: the pupils leave a line if they do not know how to spell a word.
The words that are omitted form the word lists for learning, and if the children spell a word incorrectly, that word is also added to the list.
It is important to remember that it is not the spelling of individual words that you are trying to teach, but the basic spelling patterns, so that pupils can spell correctly words they haven't been taught but want to write.
Do not give the children marks if you are testing for analysis.
It is important that they should understand that they are not being examined to see how ignorant they are but that you are trying, with their help, to help them to become good spellers.
See it as a joint effort.
Basic teaching points
The child should always go through the same basic procedure: seeing the whole word — hearing and pronouncing — writing from memory.
This involves the visual and auditory memories.
But it's important too to draw the child's attention to the patterns of spelling, and to show him how to analyse words.
The ideas below are to be used in addition to the basic strategies, not instead of them.
1
Where children have failed consistently, remove their feeling of failure by giving a series of short regular lessons, designed to produce success — for instance, three simple words daily if the children are aged 6–8, four for the 9–10 range, and six for the 11–13 children.
Make sure the children succeed: set out to convince them that they can spell, not that they can't.
So don't give complicated tests, and so on.
2
Syllabification Breaking the word into suitable units, usually syllables, is a very useful teaching procedure: caravan = cara-van or ca-ra-van.
It's easier for the learner to remember three syllables, each of which is simple to spell, than a seven-letter word which is hard.
This is particularly important for prefixes and suffixes: dis-ap-point-ment care-ful-ly.
Teaching like this helps the pupils to learn the pattern of spelling.
You are stressing now how difficult the whole word is (photograph) but how easy it is when it's broken down (pho-to-graph).
Syllabifying demonstrates to the learner that there are logical patterns at work.
Draw his attention to the way the same syllables recur in different words: pic-ture o-pin-ion frac-ture on-ion. tor-ture Many common errors can be cured by syllabifying.
The two words absent and present are often misspelled as abscent and prescent.
Perhaps there is an unconscious echo of the word scent or descent.
Syllabifying as ab-sent and drawing attention to the familiarity of sent can stop this error.
Similarly, the misspelling abscence can be cured by reminding pupils of absent, and drawing attention to sent again.
3
Give positive advice, not negative.
So, for instance, to teach separate, draw attention to the para — "like parade" , NOT "Don't use an" e "and make it seperate." 
Wrong examples confuse pupils who already have difficulties with words, so never give an incorrect example on the board as a teaching point.
N.B. Good spellers, on the other hand, often enjoy searching for exceptions and looking at incorrect examples, because they can see what's wrong.
4
They're, there, their Don't try and teach these together: that will guarantee confusion.
Teach there with here, where; their with your, our; they're with we're, you're.
A useful method is to have frames, that is sentences with blanks to be filled in.
(a)
Where are they?— on the table.
(They're, You're, We're)
(b)
Where are you going?
I'm going —.
(here, there)
(c)
Whose book is that?
You know the Smiths?
It's — book.
(their, your, our).
5
Sometimes it's helpful to write up a word so that you draw attention to the fact that its syllables form other words: island — is land; breakfast — break fast.
It can become a game too: spot the inside words — practice,(act, ice); cemetery (met, meter).
6
The Language Master Machines can release the teacher for valuable contact time.
If it becomes clear that some words are being asked for over and over prepare Language Master cards.
Write the word clearly (not in capital letters), and record your voice on the card saying it as naturally as possible.
Be careful that the words sound the way they do normally, because it's very easy when you pronounce individual words to make them sound odd.
The cards can be stored alphabetically, and children can use them instead of taking up the teacher's time.
The Language Master is likely to be more successful than a wall-chart, because the child hears the word as well as seeing it.
You can also colour-code or underline parts of the word which might cause difficulty, and can comment on the tricky bit when you record.
So a typical card might be like this.
The word is usefully, with the suffix -ly in a different colour.
The teacher's voice said"Usefully.
That's useful with -ly at the end.
Usefully."
At a deliberate talking speed that takes a card about 12 inches (30 cm) long.
The pupil can also record his voice, to check his pronunciation.
The Language Master is only one machine.
Another which could be used, if you want a longer stretch of time for the recording, is the Synchrofax Audio Page (see Appendix 2).
Exceptions to the rule
All teachers know that as soon as you say "Words never end in -ley" , some bright child asks, "What about valley?" 
There are, it is true, many exceptions to the basic spelling patterns, and often they can confuse everyone thoroughly.
So:
1
Don't list exceptions at the same time as you discuss particular spellings: acknowledge them but don't make a fuss about them.
2
Where there are exceptions, it's helpful to consider them not as different patterns, but as words: that is, the pattern of valley, alley,(cf. ally) should not be stressed, because there are very few words spelled that way.
At other times, the options are less clear-cut.
The ea of dead and head is much less common than the normal ea as in eat or bead: but it needs attention because there are important words spelled that way.
In cases like this, the solution is to choose for teaching the words most likely to be needed by your pupils.
Will they really want treadle or dread?
They will certainly need bread, measure and ready.
3
It is more important to make the pupil aware that there is actually a spelling choice, for example between ea or e.
Thus, faced with words with a medial e sound like: head bed thread or led health except the pupil ought to be clear that because there is a spelling choice, he is encouraged to use the dictionary to check which is the correct form for this context.
The same basic policy should be used for all "exceptions" : acknowledge the existence of alternatives, and encourage the habit of checking guesses by referring to the dictionary.
4
There are some words which are simply anomalous, like women, or once or gaol (which is, anyway, being pushed out by the more reasonable jail).
With anomalies, you either go into the history of the word, or advise the learner to memorise it by finding a mnemonic.
The advice on page 11, number 6, is helpful: most people devise mnemonics which help them to remember particular words by saying them in special ways.
We do tend to try and remember odd words, because of their oddity.
Finally, an exploration of unconventional patterns can make an engrossing lesson or series of lessons with pupils who become interested in the whole question of  spelling and its history.
For example, using a good etymological dictionary, try looking up the origins and spelling changes in words like: ache delight ghost guest health (and whole, hale) island thought Changes in place names are particularly interesting, because they demonstrate clearly the way in which spelling does not determine pronunciation, but so often limps along behind.
Doing corrections
The teacher's job is not to correct mistakes the pupil has already made, but to help him not to make that mistake next time.
Although it is usual for children to be asked to write out errors a number of times, this doesn't often improve their spelling, because repetitive copying does not involve the use of visual memory.
Some preliminary points
1
Don't mark every error.
Choose three or four and pick the ones that most need correcting, that is, the words the pupil ought to be able to spell at this stage (see What goes wrong?, page 6).
Relate your corrections to what you know of the child's general approach to spelling.
2
I said "the words he ought to be able to spell" .
But this is complicated.
An indifferent speller will know that some words cause him difficulty, and will ask for them; but he will also think he is spelling some words correctly that he is, in fact, getting wrong.
Be aware, then, that he simply will not be able to proof-read his own work, because he may think, for instance, that latter is the correct way to spell later.
So an important strategy for helping the learner is occasionally to list, at the end of the piece or work you are marking, all the errors the pupil has made, writing them correctly and clearly, and to ask him to study them in the way the Basic spelling strategy "B" suggests (page 11).
3
Marking a child's spelling errors should always be less important than reading with sympathy and understanding what he is trying to say.
Suggested ways of doing corrections
1
Often a child asked to read his work aloud will pick out his own errors as he tries to say them, because he is a good enough reader to be confused by what he wrote down.
This suggests again a poor visual memory.
You can try by giving him his work back and saying,"You've made three spelling mistakes there.
Can you find them yourself?"
But only try this if he's likely to find them, that is, if he's a potentially good speller.
2
When correcting errors, do not insert letters in a word that is wrong.
It can confuse the child.
Instead:
(a)
If the children write in pencil, you can write the correct form on a separate piece of paper, or in the margin, preferably using ordinary pencil.
The pupil erases the wrong word, and puts in the right one.
He can then erase your word, and the work looks unmarked.
Or
(b)
Delete the wrong word completely.
Write in the whole of the correct version of the word in pencil, either above the deletion, which is best, or in the margin.
Some children, although they wouldn't say so, are upset if their work is heavily marked in red by the teacher, especially if they were pleased with what they wrote.
3
If the child writes out the word somewhere else (not, preferably, in the same book he does his writing in) say, in his word book, he can use felt-tips to colour the parts of the word which caused him difficulty.
4
Use the Language Master.
The child can make his own cards of his own errors.
Fold or clip some blank paper over the white card so that the pupil writes on that, and the card can be re-used.
Otherwise he follows the same basic procedure as the teacher (see page 15).
5
Doing fair copies of written work, infrequently and not as a punishment, can be useful; but give it a real purpose.
Suggest it, for instance, as a way of presenting work to real readers outside the classroom — parents, relatives, friends in other classes.
Remember, though, that everyone makes more mistakes in copying than in original writing, so you may end up with more errors in the rewritten piece than in the original.
6
The rewriting mentioned in 5 becomes most real when writing is seen as first draft, that is, when the writer intends to rework it later.
In this case, the student can write in pencil the words he isn't certain how to spell; or underlines them for his own or the teacher's later attention.
In rewriting, the spellings can be put right, and the finished piece of work is more likely to be accurate.
But writers want to redraft only when they are concerned enough about their work to want to improve it; a good deal of the writing done in schools pupils would not wish to redraft, because it isn't important enough to them.
7
A very simple and effective thing for the teacher to do is to comment on errors, not as a complaint ( "You should know how to spell that word by now" ) but as praise for the attempt.
( "You had a good try and you used the right sounds: it sounds like that, but we write it like this" ).
8
Marking the error with a symbol like sp or s without also giving the correct version of the word, is unproductive, because it merely demonstrates to the pupil that he has "failed" , without showing him how to improve.
He probably knows already that his spelling is weak: what he wants to be told is how to make it better.
Be careful, therefore, that you don't merely make him feel worse about his spelling.
A teacher should be helper and guide, not a printer's proof-reader.
There are some very interesting comments and ideas about encouraging pupils to become competent proof-readers, in Nancy Martin's Here, Now and Beyond (Oxford English Source Books, Oxford University Press 1968) which also contains notes on spelling.
The thing to remember about proof-reading is that a proof-reader's corrections are intended as advice to the printer, not as a punishment to the writer.
Marking
The section on Doing corrections (page 18) is about what the pupil might do, but what the teacher does is in many ways more important.
Pupils can be encouraged or discouraged as writers by what the teacher does with their writing, and the way you receive written work and respond to it powerfully affects the work the pupils do next time.
I want, therefore, to illustrate how marking can be concerned with spelling, punctuation and structure, but can also simultaneously pay attention to the more important aspects of writing — what the writer is trying to do, and whether he has achieved it.
The pupil is 14: the class had been reading Leon Garfield's story.
 "The Boy and the Monkey" , and had been asked to write a court report about the trial in that story.
This is what the boy wrote: The marker considered the piece, then decided to type it out.
He took five minutes to type out the piece and comment on it.
What the pupil received back looked like this.
THEFT OF A BOY AND A MONKEY
Tim the boy and his monkey Pistol were accused of the theft of the ring.
Tim and Pistol were in a pub when Pistol had been made angry by the men in the pub.
He landed on the person's head who had given the ring to Tim in front of him and was sent to court at Newgate.
The Judge said that he had stolen Lady Margaret's ring, and that she had only bought it that day and the ring was a very expensive diamond.
The Jury said that he would be charged with the theft of the ring, and was going to be hanged but the ring had cost eleven pence and one halfpenny.
The Judge said if it had cost one penny more he would have been hanged.
The Judge said, "You may not be hanged for your crime, you must be sentenced to seven years to his Majesty's colonies in Virginia, where your bond will be purchased, and you will work as a purchaser directs for seven years in Virginia." 
I like the way you've got it to sound like a court report, especially where you've used the reported speech for the Judge and Jury.
I've changed quite a few things
(a)
a few spellings — can you see which ones?
(b)
I've added some full stops
(c)
I've left out and altered some things because they weren't right for a court report.
I think you need to look again at the bit I've marked above where I couldn't understand it, and try to clear up the problem.
I like the way what you write seems to show what you felt about the story.
It sounds as though you really enjoyed reading it.
Looking at the original piece, one's first reaction is that it is not good.
The handwriting perhaps prejudices the reader against it, and misspellings like acused, juge, sentencet, can so easily make a teacher feel that the piece is incompetent and deserves low marks.
Typing it out shows quickly that the work is better than it appears: indeed, once the courtroom scene is reached, the writer's touch becomes sure, and his competence in handling reported speech is impressive.
The overall intention of the marking then is not to punish the pupil, but to show him how to improve by building on what he is already good at.
You will notice that the comments do pay attention to spelling, but that the main purpose of the response is to show the pupil that he has achieved what he set out to do, that is, to write it like a court report, and to include the main information from the story.
In addition, the marker has responded as master-craftsman to apprentice, so to speak: he knows what a court report ought to be like, and so has helped the pupil-writer towards that understanding, and has directed his attention to the part where the reader was confused.
Teaching ideas and games
The basic strategies do the teaching: most of the ideas in this section are meant as diversions, or ways of playing with words.
But they also involve one or other of the basic spelling skills.
Flash cards
For group work: possible with the whole class, but difficult.
Flash-card games are useful for introducing words for Topic or Maths work, or any specific subject.
But remember they only teach the spelling of the word, not an understanding of its meaning.
Select specific words as necessary: one word per card.
1
Pronounce the word, show the card for ten seconds.
The length of time is important.
2
Cover the card.
Children are asked to remember the word, and think of it, for another ten seconds.
3
Children write the word down.
4
As a way of "marking" show the word again, and say it.
You can underline, colour-code, or in any other way emphasise particular parts of the word you want to draw attention to.
The child is learning to visualise.
He must remember the word and carry it in his head for some time, and so is writing from an image.
Flash cards with phrases
Group and pair work.
Class possible but difficult.
This is a development of flash cards which works the visual memory even harder, because the pupil has to carry an image of strings of words.
1
The card this time has not more than six words on it, because that seems to be about all that most people can hold at once.
Allow about fifteen seconds' looking time.
It must be a phrase or short sentence, and include words that you feel the children need to learn to spell, e.g. "The sun is really shining." 
They should not be disconnected words.
Pronounce the phrase while showing the card.
2
It is possible to dictate whole passages by using flash cards like this.
3
Show the card again if the pupil gets stuck.
The visual memory is being worked hard here; the child has to carry strings of words, related by meaning.
It's easier, though, to remember a meaningful sentence or phrase of six words than to remember six disconnected words.
Word families and dictionary work
Best for individual and pair work.
The children work on lists of words with instructions to discover specific patterns.
For instance:
Find words in this list which have the same two or more letters next to each other in the same order.
Underline the letters with coloured pen.
You'll find there is more than one set of letters.
Arrange these words in dictionary order:
These two represent two extremes of difficulty: the first involves only initial letters, the second involves going to the fourth or fifth letter to decide on order.
Nonsense words
Class, group or pair work.
1
The teacher asked children to spell nonsense words.
He says the words, the children decide on how those sounds should be spelled.
Construct the nonsense words to fit what you know to be the specific difficulties of the pupils.
So you might call together a group who have difficulty with the single-double problem and offer them: linning grining frumy bolly etc.
There are two possible ways of using answers.
The second is better.
(a)
You can compare with your own previously decided spelling, and accept or reject the offers as you would normally.
(b)
You can simply accept any answer and then ask the rest of the class or group if they agree.
Thus:
You ask for a spelling of frimble.
Child offers frimbal.
You ask class for comments.
Draw their attention to the -bal and ask for examples of real words which sound the same as frimble.
Consider their spelling.
You write up the offered words, correctly, without asking how they are spelled.
The children may offer:
If you want a definite conclusion, you can ask which seems the most likely spelling (in this case obviously -ble) and accept that.
2
Children, individually or in groups, can make up their own nonsense words, and decide how they should be spelled.
3
Both of these games can be worked in reverse.
The spelling can be given, and you (or a pupil) can ask how it should be pronounced, e.g. @how would you say  You can ask a pupil to give similar real words to support a particular pronunciation, e.g. sawk could be associated with law, saw, squawk, etc.
4
Invite as many different spellings as possible as a spoken nonsense word: discuss the suggested spellings, decide which are the most likely, and make lists of real words which fit the pattern, e.g.  Games like these demonstrate to children the relationship between sound and symbol which it is fundamental to understand in order to become a competent speller.
The auditory memory is having to find logical patterns of symbols to fit the sounds heard.
By asking the pupils to construct lists of similar words you are affirming the underlying logic of English spelling — that there are patterns and families, that particular sounds may have different ways of being written down, but that there are only a limited number of ways, and they do actually obey certain rules.
Games
1 Hangman
Hangman is well known as a spelling game, but it is less useful than it should be, because it is usually played as a pure guessing game.
Much better is the next game
2 Shannon's Game
Called after the man who invented it for research purposes.
Play it, to begin with, with the whole class.
(a)
Put a number of dashes to represent the number of letters in the word.
If you wish put the first letter of the word, too.
Thus: c—————
(b)
The children must guess the next letter.
Count and record the number of guesses.
After ten guesses, if they haven't guessed, tell them: ch————
(c)
They will find the next letter in this word easier.
They will probably guess a e i o u, and if they're not yet right, follow with r (chr) or, with older children, chl:-chu———
The next stage produces as guesses c, b, m, n, etc.
(d)
When they are certain, not just guessing, they can say the whole word: church.
The point of the game is that without being conscious of it, the pupils inevitably apply to their guesses their knowledge of the structure of English spelling.
If any child makes wild random guesses note quietly who it is: those pupils will need your attention.
The game indicates the predictability of certain spelling structures.
Discussion of the number of guesses recorded can be used to point out the different kinds of letter order in words.
You can also record the letters they suggest, and talk about them afterwards, how likely they were, whether they were pure guesswork or genuine predictions, which words they may have had in mind, etc.
3 Dictionary games
Best played as a team game with the class, especially at the ends of days, weeks or terms.
You say a word, the children find it; first team to find it gets a point.
You may have to handicap so that the same group doesn't always win; for instance, some children find one word, while others find another.
Or you can ask them to find how many words begin with a particular group of letters: chro-; mini; gn-.
4
Growing words For individuals, pairs, groups or the class.
A word is written, and the last letter is used as the beginning of the next one.
Use short (3–4 letter words) to begin with, if you think it best.
Later, any letter after the first can begin the next word but then the new word must include all the remaining letters:
5 Ghosts
An excellent if rather complex game.
Older children can become obsessively interested in it.
(a)
Divide class into teams of 4–5.
(b)
The teacher writes on the board, and is neutral judge and scorer.
Have a good dictionary available for reference.
(c)
Team 1 says a letter which is the first letter of a word they have in mind.
They say, for instance, b.
They do not say what the word is, unless challenged (see f).
(d)
The next team, with a word in mind beginning with b, which may or may not be the same as the original word, add a letter.
They say b e.
(e)
The smallest allowable word has three letters.
The team which completes a word loses a point.
Thus, if team 3, thinking of beef adds an e they have completed a word — bee — and lose a point; but only if another team spots it and challenges them.
Names of people and places, and abbreviations, are not allowed.
But words like jack which are names but also things are allowed.
(f)
Since teams are trying not to complete a word, sometimes they invent words to wriggle out.
If a following team thinks there is no such word, they may say "Challenge" .
The last team then has to say the word they had in mind.
If the judge accepts it, the challenging team loses a point.
If not, the challenged lose a point.
Any spelling error can also be challenged: if a word has been spelled wrongly and is challenged, the last team loses a point, not the team that misspelled it.
A team that is challenged and has a real word in mind, but misspells it, loses.
(g)
Three points lose a life, and the team is then a ghost and is out.
(h)
It's best to have a time limit for a team's deliberations — say thirty seconds — or the game goes on for ever.
(i)
Enthusiasts aged 11 and over can be introduced to Superghosts, in which letters can be added at either end of the word.
Note
1
Anagrams and crosswords are well known but generally don't teach spelling.
They give the good speller a chance to use his skill, but may depress a poor speller.
However, if you give the child the crossword clues and the answers, not in order, then he has to read carefully, and fit words together.
2
As far as possible, all games for teaching spelling should involve writing, and not be only oral.
Only good spellers can spell easily orally.
Games which pressurise weak spellers by making them write words quickly are not good for them.
3
A good spelling game is one that stresses visual patterns and makes it clear to the players that there are predictable patterns which they can anticipate.
Etymology and word families
Most people are fascinated by the way words change their meanings and their form and spelling: your pupils may not know that the history of any one word can be a  story in itself (like the etymology of the word "history" ).
Some words, indeed, have stories attached to them, like psych-; others, hard to spell, like sword, gnat, knight or parliament, the days of the week and the months of the year, become accessible and memorable when their stories are known.
The way words generate whole clusters of other words can come as another new and interesting idea.
The connections between sign, signal, and signature; or bomb and bombardier; or, at a subtler level, inhibition and exhibition — these can all demonstrate that there are other ways of recalling spellings than simply trying to memorise the letters in a word.
As a general principle, every so often it's worth spending a little time relating words to their root, either the immediate derivation (fanciful — fancy, variety — vary, especially — special), or etymologically (hippopotamus, fee, salary, window).
Analysis
Analysis of a child's errors is not just a matter of marking or counting the mistakes: it involves trying to see what general patterns of error emerge when mistakes are classified.
Just as there are families of correctly spelled words, so there tend to be families of error.
By analysing the work of a child or group of children, the teacher can teach more economically, more carefully, and with more chance of success.
Each child is likely to have his own particular patterns, but it's not necessary, or desirable, or possible, to analyse each child's errors as thoroughly as these examples do.
But if you want a specific remedial programme for one child, or want to find one pupil's strengths and weaknesses, the analysis is the best way.
It is also something you can do with the particular pupil whose book you are marking.
It will not always be possible to classify all the errors.
Some have no apparent logic.
But trying to classify and understand them will show you a good deal about what is going on for that child.
The crucial point is that spelling errors are not simply mistakes: they are miscues, with reasons for each miscue.
Find the reason why the pupil spelled the word that way, and there is a chance you can teach him not to.
The following three sections take one class and two children and analyse their work in the way suggested in Discovering which words to teach (page 12).
Analysis 1: 100 errors from a class's writing
One hundred errors were collected from the work of a class of 9–10 year olds, writing about parachute jumping.
All the errors quoted in this section came from the one hundred.
For a complete list of the words, see the end of this section.
An approach
1
Collect the words by writing down the misspelled form, not the correct form.
If there is any possibility of being puzzled later, note both the misspelling and the correct form, e.g. hire (higher), ball (bail), of (off).
Count different misspellings of the same word as different errors, e.g. floting, flouting,(floating) = two errors.
Note if the same misspelling occurs more than once.
2
Arrange the words first in the most helpful way to begin your analysis.
I do it alphabetically by error.
Thus iys (eyes) goes under i not e.
You may prefer a different way.
3
When you begin classifying, look for the most obvious groups first.
As you eliminate a group of words, patterns begin to emerge.
It's at this stage that the work is most interesting and most difficult.
You can take over other people's classifications (Margaret Peters suggests some interesting ones in her work) or devise your own that you feel comfortable with.
4
Not all the words fit easily into categories.
Where, for instance, would you put Spleep (sleep)?
Keep one category for "unclassifiable" .
But if there are more than about 12–15 words in the unclassifiable group, and your children are older than 9, then look again more carefully, because you have probably put words there that ought to be in a different category.
5
Some words can go in more than one category: put them in the category of the simplest error, or the one that offers the simplest way in to teaching.
Thus, pesfull is placed in the group of suffix errors, because a pupil might well not have recognised that the word was peace + ful.
If, after learning successfully about the suffix -ful, he still makes that error, then consider it as a phonic alternative.
6
Once you have constructed satisfactory categories, you can see much more clearly what kind of teaching programme is needed.
But remember that not all the errors in one category are caused by the same underlying problem.
Safly and hardle are both in the -ly suffix group; but the child who misspells safly seems to understand about the suffix -ly and so is potentially a better speller than the one who hasn't understood the suffix and produces hardle.
7
Finally, remember that this analysis produces a whole class programme.
It is unlikely to solve specific problems for which you need to do an individual analysis.
What it will do is to identify those kinds of misspelling that most pupils  are likely to make: appropriate teaching at this stage helps to avoid remedial teaching later.
It does NOT identify the particular words you must teach: more importantly than that, it points to the patterns that need learning.
Doing an analysis like this is difficult and takes time.
It's best not to try and fit it in during school breaks because you need a continuous stretch of time at it.
Do it systematically.
As Margaret Peter's research showed, any systematic approach to spelling, whatever its basis, is better than no approach at all.
The purpose of analysis is to break the errors into different groups so that teaching can be specific.
It is the causes of error that you are looking for: find them, and you can help the pupils improve.
Analysis isolates possible patterns of error which indicate underlying causes.
The particular one hundred words in this case categories as follows: this is the order in which I worked through the set.
Prefix, suffix
Twenty words, mostly involving suffix errors: -ly, -ful, -ing, -ed.
Also dis-, de-, lonley, safly, comeing, wakeing.
Because of this confusion, some words add an unnecessary -e-: lightley, slowley.
Three errors involve the change of y to i: cryed, emptyness, tryed; others show confusion about what the actual prefix or suffix is: full for ful, diss for dis, -d or -t for -ed (see pages 37–8) are the kind of errors made.
Letters omitted or inserted
Omissions, sixteen words.
In five, the omitted letter is -h- (wirling, wizzing etc.): in four, an -a- is omitted from the form -ea- (reched, ment, serching, heving).
Sometimes the error is a phonic attempt, as in ment, relived; sometimes it is a non-auditory error, as in sared (scared), fligs (flings), canged (changed).
Here the first thing to check is whether they are slips or not: if the pupil can correct his own errors, don't count them as serious spelling miscues.
Insertions or additions total four words: recourd, medale, sundenly, spleep (sleep).
Diphthongs
In twelve cases, it seems that the pupil's attempt at spelling the diphthong has caused the trouble 
This is, of course, a particularly tricky area, mainly because it needs systematic teaching, in both spelling and reading teaching.
Considering the three /o/ words, it is clear that there are three different spelling patterns represented: It needs to be indicated that these three forms, plus the o of open, are the major ways in which the sound is spelled: in other words, when the pronunciation indicates the sound o, then it's likely, depending on the position of the sound in the word, to be spelled like this: The oa is a medial spelling, but much rarer than o-e: boat, coat, float, goat, soap, throat.
It should also be pointed out that this is the pattern for the most usual spellings for the other vowel and diphthong sounds:
Single-double, double-single
In this case, seven of the eight examples are single instead of double letters: beter, faling, tumy, of (off) sudenly.
The exception is breezzy.
Phonic alternatives
I classify seven words as indicating probable problems with reading, because they are the kind of errors younger children would be expected to make: fritend, herd, crecher, dangrus, tow (two), mac, mec (make).
The reading of the children who made those errors would be looked at carefully.
Mac and mec (make) from one child's work need particular attention.
Thirty words in addition are phonic alternatives: most of them are reasonable attempts:
Summary
The analysis, then, suggests the following: on the whole, the class is competent at spelling: even though there are some weird errors, the type of error is on the safe side, and the largest single category is that of reasonable phonic alternatives, which suggests that the pupils' basic approach is sound.
It looks as if almost 50 per cent of the errors could be cured by a systematic consideration of prefixes and suffixes, of most common spelling of diphthongs, and by encouraging the habit of checking guesses, especially about diphthongs and digraphs like wh. (see also Exceptions to the rule, page 16.)
To explain more fully the process of analysis and classifying, I append here some sample decision-making about words in the 100-word sample.
The six words are:
1 areplain
(aeroplane) The errors are in the unstressed syllable, and the unexpectedness of the ae and the plane is confusing.
In one sense, the error to be noted is the unstressed syllable rather than the others: plain for plane is understandable.
The misspelling may be because the child has not previously seen the word written down, but more likely because he has seen it in the context of his reading, without paying much attention to anything more than its contour — that is, he has recognised the word without having to decode it, and has understood it without giving its spelling structure close attention.
This is, of course, what efficient readers always do in their reading.
Since it is a reasonable phonic alternative, this suggests that the error is one of visualisation.
It is probably best classified as a phonic alternative, that is, it suggests that any spelling strategy should pay attention to the visual memory.
2 comeing
What has happened, as it so often does, is that the child knows come, has adding ing, and has not recognised, or does not know, that the e should disappear.
It is best to classify this as a prefix-suffix error: any corrective  teaching should focus the children's attention on the effect of -ing on words that end in -e.
3 geos
The first reaction to this is that the speller needs to be looked at more closely: the inversion of letters here, and the production of a completely un-English-looking word, suggests that the child has considerable difficulty with visualisation, and possibly has trouble reading, too.
But the right letters are there, even if they're in the wrong order, so he knows how it ought to be spelled, up to a point.
Classify as "unclassifiable" at the moment, and identify the child as being one who needs attention.
4 mac, mec
(make) Both in the same script: the difference in the attempt to spell the same word indicates fairly clearly a weak visual memory.
But, in addition.
there are two other problems: the c/k confusion, and the inability to understand the effect of the e-marker.
Of the two, quite clearly the c/k confusion precedes the other in calling for attention.
It would be pointless to teach him the effect of the e-marker if he's not clear about which symbols represent which sounds.
He needs to be tested on his understanding of sound-symbol relationships; delay, for the present, any comment on the e-marker.
The difficulty he has confirms his likely weakness of visual memory.
Classify at present as an error indicating difficulties one might normally expect with a younger child, or particularly weak spellers of this age.
Check also on his reading: he's probably having difficulties there too.
5 rusing
(rushing) Two possible causes for the error here — one, a simple omission, a slip of the pen, perhaps, because the writer paused in the middle of the word.
If this is the cause, then the child will probably recognise the error quickly if he is asked to read the word.
Or it could be that the writer believes that he has adequately represented the sound of sh by using the s; in which case, his auditory analysis is poor.
Classify as an omission, and delay judgment about cause.
6 trafice
The child is probably trying to write down a suitable looking word, and hasn't said to himself the actual word he has written down.
Often, when the writer is attempting to represent a particular word, he assumes that the word he has written down genuinely approximates to what he wants.
The pronunciation he knows gets in the way, so that he doesn't really see what he's written down.
Classify as a phonic alternative, but this is tentative.
Analysis
One hundred errors collected from the written work of a class on one assignment about parachute jumping.
Analysis 2: Piece of writing
This story was written by a boy on the subject of Memory.
Memories
A long time ago when I was six years old me and Neil went out mise chifing I chut a stown and it naile it a wondow then we ran off then we came to somedody garben then we clad up there tree and shouted fatet.
Then we clad and ran off home then we went back mishchifing again we came to a boy and shoved he down in the grass and piched is sweet and then we ran off then I made a apple bom then I chudet it then we went home.
Michael (9)
(Note: "mischiefing" is a specific Northern term.
Mischief night is the night before November 5th.)
Errors
Grouping of errors
1
 "There" is not a misspelling.
It is accurately spelled out but the wrong word; it is a homonym or more technically a homophone, i.e. a word that sounds the same but is spelled differently, e.g. hair — hare; threw — through.
Do not describe this as a misspelling for the purpose of analysis.
2
Transliterations (wrong letters).
somedody garben
In both cases it would be better to describe these not as misspellings.
The child knows the spelling, but has mixed up b and d.
Although adults and good spellers can also get mixed up with these, especially when they are writing quickly, this confusion is often the sign of weak visual memory.
3
Words written as they sound (phonic confusion).
mise chifing fatet stown
Three different phonic errors are represented here.
(a)
mise chifing is a bold attempt, but the addition of the "e" shows that the child doesn't fully understand the effect of the e-marker in such contexts as -a-e, -i-e, etc.
This suggests that the child doesn't ask himself how the letters he has written down might be pronounced.
The vowel i for ie is very understandable.
(b)
stown: the diphthong sound of stone (-o-e) is confused (understandably) with thrown, low.
But the error shows the child is potentially an able speller. (see also page 33.)
(c)
fatet: firstly, the child may not have seen the word written down, and so may be attempting to spell a visually unknown word; secondly, the d-t error is caused by the similarity of the sounds (cf. 5(d) below).
This suggests he has some difficulty in distinguishing sounds.
4
Letters omitted
it is bom piched
(a)
it, is: probably caused by pronunciation, and by not recognising the relationship between sound and symbol.
He writes an accurate version of what he hears (see Appendix 1).
Although this is an initial letter, it is not a serious error.
(b)
bom (bomb): the so-called "silent letter" (see Appendix 1).
Again, he has accurately written down the sound of the word.
(c)
piched (pinched): perhaps he has difficulty hearing the blend -nch.
Together with his error fatet, this may confirm that he has difficulty in distinguishing sounds.
5
Serious spelling errors
wondow mishchifing naile chut chudet clad
(a) wondow
This may be less serious than it seems.
His hand may have anticipated the sound -o-.
If he recognises the word as wrong himself, then it isn't serious.
If not, it's a bad phonic error.
But that would be inconsistent with his other errors, and it seems likelier to be a slip.
(b) mishchifing
This also looks like anticipation of the ch, so it was probably a slip rather than a misspelling.
But the way he misspells the word in different ways again indicates a weak visual memory.
(c) naile
A phonetic attempt, based on his own pronunciation, perhaps.
But his use of the -le ending reinforces the idea that he doesn't really understand what -e does as his attempts at mise chifing and stown have already shown.
(d)
Chut, chudet for chucked suggest that
(i)
the child may need help with -ed: on both occasions he replaced it with -t (cf. fatet).
This on its own is not a serious error.
The pronunciation of -ed as -t is so common that it has occasionally produced two separate accepted spellings 
(ii)
he has no real understanding of -ck.
(iii)
to use a medial -d in chucked indicates the same uncertainty with complex blends mentioned earlier.
(e) clad
The worst error.
A whole chunk of the sound has been omitted, and the vowel is entirely wrong.
Once more the medial sound has confused him, as with pinched and chucked.
(But it may be a local children's term for "climbing trees" ; check before judging.)
Summary
Almost certainly, he has a weak visual memory, and so any teaching should aim to help him to strengthen that; but he has some difficulty with the auditory side, too.
he has problems with the e-marker, and needs, especially, to hear many of the words he misspells pronounced clearly while he is looking at them, and to have pointed out to him the parts of the word that correspond to the various sounds.
He seems to have specific problems with complex consonantal blends (-nch; -ck-).
On the whole, he shows that he has the potential to spell well, and with some specific teaching, should be able to correct himself.
Teaching programme
1
In marking the piece, draw his attention only to the words is, it, bom, stown, Point out to him wondow, garben and somedody to see if he can correct them himself.
2
Apply general strategies (pages 9–11).
3
Strategies designed to strengthen visual memory; see especially 1 and 2, page 24.
4
Use a Language Master, if you have one available (see page 15).
If not, ensure that he hears and pronounces words.
5
Teach simple prefixes and suffixes mis-, -ly.
6
Some attention to handwriting, for b-d distinction.
7
Work on the e-marker.
8
Some intensive practice in listening for complex consonantal blends; for example "What is the middle sound of switching, tasted, winter, entrance?" 
Afterword
Don't ignore the fact that although Michael misspelled 14 words, he spelled 75 correctly, and that his story is worth reading.
Analysis 3: Schonell Spelling Test A
The test was administered according to the instructions, but instead of stopping after ten errors the child was asked to continue.
Some of the child's errors (aged 9)
(Note that where the errors do not immediately show what the correct word is, it's best to write a reminder of the word beside it.
This always applies when you collect pupils' errors.
Omissions
Only one: nose (for noise) which seems worse than it is, because the misspelling has produced a rather comic word, and we may feel she ought to have recognised it as the word it is, rather than the word she meant it to be.
This error points to some important problems about testing.
Because she is doing what is clearly a test, the words she writes down in this list have no real context: she would probably not write in the course of a story "I heard a funny nose…" without recognising the error herself when she read it back.
But like most children (and adults?) she has an attitude to tests which somehow stops her from checking back for possible errors.
Perhaps she even makes more errors in a test than in continuous writing, because not having any context for the words, she is unable to check them for meaning when she reads them over.
Additional letters
(a)
loude, remaine An error of visualisation.
She has a strong auditory memory and knows enough about patterns of spelling to recognise the effects of the e-marker.
(b)
danceing A suffix problem.
Perhaps the child has said the two syllables to herself — dance + ing — and written them down, rather than visualising the complete word.
A very common error, and not very serious.
Words written as they sound (phonic confusion)
In all cases the error is in the vowel-sound in the unstressed syllable (see What goes wrong? page 6).
(a) dutys
The plural form of y+s = ies often causes mistakes (cf. fly — flies; spy — spies etc.)
Children need to learn that y is a substitute letter for i at the end of words, and that it likes to change back to i when it can, that is, when there is something after it.
It is not a serious error.
(b) lowist consat damige entad damestic
These could sometimes be the result of pronunciation.
But since on this occasion the words were dictated to the child it is more likely to be the child's efforts to repeat the sound to herself and to write down her idea of a phonic equivalent.
At this stage, perhaps because she is unfamiliar with how the words look, she has substituted for the correct letters something which sounds all right but is inaccurate.
These words show very clearly the difficulty of the unstressed syllable.
In five of the spellings, the actual sound of the vowel in the unstressed syllable is almost the same when the word is said normally (see also page 7): lowest damage entered concert domestic
Serious spelling errors
(a) Whrite
Whr is not a pattern of English spelling.
There are no English words which begin like this.
It is a visual confusion — wh + wr.
(b) amonet (amount)
Puzzling.
The child has made no effort, obviously, to relate the word she has written to any pronunciation.
This may be because by now she is find the spelling test hard and is getting anxious; or it may be because she cannot make an accurate guess at the way new words are pronounced.
In other words, she may find it difficult to relate sequences of letters to their appropriate pronunciation.
But this is unlikely.
More likely is that she wrote down (accurately) the beginning, remembered the sound of the end, and linked them together in what seemed to her a possible sequence.
(Could she spell about?
If not, the diphthong may be troubling her.)
(c) throge (through)
An indication that the child knows what letters ought to be in the word, but can't remember clearly enough how they really look.
There is also a suggestion here that her analysis of the relationship between letter and sound can be unsuccessful: -oge is a highly unusual pattern in English (gamboge: is there anything else?) and that should have told her that it was unlikely to be right.
On the other hand, since she was trying to spell through she was probably simply putting together badly-remembered letters.
Again, she is certainly not relating word to pronunciation.
(d) coffee (cough)
She may have misheard the word as dictated, but it's much more likely that as she started writing the first syllable, she almost automatically shifted the word across to one she knows (and can spell! coffee  causes problems, usually).
So she's written the first syllable as she feels it sounds (coff-) and that triggers the -ee.
(e) dhater (daughter)
Again, she knows vaguely what letters should be there but can't visualise where they go.
This too is a serious error, because dh is not a letter sequence in English.
Summary
These words are well past her point of failure in the Schonell Test (that is, ten consecutive errors), and so it is possible that she had reached a level of frustration: feeling that all the words were too difficult she ceased to think carefully about whether what she was writing down was likely, and simply put down anything that came to mind.
But they are not random errors: they grow out of her particular approach to spelling, and suggest that she may have trouble in the future because of a weak visual memory and her attempts to compensate for this are reckless and haphazard.
She does not, apparently, test her spellings by saying them as they look, but imposes upon them the correct pronunciation.
In other words, she is someone who might have difficulty with spelling as she grows, but could be helped now to become a competent speller.
Teaching programme
1
Strategies designed to strengthen visual memory: pronunciation, flash-card or Language Master practice for consat, damestic, etc.
2
Apply general strategy for learning spelling: pay particular attention to stages 4–5–6 (page 9).
3
Teach suffixes, especially -ed, -er, -est.
4
Practice in listening to words, picking out particular syllables and suggesting their spelling, e.g. roundabout.
5
Spelling lists, if you want to teach from lists, which draw attention to patterns she is having trouble with, e.g.:
Cautionary note
It would be important to check on this girl's spelling in other ways as well.
Just as many children score lower on a word-recognition reading test than they ought, because the words have no context of meaning, so she may be able to spell better than she demonstrates on this test.
So you would need to look carefully at her stories and other writing, and see if she makes the same kind of mistake here.
The differences between reading and spelling
It's often felt that reading, or reading aloud, is an effective way of teaching spelling, and pupils may be advised that to improve their spelling they should read more.
In fact, reading as a process doesn't necessarily have any effect at all on spelling, and an excellent reader may be a very weak speller.
(So may excellent writers: Byron and Keats were both less than perfect spellers.)
The reasons for this are complex, but basically the more efficient one is as a reader, the less one reads individual words as separate bits, or pays attention to their structure.
Indeed the closer one focuses attention on the words and how they are made up, the less likely one is to understand what the passage is about.
The poorest readers are those who read word byword, even letter by letter; and the best are those who aren't conscious of "reading words" at all, and who use context and meaning before they use word analysis.
In spelling, on the other hand, one must pay close attention to the structure of the word; knowing the meaning is probably no help at all in spelling it.
In addition, spelling and "phonics" (see Glossary) are exactly opposite processes.
Phonics involves making the appropriate noises for particular symbols: it is, by definition, about reading aloud, or about finding out what a word is by saying it.
It begins from printed symbols and the reader must know what sounds those printed symbols represent in that environment.
If someone can't read aloud competently, this does not mean he can't read at all: consider the number of us who could read French silently and understand it, but who would find it very difficult to "sound it out" and read it aloud.
Spelling, on the other hand, begins from sound, and is about symbolising that sound into print (see Symbol in Glossary).
Perhaps an illustration can make this difference clear: faced with the word saucer to read aloud, there are only a limited number of ways in which it can be read, given the rules of English orthography.
At most, there are between six and ten.
But faced with the sound of the word, and asked to write it down, the possibilities multiply so that instead of half a dozen there are now somewhere round one hundred and fifty variants possible.
Indeed, Margaret Peters actually quoted two hundred and five variant spellings of the word she has collected.
So we have exactly reverse processes: and the problem for the student is that there are so many more possibilities to  choose from in spelling than there are in reading aloud, where one also has meaning to help.
This is not to say, of course, that there is no relationship at all between reading and spelling: but it does seem that teaching phonics may not necessarily have much effect on spelling ability.
General summary
Put together research on spelling, and the evidence of experienced teachers, and you end up with handy hints like this.
1
Teaching from spelling lists, on the basis of study followed by tests, does not help the child to become an efficient speller in his writing.
2
Slightly better is to use the test followed by study of the words spelled incorrectly; but this causes only a marginal improvement.
3
Spelling rules are of little help, because if they are thorough enough to explain a pattern, they're likely to be incomprehensible to the children.
4
Children who have a good general understanding of sound-symbol relationship, even if they do not spell well at the moment, are, as Margaret Peters says, "well on their way" to becoming good spellers.
5
Teachers who have an enthusiasm and enjoyment for spoken and written language, and a care for it, have pupils who are likely to be good spellers.
6
An interest in words, their meanings, shapes, history and sound, generates improved spelling.
7
The more interested pupils are in what they write, the more attention they are prepared to give to its appearance, including spelling.
8
When children recognise that their writing is for a real public audience, not just the teacher but other people, they are more likely to be concerned with their spelling.
9
Good spelling habits are:
The habit of checking guesses by looking the word up, or asking.
The habit of proof-reading (which tends, ironically, to arise from a concern in the first place to spell well).
The habit of spelling analysis: how is it pronounced? is the spelling phonetic or not? how can I remember the difficult bits?
10
Spelling is changing all the time, but slowly.
What one generation finds appalling the next generation accepts.
For example, today we worry about all right , and prefer it to alright; but we happily accept already, although, almost…
Program is now generally used, relating to computers.
Adviser and advisor are often alternatives; -ize endings are gradually being replaced by -ise, but newspapers and publishers seem to disagree on this.
Be careful, therefore, about condemning words too quickly.
The Oxford English Dictionary gives develop and develope as alternative spellings.
Many words originally hyphenated are now written without hyphens.
Give your time not to outraged attacks on what offends you but to the more urgent and useful task of teaching pupils how to spell by considering the recurring patterns of English spelling.
Appendix 1: Silent letters?
Adults, who have been able to read and spell for years, tend to forget what it was like when they couldn't unless they have recently learnt a foreign language.
One very important problem in early learning is caused by the difference between spoken and written language.
Speech comes first.
People could speak English before there was universal literacy, and in the same way a child learns to speak long before he learns to read and write.
So writing grew out of an attempt to reproduce speech in a permanent form.
Speech is not an attempt to pronounce written words.
In normal speech, not all letters written down are sounded.
We are familiar with this in words like gnome, or Wednesday; but we aren't always conscious that Saint Paul's in normal speech sounds like Sn Paulz or that bread and butter sounds like bread n butta.
In other words, although a lot is said about "silent letters" , it's more helpful to see that almost all words have "silent letters" in a sense, and that they aren't silent at all, but are attempts originally to symbolise regional or personal differences in pronunciation.
For instance, the sound /n/ can be written today in six different ways in English 
The child has to learn which particular spelling is appropriate, and that gn and kn are just as much symbols which represent one sound as k or d.
Young children, not being very familiar with the way words are spelled, often write accurate versions of what they hear which don't match with the conventions of English spelling.
They may write is for his, or Inglish for English, because that's the way it sounds when people say it.
What they have to learn is:
1
You don't always say a word the way it's spelled.
2
You don't always spell a word the way you say it.
What teachers have to learn is that a child who writes ows for house, and one who writes ekstra for extra, are making the same kind of error.
It's not that the first one "speaks badly" .
Equally, regional variations in speech may generate different spellings.
Originally, before universal printing standardised the written language, the educated people in different parts of the country wrote words down in different ways, so that a monk in Whitby might spell as book what one in Ely would spell buk because of local accents.
Later, when Caxton set up his printing press in the fifteenth century, the expert printers he employed were Dutch: so although the written language became more standardised, many of our odder spellings derive from the attempts of Dutchmen to symbolise English words.
It was only in the late eighteenth century that spelling became standardised in a way that we would recognise today, and as late as 1900 you can read variant words that surprise us  rather — shew for show, for example.
Be tolerant, therefore, of learners who spell in non-standard ways because the local pronunciation is what it is.
You need to help them to learn standard written English, without in any way demeaning their own personal or regional versions of spoken English.
Correct both kinds of error by saying "Yes, that is the way it sounds, but we write it like this…" .
Appendix 2: Teaching aids, and equipment
Machines can be helpful in several ways.
They release the teacher for other work by giving the pupil something which he can operate himself without having to have the teacher there; and they can also enliven the teaching of otherwise difficult topics.
They are, of course, like computers, only as good as the people who program them, and do not offer miracle solutions to impossible situations.
The most commonly used machines, after cassette tape-recorders, are the Language Master, and the Synchrofax Audio Page.
They have the advantage over the cassette tape-recorder in that they can be easily associated with written language.
The Language Master
Both Bell and Howell and Rank-Aldis make versions of this machine: bell and Howell's is the Language Master, Rank-Aldis calls theirs a Card Reader, but they perform the same function.
A card with a strip of recording-tape is fed through the machine, and the teacher records whatever is desired — a reading of the text on the card, questions, comments, instructions or anything else.
The tape carries two tracks, so that pupils can record their own versions, too.
When the card is fed through the machine, the teacher's voice is played back, and the pupil can simultaneously read whatever is written on the card.
The machines are not cheap, nor are the cards; but they are useful.
Synchrofax Audio Page
Basically, The function is the same as for the Language Master — a recording can be made of written language which is displayed for the pupil — but the Audio Page runs for 4 minutes where the Language Master only provides at most about 10 seconds of time.
The sheet for recording has a writing surface on one side, and magnetic backing on the other.
Recordings can be erased and the sheet reused.
It is a slightly more flexible machine than the Language Master, and is a little more expensive.
Breakthrough Word-Maker
The Breakthrough to Literacy materials (published by Longman) contain a useful piece of equipment which can be used or adapted for any age of pupil.
The Word-Maker contains the various symbols — consonants, blends, vowels, etc. — printed on separate slips of card, and a pupil can build up a word he wishes to spell.
There are two Word-Makers.
The first Word-Maker contains the consonants and vowels and simple digraphs (ch, gh).
The second is more advanced; it has beginnings, middles and endings.
So, for example, the beginnings include as separate units ch, ph, qu, wh, wr; the middles ai, au, ou, ee; and the endings ck, ff, gh, mb, sh.
In addition, the middles (vowels) are on a different coloured card.
The pupil builds up the words he wants in a stand, and can test out his ideas without having to commit them to paper yet.
The great advantage of the Word-Maker is that the word can be corrected without confusing the speller by crossings out and insertions.
Wrong letters are lifted out, and right ones inserted, leaving the corrected word as a unit.
Its physical manoeuvrability makes it easy to demonstrate syllable structure or to emphasise tricky bits.
Teachers who use Breakthrough find that their pupils become conscious of the construction of words, and tend to play with words in a way which is helpful for their spelling.
If you do not wish to use the actual piece of equipment, the idea itself is worth taking up.
Appendix 3: Dictionaries
Using dictionaries doesn't itself teach people how to spell; but someone whose spelling is uncertain finds it hard to use dictionaries at all.
We tend to expect pupils to find words in dictionaries, because we assume it is a skill which is simply acquired.
It is not, of course: some will acquire it, but many have to be helped to learn it.
You certainly won't miraculously ensure perfect spelling by helping pupils to use dictionaries, but you will find that it's time well spent, because the main use to which dictionaries are normally put is to check spellings.
An American, Heilman, suggested that to use a dictionary you need five subskills:
(a)
an understanding of alphabetical order.
(b)
the knowledge that words can mean different things.
(c)
a knowledge of root words and their various derivations.
(d)
an understanding that letters and combinations of letters have different sound values in different contexts.
(e)
the knowledge that y at the end of words changes to i when es is added (see page 41).
To that should be added a familiarity with the commonest ways of symbolising sounds; a dictionary user faced with looking up a word whose spelling he doesn't know, ought to be able to choose where to start looking for it, with a fair degree of success.
To do this, he should know something about the probability of sounds being symbolised in one way or another, and which is the most likely way for this set of sounds to be symbolised.
Thus, you may need to introduce your pupils to common variants — especially at the beginning of words: Choice becomes more complex once we consider vowels: the sound of the diphthong a can be symbolised in several different ways (see also pages 32–3): ay (day); a-e (make); ai (wait), au (gauge); ei (neighbour); ey (they).
But what's important, as I've said before (page 16), is that the learner should know that there are alternatives, and that words are spelled from options within the language.
The Chambers Young Set dictionaries have a very useful little handbook.
Words Children want to use, by Amy Brown, John Downing and John Sceats, which is worth  reading, and the dictionaries themselves are good for primary schools.
At secondary level, "real" dictionaries are the best: the teaching needed to show pupils how best to use them is itself valuable.
Finally, there are simple conventions that need explaining: not all pupils will know that the two words printed at the head of a page tell you something about the alphabetic range of the words on that page.
And it may not be automatically obvious that whereas in some dictionaries "accountable" will be a separate entry in others it will appear under the general entry of "account" .
When pupils do refer to dictionaries, take the opportunity to introduce them to various aspects of their use.
Appendix 4: Schonell Spelling Test checklist
Glossary
These definitions are not meant to be academically accurate, but to describe the meanings generally intended.
Auditory analysis
The ability to hear a word and to recognise the separate sounds that make it up.
It is, up to the age of 9 or so, a developmental ability: many young children will simply not be able to isolate the different consonant noises in words like bump or thirst.
With vowels, the problem is not distinguishing the sounds but knowing how to symbolise them, because the same sound can be symbolised in different ways.
Consonant
The letters of the alphabet excluding the vowels:
Digraphs
By this, I mean the use of two (or more) letters which customarily occur together, like ck, th, sh, wr.
There is a difference between those units where a new sound is produced by the combination, as with th, sh, ch, ph; and the unit where only one sound is heard — ck, gn, mb, wh, wr.
The second group causes most of the difficulties in spelling with consonants.
Diphthong
A vowel sound which incorporates two individual sounds, because the tongue moves during its pronunciation: for instance, hate includes a and e in the pronunciation of the a sound.
The sounds of hate, bee, high, bone, few, are the basic diphthongs.
Others are found, toy, here, air, poor.
E-marker
Also called the "magic e" .
The addition of an -e to the end of a simple consonant-vowel-constant word (e.g. hat, cap, pin) is a way of indicating a change in the way the vowel sound is to be pronounced.
Although it is sometimes called the "magic e" , the e itself doesn't change anything: it marks the fact that the word should be pronounced differently.
Historically, it originated in the recognition by the early scribes in the twelfth–fourteenth centuries that readers needed visual clues to tell the difference between words that otherwise would look identical; and one of the ways they tried to show this was by the addition of the e.
(Another example of this attempt to separate similar words, as a matter of interest, is the number of occasions where identical words are distinguished by doubling letters — of and off, to and too (but not two, which comes from a different root — twegen) and more subtle ones like in and inn.
Homonyms are another example of a way of distinguishing between identical sounding words.)
Homonyms
Words having exactly the same sound, but different spellings and meanings: To be completely accurate, these are homophones: but homonym is the term in more general use.
Initial-medial final
The place within the word where a sound or letter occurs.
The first sound is initial, the last the final: anything between them is medial.
Sounds can change depending on where they occur: thus breath (noun) has a final th which is unvoiced, but in breathing the sound becomes voiced.
Phonic, phonetic
Sometimes these words are used interchangeably, but they have very different meanings.
Phonic refers to 'sounding out': the relationship between letters or groups of letters written down, and how one says them when reading aloud.
Phonetic refers to a way of writing down an accurate version of what sounds people make when they talk, and uses phonetic symbols; so butter would be written phonetically as 
Stressed, unstressed
In normal speech, English has a rhythm because particular syllables are emphasised, making a pattern of stress: Normally, the stress falls on the first syllable of a word, but not always, as the examples above show.
Sometimes it is the stress alone which distinguishes between otherwise identical words — refuse/refuse: discount/discount.
The stressed syllable is spoken louder, and the rest of the word often has a falling intonation.
Native speakers do not recognise this, but foreign learners of English notice that it is often difficult to hear the unstressed parts of a word in ordinary speech.
Syllable
A sound or group of sounds pronounced in a single impulse of breath: in writing, this generally (but not always) means that a syllable is a vowel, or vowel plus consonants.
But rhythm has two syllables, but only one vowel(y).
Symbol
Letters are not themselves sounds: they represent the sounds of the spoken language, of which there are considered to be about 44 in standard English.
Some  sounds are represented by the combination of two or more letters (sh, ai); and some letters represent more than one sound (c, o, s).
Sound-symbol relationship, therefore, means the way in which a particular sound is symbolised into the letters of our alphabet.
It is only by convention that our alphabet represents the sounds it does.
Many of our spelling problems were caused by French scribes in the years after the Norman invasion, trying to symbolise English sounds in French spelling.
Others were the result of fashions — the change of g to gh for example; ghost was originally spelled without the h.
There is a good deal of mythology and misapprehension based on misunderstandings about sound-symbol relationship and its connection with where symbols occur in words.
Bernard Shaw's much-quoted example of ghoti as a way of spelling fish shows both his wit and his refusal to acknowledge the regularity and predictability of English spelling.
The o of women is admittedly eccentric.
(One theory is that it arose from scribes' attempts to make the word more legible.
In Middle English the first four letters of the original word (wifmen) would have looked very similar.
At a time when spelling was so much more fluid, it would have seemed sensible to have changed letters for the sake of legibility.)
Thus initial gh symbolise f, and final ti cannot symbolise sh in English.
The relationship between sound, symbol, and position in a word are far more consistent than they may appear.
Visual memory
The ability to recall a visual image.
Voiced, unvoiced
Consonant sounds can be paired together.
The difference between the pairs is whether or not the vocal chords are used in making the sound or not.
In this list, the first sound of the pair is unvoiced, the second is voiced.
Vowels
The rest of the letters after the consonants have been taken out: a e i o u y
It's important to class y with the vowels (fly, hymn).