

London, 21st January, 1919
There was the nightmare — always the nightmare.
In the dream, she saw the knife coming towards her face.
It was moving slowly, so slowly.
In the dream she lifted her right hand and stretched out her arm, the tiny pistol almost lost in the palm of her hand, pointed it at the man who had once been her lover — and shot him dead.
The sharp crack of the pistol always brought her awake, cold and shivering.
But the bottle helped then, helped dull the pain, helped quell the shivering, helped ease her back into a dreamless sleep.
The bottle helped…
It was a little after noon when Katherine Lundy awoke, her head pounding, her mouth foul.
Turning her head slightly she looked at the cut-glass decanter on the bedside table — it was a little less than half full, which meant that she had drunk three…no, four glasses of whisky at some time during the night.
She half-remembered awakening around dawn, the light vague and grey against the heavy drapes, but she had no recollection of drinking four glasses…
She sat up slowly in the bed…and immediately amended her count to three glasses; she had spilt most the contents of the fourth down the front of her muslin pyjamas and onto the lace coverlet.
But the sudden movement set her head pounding, and she squeezed her eyes closed, attempting to shut out the dancing varicoloured slivers of light.
She remained still and unmoving for a few moments, allowing her head to settle, listening to the muffled noises from the house, the only recognizable sound the squeal of laughter from her daughter's room further down the hall.
She was sure if she listened hard enough she would be able to hear the creak of the rocking-horse the girl had been given as a Christmas present a month ago.
Easing back the stained coverlet, Katherine slowly swung her legs out of bed, and then remained motionless for a few moments, resisting the urge to throw up.
She looked down at her new French muslin pyjamas, the corners of her thin lips turning up in a rueful smile, wondering if the whisky stains would come out — and deciding that they probably wouldn't.
She reached out and turned the clock towards her, blinking at the small ornate face, attempting to focus on the figures, trying to work out if it was twenty past twelve or twenty past one, finally deciding it was the earlier hour.
The calendar beside the clock was turned to the 21st January, 1919 — but was that yesterday's date or today's; had she changed it before she went to bed last night?
Katherine Lundy shook her head savagely, digging the palms of her hands into her eyes and rubbing hard.
This was the part she hated, the feeling of stupidity, the loss of control, and the fear and loathing it left in its wake.
But it was the nightmare — she needed the drink to cope with the nightmare, and because the nightmare was an image from her past it was all the more powerful, the images and details razor sharp.
It had been three years since Katherine Lundy had shot the man she had once loved.
She had shot him for all the things he had done to her and her husband, shot him because, in the end, she still loved him, and it made his ultimate betrayal all the harder to bear.
She had shot him without qualm of conscience, without a second thought, and walked away without even looking back.
She had thought that would be the end of it.
It was an episode of her life she was finished with.
Katherine had left Ireland almost immediately afterwards, spending a little time in Cornwall with her children before  travelling up to Scotland to stay with friends there.
Some months later, when she judged that things would have quietened down, she had come down to London and had set about re-establishing her business.
The following year had left her with little enough time for dreams, let alone nightmares.
But once the business had been established and the initial problems of setting it up had been dealt with, she had found herself with a certain amount of time at her disposal, time to relax, time to remember.
And that was when the nightmares had started.
Everything had been fine until the nightmares.
If she had been a religious person she would have put it down to retribution for her sins, but she had lost whatever faith she had had in her years as the Madam of Dublin's most fashionable brothel.
But Dublin was long ago and far away; the city she had known had changed irrevocably on that Easter Monday three years ago when a handful of men, including her husband Dermot, had walked out to do battle with the might of the British Empire.
Katherine stood up quickly, her head spinning, bile rising in her throat.
Another effect of the drink was to make her maudlin.
That life — the Dublin days, she called them — was gone forever.
She had made a new life for herself now in London, a better, much more successful life than Dublin.
And she didn't need reminding of the "good old days" .
They had not been so good to her; she had lost too many things, too many friends, too much of herself.
Katherine crossed to the window and pulled back the heavy drapes, squinting against the pale January sunlight.
It had snowed again during the night.
The snow showed no signs of melting; it was piled at least four inches deep on her window ledge and against her windows, and there were deep bird tracks patterned across it.
The park, directly across from her house, was completely obliterated beneath the snow, the bushes now little more than vague mounds, and the trees  standing stark and forlorn.
The street below was quiet, little traffic braving the snow and ice even at this time of day — but then Mayfair really only came alive at night, when the various hostesses entertained.
And no-one entertained more lavishly, more sumptuously, more successfully than Mrs Katherine Lundy.
Smiling at the idea, Katherine turned away from the window, unbuttoning the pyjamas, heading towards her bathroom.
The bathroom — which was lavish even by Mayfair standards — was all glass and cool, muted blues, which had looked lovely when she had put it in, but which she now thought was cold and vaguely forbidding, and as she pulled off her pyjama top, she thought it made her flesh look white and dead.
The mirror, too many reflections.
The years had been reasonably kind to Katherine Lundy — or at least had been until she had begun drinking heavily.
She was thirty-nine now, and it was only in the past two years that she had put on weight.
It showed around her face and on her stomach.
She touched her soft cheeks, the once-proud cheekbones lost beneath a covering of fat and pulled down the sagging flesh beneath her bloodshot eyes; she had never been beautiful, now she was merely plain.
Her hair, which had always been her most attractive feature, was now lined with grey, and she had given up dying it black.
She touched it; it was dry and coarse to her touch.
She ran her hands down her body, over her small breasts, now beginning to sag, her fingers coming to rest on her stomach.
The rich food and drink showed there.
She had recovered her figure after the birth of both her children very quickly, but now it looked as if she was four months pregnant.
She swore — yet again — that she would leave off the rich food, forget the drink, but even as she making the promise, she knew she would not be able to keep to it.
She washed quickly, the water barely lukewarm, but the tepid water helped clear her muzzy head, and she  began running through her plans for the day — if she kept herself busy she could avoid the drink.
Today was…
Tuesday, the 21st January.
There were still bits and pieces left to organize for the coming weekend, when she was hosting the first major social gathering of the new year.
Lloyd George, recently re-elected, had been issued an invitation, but it was unlikely that he would attend, but certainly Austen Chamberlain, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Winston Churchill, the Secretary of State for War might attend.
There were some minor foreign royals who had attended the Christmas celebrations in the palace who might also be prevailed upon to come — they would provide a little exotic colour.
She wasn't sure whether there were any artists or writers in town at the moment, but there were bound to be one or two back in the city after the Christmas recess.
Politicians, royals and artists — the perfect mix for an entertaining evening.
Katherine wandered back into her bedroom and lazily sorted through her wardrobe, before finally settling on a simple gown of heavy blue satin that was at least two seasons out of date, but which served to hide her fuller figure as she refused to wear a corset.
In her years in the brothels in Dublin, she had seen far too many girls with their bodies twisted and scarred by the constricting corsets.
She wore no jewellery except for a simple band around her wedding finger.
As she opened the door to her room, she heard the first gong warn that lunch would be served shortly.
The last reverberations of the gong were still vibrating on the still air when a door down the corridor burst open and young girl raced out onto the landing, heading for the stairs.
 "Senga!" 
Katherine's voice cracked as she called her daughter's name, and she repeated herself, more softly this time.
 "Senga!" 
 "Mama." 
The young girl stopped and turned back.
 "I did not see you there." 
Katherine smiled proudly; the voice, the accent and the pose were English, three years of the best schools and governesses had completely eradicated the Dublin accent.
 "You are well, Mama?" 
Katherine bent her head and the young girl kissed her check.
 "I am a little tired…the festivities…" 
Katherine said vaguely.
Senga Lundy nodded, but said nothing; she had smelt the stale odour of drink on her mother's breath.
She was eleven years old, with a smooth oval face, and deep, dark brown eyes that at the moment seemed far too big for her face.
She had also inherited the lustrous black hair that had once helped to make her mother so attractive.
 "And what did you do with Miss Powers today?" 
Katherine asked as they began to descend the gently curving marble staircase.
 "We began with history, and covered the early years of Queen Elizabeth, and we were to have some music practice, but I persuaded Miss Powers to leave that until later this afternoon, lest it disturb you." 
Katherine squeezed her daughter's hand affectionately.
"Thank you.
And how are your language studies?"
"Fine.
My French is improving, so is my Latin, but the Greek…"
She shrugged, allowing the sentence to trail.
She knew she would never be able to master the Greek language.
 "I have been considering finding you a tutor in another European language," her mother continued.
 "German perhaps…" 
Mama, surely not German!"
The expression of distaste on the girl's face was almost comical.
 "We will discuss it later," Katherine said absently, stopping on the last step, her eyes sweeping along the broad expanse of highly polished hallway, automatically checking the corners, beneath the lacquered Chinese table, around the edges of the mirror, and finally the glass on the print and picture frames.
She had  been a servant herself once, and she knew all the shortcuts.
Satisfied that everything was to her satisfaction, she crossed the hall and entered the sitting room behind her daughter.
The room was warm, a sparking, crackling fire blazing in the hearth, and comfortably cluttered with furniture that conformed to no particular taste or style; this was the family's private sitting room, where the image that Katherine Lundy worked so hard to maintain to the brittle world of Society London could be dropped, where she and her family and close friends could be completely at ease.
French doors opened out onto an enclosed patio which overlooked a long, sloping back garden.
Katherine sat before the fire, and began sorting through the morning's post, which had been left on a small silver tray on the side-table beside her chair.
She flicked through the envelopes, sorting them into two piles; the first would be opened immediately, while the second could wait until after she had eaten.
Generally, invitations and the like fell into the second category.
She glanced at her daughter as she reached for the silver letter-knife; Senga was standing before the French doors, looking out at the snow-piled garden.
It had backed up against the patio, completely concealing the ornate wall and steps that led down onto the gravelled walks.
The girl's face was set into rigid lines from the garden, robbing them of all expression.
How serious she is, Katherine thought, she reminds me of myself at that age.
She looked up at the clock, wondering if there was time for a pot of tea before lunch, but deciding that the second gong would sound soon, and she could wait.
She returned to the letter in her hand, turning it over in her slender fingers before opening it.
It was postmarked Manchester, the paper was poor, and the writing scrawled and dipped across the stained envelope.
She frowned slightly; it wouldn't do to have  letters like this arriving here, she would make arrangements today for a discreet postal address.
One of the reasons she had survived in business was because she had always been so careful.
Crumpling the envelope in her hand, she tossed it into the fire, watching intently while it blackened and burned before returning to the single sheet of cheap paper.
The letter was brief, and couched in the most guarded terms; it reported a half-yearly profit to the end of December, but also added that there had been some deterioration in the product and requested a fresh consignment, preferably of foreign origin.
Katherine made a brief expression of annoyance; this was the third time Lumley had requested fresh stock — she would have to do something about it, and him.
She made a tiny note with a gold Swan pen on the note-pad on the table, "Manchester stock" .
There was a similar letter from Glasgow; this time the writing was marginally more educated, and the paper of slightly heavier stock, but the letter was  couched in the same guarded terms: a half-yearly profit that was a substantial increase on the same period last year.
There was also a note to the effect that a suitable premises, with stock, had been offered at a reasonable price, in a similar location to her present premises.
Katherine tapped the letter several times with her fountain-pen.
She was looking for the opportunity to extend her holdings in Glasgow, but she was unsure if she wanted to expand her business in the same district as her first premises — perhaps she ought to move upmarket, rather like her London operation.
But was there a market in Glasgow for a quality product; should she be thinking of Edinburgh instead?
A sudden thought struck her and she began to laugh.
Senga looked at her quickly, before turning away — perhaps there had been something amusing in one of Mama's letters.
She hoped so; Mama rarely laughed these days.
Katherine wiped a tear from her eye with a lacy  handkerchief.
She was beginning to think like a shopkeeper.
Katherine Lundy's trade was in flesh.
She ran one of London's exclusive brothels.
Situated in Mayfair, directly across the park from her own house, its clients were drawn from the highest echelons of society.
She also owned a brothel in Manchester and one in Glasgow; however, both were considerably downmarket, catering to the middle and working classes.
 "Mama?" 
 "Yes, dear?" 
 "Do I have to learn German?" 
"I said I would think about it.
I think you should have another European language rather than French."
 "But no one will speak German now that the war is done and they have been defeated," the girl said seriously.
Katherine glanced up as she slit open the third envelope.
"The Prussians are hard workers, dedicated people.
I would imagine it will not take them too long to become a world power again."
 "Surely not, Mama?" 
Katherine nodded.
 "I am convinced of it." 
 "Were you ever in Germany, Mama?" 
Katherine looked across at her daughter and smiled briefly, remembering.
 "Yes, once, for a little while, a long time ago." 
 "What did you do there?" 
Before Katherine had a chance to answer, the second lunch gong sounded followed, seconds later, by the jangle of the hall bell.
 "That will be Patrick!" 
Senga shouted and dashed out into the hall, almost colliding with Gerard, the butler "That's Patrick," she said quickly, "he said he would be back in time for lunch." 
 "I'm sure it is, Miss Senga, I recognize his ring." 
Katherine heard the voices fade and lifted the third letter.
There was no name, no return address and although the paper was cheap, the writing was firm and rounded, educated certainly.
 "There will be an auction of some Irish Glass lost in '07; the Greek has details." 
How very curious.
Wondering who had wrote it, Katherine turned the letter over in her hands, and then held it up to the light, looking for a watermark — anything which would indicate its origin.
There was nothing.
The Irish Glass lost in '07 could only be the Irish Crown Jewels.
They had been stolen in 1907 causing both the British and Irish authorities much embarrassment, especially since they had vanished on the eve of a royal visit.
Katherine's lips moved in a grim smile as she recalled some of the details — it had been quite a scandal.
And she was unsure whether she wanted to become involved with them again; the jewels were not actually worth that much, and the very fact that they were of Irish origin was enough to turn her away from them.
When she had fled Ireland, Katherine Lundy had sworn she would never again have anything to do with the country.
Ireland had caused her nothing but trouble, and not only her, but those she held dear.
Her father had been maimed while on duty in Ireland, and she herself had been sold into virtual slavery there, where she had been seduced and made pregnant.
When that was discovered she had been thrown out on the streets, and subsequently forced to live in a brothel.
She had lost her husband and all those she had loved because of Ireland.
If Ireland was a woman — as the poet Yeats kept saying — then she was a banshee, a fairy woman, who brought with her nothing but death and despair.
The subject of Ireland was banned in her house; she employed no Irish servants, imported no Irish goods — although she used Irish girls in her brothels — allowed no Irish books or papers into her house.
Katherine Lundy was determined that her children would grow up unaffected and untainted by the cursed country.
All she had taken out of Ireland when she had fled had been the money she had made there and her trade — and her trade was that of a Madam.
Hearing voices approach down the hall, she threw the paper and envelope into the fire, and then stood up as Senga reappeared, leading a tall serious-faced young man.
Although there was nine years between them, there was no doubt that they were brother and sister; they each had the same deep intense eyes that were their dead father's legacy, and Patrick had inherited his father's square chin, and wiry black hair.
 "Mother." 
Smiling he came forward, rubbing his hands to his glowing cheeks.
 "Patrick…" 
Katherine turned her cheek for his kiss, and them immediately ushered both children towards the dining room.
 "Where were you, Patrick?" 
He held open the door for his mother and sister.
 "I went to the Charing Cross Road to buy some books I'm going to need for my studies." 
Katherine nodded, satisfied.
Patrick was studying medicine, and it was her wish to set him up in a practice of his own one day.
She stood at the head of the small table, waiting for her son and daughter to seat themselves on either side of her and then sat down.
 "Did you get what you were looking for?" 
He ran his fingers through his hair, brushing it back off his high forehead, and nodded.
 "A Gray's Anatomy — a good second-hand copy, and some works by Doctor Freud." 
 "You bought second-hand books!" 
Patrick shrugged in embarrassment.
"Only the Gray's.
It was an excellent copy…"
"Patrick, I've told you before.
You don't need to buy anything second-hand.
I have worked long and hard to ensure that my children want for nothing."
"Mother…
Mother…"
Patrick held up both his hands in surrender.
 "I bought a second-hand copy deliberately, and not just because of the price…" 
He fell silent as the door to the dining room opened and one of the maids entered with the first course.
When she left, he continued.
 "I bought a second-hand copy because it had been very usefully annotated, the notes alone will save  me hours of work." 
Satisfied, Katherine nodded.
 "Eat your lunch," she said shortly.
Patrick bent his head to his soup and hid a smile.
Patrick Montgomery Lundy was almost twenty, but looked older, and he had no interest in medicine.
He had braved the bitter weather to go down to the bookshops on the Charing Cross Road not just for the chance to get some books — he could have bought them any time — but principally to meet Joseph Hyde and hear the latest news from Dublin.
Patrick had grown up in the Dublin that his mother now worked so hard to forget.
He remembered his father, Dermot Corcoran, the man whose name was never mentioned in the house, the man whose name they no longer wore.
He distinctly remembered the Monday morning his father had gone out, dressed in the green uniform of the volunteers, carrying his rifle.
A week later he was dead, but by that time they had both been shipped off to England.
And while his mother may have forgotten Dublin and his father, who had given his life to make it a better place for his children to live in, Patrick had not.
Initially, he had bucked against her restraints, often asking her direct questions about her previous life, about his father.
Almost inevitably, questions about Dermot sent her into a rage — and she usually soothed that rage in a bottle.
Patrick didn't need to be a doctor to know that his mother was drinking herself into an early grave.
She had banned everything Irish from the house, burnt any newspapers or pamphlets that he brought home, and even searched his room for unsuitable material.
In the end he had relented, and agreed to take up the career she had chosen for him.
If the truth were known, he had only acceded to her wishes because it took him away from her, allowing him access to libraries, bookshops and students of all races and creeds — many of them Irish.
Patrick Lundy had made many friends amongst London's large Irish community, his parentage, and especially the fact that his father had fought and died in the General Post Office, making him welcome.
And chief amongst these was Joseph Hyde, an ardent Nationalist who had actually known his father and mother in Dublin, but who now worked in Webbs, one of the bookshops on the Charing Cross Road.
Patrick didn't like to think what would happen if his mother ever discovered his association with Joseph.
He especially didn't like to think what would happen if his mother ever discovered that he was going to sneak out of the house to attend an illegal meeting a few days hence.
Joseph had been tremendously excited when Patrick had strolled into the dusty bookshop that morning.
The small Irishman had just sprinkled the wooden floor with water to keep down the dust and was briskly sweeping the warped boards with a long-bristled broom when Patrick arrived.
The shop was empty, few people having braved the chilled and icy streets, and Joseph had simply dropped the brush and dragged Patrick to the back of the shop.
 "There's trouble brewing at home," he said breathlessly, pushing his wire-frame glasses back onto his face.
 "What sort of trouble?" 
Patrick asked, feeling his heart beginning to pound.
Ireland — home, as Joseph called it — had been a powder keg since the Easter Rising three years ago.
The situation had been compounded during the elections in the previous month when the Nationalist had taken seventy-three seats out of a total of one hundred and five, and out of those, forty-two of those elected were in jail for various offences related to their opposition of the British presence in Ireland.
 "The new government sits today," Joseph said hurriedly, "and there'll be trouble, mark my words." 
 "What sort of trouble?" 
Patrick asked again.
Joseph glanced around, his eyes darting, and Patrick suddenly realized just how nervous the man was.
 "There'll be war — mark my words." 
Patrick could only shake his head.
 "There'll be war," the older man insisted.
"Civil War.
We'll not let those who fought in the Rising die in vain."
 "I'm not sure I understand…" 
 "They're being betrayed — what they fought for, what they died for, they're being sold out." 
 "You're not making sense," Patrick said reasonably.
But we'll not betray them — we'll make Ireland free, by force of arms if need be!"
Patrick sighed.
He had heard the speech often, not only from Joseph, but from those like him, committed, embittered men with a vision that even Patrick with all the wisdom of his twenty years, knew would never be achieved in his lifetime.
He touched Joseph on the shiny sleeve of his coat and nodded towards the large-faced clock on the wall above the door,"I've got to go, Mother is expecting me home for lunch.
You know what she's like."
Joseph nodded absently, still wrapped in his thoughts.
 "I'll see you soon." 
 "They'll need young men, men of conviction," Joseph said suddenly, as Patrick headed towards the door.
The young man stopped, his hand on the door.
Joseph picked up a small parcel and walked down the length of the shop to hand it to Patrick.
 "Take these; an annotated Gray's Anatomy, some Freud — at least it'll prove you were here for a reason if nothing else." 
Patrick smiled his thanks, and slid his hand beneath his heavy overcoat for his wallet, but Joseph put his hand on his arm and shook his head.
 "A gift…" he began and them hurried on as Patrick started to shake his head.
"Well, an investment then.
You can treat me for free when you're a doctor."
He pulled open the door and peered out into Charing Cross Road, which was virtually deserted, the slush packed high and filthy against the kerb.
 "There'll be snow again." 
Patrick nodded and pulled up his collar.
He stuck the brown-paper bundle under his arm and stuck his hands  deep into his pockets.
 "I couldn't go back," he said softly.
They both knew he meant Ireland.
Without looking at him, Joseph said, "Why not?" 
 "Mother…" the young man said eventually.
"You've got to make the break sooner or later.
It's your country — it could be your fight.
If your father was alive — what do you think he'd do, where do you think he'd stand, eh?
And if you think you owe his memory anything, you'll know where you should stand."
 "Why does my mother hate Ireland so much?" 
Patrick said softly.
 "Have you ever asked her?" 
Joseph said glancing up at the serious young man.
 "Often; she says she doesn't want to talk about it." 
"Ireland took a lot from her, including her husband.
She's bitter,"he shrugged.
Without looking at Patrick, he said very quietly, his eyes on a tram lumbering slowly and cautiously down the street,"There's a meeting in the usual place on Saturday night.
You should come.
There'll be some people from home with all the latest news."
Patrick patted the books under his arm, and then deliberately pointed to the window, as if he was speaking about a book.
His eyes were on the street, scanning the few passers-by.
The bookshop was often watched by the British Authorities because of its known association with Irish sympathizers, but in this weather, with so few people about, any observer would be sure to stand out.
"Saturday…yes, Mother's giving a party, I should be able to slip away.
What time?"
 "The usual, eight or thereabouts," Joseph said, barely moving his lips.
"Think about going back.
I could arrange it, if you wanted to return.
Give you the right introductions…"
Patrick smiled vaguely.
"It would be lovely.
And in a year or two perhaps I might be in a position to take you up on it."
 "It might be too late then," Joseph said slapping Patrick on the shoulder, before turning back into the  shop and closing the door.
Patrick Lundy stood on the street for a few moments, staring unseeing into the windows, and then he turned away and headed back up to Mayfair.
And if he was quiet and preoccupied during lunch, neither his mother nor sister seemed to notice.
They were each wrapped in their own thoughts.
Katherine Lundy sat back in the darkened sitting room, her eyes on the deep red glow from the fire, the only sound the soft hissing of the burning coal and the solemn ticking of the clock.
There was a half-full glass of pale sherry standing beside the notepad and pen resting on the arm of the heavy leather chair.
When a thought occurred to her, she quickly noted it on the pad.
The house was almost completely silent.
The children had gone upstairs after lunch, Senga to continue her lessons with Miss Powers, her governess, Patrick to pursue his studies.
Katherine was still vaguely annoyed because he had bought a second-hand book, and she also had the feeling that he was being evasive.
No, it was more than a feeling — she knew he was lying.
All she wanted to know was why.
Patrick was nearly twenty now, and she couldn't hold on to him forever, she realized that.
But she only wanted the vest for him; he had a start in life that she never had; why, when she was his age she had already had one child, and was working in Dublin's most exclusive brothel.
No, not true, not quite true!
By the time she was twenty, she had already travelled across Europe, visiting the brothels of London, Paris and Berlin.
Her thin lip curled in a rare smile — one might say she had been pursuing her own studies.
She could look back on that time with a great deal of fondness; it had been one of the few times in her life when she had been truly free — there had been no one, neither family, friends nor employer — to make demands on her.
Good times, yes, they had been good times…
The muffled jangle of the bell disturbed her reverie, and she glanced up at the clock — it lacked a few minutes to three — her visitor was punctual as usual.
She was already rising to her feet when Gerard the butler taped on the door before opening it.
 "Mr Lee, Ma'am." 
"Thank you, Gerard.
Some tea please."
The butler bowed slightly and retired, and although his face was expressionless, Katherine could almost feel his displeasure towards the man who now stepped into the room.
 "Ma'am," he bowed stiffly, almost reluctantly.
Michael Lee, although he dressed, talked and had the manners of an Englishman, was a half-caste — it showed in the vaguely Oriental slant to his features, and the slight pigmentation of his skin.
Officially, he was Katherine's business consultant, in reality he was the manager of her London brothel.
 "Your message sounded urgent," he said directly.
She nodded.
 "It is" .
She returned to her seat and he sank languidly into the chair opposite.
She made no attempt to light one of the gas bowls and the vague glow from the fire did little to brighten the dimness of the room.
Michael Lee was well used to Katherine's preference for darkened rooms; when had had first started work for her, he had done some research and discovered that when she had operated in Dublin, she had never appeared in public during the daylight hours and always met her business associates in darkened rooms, where she was known only as Madam Kitten.
He waited patiently for Katherine to speak.
Lee had inherited a little of his father's Oriental patience — although he had never met his father, who had apparently run one of the infamous Opium Dens in Whitechapel — and was quite content to sit, absorb the heat, and listen to the soft ticking and creaking as the house settled, content in his own company.
Michael Lee had grown up in London's dockland at a time when prejudice towards the Chinese seemed to be  at a height — and especially half-caste Chinese children, and there were few enough of those.
His mother was a common prostitute, working the wharves, the cheap gambling clubs, and the dens.
An addict of the pipe herself, she had little time for her son — the only one of three to survive — and left his rearing to her own mother.
By the time he was eight, Michael Lee was an accomplished thief, and successfully touted for business for some of the street-girls, usually those who were either too ugly, raddled or diseased to approach a customer themselves.
Lee would pick out a suitably drunk customer, extol the virtues of his "sister" and then lure the man into a nearby darkened alley where, more often than not, the customer was attacked and robbed of everything he had on him, sometimes even his clothing.
The young boy quickly became an authority on who received and dealt in stolen goods in London, who specialized in watches, clothes, foreign money, rings.
By the time he was fifteen, he was an accomplished fence himself, often dealing as a middle-man between the thief and the fence.
He also had a small stable of girls working the docks, specializing in the new boats to put into harbour, and the girls had their instructions to discover details of the shipment…and there was always a bonus if they discovered an interesting cargo.
Interesting cargoes had a tendency to go missing.
Katherine had come in contact with him three years previously through her contacts in the London underworld.
Her proposition had been simple and direct — if he were to work for her, she would make him wealthy and ensure him a place in society.
And, although she never actually put it into words she had made it perfectly clear that she would put him out of business if he didn't agree to her terms.
With little option, Michael Lee went to work for the Madam.
But in the three years he had worked for her, she hadn't deceived him.
He had wealth, position and authority, and by nature of his association with Mrs  Katherine Lundy, he was invited to some of the best parties in London society.
The half-caste prostitute's parties in London society.
The half-caste prostitute's son had come a long way.
Katherine made a tiny note on her pad and then looked across at Michael Lee.
She opened her mouth to say something, when there was a knock on the door and Gerard re-entered, carrying an ornate silver tea service on an equally ornate tray.
He stood in the doorway, blinking in the dimness.
"Your tea, Ma'am.
Shall I turn up the light?"
 "No," Katherine said immediately, "I don't think that will be necessary; neither Mr Lee nor myself will be reading nor writing, I don't think we will need a light." 
 "I find the afternoon twilight very restful," Michael Lee said quietly, concentrating on keeping the accent he had perfected to hide his East End slang.
 "Very good, Ma'am…sir…" 
The butler placed the tray down on a table close to Mr Lee and with infinite care poured the tea.
Both Katherine and Michael Lee preferred it black.
Gerard handed Katherine her cup, and Mr Lee took a certain small pleasure in allowing him to pass over the second cup, even though he could have easily reached out and taken it.
Although the butler had never said or intimated anything untoward, Michael had grown up with prejudice long enough to recognize it for what it was.
 "If that will be all…?" 
Gerard bowed slightly and left, closing the door softly behind him.
 "He doesn't like me," Michael remarked.
 "That worries you?" 
He smiled, showing surprisingly white teeth.
 "Not at all." 
 "He is everything a butler should be, and a good butler is essential to one's position; moreover he is discreet and, as far as I can determine, without a vice." 
 "Every man has his," Michael said softly.
Katherine nodded.
 "Granted, but I have not yet discovered his." 
She sipped her tea and grimaced.
"Now, I asked you to come over for several reasons.
I received  some letters this morning which are of interest."
He nodded, a vague movement of his head.
 "Lumley reports a half-yearly profit, but is in need of stock again." 
 "Again?" 
Katherine nodded.
"I think perhaps you should investigate.
This situation is extremely annoying, though.
I fear Lumley may need replacing.
If he does, I would prefer it if he were to emigrate."
Michael Lee smiled broadly.
Katherine's two main rivals in London when she arrived had both mysteriously and suddenly decide to "emigrate" when she started her operations.
One was later found in a shallow grave in the New Forest, the other — his body wrapped in chains — was at the bottom of the Thames.
 "There was a letter from Glasgow, again reporting increased profits, and giving details of a nearby establishment for sale." 
"I will investigate that also.
On principle I am against owning too many establishments dealing in the same merchandise in the one town.
If one falls, the others are likely to fall alongside it."
 "That is true, but you must also bear in mind that premises offering similar service often feed off one another…at least that was my experience in Dublin." 
Katherine sipped her tea.
 "Well, visit it anyway, and see what you think, we can discuss it again." 
She placed her cup down on the side table and folded her hands together.
"There was a third letter, this one unsigned and undated, the paper poor, but the writing was educated.
It said — and I quote — "There will be an auction of some Irish Glass lost in" 07; the Greek has details."
Unquote."
 "Irish Glass…?" 
 "Jewels," Katherine murmured.
 "The Irish Crown Jewels?" 
Michael Lee asked.
 "I believe so." 
 "Are you interested?" 
"I'm more curious than interested.
I can remember  when they were stolen, and the investigation which followed.
From what I learned of their disappearance at the time, I never believed they would re-surface intact.
Their monetary value was not great, neither as individual stones nor as pieces of work.
However, contact the Greek…find out what you can."
 "Of course." 
"Now, finally.
There will be a fancy-dress party here on Saturday evening.
It will be the first grand event after the Christmas and New Year celebrations, and I am determined to make it a success.
Here is a copy of the guest list.
I want you to go through the list and then supply some girls who will be unknown to any of the people here."
Lee grimaced.
"You realize that is getting harder and harder to do.
As the house becomes more and more popular, we are attracting quite a select clientele — some of whom I feel would be on yours and every other society guest list."
Katherine smiled thinly.
 "Either that says a lot for the quality of guests, or for the reputation of the house." 
 "Do you want me to bring outsiders?" 
 "No," Katherine was emphatic.
"I want no cheap tarts masquerading as ladies.
Use only our own girls and warn them to be on their best behaviour.
Give them the standard aliases.
Also, on no account are they to conduct their activities here in this house."
Michael nodded, dipping his head to hide his smile; Katherine Lundy was so conscious of her reputation.
If his guests picked up some pleasant female company at her party then that was fine…as long as they didn't enjoy that same female company on the premises.
Katherine sighed.
 "That is really all I wanted to see you about." 
The tall, thin young man stood up, realizing that the interview was at an end.
 "If that is all…" 
Katherine nodded absently.
"Wen you investigated my son Patrick last year, you found nothing unusual about him?
You are positive he had made no connections with any of the Irish organizations?"
"Nothing, Ma'am.
I think I told you then, you were worrying yourself unnecessarily.
My agents could find no connection between him and any Irish organization or group.
The closet to Ireland we came were a few students in college, and even they seemed to have interest in politics."
He paused and added,"Why, has something come up…?
 "I have a feeling…" 
Katherine said slowly.
She looked up at Michael.
"Perhaps you should have him watched again.
I want to know his every movement for the next two weeks.
I want to know where he goes, who he meets…everything."
 "Something is bothering you," Michael lee said very softly, looking carefully at Katherine.
 "A feeling," she repeated.
"I know when someone is lying to me, she added with a thin smile.
 "Might it be nothing more than a girl?" 
 "Patrick has never exhibited any interest in girls," Katherine said quickly.
 "A boy then?" 
Lee said seriously.
Taking no offence, Katherine thought about it, and then finally nodded slowly.
"It is possible — just possible.
he has grown up surrounded by women.
I suppose it is possible he has formed an affection for some boy,"she conceded.
 "It does not bother you?" 
Michael said cautiously.
One of the reasons he was able to run his brothel so successfully was because he was homosexual, and therefore had no interest in the stock.
 "No, it doesn't bother me," Katherine said, keeping her face impassive.
Although Michael Lee concealed the fact very well indeed, Katherine was well aware of his leanings.
And them she suddenly wondered if her son and Lee…she dismissed the idea equally swiftly; she would know.
She picked her employees very carefully, and then she watched them equally cautiously; there was little she didn't know about them, from the girls who worked in her houses, to the scullery maid who worked in the kitchen.
"It doesn't bother — perhaps it should, but then that is what this business does to you.
You get used to seeing so many things, you become immune to what would normally be considered perversions.
If Patrick was homosexual then it might sadden me, but it wouldn't shock me."
 "He would be in very good company," Michael Lee said with a sly smile, "all the best people are." 
 "The very best company," Katherine agreed.
Michael Lee bowed slightly as he prepared to take his leave.
 "I take it you would be happier if your boy was effeminate than if he were somehow connected to some Irish political group." 
 "If I find he has any connections with Ireland, I'll kill him," Katherine Lundy snapped, and Michael Lee suddenly realized that hi didn't know if she was serious or not.
Dimly, Patrick Lundy heard the governess' shrill voice repeat — yet again — a line of verse.
All he could distinguish was the sound rather than the words, but he could tell by the tone of her voice that Senga wasn't taking it in.
The thin young man was standing by the window of his bedroom, his hands deep in the pockets of his dressing gown, looking out over the park.
Dusk was drifting in over the park, covering the snow in gritty grey shadows, bringing the houses around the park alight almost simultaneously.
His thoughts were spinning, mulling over what Joseph had said to him earlier.
Deep in his heart he knew he just didn't have the nerve to give up everything — his home, his family, his fortune — to return to a country he thought he loved.
He knew he hadn't the nerve to face his mother's wrath.
Joseph Hyde said Ireland had taken too much from her, but was that enough to account for her hatred of the country?
There was a mystery there.
He heard the hall door directly below the window slam closed, and a slim dapper man stepped carefully  down the clean-swept steps, the ferrule of his cane tapping the steps.
He paused on the bottom step to turn up the heavy collar of his overcoat, before striding off down the street, his breath pluming before him.
Now there was a mystery — how had his mother ever got involved with a shark like Michael lee, a miserable jumped-up half-caste, with his too soft handshake and his ice-cold calculating eyes?
Mysteries, all mysteries, but no answers.
The only answers, he knew lay back in Dublin.
And he wondered if he would ever discover them.
He wondered if he wanted to.
Saturday, 25th January, 1919
In the still pre-dawn silence, Katherine awoke.
She lay in her bed, her eyes moving across the ceiling where the snow piled outside her window reflected vague purple-grey patterns into the room.
It came almost as a shock to realize that her night had been peaceful — there had been no dreams, no nightmares, and the bottle by her bed remained untouched.
It might have been an omen.
But Katherine Lundy didn't believe in omens; she imagined her untroubled night's sleep was due to nothing more than complete exhaustion.
She had been up until close to three the previous night, putting the finishing touches to the preparations for this evening's grand dinner.
She was determined it would be a success.
This would be the first party since the Christmas and New Year round of celebrations, and it would set the tome and standard for the rest of the year.
But because it was the first, it naturally left itself open to criticism.
Katherine lay in bed, listening to the floorboards outside her door creak and the hurried whispers of the servants as they made there way down from their attic quarters; it was a little before six then.
In her days in service, the fires would have to have been cleaned and lit by six.
But times had changed, the Great War had seen to that.
She snuggled deeper into the warmth, idly reviewing the plans for the evening.
It had to be a success — she knew she would only be allowed one failure.
Too many people had resented her abrupt intrusion onto the  London society circuit, and while she might have gained some measure of respectability, she knew the resentment remained.
She had appeared out of nowhere three years previously, with money and connections, and had almost immediately established herself as one of the city's leading society hostesses.
Her sudden, almost overnight, success had not been without its problems however.
Initially, she had been ostracised in some quarters, and on several occasions when she had arranged a soiree, rival parties had been arranged for the same night.
But somehow Mrs Lundy's were always better, and invitations to her gatherings were soon eagerly sought after.
Eventually, those waging their campaign against her found they were losing, and furthermore, they quickly realized they couldn't afford not to be seen as a Katherine Lundy party.
Tonight the theme was an anonymous — but not a fancy-dress — ball; no names would be used and everyone would be masked.
Katherine smiled; the idea appealed to her.
There would be enough celebrities to keep the guests guessing…and it would also allow her girls to mingle unnoticed in the crowd.
lee would pick the girls for the evening and she would approve his choice.
Much would depend on that choice.
Katherine Lundy ran two similar, but quite separate, operations.
There was the high-class brothel, managed by Michael Lee, which operated out of the house across the park from Katherine's own home, and then there were the dozen or so girls — the pick of the brothel girls — who worked the society parties.
Their task was simple; they would entice a given target with their charms or education, whichever was appropriate, holding out the possibility of a night together.
If the ruse didn't work the first time, it invariably did on the second occasion.
The idea was to get the target hooked, and once he was hooked, he could be played along — very successfully and lucratively — for presents.
These usually took the form of cash, but were more often clothes, furs and jewels — all of which Katherine's  organization had a ready outlet for.
And of course, each girl was the mistress of more than one man.
But the success of the operation depended on the girls Katherine and Michael Lee chose.
Each girl was them carefully suited to the target, tailored to his likes and dislikes.
Tonight, four of Katherine's special girls were working the party, each one fully acquainted with her target.
There would also be a dozen girls from the brothel in attendance, they would provide colour, and nothing more.
Tonight, they were young ladies of quality, they were not whores.
The food was ready, the rooms prepared, the entertainment laid on.
it was going to be a very successful night indeed.
Katherine threw back the covers and swung her legs out of bed.
She reached for her silk dressing gown and pulled it on; she felt good, it had been a long time since she had awoken feeling so alive.
It boded well for the night.
At the other end of the corridor, Patrick Lundy was also thinking of the coming night.
He was wondering how he was going to slip out for a few hours without alerting his mother.
Last week, when he had left Joe Hyde in the bookshop, he had more or less made up his mind not to attend the meeting of the Irish sympathizers planned for this night.
But that had been before he had heard of the shootings.
Two Irish policemen had been shot dead at Soloheadbeg last Tuesday by fellow Irishmen: it looked as if Joseph Hyde's prediction about Civil War might become a reality all too soon.
Patrick had heard various stories and rumours about what had actually happened on the lonely country road from Tipperary town into Soloheadbeg Quarry when a shipment of gelignite — or dynamite — had been intercepted and the guards shot.
On his way home from college, he had managed to slip into the bookshop and grab a few quick words with Joe  on the pretext of asking for a book, but the small, stout man could only tell him more or less what he already knew.
He had mentioned that they would have the full story on Saturday and that had changed Patrick's mind for him.
Now he was committed to attending the meeting; Joseph would have his disguise ready and would vouch for him.
All he had to do was get out of the house.
He wasn't actually sure why it was important for him to discover the facts.
On the face of it, the shooting looked like another bloody event in Irish history, but perhaps it was its timing — on the same day that the government had sat for the first time — that intrigued him, or perhaps it was Joe's words: that his father and the men like him had died for Ireland were being betrayed.
Perhaps it was nothing more than idle curiosity.
Patrick pulled his hands out from beneath the covers and clasped them behind his head, his eyes on the ceiling.
Unlike his mother, who slept with the curtains drawn, Patrick preferred them open, and the wan dawn light reflected off the snow and created a ghostly, sparkling pattern across the high ceiling.
Tracing the glittering lines of light, he idly wondered how he was going to get out tonight.
occasionally his mother allowed both Patrick and Senga to attend one of her functions, but obviously tonight's grand affair was not to be one of them.
If they had been invited it might have made it easier, since it would have allowed him to slip away unnoticed.
Tonight, he would have to try another ruse…
Although Patrick Lundy was almost twenty, Katherine still considered him a child and treated him accordingly, and often it was easier to go along with her rather than risk an argument.
He could of course simply walk out on some pretext — visiting a friend.
Some other students — but he knew from experience that his mother would want all the details, and he clearly remembered the time he had slipped out for an evening to meet a girl  the only girl he had ever really liked.
He had given his mother a false address that time.
The following day she had been able to tell him that he hadn't been there, and had demanded the truth.
With no choice, he told her and while he never discovered what she did or said to the girl or her parents, the girl never spoke to him again, indeed, never even looked in his direction.
At the time he had assumed that she had simply contacted the address on some pretext and discovered that he hadn't been there, but it was only later, when the argument had blown over, that he remembered that the address he had given his mother had been vacant.
Which meant that he must have been watched…and that made him wonder was he still being watched?
And why?
Which brought him back to tonight.
Patrick threw back the covers and hopped out of bed.
Unlike his mother's room which was fully carpeted, his floor was of plain though highly polished wooden boards.
In the summer, with the sun slanting in through the window, with the deep tan wallpaper, and the overall colour scheme of tan and creams, it looked lovely, but in the depths of winter it looked vaguely soiled, and depressingly dull.
he dug his feet into his slippers an dragged on his heavy dressing gown, feeling the chill air nip at is flesh.
He pulled open his door and hurried down the landing towards the bathroom.
He could hear the pipes chugging and banging together and from below came the rattling of pots in the kitchen, and the faint smell of a freshly lit fire.
The combination bathroom and toilet was bitterly cold, and the water was freezing, hot water not having come through yet.
Shivering, he splashed cold water on his face and washed his hands and then hurried back to his own room, trying to decide whether it would be better to go back to bed, or to get up, get breakfast and do a little study before Senga was up and about.
There was no school on a Saturday and she would probably demand that he take her skating on the frozen lakes in  the park — and in all honesty he didn't want to disappoint her.
There was little enough fun in her life; she had no friends, she rarely left the house and on the few occasions she did, it was never on her own and her only contacts were with her mother, the tutors, some of the servants and Patrick.
Patrick couldn't help wondering what had occurred to make his mother so possessive of her children, so overly-protective to the point of obsession.
He stood in front of the window, looking out across the snow-locked road and smiled wryly.
He was twenty — well this June — and he still hadn't walked out with a girlfriend, and yet his mother was moving in very exalted circles, where it should have been possible for him to meet the pick of the debutantes.
When he had broached the subject — tentatively — he had been turned down with surprising sharpness.
He could understand his mother — any mother — not wanting to lose their children, but she was carrying it too far.
Some day, he promised himself, he would discover the reasons for his mother's obsessions.
When he had graduated, but before he had established a practice, he would return to Dublin and retrace his mother's steps.
The answer to his questions lay in his mother's past, in Dublin.
Patrick dressed quickly, his teeth chattering in the chill air, and then hurried down to the kitchen.
His mother would have disapproved, he knew, but at the moment it was the warmest, cosiest room in the house.
Patrick tapped softly on the kitchen door with the tips of his fingers and then turned the handle and poled his head in.
 "Morning!" 
Four of the eight servants in the Lundy household were seated around the scrubbed kitchen table, drinking tea, finishing their breakfast.
Gerard the butler sat at the head of the table, facing Mrs James, the cook, while the two maids, Jane and Sarah, sat beside her.
They all looked up, startled, and Gerard started to come to his feet.
 "Stay where you are," Patrick said quickly, stepping into the room.
 "I've only popped down for a cup of tea." 
"I could bring it up to you, sir.
The fire should be lit in the dining room,"the butler said stiffly.
"Not at all; it will still be freezing up there.
I'll have it in here with you — if you don't mind that is,"he added quickly.
 "Don't mind him, you sit down and warm yourself," Mrs James said quickly, glaring at Gerard.
The cook looked at one of the maids, "Jane, will you fetch Master Patrick a cup and saucer please." 
Patrick thanked her and sat down facing the second maid, Sarah.
Her eyes met his and she immediately dropped her gaze, colouring slightly.
She and Jane were sisters, but while Jane was slender and dark, Sarah was broader, and lacked her younger sister's intense dark beauty.
Aware of the growing silence, Patrick looked at Mrs James as she poured the tea.
 "I'm surprised to find you in so early." 
 "Aaah, it's this party tonight, I want to make sure everything's ready." 
 "I'm sure it will be," Patrick said, smiling his thanks as she passed across the cup and saucer.
 "You're up early yourself, sir," Jane said softly, ignoring the butler's glare of disapproval.
 "Oh, I've some studying to do, and I thought I'd get it in now while the house is still quiet." 
 "And how are your studies coming along, sir?" 
Gerard asked, politely, although it was plain that he considered Patrick's presence in the kitchen as an intrusion.
In the old days — the good good old days — a member of the family would never even consider entering the servants' quarters or the kitchens.
Patrick sipped his tea.
"Oh, they're coming along slowly.
There seems to be so much to learn, so much to absorb.
And there are new techniques being discovered every day — why, the Great War alone brought us many new methods of surgery and medicine."
 "And you'll make a grand doctor some day," Mrs James said with a quick smile.
She was aware of the butler's discomfort and enjoying it.
She took a great deal of satisfaction in seeing the pompous old ass upset.
He was a sour one, and no mistake…
 "I think it will be along time before I'm qualified," Patrick said with a smile.
"Well, when you are you can treat my rheumatism.
This damp weather kills me. @
 "I could suggest some liniments…" 
Patrick said with a smile.
"You wait till you're qualified.
You don't want to go practising on me!"
The two girls fell into a fit of giggling, more at the butler's outraged expression than anything else.
Patrick finished his tea.
 "But we need bodies to practise on," he grinned, "we're always looking for volunteers." 
He stood up, pushing away his empty cup.
 "Thank you for the tea — and thank you for allowing me to join your table." 
 "Do you want some breakfast…it's no trouble?" 
Mrs James asked.
"No, not yet, thank you.
I'll wait until my sister or mother come down, and I'll eat with them.
The tea was perfect — just what I needed.
Thank you again."
 "It was our pleasure, sir," Gerard said quickly.
I'm sure it was, Patrick grinned as he walked down the corridor and climbed the half-dozen steps from the servants' quarters up to the hall; he had seen the look on the butler's face, and knew how uncomfortable it had been for him.
He toyed with the idea of reading in the drawing room, but he could hear one of the junior maids moving about in there and decided to go back up to his room instead.
He was standing on the bottom stair when he heard footsteps coming up the back stairs from the kitchen and then Jane's large dark eyes peered through the banisters at him.
 "You've quite scandalized Mr Gerard," she whispered.
 "And hasn't he little enough to worry about," Patrick  smiled, the accent and phrase coming straight from his childhood.
 "He's giving out to Mrs James for making so free with you," 
 "I didn't realize she was making free with me," Patrick grinned at the thought.
 "He didn't think it was proper for her to tell you about her complain." 
"Oh, her rheumatism.
She should have let me prescribe for her; I know an excellent liniment…"
 "She's right," the maid grinned, "you are just looking for a body to practise on." 
 "Well…" 
He looked at her speculatively, wondering at the expression in her dark eyes and then said very slowly and carefully, "Well…it is true, we do need bodies to practise on…" 
Colour touched her cheeks but she looked him straight in the eyes and was just about to reply when the kitchen door opened and Gerard's solid footsteps sound along the hall.
Without a word, Jane turned and fled into the sitting room, leaving Patrick alone on the stairs, wondering what her reply might have been.
The first guests were due to arrive around eight, which actually meant that they would begin arriving anytime after nine.
The house had been polished, checked, and then double-checked, first by Gerard and then later by Mrs Lundy herself.
The large dining room which had been airing for the past week had passed its final inspection although Mrs Lundy had insisted that the maids cleaned the windows and French doors one more time.
Earlier that afternoon, Katherine had stood before the French doors and watched her some and daughter playing in the snow outside.
She would lose Patrick soon, she suddenly thought — all that was keeping him with her now was because she kept a very tight control of the purse strings: he had no money of his own.
But he would be twenty next birthday, a young man certainly, but not mature — certainly not mature.
Although he had been brought up in a brothel, Katherine had ensured that neither of her children knew the true function of the house, and while they might suspect where some of here money came from — especially Patrick — they were in no position to argue about it.
That same money had given them everything they possessed, including their fine education.
So, she would lose Patrick, first to medical school and then later to a practice — and she would ensure that it would be one of the finest in the city — and then she supposed there would be a wife and children…and the intensity of her sudden anger surprised her.
She might not be able to keep her children forever — but she would try.
They were all she had; everything else was transient — the money, the position, the power — but her children were tangible proof…proof of what?
 "Madam…?" 
Katherine turned, her eyes vacant.
 "The musicians for tonight's entertainment," Gerard said stiffly.
Katherine turned her back on the window — and immediately forgot about her children.
Patrick watched his mother walk away form the window and turned back to his sister.
"Senga, listen to me for a moment.
I need your help,"he said slowly, putting the finishing touches to the snowman he was building for his sister.
He glanced back up at the house, where warm orange light spilled out from the dining room into the grey afternoon.
Senga turned a large adoring eyes on her brother.
 "What do you want me to do?" she breathed, dropping her voice to a conspiratorial whisper.
Patrick took his sister's hand and led her further down the garden, out of sight of the house, and then he squatted in the snow and stared into her deep, dark eyes.
She would never be a great beauty, he knew, but she had a natural charm and personality that lent an extra depth to her character, and he imagined that this would have been how his mother would have looked  at a similar age.
 "I need you to do something for me," he said, his breath white on the bitter air.
 "What?" 
 "I need to slip out tonight…" he began.
 "Where?" 
"It doesn't matter where.
I won't be long."
"It's a girl, you're seeing a girl.
What's her name, what's she like?"
 "I'm not seeing a girl," Patrick insisted with a grin, his sister was as eager to see him married off as his mother was against the idea.
 "I just need to see some friends…from college." 
Senga frowned.
 "Why don't you ask Mama…?" 
Patrick shook his head.
"She won't let me go — you know that.
Nom I'll have to sneak out while she's tied up with the party.
But listen, when we go in now, I'm going to say I'm not well and then I'll go up to bed.
If you're asked, will you say that I was sneezing out here?"
 "Well…" 
Senga began doubtfully.
 "Please?" 
"Oh, all right, I suppose.
But I hope you won't go getting yourself into trouble,"she added, and Patrick burst out laughing: the phrase and the accent were his mother's.
As Patrick and Senga strolled into the house a few moments later, Katherine suddenly heard her son sneeze explosively.
Frowning slightly, she hurried across the highly polished floor back into the dining room, and was in time to see Patrick sneeze again and then again.
He was fumbling for a handkerchief as she hurried up.
 "Patrick's not well, Mama," Senga said immediately.
 "He's got a cold." 
Katherine looked at her son's streaming eyes and nodded.
 "To bed," she said decisively, "I'll have some tea sent up in a little while." 
 "Mother…" 
Patrick protested ineffectually, bringing up his handkerchief again to hide his smile.
 "Bed!" she insisted, "I don't want you falling ill and missing classes." 
 "Yes, Mother," Patrick said, and sneezed.
Senga took her brother's hand and led him out into the hall.
@How did you do that?"she hissed, as they climbed the stairs to his room.
 "Do what?" 
Patrick winked.
 "Snuff," he grinned.
Katherine came to visit Patrick a little later.
She found him sitting up in bed, a score of his medical texts and notes scattered across the heavy coverlet.
The fire had been lit in the bedroom, and Senga was sitting curled up in the rocking chair beside the fire quietly reading aloud from the latest issue of the "Girls Own Paper." 
"Senga — you shouldn't be disturbing your brother.
He should be resting."
 "I'm fine mother," Patrick said, pitching his voice low and adopting a nasal twang.
 "Yes, I'm sure you are," Katherine said slowly, something about the expression in her son's eyes or the way her daughter lifted her paper a little higher to hide her face, making her suspicious.
She crossed to Patrick's bed and rested her hand on his forehead; it felt hot and his cheeks were certainly flushed — but perhaps that might be nothing more than the heat in the room.
Dismissing her fears — her whole life seemed to be ruled by fears, both from within and without — she bent her head and kissed Patrick's forehead briefly.
"Now, you must rest.
Tea will be up shortly, and then I want you to try and get some sleep.
Hopefully, the noise from below won't disturb you too much."
 "I'm sure it won't, Mother." 
Katherine looked at her daughter.
 "Senga, now you run along…" 
 "Can I come down tonight?" 
Senga asked hopefully.
"No, I'm afraid you cannot.
You can watch the guests arriving from the window, if you wishes.
But that's all; I want you in bed early."
 "Mama!" 
Senga said in exasperation.
 "Senga!" 
Katherine said warningly.
The young girl lapsed into sulky silence.
"Now, run along to your own room.
I'll see you in the morning"she added, looking back at her son.
 "Good-night Mother, enjoy your party." 
Katherine smiled slightly, and then ushered Senga out of the room before her.
She paused at the door before closing it.
 "I want you to stay in bed Patrick, let's try and get rid of that cold before morning." 
 "I'm sure it'll be fine by then," Patrick mumbled, hiding a smile.
The fire had died down to a dull glow and Patrick was just beginning to doze off when there was a soft knock on the door, and it opened to admit Jane, the younger of the two maids, carrying a large tea tray.
"I heard you were unwell, Master Patrick.
I'm sorry about that."
 "It's just a touch of a cold." 
Patrick said, smothering a huge yawn.
 "What time is it?" 
 "Just gone six." 
The young woman put the tray down on the table beside the bed and began gathering up the books and papers off the bedspread.
 "You looked very well this morning," she added, glancing sidelong at him.
 "I only sneezed a couple of times…but you know what mother is like," Patrick said defensively.
 "Yes, I know." 
Something in her voice made Patrick look up.
 "What do you mean?" he asked quietly.
 "Nothing…nothing, sir," she said quickly, knowing she had said too much.
 "Come on," Patrick reached out and grabbed her hand.
"Tell me.
I won't say anything."
 "I've seen the way she treats you, sir…like a child," Jane blurted out.
And then realizing he was still holding her hand, she gently disengaged it.
 "She is a bit over-protective," Patrick admitted.
"You shouldn't let her.
Look at you — a few sneezes and she pops you into bed like a six year old."
 "Hold on now." 
Patrick threw back the covers and  swung his legs out of bed.
For some reason, he felt he had to explain himself to this dark-eyed, intense young woman.
 "I didn't just let her send me to bed — I wanted to go to bed." 
 "Oh…yes?" 
Jane said, looking him up and down.
She handed him his dressing gown and then knelt to add some coal on the fire.
Patrick tied on his gown and sat down in the chair beside the fire.
For a few moments he was content to look at the maid's face and the way the orange firelight lent it strength and mystery.
She turned her head to look at him, her eyes twinkling red-gold with the firelight, a touch of a smile curling her lips.
 "Look, the thing is, I want to go out tonight, but my mother wasn't likely to allow me…" 
 "Oh, seeing a girl, eh?" 
 "No, not a girl," Patrick said in exasperation.
 "There is a meeting of an organization my mother disapproves of." 
 "It must be Irish then," Jane said shrewdly.
 "It is." 
 "So you told her you were sick and now you're going to sneak out, hoping that you'll be back before the party is over." 
Patrick nodded.
 "Exactly." 
 "And I suppose you're going to slip out the kitchen door," she continued, "which you might be able to do if you time it right and both Mrs James and Mr Gerard are distracted but how are you going to bet back in?" 
Patrick opened his mouth to reply and then closed it again.
 "Ah!" 
Jane nodded.
"Exactly.
By the time you get back most of the staff will have retired; Mrs James will certainly have gone home, but Gerard will still be up until after the last guest has gone.
And there's no way you're going to get past him."
Patrick nodded glumly.
"You're right, of course.
But I've got to go to this meeting…"
Jane smiled archly.
She stood up, dusting off her  hands and stood before Patrick.
She smiled down on him.
 "What you need now is someone in the basement who might just leave a window open for you…" 
Patrick suddenly smiled.
Jane and her sister shared the basement rooms off the kitchen, unlike the other two maids, whose rooms were at the top of the house.
Playing along with the game, he asked, "And do you know anyone who might be prepared to leave a window open…?" 
 "I might…" 
 "And would there be a payment involved do you think?" 
 "There might." 
The speculative look in her eye was unmistakable.
Suddenly conscious of the pounding of his heart and the raw burning at the back of his throat, Patrick stood up.
 "And what do you think that payment might be…?" 
The maid stared into his eyes for a long moment and then suddenly turned away.
 "Well, we will just have to wait and see, won't we?" 
She stopped by the door.
 "Your tea's getting cold." 
 "And the window?" he asked.
 "It'll be open." 
The first guests began arriving just before none.
Patrick stood by his window, fully dressed, but still wearing his dressing gown, watching an elegantly dressed meddle-aged couple alight from a gleaning Rolls Royce.
Even as the car was pulling away, another was swinging in around the Green.
Secure in the knowledge that his mother would be fully occupied for the rest of the evening and the butler would be busy introducing the guests, Patrick pulled off his dressing down and slipped down the back stairs to the kitchen.
He stopped outside the kitchen door and carefully cracked it open a fraction — and looked straight into Jane's wide eyes.
She moved her head fractionally and mouthed the word, "No." 
And then Patrick saw Mrs James moving behind her.
 "Do you not think it's very hot in here?" the maid suddenly asked the cook.
 "It is a bit; will you open the back door for a few minutes and let in a breath of air?" 
Jane flashed a grin at Patrick and turned away to open the door.
A gust of cool air swept through the kitchen, setting the steam swirling, drawing it our the door.
"That's better.
Now, I need some butter,"Mrs James said, and passes behind Jane again, heading for the larder.
Jane nodded quickly and Patrick immediately dashed through the kitchen, squeezed Jane's should as he passed, and was then out through the open door.
When Mrs James returned moments later with a slab of yellow butter, Jane was just closing the door.
 "It was getting chill," she said.
From where she was standing, she could just about make out the shape of Patrick's cap as he hurried down the back lane.
Patrick made his way to Joseph Hyde's digs in one of the backstreets almost directly behind the bookshop on Charing Cross Road.
From the window of his room on the top floor of the tenement building, Joe could see down into old Mr Webb's office at the rear of the shop, and the outline of scores of books were clearly visible poled up against the filthy windows.
Hyde's room was small and squalid, hot and stuffy in summer, cold and amp in winter.
he had to share a bathroom with the four other tenants on the floor, and the room itself consisted of little more than a single bed pushed up against the wall to one side of the room, a wood-wormed wardrobe and a single gas ring for cooking.
Although Joseph Hyde had occupied the room for nearly eight years, he had done nothing to personalize it.
Patrick had once remarked that if Joe were to pack his bags and walk out, there would be nothing of him left behind, no hint, no trace.
The small, stout man had smiled and said, "That's the idea, my boy." 
Joseph had just stepped out of his room and was pulling the door closed when Patrick came panting up the stairs.
Joe squinted short-sightedly at the shape in the dimness.
 "It's you," he said, automatically lowering his voice.
 "I was beginning to think you weren't coming." 
 "I had a few problems getting away." 
Joseph nodded; he knew what Katherine Lundy was like.
He put the key back in the lock and opened the door, and then ushered Patrick through before him.
He paused for a moment, checking the hall and stairs before stepping into the room and closing the door behind him.
He locked it, and then turned on the light.
"You best hurry up, otherwise we'll be late.
The  clothes are in the usual place,"he added.
Patrick opened the wardrobe and pulled out an old army kit bag.
It held his "disguise" — a limp, old round-necked sweater, and a pair of stained work trousers.
There was an oily cap on the top shelf of the wardrobe and a pair of much worn and down at heel working boots under the bed.
Patrick stripped off and changed quickly, trying to ignore Joseph Hyde's too intense stare; he had long suspected his friend's preferences for young men — although to be perfectly fair, he had never seen him in any company other than those who supported the Irish movement.
Patrick brought the jumper to his nose and then winced.
 "Don't you ever wash this?" 
 "I never wear it," Joseph remarked with a grin.
He turned off the light and crossed to the window to stand and stare out across the back of the houses.
Patrick finished dressing in semi-darkness.
 "Why do I have to wear this stuff?" he complained.
 "You're the one who wanted your identity kept a secret," Joe reminded him.
"Yes, I know.
But I think this is taking it too far."
Joseph smiled.
"Well, it's a bit late now.
People are used to seeing Paddy Montgomery at these meetings; if Patrick Montgomery Lundy were suddenly to appear, questions would be asked.
And you don't want that — do you?"
He turned, the light from outside silhouetting his face, robbing it of all expression.
Patrick squirmed uncomfortably in the jumper and the trousers, which were at least two sizes too large for him — he felt as if they were going to fall down at any moment.
He popped the cap onto his head and pulled the brim down over his eyes.
 "I'm ready." 
Joseph moved away from the window.
 "Now remember, keep those finely kept hands of yours in your pockets; I guarantee they'll be the softest hands in the place tonight — and that includes the women!" 
The Queen Victoria was deep in the heart of dockland, a  quayside pub that catered mainly to the wharf trade.
Its clientele was drawn from every part of the world, and the owner was a tiny German whom everyone called Fritz, although that wasn't his real name.
He ran the pub with his wife, an Irish woman who was known as Mrs Nora, and whose reputation along the docks had been assured the day she had broken up a brawl between a huge Turk who had just knifed two men, and a dozen of the wounded men's shipmates.
While the pub had been emptying of its customers, and Fritz had been covering down behind the counter, Mrs Nora had grabbed a broom and, holding it in both hands like a bat, had waited until the Turk had turned to face her — and then cracked him across the forehead.
he had gone down without a sound — and by the time he had woken up, his ship had been two days out into the Channel.
The Queen Victoria sold cloudy beer, bad gin and passable whisky, but the main source of its revenue — especially when the docks were quiet — came from the rent it received from its rooms.
Although the Victoria was not an especially large establishment, it backed onto an old warehouse that had at one time been split down the middle and then divided up into a series of small rooms that all opened onto a single long corridor.
There were forty rooms in the warehouse, twenty on either side of the corridor and Fritz let the rooms to the street girls who worked the docks.
If a boat was in, each room might see between eight and ten customers a night, and could earn anywhere between ten shillings and a pound a night.
The German's rates differed from girl to girl, and with some he had an arrangement that he received a commission rather than a rent per room; the advantage here for the girls was that they could pay him at the end of the night, rather than each time they used the room And to ensure they didn't even think about cheating, he employed a "caretaker" whose job was to keep a tally of the girls and their customers.
But Fritz wasn't too perturbed what his rooms were used for — so long as he was paid, and many factions and  organizations, both political and criminal, operating in London used the Warehouse Hotel, as it was called, for their meetings.
Amongst its advantages were a series of paid watchers who warned of approaching police, as well as numerous exits out into the warren of houses and warehouses that backed onto the Thames.
And in one of these rooms at the rear of the long warehouse, the group of Irish sympathizers had gathered.
Although the room was nearly twice the size of any of the other rooms, it was uncomfortably crowded with the dozen men packed into it.
As Joseph and Patrick squeezed in, nodding to the faces they recognized, Tom Rooney, the most senior of their group was finishing speaking.
 "…who'll give us all the latest news from home…" 
A sharp-faced young man immediately stood up and looked, unsmiling, at the other men in the room, suspicion evident in his eyes.
He struck his hands in his belt pulling back hi coat, allowing them all to see the butt of a revolver protruding from the inner pocket of his coat.
Patrick leaned forward and whispered to Joseph.
 "Who's he?" 
The bookseller shook his head slightly.
"Don't know, never seen him before.
Cocky young pup though by the look of him."
 "Suspicious bastard too," a tall bearded man beside Joseph murmured with a grin.
 "Don't know whether he's showing us the gun because he's afraid of us, or so that we'll be afraid of him." 
The young man pulled forward the chair he had been sitting on and lifted one leg up on it.
He then leaned forward, resting his right forearm on his raised leg.
 "Reckon he took his time getting the pose right," the bearded man added in a broad Cork accent, and the men standing around him laughed quietly.
 "Brothers," the young man said softly, "I've news from home." 
His voice was soft, the Dublin accent immediately evident, and Patrick immediately placed  him as coming from one of the city centre tenements — some of the great breeding grounds for revolutionaries.
"On Tuesday last, January 21st, we struck another blow for Irish freedom.
But before I start, I should tell you that Mick Collins sends you all his regards and thanks you for your efforts on his — and out behalf."
There was a quick murmur of appreciation around the room, after the execution of Patrick Pearse and the other leaders of the Easter Rising of 1916, Michael Collins was the most active and charismatic of the leaders of the Cause.
The un-named young man smiled, showing broken, discoloured teeth.
"Aye, the Big fellow is active again you'll be pleased to know; perhaps we might see some results soon.
We'll certainly see some action."
 "What happened on Tuesday?" someone from the crowd asked impatiently.
The young man's eyes narrowed as he tried to identify the speaker.
 "On Tuesday," he said slowly and distinctly, "seven men of the south Tipperary Brigade of the Irish Republican Army under the command of Seamus Robinson captured a consignment of gelignite…" 
 "Hang on there a minute, the bearded man beside Hyde said suddenly," what's this Irish Republican Army, eh?"
The young man straightened up and put his hands on his hips, staring at the man.
 "And your name?" he demanded, his lip curling into a sneer.
The bearded man pushed his way through those in front of him until he was standing not more than six inches from the young gunman.
 "I'm Dan Brady, and I've served the Cause both here and at home since before you were born…so I'd take that look off your face before I take it off for you." 
The young man's hand moved fractionally closer to the butt of his pistol.
Brady smiled, showing his teeth.
 "And if you touch that gun, boy, I'll take it off you, and shove it down your throat." 
 "Gentlemen…gentlemen…" 
Tom Rooney pushed his way between the two men.
"Gentlemen, we're all on the one side remember.
Our enemies will divide us soon enough without us doing it for ourselves.
Now Dan, why don't you clam down.
This young man has come from Dublin to answer all our questions, and I had a letter from Mick Collins himself telling me that this young man would assist us in every way possible…"
Patrick was watching the gunman's face when Tom Rooney had mentioned the Big Fellow's name, and was surprised to see the reaction it brought.
The man either feared or greatly respected Michael Collins.
 "I won't be threatened by a young pup…" 
Dan Brady said belligerently.
I'm sure there was not threat intended, now was there?"
Rooney asked, looking at the younger man.
He shook his head slowly.
 "No…none intended I'm sure." 
Joseph Hyde tilted his head back and Patrick leaned forward to catch what he was saying.
 "That's taken the wind out of his sails." 
 "Now why don't you tell us about this Irish Republican Army," Tom Rooney said to the gunman.
 "It was decided to change the mane of the loyal volunteers to the Irish Republican Army." 
 "Why change the name?" 
Joseph called out.
 "Because we're an army now, fighting for the cause." 
 "We were always an army," someone else shouted.
Tom Rooney raised his hand.
"We seem to be drifting away from the point here.
Let's forget about the name for a moment, and perhaps we'll get to hear what happened last Tuesday."
There was a general murmur of agreement.
 "Tell us first," Dan Brady called, "were you there, young man?" 
After a moment's hesitation, the gunman answered.
 "No, I was not: I'm not a member of the South Tipperary Brigade, but I heard the details from one of the lads there, and they've since been confirmed by the  Big Fellow himself." 
He brought his leg back up onto the chair and resumed his original pose.
 "There was a shipment of gelignite heading into the quarry at Soloheadbeg, and the Brigade had orders to capture it…" 
 "Orders from whom?" 
Rooney asked.
The young man looked puzzled.
 "Dublin, I suppose." 
The old man shook his head.
"They deny it.
But go on…"
"There's little enough to tell.
The boys captured the gelignite…"
His small dark eyes darted around the smoke-filled room, looking for a friendly face, but they were all closed and impassive.
There were no youthful revolutionaries, they were all, in the main, mature men — some of whom had fought in '16 —and all of whom had advanced the Irish cause either with funds or arms down through the years.
 "And there were two of the constabulary shot in the process," he finished quickly.
 "How many guards…" someone asked.
 "Just the two…" 
Patrick stifled a yawn.
He desperately wished he could glance at his watch, but knew he couldn't risk it; it was late…it must be sometime around ten.
And he was going to stink of smoke.
He would change back at Joseph's digs, but the smoke would linger in his hair and on his skin.
He would have to bathe early tomorrow morning — before his mother was up, but that shouldn't be too difficult.
With luck, she should — if she followed her usual pattern — remain in bed until around noon.
He only hoped Jane had remembered to leave the window open — otherwise he was rightly stuck.
He had no key to the house; he had asked his mother for one, but she had said it wasn't necessary — there would always be someone there to let him in.
He wondered what he would do if he couldn't get into the house…well, he supposed he could go back to Joseph's place, spend the night there and then hurry home at first light, when the servants would be up.
But then there was every possibility that his mother would get to hear of it, and he didn't want that…
There was the sudden sound of clapping, and Patrick automatically joined in, abruptly realizing that the meeting was over.
The men began moving restlessly when the young gunman raised his hand.
 "One final thing," he said loudly, "the Big Fellow needs people like you; loyal, committed people…so if any of you feel like joining us, you'd be very welcome." 
He looked from face to face, but no one said anything.
Most of the men there had families or commitments in England, and while they would support the Irish cause in word and sometimes in deed, no-one ever seriously considered leaving everything to go and fight for the cause.
They had already done their bit.
 "Aye…well, if any of you change your mind, you can contact me through Tom here." 
There was a gradual movement towards the door and Patrick allowed himself to be carried with it.
Joseph Hyde tugged at his sleeve.
 "Well, what did you think?" 
 "Yes…interesting, very interesting," Patrick said, his voice carefully neutral.
Joe looked scornful.
"Two policemen — Irish policemen too — dead and killed on the same day as the first sitting of the new Irish parliamentarians.
You can't tell me that was accidental.
It does our cause no credit."
Patrick smiled and shook his head.
 "No, I suppose not," He was only half listening to the bookseller.
His eyes were on the numerous doors lining the corridor, and he couldn't help wondering what went on behind those doors.
Occasionally, he caught a snatch of sound — a moan, a groan, the creak of springs — which fired his curiosity even further.
Although he had a reasonably good idea of what went on between men and women, so far he had never even kissed a girl.
There was a small queue at the rear exit as the men waited to slip away into the night.
Tom Rooney was standing by the door with his pocket-watch in his hand, allowing his men out in regular intervals.
It was raining outside and the gusts of cold, damp air were refreshing  after the stale smokiness of the room.
Joseph and Patrick joined the end of the queue and patiently waited their turn.
 "What time is it Tom?" 
Patrick asked as they drew level with the old man.
"Half ten son; why, are you in a hurry somewhere?
Off to meet a girl, I shouldn't wonder, eh?"
Tom Rooney knew Patrick Montgomery's identity; like Joseph Hyde he had also known the Madam in Dublin and was all too aware of her reputation.
 "Something like that," Patrick grinned.
Half ten!
Well, he would be home in an hour; the dinner party would be in full swing and if his luck had held he wouldn't even have been missed.
He didn't want to think of what would happen if his mother discovered that he had been out of the house.
Katherine Lundy closed the door to her son's room.
Her face was set in grim lines and beneath her make, she was white with rage, her lips drawn in a thin line.
On impulse she hurried down the corridor to her daughter's room and carefully opened the door a fraction.
A long sliver of light fell across Senga's bed, sparkling off lustrous black hair.
Senga slept curled up in a ball, her long-fingered hand splayed across her cheek.
Suddenly conscious that she had been holding her breath, Katherine pulled the door closed and then leaned back against the wall, aware of the pounding of her heart.
Her one great fear had always been that she would lose her children — they were too precious to her, they had cost to much to lose now.
But Patrick had deceived her — and that was unforgivable.
Katherine Lundy operated in a world where deceit was accepted — indeed, expected, and she survived in this world because she herself had learned her lessons in one of the toughest schools of all — in the fire and revolution of Dublin before the"16 Rising.
But she expected — she demanded — complete honesty form her children.
Coming to a decision, she turned and hurried down  the stairs.
Below, a door opened and there was a brief swell in the volume of conversation and laughter as Gerard stepped out into the hall.
He stopped when he saw Katherine sweeping down the stairs.
 "Ma'am — is everything in order?" 
"Yes — everything.
Why do ask?"she demanded suspiciously.
"You look a little pale, Ma'am, the butler said quickly.
 "A touch of a headache." 
she stopped on the bottom stair and pressed taut fingers to her throbbing temples.
 "Who locks up at night, Gerard?" 
 "Why, I do of course." 
 "I want you to make doubly sure everything is locked and secure tonight." 
 "I always do," Gerard said, sounding slightly affronted.
Katherine recognized the tone and smiled placatingly.
 "I'm not doubting you, but the thought struck me that a gathering of this type might attract some unwarranted attention, and perhaps encourage unwanted visitors." 
Gerard bowed slightly.
 "Of course, Ma'am." 
 "Now," she continued changing the subject, "is Mr Lee still inside?" 
 "He is, Ma'am; I passed him a moment ago and he was talking to Mr Churchill." 
"Would you be so good as to ask Mr Lee to step out here please.
I have a few words for his ears alone."
The butler nodded and stepped back into the grand dining room, only to reappear almost immediately with the tall, thin figure of Michael Lee following him, his face impassive.
 "That will be all Gerard," Katherine said immediately, "you may return to your duties." 
The butler nodded and was about to turn away, when Katherine added,"Oh, and Gerard, ensure that we are not disturbed.
We will be in the sitting room."
 "Of course, Ma'am." 
Although the butler's face registered nothing, his eyes flickered from Lee to  Katherine and back to Lee.
He would gladly have given a year's salary just to know what exactly was the relationship between these two.
The sitting room was dark, and the fire that had blazed earlier had died down to grey-ashed coals.
The only light in the room came from the street lamps which vaguely illuminated one corner of the room but left the rest in shadow.
Without turning up the light Katherine crossed to stand beside the window, leaving Michael Lee to close the door and move gingerly into the centre of the room.
He made out the high-backed chair to one side of the fire and sank into it, sitting tall and erect, careful not to crease his dinner jacket.
 "Patrick has disappeared," Katherine said without preamble, glancing around, barely able to make out the seated figure of the man beside the fire.
"What do you mean, disappeared?
Lee asked, taken aback.
"He went to bed earlier today because he had a cold coming on — or so he said.
When I went up to check on him a few minutes ago, his bed was empty and cold; it hadn't been slept in.
His clothes and wallet are also missing."
 "His keys?" 
 "He has no keys," Katherine said shortly.
 "Have you any idea where hi might have gone?" 
Michael Lee asked softly.
He found it difficult to have any sympathy for Katherine Lundy in this instance; this situation was entirely of her own creation.
 "He's obviously gone some place he knows I would disapprove of — which probably means something involving the Irish sympathizers…" 
Katherine turned back to the window.
 "I want you to find out where he went, who was there and what they discussed." 
 "I don't think…" 
Lee began, coming to his feet.
 "And I want to know by morning." 
She turned back and faced her manager.
"By morning, I want to be able to tell my son where he was.
I want him to know how futile it is for him to try and escape my influence…"
 "I think you're making a mistake; I think you'll probably lose him…" 
 "I don't give a damn what you think!" the woman snapped.
 "You're paid to do as I say." 
Her voice dropped, turning low and vicious, and not for the first time, Michael Lee realized how cold and calculating, how vicious and cunning she was.
 "I want that information by mid-morning." 
 "I will attend to it myself." 
 "Do that!" 
The woman brushed past Lee, leaving the essence of expensive scent and the faintest hint of perspiration on the air.
He was almost surprised to find no trace of alcohol.
Lee rubbed his long-fingered hands together; he wondered where to start.
Start with Patrick.
now just whom did he know in the Irish organizations?
The bookseller Patrick Lundy associated with, he had strong Irish connections, hadn't he?
Now what was his name…?
It was close to midnight by the time Patrick reached the house in Mayfair.
he had been delayed by Joseph Hyde who had wanted to discuss the night's events again and again, working out possible and probable courses of action; from experience, Patrick knew the stout bookseller would do nothing.
He had left as soon as he could, leaving Joe to consume half a bottle of whisky whole he raced through the backstreets, slowing to a walk only when he spotted someone approaching.
He was propositioned twice by ragged and wretched young women in the alleyways and a drunk rising up from a pile of papers frightened him into shouting aloud.
He was delighted to find the house still a blaze of light; that meant the part was still in full swing, which meant Gerard would be busy…and that meant that he should be able to creep in through the kitchen door.
He moved around to the back of the house, and then ducked in to the laneway that ran behind it.
Taking a deep breath, he than walked slowly and sedately down  one side of the lane, keeping to the shadows, praying that none of the neighbours would report a suspicious man creeping along the back of the houses.
he paused at the wooden gate to his mother's house, squinting against the glare thrown out from the uncurtained kitchen window.
The kitchen seemed to be empty.
Holding his breath, Patrick lifted the gate slightly to prevent it scraping along the ground and then pushed it open.
A shadow crossed the kitchen and he froze, recognizing Gerard.
The man reappeared, picked up something and then moved from sight again.
Patrick guessed he was bringing a tray into the sitting room, which gave him a few moments.
Bent almost double, he darted towards the kitchen, pressing himself against the wall.
His heart was throbbing painfully, and he controlling his breathing with the greatest of difficulty…but he also realized that he was enjoying it.
When he finally reached the house, he risked a quick look inside.
The room was empty.
Bending double, he ducked beneath the window and was moving towards the door…when a long man-shaped shadow moved across the bar of light thrown out onto the paved pathway.
Gerard had returned.
Moving as quietly as possible on the gravel, Patrick moved away from the kitchen, and then continued on until he came level with the basement windows.
He wondered if Jane had remembered her promise; if she hadn't, he was in serious trouble.
Treading carefully so as not to walk in the flower beds that were almost directly beneath the window, Patrick pressed two fingers against the glass, just over the lock and pushed…and the window opened.
Breathing a sign of absolute relief, Patrick Lundy scrambled inside…
And a hand touched his arm!
 "Jesus Ch…!" 
 "Sssshh, it's me." 
The voice was soft and feminine, coming from the shadows directly in front of him.
 "Jesus, but you frightened the life out of me," Patrick  whispered hoarsely, climbing down off the window ledge.
 "Sign of a guilty conscience," Jane giggled.
Now that his eyes had adjusted to the light, Patrick could just about make out the vague shape of the young woman before him, her face a dim grey against the paler shape of her nightdress.
"Thanks for leaving the window open.
have you been waiting long?"he asked then.
 "Not long." 
 "Where's Sarah?" 
Teeth flashed in the gloom.
 "Oh, it was agreed earlier that Mr Gerard would only need one of us to assist after the coffee was served, so I pretended to have a headache." 
Patrick manoeuvred around the bed which, along with a wardrobe and a chest of drawers were the only pieces of furniture in the room.
 "Look, thanks again for helping me, I really do appreciate it." 
"Your mother called Mr Lee out of the party and spoke to him privately in the sitting room, Jane said suddenly.
Puzzled, the young man stopped, not sure what the girl meant, but a vague uneasiness settled into the pit of his stomach.
 "I overheard Gerard tell Mrs James that she had come down stairs with a" face fit to murder", Jane continued, doing a passable imitation of the butler.
 "Then she sent him in to get Mr Lee and they spent about five minutes in the sitting room." 
 "Do you think she knows I wasn't upstairs…?" 
 "I don't know, but you better have some story ready just in case." 
 "There's no story going to get me out of this one." 
 "You could of course tell her the truth," Jane suggested.
She took a step closer to Patrick and lad her hand on his arm.
"She'll be angry, but she won't want to lose you.
She won't do anything rash."
Patrick shook his head, not quite so sure.
Jane squeezed his arm, and the young man abruptly — shockingly — realized just how close she was to him.
he could feel the heat from her body and he was quite sure that, beneath the long cotton nightdress, she was naked.
 "This could be the opportunity you've been waiting for," she said slowly, her eyes black shadows in her face.
her lips curled in a smile, and Patrick wondered if she knew what effect she was having on him — and then realized that she probably did.
 "You could invent an argument with her — and have a huge blazing row — and then you could demand your freedom." 
Patrick nodded, although he wasn't really listening.
Jane had now taken hold of both his elbows and was gripping then tightly as she stared into his face.
 "You can't stay tied to her forever," she insisted.
Patrick nodded.
And then she kissed him.
There was a moment's shocked resistance and then he melted against her, his arms curling around her back, feeling her flesh soft and warm beneath the thin cotton.
Her fingers slid into his fair pulling his face close to hers, and her tongue and lips moved against his.
And then she abruptly pulled away and held him at  arm's length.
 "There's a lot to be said for being free," she panted.
She twisted away from him and backed over to the door, and then cracked it open, and peered out into the hall.
"All's clear,; she whispered.
Patrick suddenly found himself standing in the hallway, his heart tripping frantically, his breathing too fast to be comfortable.
Still in a daze, he made his way to his bedroom.
Katherine Lundy opened her son's bedroom door less than an hour later, the bar of light fell across the sprawled figure of Patrick, the sheets rumpled and curled around him.
She smiled grimly, let him sleep, let him get all the rest he could — he was going to need it.
"Joseph…
Joseph…open up…"
Joseph Hyde opened his eyes, blinking rapidly until  he realized that the room was in darkness and the lighter grey square to his left was the window.
Gradually, he reassembled the room and added the events of the previous night.
He was sitting propped up against the end of the bed with his back to the wall, still fully dressed.
he had come back from the meeting with Patrick, and he had opened a bottle of whisky…automatically his had reached for it, found it between his legs, and he was raising it to his lips when the hurried knocking shook the door again.
"Joseph…
Joseph…open up."
His mouth worked, but nothing happened, and he took a quick swig of whisky.
 "Who…?" he croaked.
 "Patrick," the urgent whisper came back.
Joseph eased himself off the bed, and staggered across to the door.
his head was pounding and he vaguely wondered what time it was and as he began to unlock the door he wondered what had brought Patrick back.
"For Christ's sake, what's wrong…? he demanded.
The blunt end of a pickaxe handle smashed into his stomach, sending him reeling backwards, choking and gasping.
he hit the edge of the bed and slid to the floor, holding his stomach, desperately resisting the urge to vomit.
There were three of them, two were large, well-built men, obviously nothing more than muscle, while the third man, tall and thin, was the boss.
Through a haze of pain, Joseph Hyde wondered who the hell they were, British or Irish?
A hand wrapped itself into his collar and hauled him to his feet, and then his arms were pinned behind his back in what felt like two huge fists.
The second thug was standing to his left, holding the long pickaxe handle in his right hand, tapping it against his left palm.
The blunt end of the club suddenly came up and pressed against his cheek, and then moved around to rest against his teeth.
Without a word being spoken, the message was plain.
The third man spoke then; his accent was wharfside  London with a touch of something else, some unidentifiable accent.
, Now, Mr Hyde, I will ask you certain questions, and you will answer them.
You will do so quietly and clearly, and you will tell me the truth.
Lie to me, and the gentleman behind you will probably break your fingers one by one, and very possibly the gentlemen wit the club will take a certain delight in knocking out your teeth."
He paused, and his own teeth flashed in the gloom.
 "Do you understand me?" 
 "You can go to hell!" 
Joseph spat.
The club struck him in the stomach again, dripping him to his knees, and there was a sudden crack that seemed unnaturally loud in the silence.
it took a moment, while fought the fire in his stomach and throat to realize that his left hand was completely numb.
He couldn't feel his fingers.
 "You really don't have much use for a little finger anyway," the thin man said.
"Now, every time you lie to me or prove difficult, we're going to break a finger, and then next time you'll lose a tooth — I promise you.
Do you understand me?"
Iron-hard fingers dug into Joseph's thinning hair and pulled his head back until he was forced to look at the soft spoken man.
he nodded briefly.
"Good.
Now, was there an Irish political meeting tonight?"
Joseph nodded.
 "Where…where?" the man repeated his voice dropping ominously when Joseph remained silent.
From the corner of his eye the stout grey-haired man saw the thug shift his grip on the club.
 "The Warehouse Hotel," Joe muttered, using the common name deliberately.
 "At the back of the Queen Vic?" the man asked immediately.
Joseph nodded.
 "And what was discussed?" 
Joseph started to shake his head — when the club struck him full in the mouth.
His two front teeth  shattered, and he choked on a sudden spurt of blood.
he was suddenly kicked in the groin, and as he struggled against the excruciating pain, the thin man put the question again.
 "And what was discussed?" 
Joseph spat and spluttered blood.
he had lost the two centre top teeth, and with the tip of his tongue he could feel that the two on either side were also loose.
 "The…the Irish situation," he lisped, his tongue huge in his mouth.
"The killings last week at So…
So…
So-lo-head-beg,"he said the last work slowly, his tongue constantly finding the gap between the teeth.
They were British Intelligence, he decided, Scotland Yard detectives investigating the Irish Brotherhood.
 "Who was there/" 
"I don't know all the names.
Security reasons,"he gasped.
 "Was Patrick Lundy there tonight?" 
And in that moment, Joseph suddenly knew who the three men were; only Katherine Lundy's men would be enquiring after Patrick.
He didn't know the thugs' identities, but he guessed that the tall thin man was Michael Lee.
 "I asked you a question," Lee — if it was Lee, and he was convinced it was — said softy.
Eventually, reluctantly, Joseph Hyde nodded.
There was another flash of a grin.
 "Good; now we're getting somewhere." 
A sudden thought struck Katherine Lundy and she suddenly sat up in bed.
how had Patrick managed to creep back into the house?
Gerard and Sarah the maid were in the kitchen, the hall door was locked, and besides, Patrick had no key.
But how had he got in?
He had help certainly — well, God help then, whoever they were!
Patrick awoke again as the church bells all across London were tolling noon.
He lay in bed, surprised that he had remained undisturbed for so long.
He remembered coming awake some time earlier, when the hall door had slammed and high heels had clicked down the steps, passing beneath his window.
He had guessed than that it was his mother — with Senga in tow — heading off to ten o'clock Mass in the nearby church.
Patrick turned over in the bed, and discovered that there was a fire burning in the grate and a breakfast tray on the small side-table beside the bed.
He reached out and pressed his fingertips against the teapot.
It was cold.
Wondering why he hadn't been awakened for his breakfast, he contemplated snuggling down beneath the covers for another few moments when he heard the door bell ring.
Moments later he heard his mother's voice, and then quick footsteps tapped up the stairs.
There was a scratching on the door and a small bonneted head peered around.
 "You're awake," Senga stepped into the room, closing the door with her heel.
 "I looked in earlier but you were asleep." 
Patrick sat up in bed, and ran his fingers through his wold hair.
 "I hate sleeping in so late," he mumbled.
 "How's mother?" he asked.
He needed a bath and quickly, he imagined he could smell smoke and the sour stench of sweat from his skin.
Senga pulled off her bonnet, and tossed it on to the chair beside the fire.
 "I don't know," she said slowly, "she's in a strange humour." 
She actually had a fairly good idea of what was wrong with her mother, but was wondering how to approach Patrick, without alarming  him…although in this case, it was probably better to alarm him.
 "She's probably just tired after the party…" 
Patrick suggested.
Senga went to stand before the window.
Looking out over the snow-covered park, she could still see her brother's reflection in the glass.
 "Mr Lee met her outside the church," she said slowly.
Patrick turned to look at his sister.
 "And…?" he asked eventually.
"They talked for a few moments, and then he handed her an envelope and walked away.
She didn't speak a single word to me all the way back here, and she's in foul form downstairs at the moment.
She's just snapped at both Gerard and Sarah for no reason."
 "What did Lee say to her?" 
Senga shook her head.
"I don't know.
She asked me to stand by the gate while she spoke to him."
Patrick rubbed his sweating palms on the blanket.
 "Do you think she knows?" 
 "Well…something's put her in a bad form…" 
Senga said very slowly.
 "I'm just saying this to you so that you can be prepared." 
She turned to look at him, her oval face pale and serious.
 "What will you tell her if she knows?" 
He shook his head and shrugged.
 "If she knows, them there's nothing I can tell her, but the truth," he said lightly, desperately hoping it wouldn't come to that.
Katherine sat in her chair at the head of the table in the dining room.
She was still wearing her Sunday clothes, black coat over a long dress, with matching gloves, hat and bag; every Sunday she remembered those dear to her who had died — every Sunday she mourned.
At the moment, the gloves and hat were placed side by side on the gleaming wood of the table before her and her hands were folded in an attitude of prayer — although her humour was anything but reverent.
Standing in a row down the left hand side of the table were Gerard, Mrs James, Jane and Sarah, the maids, only the two skivvies had been excluded.
None of them — except possibly Mrs James, the cook — looked comfortable, Katherine mused.
Even Gerard, whom she probably suspected the least, looked as if he had something to hide.
 "I have asked you here," she began without preamble,"because something has happened which has caused me deep hurt.
My trust has been betrayed,"she said dramatically, watching their faces intently, looking for a reaction.
Gerard coughed discreetly.
 "May I ask in what way, Ma'am?" 
"Someone here has gone against my will, has connived with someone else to deceive me.
Now, they know who they are, and I would like them to come forward and admit their guilt."
Gerard frowned.
 "Perhaps if you could be more specific…" he suggested.
 "No!" 
Katherine snapped, her eyes beginning to glitter dangerously.
"No, I will not be more specific.
But what I will say, "she added, her voice falling to little more than a whisper," is that if that person does not step forward, it will go badly for all of you.
Is that understood?"she snapped.
No one moved; no one said anything.
 "Fine." 
Katherine looked at each face in turn.
"Well now, I want you to go away and think about this very carefully.
If I do not know the identity of the person who assisted…who deceived me…by the dinner bell tonight, well, them you're all dismissed — without references."
 "I must protest…" 
Gerard began.
 "I don't give a damn what you do!" 
Katherine hissed.
 "But if I don't have that name you'll walk the streets too — and you know how difficult it will be to find another position without references." 
 "Impossible," Gerard admitted.
 "Exactly." 
Katherine was waiting for Patrick when he eventually plucked up enough courage to come downstairs.
His mood throughout the early afternoon had swung sharply between apprehension of the inevitable scene and a certain amount of self-disgust at his fear of his mother — after all, he was twenty.
Surprisingly, no Sunday lunch was brought up to him, nor was there any tea, and it was only around three in the afternoon that he realized he had had no visitors since noon.
He dressed quickly, all the time arguing fiercely with himself, working out possible conversations with his mother, and what he would say to her, the devastating arguments he would present…and all the time he knew that she would say her piece and he would agree.
And he hated himself for it.
He found his mother and sister in the family sitting room, both silent and seemingly absorbed in their own tasks.
His mother was leafing through a huge pile of correspondence, the wire-framed spectacles perched on the end of her nose threatening to fall off at any moment, while Senga sat beneath the window, copying verses from an open Bible.
They looked up as he came quietly into the room, and he knew — immediately and instinctively — that his mother knew everything.
His sister"face was pinched, her eyes large and dark against the paleness of her skin, and she looked for all the world like some sort of trapped animal.
His mother's expression was cold, her expression set, her lips pursed.
Without saying a word she began to gather up her pieces of paper.
Patrick hovered around the door for a few moments and then finally decided to brazen it out.
Taking a deep breath, he walked slowly across the room and sat down in the easy chair directly facing his mother.
 "You are recovered," she said eventually.
 "I am much better thank you." 
 "A remarkable recovery," Katherine said softly, removing her spectacles.
Patrick nodded, unsure what to say.
In the long silence that followed, the solemn ticking of the clock seemed very loud indeed.
Patrick squirmed beneath his mother's scrutiny, her gaze was direct and unblinking — like a snake, he realised, and he wondered where she had perfected that trait.
He dropped his gaze and concentrated on his hands, examining his clean perfect nails.
He could sense the gathering storm in the room, and knew it was only a matter of time…
Fully ten minutes went by before Katherine spoke.
When she did, her voice was soft, but tightly controlled, the words clipped, and it was obvious that she was holding her temper in check with the greatest difficulty.
"Perhaps it is time for a little truth.
A little honesty.
Would you care to tell me about your sudden cold, Patrick?
Would you like to tell me where you went last night?
What you did?
And while you're at it, would you like to tell me who let you back into the house?"
 "Mother, I don't…" 
Patrick began.
 "And don't even think about lying to me," Katherine whispered, her voice sending a chill through him.
 "You two are my children," she continued, her voice abruptly returning to normal,"you are all I have, the only things that are truly mine.
I will give you everything — everything you want and need, everything I never had — but in return I want, I demand, perhaps not your love, but certainly your respect.
And with the respect, your honesty."
She looked from Patrick to Senga.
 "Do you understand me?" 
 "Yes, Mother." 
 "Yes, Mama." 
Katherine turned back to Patrick.
 "Now the truth." 
He started to shake his head.
 "There's really nothing…" 
Katherine expression turned stark, her face hardening to a mask.
 "Well then, let me tell you," she hissed.
 "Let me tell you what you did, and whom you saw." 
 "Mother…" 
"Be quiet, she snapped.
With the forefinger of her left hand, she slid out a single sheet of paper from the pile at her side.
Holding her glasses before her face she glanced down at it.
 "It seems you went to see your friend Joseph Hyde first," she said softly, very softly, "and then, having changed your clothes, you accompanied him to a public house called the Queen Victoria where you attended a secret meeting of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, of which apparently, you have been a member for some two years." 
 "Since I was eighteen," Patrick said defiantly.
Katherine ignored him.
 "Following the meeting, you returned with Hyde to his rooms where you changed back into your clothing…" 
She stopped as a sudden thought struck her and she looked up, removing her glasses.
 "Are you homosexual?" 
Shocked, surprised, Patrick shook his head.
 "No." 
 "But your friend Hyde is; you do know his preference is for young men?" she asked with a sly smile.
 "I know," Patrick said defiantly, realizing what she was trying to do, "I've known that for a long time." 
Katherine glanced at her notes again.
 "It seems you returned here sometime around eleven or so…and someone let you into the house." 
Katherine looked up and removed her glasses again.
 "And I would like to know who let you in." 
 "I want to know where you got all that information," Patrick demanded.
 "It doesn't matter." 
"It matters to me.
I want to know why you're having me watched, why you need to know every move I make, why you must have control over everything I do."
 "I am your mother," Katherine said simply.
 "That's not good enough," Patrick snapped, surging to his feet.
"Sit down!
Just remember who you are and who you  are talking to.
You may lie tome, deceive me in my own house, turn the servants against me, but you will not shout at me!"
Patrick subsided into his seat, thoroughly alarmed now at the expression on his mother's face.
It was hard and set, her jaw clamped shut, the muscles rigid, her eyes staring.
"Now, I don't want to know what was discussed at the meeting; if I did I could find that out easily enough.
But I am forbidding you ever to attend another of those meetings.
Is that understood — you will stay away from these Irish organizations."
 "My father was a member of the same organization," Patrick said defiantly.
 "And he's dead now — thanks to the same organization," Katherine said, bitterness like bile in her throat.
 "But at least he died for what he believed in!" 
 "No…no he did not," Katherine said, her voice falling to a hoarse whisper.
She opened her mouth, as if she were going to say more, but then closed it again.
"You will not see Hyde again.
You will not attend any more meetings of the Irish Republican Brotherhood.
Is that understood?"she snapped.
 "I hear you." 
"But are you listening to me?
Katherine hissed.
 "Stay away from Hyde, stay away from IRB." 
And this time the threat in her voice was quite implicit.
Katherine shuffled her papers together and turned away.
Patrick took the opportunity to stand up.
 "There are two more things," his mother said very softly, her voice almost gentle.
 "You will never again leave the house without my permission…and I want to know who let you back in last night." 
She looked up quickly.
"Now, I don't expect an answer just now, but if I don't know by dinner tonight, I am dismissing the entire staff without reference.
I will do so in your presence of course,"she added.
 "You may leave." 
Moments later, Patrick Lundy slammed the hall door  shut and hurried down the path, and Katherine, speechless with rage, could only watch him race down the street, still pulling on his coat.
That boy needed a lesson — well, perhaps it was time he got one.
Although he partially guessed that Joe Hyde would not be in the shop, Patrick stopped long enough to check the window.
When Joe was in the shop, the first think he did every morning was to place a copy of Irish Fairy Tales, by W.B. Yeats, in a corner of the window; when he left in the evening or for lunch, the book was removed.
It was a simple code whereby his friends were able to determine his presence without attracting attention to themselves by actually going into the shop.
There was no book in the window today.
Patrick's next impulse was to race around to Hyde's digs, but something like caution held him back.
His mother must have had him watched last night; perhaps he was still being followed.
Automatically he glanced over his shoulder — and was startled to discover two bulky men in long overcoats standing some distance away — both very obviously watching him.
Startled, and by now more than a little frightened, Patrick headed for Foyles, hoping to lose his followers in the bookshop's maze of nooks and corners.
It was only when he reached the closed doors that he remembered that it was Sunday.
And that of course also accounted for the fact that there was no book in Webbs' window.
He was so scared that he wasn't even thinking straight.
He glanced over his shoulder again, and discovered that the two men were nowhere to be seen — it had been nothing more than his imagination.
Shaking his head in annoyance, Patrick strolled down the street and turned to the left, heading up towards Joe's digs.
he was whistling tunelessly, annoyed that he had allowed his mother to so unnerve him.
He would be seeing shadows around every corner next.
Behind him, two men in long overcoats stepped out from the shadow of a doorway and watched the young  man turn to the left again, heading up the main backstreet that led to Joseph Hyde's flat.
The door was ajar and Patrick could see movement inside the room.
He stopped on the stairs, all his old fears returning, feeling his heart beginning to pound.
In all the time he had know Joe, he had never seen anyone else in his room; indeed he had never seen him in company, except at the meetings of the IRB.
His immediate reaction was to turn and walk away, but to date, his life had been spent turning and walking away, allowing his mother to have her own way, to do things her way.
Taking a deep breath he moved up a step.
he could hear voices from within the room now, three possibly four — accents, and they all sounded either Irish or Dublin.
Stepping up onto the landing, he was about to walk over to the door when a large hand dropped onto his shoulder.
 "Christ" "
 "There's no need for that." 
The voice from behind him was Irish — a broad flat Dublin accent — that Patrick thought sounded vaguely familiar.
 "Now, what're you doing here, eh?" 
 "I'm a friend of Joe's," Patrick began, without turning around.
 "Oh." 
The grunt was expressive, and Patrick immediately knew what sort of friend the man thought him to be.
The hand tightened on his shoulder, the stubby fingers biting into the muscle.
 "Well, now, Mr Hyde isn't receiving any visitors today; come back another time." 
 "I've got to see him…" 
 "And I said no!" 
The door to Joe's room swung open and a man stepped out into the landing.
 "What's going on here?" he demanded.
His accent was soft, but also Irish.
 "One of Joe's friends," the Dubliner behind Patrick grunted derisively, "looks like he'll have to fall downstairs." 
 "Take it easy," the newcomer advised.
He stepped  forward and Patrick suddenly recognized him.
"Tom…
Tom Rooney?
It's me, Pat, Patrick Montgomery."
The old man stopped in surprise and then craned forward, squinting in the dim light coming through the grimly fanlight.
"Why, so it is.
What are you doing here?"he asked, but before Patrick could reply, he glanced at the man holding him.
 "Its all right, he's one of our own." 
The hand dropped from his shoulder, and Patrick glanced around, massaging his stiffened muscle, to see a broad, stout man grinning at him.
The man smiled sheepishly.
 "You can't be too careful, you know?" 
Patrick nodded.
he looked back at Tom Rooney, one of the leaders of the IRB in London.
"What's wrong?
What happened?"
The older man stepped aside and ushered Patrick into the room before him.
It was made tiny by the three men standing around the bed, but Patrick only recognized the bearded Dan Brady.
The men parted to allow him to see Joe Hyde lying on the bed.
 "Jesus Christ," Patrick breathed.
Joseph Hyde had been beaten up; systematically, and by someone who knew what they were doing.
His face was a mass of purple bruises, his lips swollen and split and his eyes lost behind puffy tissue.
His hands, resting on top of the blankets were swathed in bandages, and there were further bandages showing around his chest, beneath his striped pyjamas.
 "Joe…?" 
Patrick whispered, his voice catching.
 "As far as we can determine there were three men, two with clubs who did the beating and one other," Tom Rooney said quietly.
"One of the neighbours found him this morning — luckily someone loyal to the cause.
They contacted me rather than the police, and we've had our own doctor patch him up."
 "He should be in hospital," Patrick said immediately.
He crossed to the bed and knelt beside it, touching Joe's hand lightly with his fingertips.
 "That would attract attention," Dan Brady said gruffly.
 "It might save his life!" 
 "He'll live, he's tough," Brady said confidently.
Patrick peeled back the blankets, examining the bandages; they had been professionally and properly tied and applied.
He lifted Hyde's right hand; the fingers had been set and splinted and individually wrapped.
 "Well at least it looks like you had a good doctor…" 
 "We did; Harley Street, with an accent and a school behind him," Brady winked, "but his parents were Galway born and bred." 
Patrick touched Joe's face and the man winced.
"Joe, can you hear me/ Joe…
Joe?
Who did this/ Joe, who did this to you?"
Joe's swollen lips moved and Patrick bent his head, bringing it close to is friend.
He could smell the copper stench of blood on his breath and wondered about internal injuries.
 "Joe?" 
Hyde's lips moved again, and then he breathed a single word.
 "Lee." 
And Patrick Lundy suddenly understood.
Both Tom Rooney and Dan Brady realized that they were being followed at about the same time.
They were walking Patrick Lundy down Charing Cross Road, the two men supporting the younger man, who was ashen-faced and shivering.
Whatever Hyde had told him moments before had obviously terrified him.
The big bearded man had dipped his head slightly and, still looking straight ahead, said in Irish, "We've got company." 
 "I know," Rooney replied in the same language, "how many do you count?" 
"Two.
Big men in coats."
 "Police?" 
 "Unlikely." 
 "Following who I wonder; us or the boy?" 
 "The boy; they weren't there when we went in nor were they around on the two occasions I checked the  street, not were they there when I accompanied the doctor to the cab." 
 "Now, I wonder why they're following the lad?" 
Rooney said, almost to himself.
 "Did you want me to discourage them?" 
Dan Brady asked with a smile.
"Not yet; let's get a sup of tea into the lad and ask him a few questions.
I think Joe told him the name of his attackers, and it's obviously someone…someone…"
Rooney's voice trailed off to a whisper.
Pieces of the puzzle suddenly clicked together.
He knew Katherine Lundy's reputation in Dublin, knew what she was, knew how she had achieved her reputation there and how she had carved herself a slice of the London underworld.
He also knew her felling towards Ireland in general, and the IRB in particular .
Now, what was it Hyde had told him, two men and one other."
The two were just muscle, but the third man could well have been Michael Lee, Katherine Lundy's notorious henchmen.
 "Here," he turned into a pub off the Strand and pushed open the door.
Because it was Sunday, it was practically empty and silent.
 "Keep an eye on our friends," he muttered and while Brady took up position beside the door, Tom helped Patrick over to the bar.
 "There's been a death in his family," Tom said to the barman who was looking curiously at the pale, wide-eyed young man.
The barman nodded sympathetically.
 "What'll it be then?" 
 "Two whiskeys — Irish," Tom said, "and look…" he slid a coin across the counter,"could you do us a favour and get a cup of tea for the lad.
Strong and with plenty of sugar."
The barman looked at Patrick and nodded.
 "Sure." 
He nodded at a corner booth, "I'll bring it over." 
 "I'd be grateful to you." 
Tom picked up the two whiskeys and manoeuvred Patrick into the corner, pushing him into the seat first so that he was up against the wall.
It also ensured that Patrick was in the deepest  shadow and not immediately visible from the street.
Moments later Dan Brady slid into the seat opposite.
Tom looked at him without saying anything.
 "They're across the street, standing in a doorway…and it's starting to snow," he said with a smile.
They sat in silence, the two older men drinking their whiskey, until the barman arrived with the tea.
 "The missus made it," he said, pushing the big cup towards Patrick, but looking at Tom as he spoke, "strong and sweet as you said." 
 "I'm grateful to you." 
 "If there's anything else…?" 
 "No, you've been very kind." 
When the barman had disappeared behind his bar, Tom Rooney pushed the steaming cup in front of Patrick.
 "Drink!" he commanded.
Patrick started to shake his head, when Dan Brady leaned over and glared at him.
 "Drink." 
The young man lifted the cup to his lips, sipped the strong dark tea and grimaced.
 "Too sweet." 
 "Now tell me what poor Joe Hyde told you back there," Tom Rooney said quietly.
Patrick's face immediately lost all expression.
 "Nothing," he said defensively.
 "He said something that upset you." 
 "There was nothing," Patrick insisted.
 "Well then, let's try it this way," Tom said patiently.
 "Would he have told you the name of one of his attackers, and might you have recognized that name…?" 
Patrick concentrated on the foul tea.
"Three men attacked Joe — and we've been racking our brains trying to figure out a motive.
There's neither rhyme nor reason for it; Joe isn't active enough to attract that type of attention.
Then we thought it might have been something criminal — but Joe is clever enough to steer clear of anything illegal, the last think he needs is investigation by the police.
Finally, we thought it might have been a lovers' quarrel, but now I'm not sure…"
 "It was Lee," Patrick said suddenly.
 "He told me Lee was there, and Lee is…" 
 "Oh, we know who Lee is," Tom said glancing over at Dan Brady; the bearded man nodded grimly.
 "But it was my fault," Patrick continued, wrapping his hands around the cup, bringing it up to his lips as if to hide his face.
"it was my fault, all my fault.
My name is Patrick Montgomery Lundy — Katherine Lundy is my mother…a powerful woman.
My mother wouldn't allow me to go to the meeting last night — you know she despises anything Irish."
Both men nodded.
"So I pretended to be ill and went to bed.
She ad a party you see, and I knew she'd be busy, and I hoped she wouldn't be able to check up on me.
But she must have found out somehow.
She confronted me with it this afternoon and she had all the details — even the name of the pub where the meeting was held."
 "Were you followed last night?" 
Dan Brady asked.
"No, no, I'm sure of it.
And don't forget, Joe was with me, and you know how careful he is. lee was at the party and one of the maids told me that she took him out of the party and spoke to him for a few minutes.
She must have been giving him instructions to find out where I was last night.
And my sister told me that she met with him after Mass this morning and he gave her an envelope."
He drank some more of the sweet tea.
 "And then when Joe said Lee, I immediately knew…" 
Dan Brady nodded.
"They beat it out of him, he said grimly.
 "It's not his fault," Patrick said quickly.
"We're not saying it is, lad.
Nor is it yours."
He ran his calloused finger around the rim of his glass.
 "And at least we know why Joe was worked over, and that's a relief of sorts." 
"That's not all though, Pat added.
"My mother is threatening to dismiss all the staff unless I tell her which one of them admitted me back into the house last night.
I've no key, you see."
 "And who let you in?" 
Tom Rooney asked.
 "One of the maids." 
 "Will she own up?" 
 "Probably." 
 "Where does you mother keep the keys?" 
Pat started to shake his head.
 "I don't…no, I do know!" 
 "And could you have borrowed one for the night?" 
Smiling in understanding, Pat nodded quickly.
 "Of course." 
 "I think lad," Dan Brady said seriously,"it's time for you to leave the house.
She'll smother you if you remain."
"I've no money, no place to stay…
I've nothing.
She controls everything."
Both men smiled, but it was Tom, the older man who spoke.
"You're a member of the organization now — and we take care of our own.
Remember that, if you ever need a place to stay, we'll be there, waiting."
"Thank you — I'll remember that.
But what do I do about Joe?
And why would she do such a think, how could she?"
Tom finished the last of his drink, and edged the empty glass over towards Dan.
The taller man grinned, "My turn, I suppose," he murmured, and headed over to the bar to order another round of drinks.
Tom Rooney looked at Patrick closely, his pale eyes squinting in the dim light as he attempted to make out the younger man's expression.
 "Tell me," he said, very softly, "what do you know of your mother's past." 
Patrick's expression was suddenly wary.
 "What do you mean?" 
 "Do you know how she earned her living in Dublin?" 
Tom asked gently.
"I…
I'm not sure…"
"You needn't try to hide the truth from me, boy, I know all about your mother.
Katherine Lundy Corcoran ran a brothel…aaah, but I see you knew that.
Did you also know that she had connections with the Dublin and London criminal underworlds?
Did you know that she dealt in stolen goods, arranged thefts and  then fenced the goods, did you know she arranged insurance for many of the smaller shopkeepers — her kind of insurance?
No…
I see you didn't.
Your mother was one of the most powerful women in the Dublin underworld.
Everyone went in fear of the mysterious veiled Madam Kitten."
Dan Brady slid back into his seat, and pushed a glass across to Tom.
 "They're still out there," he remarked, dipping his head in the direction of the door.
 "Good and cold they look, too." 
Tom nodded.
 "I was just telling Pat about his mother." 
 "Ah, the mysterious Madam Kitten," Dan grinned, "not a nice lady at all." 
"Your father was one of us, remember?
When he joined the organization, and later, when the meetings of the high command were actually held in your own house, we made certain inquiries.
Your father, Dermot told us a lot of course — I'm sure your mother would have been none too pleased, if she knew, but his first loyalty was always to the cause.
Coupled with what he had told us and what we already knew, the rest was easy."
 "And now?" 
Pat asked.
"What does she do now/@ he asked, although he had already guessed the answer.
 "The same," Tom murmured.
 "People who cross her, have a habit of ending up dead," Dan said, without looking at Patrick.
He was sitting at an angle which allowed him to watch the door.
Tom Rooney nodded.
"When she was setting up her business in London, several of her opponents disappeared.
@
Patrick shook his head savagely.
 "I can't believe I'm hearing this!" 
"Lee is one of her brothel masters.
He's a sadistic man — he must have taken great pleasure in working over Joe last night."
 "But why?" 
Patrick breathed, "Why?" 
"You defied her, tricked her.
She couldn't take out her anger on you, so she probably instructed Lee to make Joe an example…"
 "A warning you mean!" 
Tom nodded silently.
 "What about the two outside?" 
Dan Brady grinned.
 "Lee's henchmen, more n" like, sent to keep an eye on you, report where you were, who you've seen.
Don't worry about them — this pub has a side door!"
Patrick finished the last of the cold tea and stood up quickly.
 "Where are you going?" 
 "What are you going to do?" 
The two questions came together.
 "I'm going to have a talk with my mother." 
Patrick re-entered the house by the back door — and was surprised to find the kitchen empty.
Immediately, instinctively, he knew something was wrong; the kitchen staff should have been busy with preparations for dinner.
Something cold settled into the pit of his stomach.
With damp palms he opened the door that led up into the hallway.
Moving as quietly as possible he climbed the stairs from the kitchen quarters.
Voices echoed flatly down the long hall.
He recognized his mother's first — harsh, raucous and demanding.
There was a second voice — sharp, abrasive — and it took him a few moments to identify the second voice as belonging to Jane, the maid.
Most of what she said was muted, but three words rang out clearly.
 "…spiteful old woman…" 
In the stunned silence that followed, Patrick raced up the stairs and down the hall and had the door open and was actually in the room before another word had been spoken.
Shocked, everyone turned to look at him, and he briefly registered the faces and the expressions — his mother's, the butler's the cook's and the two maids' — before Jane turned and brushed past him, her face set, here eyes hard and glittering.
Patrick saw something settle down behind his mother's eyes, something like satisfaction, and the anger that had burned within him since he had discovered the identity of Joseph Hyde's attackers, turned cold and brittle.
Stepping to one side, he looked at the three remaining servants, and said, "That will be all, thank you." 
It was the first order of its kind that Patrick had given, but both Mrs James and Sarah immediately moved  towards the door.
Only Gerard lingered, looking at Katherine questioningly.
 "You may go Gerard," Patrick insisted coldly.
Katherine nodded fractionally, and the butler bowed and moved silently from the room, not looking at the younger man.
Patrick nudged the door closed with his foot and turned back to his mother.
 "I think you and I need to talk." 
He crossed to the easy chair facing his mother and sank down into it.
 "I think you owe me an explanation, young man," Katherine snapped, looking at her son over the rim of her wire-framed glasses.
 "I owe you an explanation?" 
Patrick whispered.
 "What do you owe me, eh?" he demanded, and then, realizing that his voice had risen, allowed it to drop again.
he knew if he allowed her to anger him, then he had lost; at all costs he had to control his temper.
"I am nineteen years old, I am capable of forming my own opinions, making my own decisions.
I will not have — I will not tolerate — your interference any more."
"You forget to whom you are speaking, young man.
It would be better if you did not anger me."
"Oh, I'm not forgetting that, I can never forget that.
And if I do anger you, what are you going to do with me, eh, have me beaten to an inch of my life?
Your hired bullies did a good job on poor Joe Hyde last night…"
 "I don't know what you're talking about," Katherine said quickly.
"Oh, I'm sure you don't.
I'm sure you didn't order Lee and his men to find out where I'd been and who I had seen.
Are you aware how they carried out your orders, eh?
They went to Joseph Hyde — probably because he was the one connection they had between the Irish organization and me, and then they nearly beat him to death just so Lee could make his report to you.
But I don't suppose you care,"he added bitterly.
 "And where were you?" 
 "I was at an IRB meeting," Patrick said defiantly.
Katherine's lips tightened into a thin hard line.
 "After all I said…" 
"You don't own me.
I'm not one of your working girls!"
In the long silence that followed, Katherine looked at her son closely, realizing — for the first time — that whatever chances she had had of keeping him, had just disappeared.
 "I don't know what you're talking about," she said eventually.
 "Oh, but you do," Patrick said aggressively.
"You ran a brothel in Dublin, and you've continued your foul trade here — but only on a grander level.
I often wondered where the money came from.
Now, I know; my mother is a brothel-keeper!"
 "Be quiet!" 
The colour had drained from the woman's face, leaving it mask-like, the eyes hard and dark against the paleness of her face.
"How dare you speak to me like that.
I did what I had to do in Dublin — you'll never know what I had to do to survive.
And when I had nothing else, I had my children — and all that I did, I did — and continue to do — is for my children."
 "And does that include running a brothel and dealing in stolen goods?" 
The anger was eating into him, and although he knew he was going too far, saying too much, he couldn't help it.
 "My father would have been proud of you," he spat, "did he even realize the half of what you did, eh?" 
Katherine's expression crystallized into something hard and ugly.
@Your father!"she spat.
 "Don't talk to me about your father," she whispered very softly,"you don't know what you're talking about.
And I don't think you want to know!"
"Mysteries…more mysteries.
Your whole life is nothing by a mystery,"Patrick raged.
"Everything's a mask, layer of lies and confusion.
You know, "he hissed," I used to wonder why my father left you to go out and fight against the British, I used to wonder why he sacrificed everything…but the more I learn about you, the more I realize why!"
 "You don't know what your talking about," Katherine began, experiencing a deep burning rage that she hadn't felt for a long time, a rage all the more intense because she knew she could do nothing about it.
 "I used to think he gave up his life for Ireland because he wanted a free country…" 
 "Your father didn't die for Ireland," Katherine snapped, silencing him, and even as the words were tumbling out, she was regretting them.
 "Your father hated Ireland and the Irish!" 
 "That's a lie," Patrick whispered aghast, "my father fought and died in the Rising…" 
 "Dermot Corcoran fought and died in the Rising, but Dermot Corcoran was not your father!" 
There were other words, harsh, angry bitter words, but later Katherine could never remember exactly what she had said, nor could she recall her son's replies.
All that remained with her was the look in her son's eyes, a look of absolute loathing and hatred, a look of betrayal.
And in those few moments he looked so much like his father, Major John Lewis, the man who had first taken her virginity, and later betrayed her husband.
The man she had killed.
Katherine sat in the sitting room, memories creeping in with the shadows.
She rarely thought about Ireland now — she had deliberately suppressed it, and usually it was only in her dreams that it rose unbidden to haunt her.
But the ghosts were very clear this afternoon.
Katherine stood up quickly and crossed to the drinks cabinet, her fingers tracing the metal discs on the cut-glass decanters…and for the first time in many months thought about Dermot Corcoran, her late husband.
He had been a young man when she had met him back in 1898.
He had been a year older than herself, almost painfully shy, but even then passionately interested in the plight of the working classes in Dublin, and determined to do something — although even he  didn't know what — for them.
He had been a reporter then and it was some time after their first meeting that he had begun his campaign to highlight the plight of the poor.
She remembered those days with a special clarity.
There had been times in her life when she had been — if not happy, then content.
She had only recently arrived in Dublin, a servant girl in the house of Captain and Mrs Lewis.
Alone and friendless, she had struck up a casual friendship with Dermot as he showed her Dublin.
And when, some months later, Katherine had become pregnant by Captain Lewis, Dermot had offered to marry her.
She had refused — even though it would have offered her an easy way out, and then circumstances had intervened and she had ended in the brothels in the notorious Monto.
Eight years were to pass before she encountered Dermot Corcoran again.
The years had changed them both, matured them too — Katherine more so than Dermot.
By 1907, she was the madam of the most luxurious of the Dublin brothels, and she had travelled extensively across Europe.
She also did a lucrative sideline in stolen goods and peddled information to the Dublin underworld, and she was reputed to be one of the most powerful and certainly one of the richest women in Dublin.
Dermot was then a respected reporter, with a growing reputation amongst the poor of Dublin.
He had championed the cause of the poor for many years in a series of investigative articles, and had highlighted the terrible conditions in which a large proportion of the ordinary Dublin people lived.
And while his experiences had hardened him, he still retained the ideals of his youth.
Fate brought them back together, fate, and a shared interest in the whereabouts of the recently stolen Irish Crown Jewels.
And when Dermot Corcoran stepped back into her life, it seemed almost natural that Captain — now Major — Lewis should reappear also.
With the  wheel turned almost full circle, it seemed almost inevitable that Dermot Corcoran and Katherine Lundy should marry.
The fact that she was pregnant with his child made the decision easier to make.
And Patrick Lundy, then seven years old, never questioned that the man his mother married was not his natural father.
As he grew older, he simply assumed that he was Dermot Corcoran's child, but conceived outside wedlock…
She had always intended to tell him the truth, but somehow the time was never right…
And now he knew.
Katherine put down the empty glass with a start, she hadn't realized that she had been drinking.
And then of course there was Major John Lewis, Patrick's real father…
Katherine turned away quickly, suddenly chilled.
For a brief moment, she had seen herself raising the tiny silver gun and pulling the trigger, once and then again, the blood appearing like a diseased flower on Lewis's soiled shirt.
The tall hard-faced woman stood by the fire, watching the small flames flicker on the dying coals, and then, with a deliberate effort of will, she dismissed the thoughts and memories.
She murmured her motto, "What's done is done, and cannot be undone," and then returned to her present problems.
The maid would have to be dismissed of course…the girl had brazenly admitted allowing Patrick back into the house, and Katherine wasn't sure which annoyed her more — the fact that the boy had managed to creep back into the house or the fact that he had been alone in the girl's bedroom.
She wondered if she should have Lee teach the girl a lesson, but decided not to — for the moment.
Later, perhaps the girl could have an accident.
Katherine liked to believe that she wasn't vindictive, but she did have certain rules, certain standards, both for her house and her business, and one of the reasons she had been so successful both in Dublin and now in London, was because she applied those rules rigorously.
And she couldn't have it put out that a servant girl had defied her and then abused her to her face, now could she?
No, the girl would be taught a lesson.
She could go now — but later she could fall under a tram.
And Patrick — what was she going to do about Patrick?
She would have to give him a certain amount of freedom she supposed, there was not way around that.
But under the strictest supervision, of course.
There was no real way of keeping him away from Irish friends…unless of course, he were to have an accident too — something that would keep him at home for several months preferably.
A broken leg perhaps?
She reached for the bell rope beside the fire and pulled gently.
Gerard appeared almost immediately.
The butler's usually impassive expression was still creased with worry.
He regarded Katherine warily.
 "I would like some tea brought up, Gerard." 
"Of course, Ma'am.
Will that be all, Ma'am?"
 "The maid is to be dismissed without references," Katherine continued in the same tone of voice.
"She is to leave immediately.
If her sister so wishes, she to can leave — also without references.
That will be all — oh, "she added, as the butler turned to go," will you have Master Patrick step in please."
Gerard bowed and backed from the room.
Katherine had barely had time to pull off her wire-framed pince-nez and press the palms of her hands to her eyes before Gerard had returned.
The butler was ashen-faced and his face was sheened with sweat.
Katherine was on her feet before he had spoken.
"What…?
"They're gone Ma'am, both of them.
They've gone!"
When Patrick had stormed out of the room, his head pounding, bile in his throat, he had started for his room, but then he had thought of Jane, and he had turned and headed back down the hall towards the room she shared  with her sister.
He rapped gently on the wood.
When there was no answer, he turned the handle and looked in.
"Oh, I'm sorry…
I didn't realize…"
Jane was standing in her shift, her maid's uniform thrown casually across the bed.
A flower-print dress was draped across the back of the chair, and there was a brown battered suitcase on the floor at her feet, which looked as if it had been pulled out from beneath the bed.
 "Well, come in and close the door," she picked up the dress and slipped it over her head.
 "You're leaving…" 
Patrick began.
 "When herself calms down she'll dismiss me," Jane said quietly, her voice surprisingly clam.
When she had left Madam Lundy's presence earlier she had been shivering with reaction, but that had now passed, leaving her calm, her options clear.
 "I'm sorry…" 
"I'm not.
I'm glad I'm going.
The atmosphere in this house is suffocating — if you'll take my advice, you'll leave before it stifles you too."
 "You're the second person to say that to me today," Patrick murmured.
 "Where will you go?" 
Jane shrugged.
She sat down on the edge of the bed and pulled off her flat shoes.
Reaching into her case she pulled out a pair of ugly buttoned boots.
 "I suppose I could try and get some waitressing work…" 
 "Will my mother give you a reference?" 
Patrick wondered.
Jane glanced up at him, her face expressionless.
 "What do you think?" 
 "Have you any relatives you could go to?" 
"There's none alive here, though my mother's youngest sister — my aunt — lives just outside Dublin, in a place called Kingston.
I haven't seen her in years, I'm not even sure if I'd recognize her…"she finished doubtfully.
 "Have you any money?" 
She shook her head without saying anything.
Patrick went and sat on the bed beside her.
He put his arm around her shoulder and hugged her unconsciously.
"I'm sorry I got you into this.
It's all my fault.
I was going to tell her I had taken her keys and let myself back into the house, "he added," but I arrived too late.
You had already said your piece."
 "She's going to make your life miserable, you know that?" 
Patrick nodded.
 "She had a friend of mine beaten up just to find out where I was," he said softly.
 "I was followed today — and it's not for the first time, either." 
Jane turned to look at him, her dark intense eyes large in her face.
 "Leave," she said earnestly,"leave with me now.
There's nothing left for you here, nothing but misery.
Come away with me, we'll find some money, maybe make our way to Ireland…"
Even as he was shaking his head, Patrick could hear Tom Rooney saying to him, "You're part of the organization now…we look after our own," and then he remembered the young gunman's statement, "We need people like you…if any of you feel like joining…" 
He could go to Ireland and join up with the Republican Army, and carry on the fight his father…no, not his father, but the man he loved as a father…had started.
And while he was there, perhaps he would be able to solve the mystery of his real father.
Yes he could do it.
He would do it.
There was nothing holding him here, except…
 "What about Senga?" he asked finally.
"You can do nothing for her now.
But once you've established yourself, made some money, you can come back and take her away with you."
 "How will we get out without being seen?" 
Patrick asked.
Jane looked at the window — and they both burst out laughing.
 "Where did he go?" 
Katherine demanded, glaring at her daughter, who was standing before her.
"I don't know Mama, truly I don't.
He called me into his room a few moments ago and said he was leaving.
He said he'd suffocate if he remained in this house for another hour.
He told me…
Senga blinked back tears, "he told me he loved me and that he'd come back for me when he'd made his fortune and could afford to take me away." 
Katherine's expression was a mask, a terrifying rigid mask.
"And what else?
What was he doing while he was talking to you?"she said tightly.
 "He was packing a small case." 
 "Was there anyone with him?" 
 "Was the servant girl Jane with him?" she snapped.
 "No…no one." 
 "Did you see her?" 
Senga shook her head.
She was still confused and shaken by the day's events.
Furious, Katherine stormed away.
It was obvious what had happened.
This girl, this Jane Bradley, was evidently far more involved with Patrick than she had suspected.
She had obviously enticed Patrick to run away with her — were they sleeping together, she wondered briefly?
But they wouldn't get far.
The girl would have had little if any money, and Patrick had none.
And London wasn't big enough to hide them.
She met Gerard on the the stairs.
 "Contact Mr Lee; tell him it's an emergency." 
The same guard was still lounging outside Joseph Hyde's door when Patrick and Jane arrived there less than an hour later.
The man moved to stand at the top of the stairs, barring their way, and then he recognized the young man.
 "Back again, eh?" 
"We may have been followed.
You might have company,"Patrick panted. he knew that they hadn't been followed, but he also knew that as soon as his mother discovered that he — that both of them — had gone, the first place she would head for would be Joe Hyde's flat.
The guard tapped his coat pocket significantly.
 "I'm ready." 
 "Is anyone inside?" 
 "Dan." 
Concealing a sign of relief, Patrick tapped on the door and then gently turned the handle and poked his head around.
The room was unlit and in the gloom the large man was almost invisible.
Joe's rasping breathing was the only sound.
"Dan…
Dan…it's me, Paddy Montgomery."
He felt Jane start beside him, and he squeezed her arm reassuringly.
 "It's how they know me." 
There was a sharp metallic click and as Dan stood up, Patrick saw him slip the heavy pistol back into his pocket.
The big man's bearded face was serious.
 "What's wrong@" he asked, looking at Jane.
"I've left…
I've left home and mother and…and everything.
Jane's coming with me.
She's the girl who let me into the house last might…
She's lost her position because of it…and so we're going to Ireland, but we've no money and no place to stay, and…"
Jane squeezed Patrick's arm just above the elbow, the sudden pain silencing him.
He realized he had been babbling.
 "We would like to go to Ireland," Jane said quietly,"Patrick would like to join the fight over there.
I would like to go with him if I could."
Dan Brady smiled quickly.
 "We can arrange that." 
 "Patrick was also worried that his mother might send men here, because she knows that this is the only place Patrick could run to." 
Dan smiled again.
 "Do you think she'll send men here?" 
"I'm sure of it.
Patrick said tersely.
 "Have we much time do you think?" 
 "A little— but not much though." 
 "All we need is twenty minutes — have we that, d'you think?" 
"I think we've that — why?
Patrick wondered.
Dan Brady winked.
 "You don't need to know that." 
He nodded at the guard waiting patiently outside.
 "You go with Pete now, he'll take you to Tom Rooney, an" Tom will make the arrangements to get you to Dublin."
 "It won't be easy, my mother will be looking for us…" 
 "She'll never find you," Dan promised.
 "I hope so," Patrick breathed.
 "Nothing." 
Michael Lee turned to look at Katherine.
"My men have scoured every cheap hotel and doss house.
I've had the stations and ports watched, I've kept a permanent watch on all those locations usually associated with the Irish movement, and I've turned up nothing."
Katherine sat back into the heavy leather chair, watching the tall, thin man, her face hard and impassive.
 "Have you traced Hyde yet?" 
Lee shook his head quickly.
"He's vanished also.
He hasn't been in contact with the bookshop…"
"Well, he's hardly likely to be after the beating you gave him.
What about the hospitals?"
"I've checked.
I've had men go through the registers but with no success.
Out own men are still on the critical list,"he added, but Katherine wasn't interested in the condition of the two men who had gone to Hyde's rooms two days ago looking for her son.
Patrick Lundy hadn't been there, neither had Joseph Hyde, but half a dozen men armed with pick-axe handles had been.
The only words spoken during the brief attack had been: "This is for Joe." 
It was unlikely that either men would ever walk properly again.
One of them might never walk at all.
In the two days since Patrick had left the house with the maid, Katherine had had her men take London apart looking for them.
She had offered a substantial reward for information which led to the capture of either of them, and had used what contacts she had with the London constabulary to have them both placed on their  wanted lists — officially they were sought in connection with the "murderous attack" on two of her employees.
If they were caught it could all turn out to be a mistake of course.
But Katherine also realized that the longer ti took, the more chance there was of them leaving the country.
She looked up at Lee, still standing before her, like a disobedient schoolboy.
 "What contacts do we have in Ireland?" 
The shallow skinned man shrugged slightly.
"Few at the moment, but money buys us a lot of friends.
Why; do you think he's gone there?"
Katherine nodded silently.
She looked down at the notes on the small side table, and then pulled off her wore framed pince-nez.
"It's the only place he would go.
The various Irish organizations would probably take care of him — it depends on how deeply involved if they're shielding him."
 "Do you want me to send some men to Ireland — they could watch the ports, make some inquiries?" 
"You'd be wasting your time — if he's made it to Dublin, then he's vanished.
But no, "she shook her head savagely," he's in London.
He has to be."
 "But where?" 
Lee asked.
 "Find out," Katherine said ominously.
Lee nodded and turned away.
He had done all he could, but the boy was gone — couldn't say he blamed him — and if the Irish Republican Brotherhood were sheltering him, then there was no way he was going to be able to make contact with him.
Since the 1916 Rising in Dublin, the organization, which had always been prone to spies and informants, had grown very security conscious.
They now operated in cells, and even if Patrick and Jane were being sheltered, only a very small number of people, perhaps no more than two or three, might be aware of it.
Still, he wondered where the boy was…
Patrick was receiving last minute instructions from  Tom Rooney in the sitting room of his three room flat in Kelly Street off the Kentish Town Road.
Jane was in the tiny kitchen talking quietly to Mrs Rooney, a tiny white-haired woman, who spoke with a broad Scottish accent.
The two men sat facing one another beside a small fire, a bundle of papers on the floor between them.
Cups of half-finished tea were on the floor beside their chairs.
Patrick and Jane had remained in the flat in Kelly Street since they had brought there two days ago, they hadn't ventured outside the door and had remained quiet and away from the windows.
Even the neighbours were not aware that they were there.
And now that an end to their confinement was in sight, they were both eager to be away.
"Now, we've arranged that you will travel as a newly-wed couple.
I think there's less risk of you being caught then — Lee's and your mother's people are looking for either a single man and woman or two unrelated young people; it seems as if they think it's inconceivable that you should have remained together.
You're going to Ireland for your honeymoon.
Now… "he rooted through the papers on the floor," now, here's your marriage certificate, it's made out in the name of Paddy Montgomery…"
 "I thought you would have changed that?" 
Patrick interrupted.
Tom shook his head, adjusting the glasses on his nose.
"No; unfortunately too many people in the organization over here know you as Paddy Montgomery; if someone from Dublin wants to check up on your credentials — as they surely will — then we need to use your established name.
We've changed Jane to Janet — I hope she doesn't mind.
"You'll be met when you step off the boat in Kingston, and taken to a safe house, and then you'll be absorbed into the organization at some level.
Your medical training might come in very useful indeed, and they might allow you to continue your medical training  it is always handy to have a fully qualified doctor to call on if the need arises — if you take my meaning."
Patrick nodded, remembering the Harley Street doctor who had attended to Joseph Hyde.
 "What about Jane?" e asked.
Tom shrugged.
"She can go her own way if she wishes.
If she wants to work for the organization I'm sure we'll find something suitable for her."
 "She did lose her position because of me, I'd like to see her fixed up with something." 
 "We'll see she has a job, don't worry." 
Patrick nodded.
 "I feel responsible for her." 
"Don't be.
She made her own decision,"Tom said, reaching into his pocket for his pipe.
He pulled out his tobacco pouch and pulled the drawstrings open.
Without looking at Patrick he said quietly, "You know she's smitten with you?" 
Patrick thought about feigning surprise or shock, but knew the older man would see through him.
 "I know," he said eventually.
 "And how do you feel about that?" 
 "Why?" 
Patrick wondered.
Tom concentrated on stuffing his pipe with strands of dark tobacco.
"From what I've seen of her, she's a strong-willed independent young woman, who knows what she wants, and is not afraid to say so.
She stood up to your mother, and I've known very few people who have had the pluck to do it."
He struck a match, and pulled strongly on the pipe.
Patrick nodded into the silence, wondering where the conversation was leading.
"I just think that she might prove to be somewhat difficult to dispose of…oh, don't look so surprised.
You're heading off into a grand adventure, you might not want additional baggage."
 "She might become dependent on me, you think?" 
 "Possibly," Tom shrugged.
"I'm just giving you a friendly warning.
Have you ever slept with a woman?"he asked suddenly.
Surprised Patrick replied without thinking.
 "No…" 
"Don't sleep with this one.
If you do, she has you.
And while she's a likeable girls, be wary of her tricks and wiles.
Never pick the first fruit,"he said mysteriously, and then continued when he saw Patrick's puzzled expression.
 "A handsome young man like you will find you'll never be short of female companionship." 
The door to the kitchen opened and Mrs Rooney, followed by Jane, came into the room.
 "And what are you both looking so serious about?" 
Moire Rooney asked with a gentle smile, and Patrick immediately knew that she had been deliberately keeping Jane in the kitchen while Tom spoke his piece.
He looked at the young woman, noticing now how her eyes rested possessively on him, and he couldn't help wondering if they were right.
Tom Rooney turned back to Patrick.
"You're leaving tonight.
You'll be in Dublin tomorrow."
It was raining when Patrick Montgomery Lundy, followed by Jane Bradley, stepped onto Irish soil, and he suddenly remembered his mother telling him that it had been raining on the day she had first come to Ireland, in the May of 1898.
And for the first time, the realization of what he had done — severed all ties with his mother, his inheritance and all the creature comforts of his home in London — sank in.
The last few days had seemed like a dream, but now, with the soft rain damp on his face, that dream had ended…and become a nightmare.
 "Mr and Mrs Montgomery?" 
Patrick whirled, half-expecting to find himself confronting — what?
Police?
His mother's and Lee's men?
Instead he found he was looking at a short, rather stout middle-aged man.
 "You are Mr an" Mrs Montgomery, Mr an "Mrs Patrick Montgomery?" 
Patrick nodded cautiously, and the small man beamed.
"Excellent.
I'm here to take you to your hotel."
Patrick breathed a sigh of relief; the man was the representative of the IRB.
 "Well now — and this is your luggage." 
He picked up the two grips and the empty suitcase Tom Rooney had given then to lend credence to their story.
 "A real honeymoon couple would have at least one suitcase" he said with a grin.
Jane linked her arm through Patrick's and together they followed the small man.
 "Now," he continued, not looking at them,"the two men standing on either side of the gate in front of us have been there since morning.
They seen to be watching the passengers.
I t might be nothing; they might be police…or they might  represent those who are chasing you, so say nothing as we go past."
As they approached the gates, their guide continued talking, but his voice was now meant to be heard.
 "Yes, your father sir, was most anxious that I meet you…and of course, he's looking forward to meeting you, ma'am." 
The men lounging beside the gate didn't even give them a second glance.
The small stout man grinned at Patrick.
"Works every time.
Welcome back to Ireland,"Patrick corrected him.
 "It's good to be home," he said, sounding much more sincere than he felt.
"Mama?
Mama?"
Katherine started awake, confused for a single moment, images of the dream in which she had shot John Lewis still vivid behind her eyes — except now when she raised the gun and pulled the trigger, it was her son who spun away, red blossoming on his shirt.
Senga waited until she was sure her mother was awake and then asked softly, "When's Patrick coming back?" 
Katherine straightened up in the chair.
She had fallen asleep sitting before the fire and she was stiff, her joints aching.
 "I don't know," she said tightly.
 "Soon, I hope." 
 "The man said he was safe…safe from what, from whom?" 
 "The man?" 
Katherine looked up, startled.
Her daughter was standing just inside the door, wearing her coat, hat and walking shoes.
Her cheeks red and she exuded chill air.
 "When was this?" 
 "The man in the street…a few minutes ago." 
Katherine shook her head quickly.
"Start again, tell me everything.
Where were you — was Miss Powers with you?"she asked suddenly.
Senga nodded.
 "Would you ask her to step…" 
The door opened and Miss Powers peered in, pale  grey eyes matching her expression.
She squinted nervously into the room.
 "I was just about to send for you," Katherine said, her voice harsh and uncompromising.
"My daughter said she was talking to some man in the street.
Is that true — can that be true?"she asked incredulously.
Miss Powers, a tall thin woman of indeterminate age shuffled reluctantly into the room.
"It is true, Ma'am.
I had taken Miss Senga into Hyde Park with the intention of showing her some of the winter birds, and the park is so beautiful at this time of the year, what with the snow piled up."
Katherine's expression made the governess hurry on.
"We were approached by a man and woman — a settled couple, I would have said — and as they passed, the woman suddenly spoke to me, calling me by name.
I stopped naturally.
She professed to have been a cook in a house where I was once governess.
I confess I did not remember her at all, but I have been in so many hoses, I suppose it is only natural…"
 "The man," Katherine snapped, "what was the man doing while you were chatting to this woman?" 
"Not chatting — surely no chatting, Ma'am.
He spoke to Miss Senga who had stepped off the path to look at a snowman.
I thought he had passed some inconsequential remark, but when the couple had walked on, Miss Senga informed me that the man had relayed a message from Master Patrick.
As I understand it, he said that Master Patrick had asked him to advise Miss Senga that he was sage and would be home in a year or two."
Katherine turned to look at Senga.
 "What were his exact words?" 
 "That's what he said." 
 "What did you do then?" 
Katherine turned back to Miss Powers.
 "As soon as I had realized what he had said I returned home again immediately." 
Katherine nodded.
"You will not leave this house again with Senga without my express permission, even  for the simplest task — is that understood?
When you do leave the house, I will ensure that you will be accompanied at all times.
You will admit no strangers to this house.
That will be all Miss Powers,"she finished sharply.
She waited until the governess had hurried from the room, her eyes sparkling with tears.
"Senga, you will not talk to strangers unless it is within my presence.
You will not go out without my permission, and when you do go out, you will be accompanied by one of the servants."
 "But why, Mama?" 
"These are dangerous times my girl, and we would be perceived as being wealthy.
There have been several kidnappings for ransom recently and I'm just taking precautions to ensure that nothing will happen to you.
Now, run along to your room and change, I'm sure it's nearly time for tea."
Katherine remained seated, listening to her daughter's footsteps hurry up the stairs and then the ceiling creaked as she entered her bedroom which was directly above the sitting room.
A cold insidious anger began to seep into her.
It was made all the more intense because it was directed inwards.
She should have anticipated that Patrick would try to get some sort of message to Senga — they had always been very close.
But it had also been brought home to her with chilling clarity how easily he might have snatched her.
She had lost one son — lost him truly, for she realized that he must be in Ireland now — but she was determined that she would not lose a daughter.
Senga would never leave her — she would make sure of that.
She leaned over and rang the bell for Gerard.
She would issue the new instructions regarding strangers and then she would have to see Mr Lee about a permanent bodyguard here in the house, someone who would blend in…a manservant.
They needed a servant to replace that girl Jane who had betrayed her trust.
She wondered where she was, and if she had gone with Patrick.
But somehow she doubted it; she was certain  her interest in him would have vanished when she discovered he had no money.
Patrick and Jane had been put up in a room in the Shelbourne Hotel which faced St Stephen's Green.
Patrick had been interested to see that all traces of the damage the insurgents had wrought in the Green — the trenches they had dug, the trees they had felled — had vanished, and the only evidence of the 1916 Rising were the bullet holes in the stonework of the hotel where the rebels had fired on the British troops positioned on the roof and in some of the upper rooms.
The small stout man had kept up a constant chatter as he accompanied the two young people into Dublin city on the train.
But although he had a seemingly endless supply of small talk, he asked no questions and Patrick wondered how much he knew.
When the train pulled into Amien's Street Station, Patrick had asked the man — who didn't volunteer a name and they didn't ask — where they were going.
But his secretiveness extended to not even telling them that, and they had to be content to accompany him as he turned left at the foot of the steps that led up to the station entrance and headed for the quays.
 "Where are we going?" 
Jane murmured.
Her right arm was linked through Patrick's and her left hand was also closed over his arm; he felt he was in a vice.
 "Some hotel I suppose," he said softly.
The small stout man had marched on ahead, and was now humming happily to himself.
 "Where?" 
 "Could be any of a dozen." 
Patrick said distractedly.
Jane's constant chatter was beginning to annoy him.
He had endured the days in hiding in London and then the boat trip across listening to her talk.
Part of it was nerves and excitement, he knew, but at this stage he knew nearly everything there was to know about the girl.
Several times over.
Deliberately ignoring her, Patrick concentrated on his  surroundings.
It felt strange to be back in Dublin, to be home, the city both familiar and alien.
He resisted the temptation to turn around and look back up the street to where he knew the turn for Montgomery Street lay.
How many times had come down here with Mickey — dead now, killed in the Rising — to watch the trains come steaming in?
A sudden thought struck him, and he realised that before he had left Ireland, his mother had insisted that he was accompanied everywhere…maybe that was why it felt strange to be here without a chaperon.
he looked down at the two hands locked onto his arm and then at the small man hurrying on ahead, and realized that he still had his chaperons, and once again they were not of his own choosing…
Their guide turned left across Butt Bridge, heading towards Great Brunswick Street which would bring them up around by Trinity College…
Patrick frowned, wondering where they were going.
At the bottom of Great Brunswick Street, they swung left around by the main entrance to Trinity.
Partially to silence Jane's chatter, Patrick began quietly pointing out some of the landmarks, the memories coming back with the names.
He was somewhat consoled to find that she seemed to be genuinely interested.
If Patrick had been expecting the small man to head up Grafton Street, then he was disappointed; the guide continued on past the bottom of the crowded street, passing Yeates & Son, the opticians with the giant spectacle frame hanging outside the shop, heading into Nassau Street and then he turned right into Dawson Street.
As they neared the top of the street, Patrick slowed as they neared the Royal Hibernian Hotel, but their guide continued on…and that left only one major hotel in the vicinity.
 "The Shelbourne?" he asked.
Their guide nodded.
At the top of the street, he turned left, heading towards one of the more expensive  hotels in Dublin.
Patrick touched his arm.
 "I've no money," he said gently, as they neared the ornate portico of the white stone building.
He stopped outside the hotel.
"All that's taken care of.
Only the best for you boys.
Now, you're booked in under the name you're using now.
You'll remain in your room for the rest of today and all day tomorrow — if you want anything order it, and have it brought to your room.
You're a honeymoon couple, so the staff won't think it unusual.
The day after tomorrow you'll receive a visitor, and everything will be sorted out then."
The man tipped his hat to Jane and then he darted across the road, heading into St Stephen's Green, leaving Patrick and Jane standing before the hotel.
 "Shall we, Mrs Montgomery?" 
Patrick asked more lightly than he felt.
 "It doesn't look as if we've any choice, Mr Montgomery," they young woman grinned.
The room was not the best the hotel had to offer, but it was still magnificent by any standards.
It was on the top floor and its two large windows looked out across St. Stephen's Green and the College of Surgeons was clearly visible across the tops of the bare trees.
As Jane wandered around the room, poking in the cupboards, examining the small but luxurious bathroom, Patrick stood by the window staring absently into the Green.
As he looked across the now peaceful Green, he found it was surprisingly easy to imagine it filled with men and women in uniform fighting for a cause they truly believed in.
Men and women had fought in the College of Surgeons opposite and British soldiers had fired upon them from the roof of this very hotel.
He was surprised at the intensity of his memories, surprised at the bitterness he felt.
And yet he hadn't directly experienced the fighting in the city; at the first sign of trouble his mother had packed Senga and himself off to England.
He pressed both palms flat against the cool glass, resting is forehead against the window.
Some of the memories were almost too painful to dwell upon.
He remembered the last time he had seen his father — Dermot Corcoran, he corrected himself — alive.
Why had he walked out on that bright Monday morning in April 1916, knowing that his chances of Corcoran returning were very slim indeed?
What would have made an intelligent man do that?
And then the questions which had arisen so few days ago arose unbidden, and this time, instead of forcing them away, he forced himself to face them — and the principal question of course was, just who was his father?
He had little enough to go on: someone anti-Republic, anti-Irish, his mother had said, but who?
And more importantly, was he still alive?
 "You're very quiet." 
Jane had come up behind him, standing so close he could feel the heat from her body, close but not touching.
 "Just thinking, remembering." 
 "Do you regret what you've done?" she asked, moving around so that she was able to look at his face.
 "No," he said immediately, surprising himself to find that he actually believed it.
 "No regrets?" 
 "No…well, only one." 
He looked into her wide dark eyes.
 "I'm sorry I ever got you involved." 
 "Don't be." 
She moved closer to him.
 "I got myself involved." 
She reached out and plucked a thread from the lapel of his coat.
Patrick flinched.
Jane stepped back in surprise.
 "What's the mater with you?" she demanded, her voice rising.
"When you crept into my room less than a week ago, you weren't so shy about touching me.
But I've noticed that in the last few days you've been careful not even to come close tome.
Why did you wait until I was asleep before coming to bed on the boat on the way over?
Just what did you think I was going to do to you — rape you?
Or do you prefer boys?"she asked suddenly, her eyes widening.
 "Your friend Joe Hyde preferred boys, didn't he?" 
 "No, no there's nothing like that," Patrick attempted a smile.
Her outburst had surprised and confused him.
"It's just…it's just…
I respect you too much."
He took a few steps away and sat down in one of the room's elegant easy chairs.
 "You make a poor liar." 
She turned her back on him and stared through the window.
It had started to rain again, and the streets below were deserted.
 "Let me tell you what I think," Jane said slowly and evenly.
"You think I'm an opportunist don't you, latching onto you as some sort of meal-ticket.
You think I'm trying to get you into bed so I can have some sort of hold over you.
Isn't that it?"she snapped, turning suddenly, catching the surprised expression on his face.
"That is it.
Well, you're wrong, Mr Lundy.
I used you to get to Ireland, that's true, and if your friends in the organization can get me a job, then so much the better, but that's the last you'll see of me.
And I don't think that's using you.
I think that's due to me in payment for having lost my job.
At the moment, Mr Lundy, you have nothing, no money, no friends, no family.
Why would I want to have anything to do with you, eh?
What do you have to offer me?"
 "I'm sorry," Patrick said eventually into the long silence which followed.
he was thoroughly confused now.
Had he been completely misreading her intentions?
 "So am I," Jane said.
 "Perhaps I should have let that precious mother of yours catch you sneaking back into the house." 
 "Why did you help e?" 
Jane folded her arms beneath her breasts.
"Because I liked you, I genuinely liked you.
I felt sorry for you I wanted to help you."
 "Look!" 
Patrick surged to his feet.
He took Jane by the elbows and looked directly into her eyes.
"Look, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
I've never been with a girl, I don't know how to react around one.
I was given some advice about you — advice which I took against my better judgement, but it seems that advice was wrong."
 "What sort of advice?" 
Jane asked seriously.
"Tom Rooney told me to beware of you, not to end up in bed with you.
He said I'd never be rid of you if I did."
The young woman threw back her head and laughed aloud.
"Oh, Patrick, sometimes you can be so stupid, so naive.
Can't you see that he was just worried that you would betray some of the organization's secrets in a moment of passion?
And to an English girl at that.
No wonder he was worried."
She unfolded her arms and wrapped them around his waist, pulling him closer.
"Patrick, I'm not a virgin, I've slept with men before.
So you needn't worry, I'm not going to fall madly in love with you…"
She stood on her toes, kissing him quickly — and then pushed him away.
 "I'm going to have a bath, I feel grimy after the boat and train." 
Patrick nodded dumbly as she walked away, working on the buttons on her cuffs.
 "You could order dinner," she called as she kicked the bathroom door closed.
As the room slowly slipped into darkness, the lowering skies bringing on an early evening, Patrick sat by the window, staring out onto the streets below, listening to the noises in the bathroom as Jane gently hummed to herself.
He was confused.
He had grown up living in a web of deceit, he was used to his mother's machinations, had grown accustomed to her lies.
He had grown up with the impression that women's motives were suspect, and so when Tom Rooney had given him advice he had found it so easy to believe, because it was what — subconsciously — he expected.
It was difficult to accept that Jane had no ulterior motives.
Patrick smiled ruefully; he was nineteen going on twenty — what right had he to assign motives to a woman?
Dinner arrived on a trolley escorted by two servants.
Swiftly and with the minimum of noise, they laid the small table with heavy silver tableware and spread out the various dishes.
There was also a bottle of wine "with compliments of the management" .
If the  waiters were curious about the room being in darkness they neither said nor did anything which indicated it; they had been in the hotel business for far too many years now to be surprised by the antics or activities of the guests.
When they had left — and Patrick had the grace to look embarrassed because he had no money with which to tip them — he went and tapped on the bathroom door.
 "Dinner." 
 "I'll be a minute." 
 "It will get cold." 
 "What are we having?" 
Patrick peered under the dish covers.
 "Breast of turkey in an orange sauce, vegetables marinated in…" he sniffed, breathing in the mouthwatering aroma, "marinated in some sort of alcohol…" 
He picked up the bottle of wine.
"There's also a bottle of wine with the management's compliments.
I wish I knew more about wine, but it looks like a good year."
 "That's champagne, you idiot." 
Patrick nearly dropped the bottle with fright.
Jane was standing right behind him.
She reached out and took the bottle from his hand and turned it around to examine the label, while he simply looked at her in amazement.
Patrick had always seen Jane as a maid, she walked, talked and acted as a maid.
And when they had been hiding out in Tom Rooney's house, they had still fallen into the roles of master and maid, and on board ship Patrick's attitude, influenced by Tom's warning, had been stand-offish.
Now, he saw her simply as a woman, and a surprisingly beautiful one at that.
She was slightly smaller than himself, slender and compact, with an intense, almost exotic beauty about her features.
Her face was oval, and her expression seemed to be constantly challenging.
Beneath an open, high-necked, long-sleeved cotton dressing gown, she was wearing a simple white cotton nightdress, which stuck to her still damp body, and she smelt of soap and steam.
Her hear, damp from the bath, had been pulled back from her face, giving it a very youthful expression.
 "Dinner's getting cold," she murmured, smiling at his startled reaction; he hadn't been aware that he'd been staring.
Over dinner, they chatted together easily, casually, the conversation drifting.
Jane had shown Patrick how to open the bottle of champagne, and they drank it slowly, neither of them enjoying the sharp fizzy taste, but neither willing to admit it.
They chatted about their respective childhoods and, while Patrick had wanted for nothing, he found himself envying Jane's childhood freedom as the daughter of a groom and maid in service in a large country house just outside London.
 "You could say I grew up in service — and so it seemed almost natural that Sarah and I should go into service." 
 "I didn't think servants were allowed to marry," Patrick remarked.
"It was unknown in the past, and in the larger houses in town it was unheard of, but in the country it was not unknown.
It was felt that married servants — especially if both servants worked in the same house — tended to be more stable, and have a stabilising effect on the younger, unattached members of staff."
 "And what will happen to you now, do you think?" 
Jane shook her head.
 "I'll always find a job." 
 "Where?" 
Patrick demanded,"you've no references.
"
P "There's always the streets," she said with a cheeky grin — which immediately faded when she saw Patrick's expression.
 "What's wrong — it was only a joke." 
 "Nothing…nothing's wrong." 
 "There must be something wrong," she persisted.
 "Tell me." 
Patrick shook his head stubbornly.
Jane reached out and rested her fingers on the back of his hand.
 "Tell me," she insisted.
 "Well, I don't suppose there's any harm in you knowing now." 
He took a deep breath and sipped some of the flat champagne.
"When we lived in Dublin, my  mother ran one of the largest brothels in the city.
Apparently, she had been taken in by the Madam who ran the house, a woman called Bella Cohen, who adopted her almost as her daughter, by personally, I always found it hard to believe myself."
"I'm sorry…
I didn't realize…"
"You weren't to know.
I didn't know myself until relatively recently.
It's just…it's just…"
 "What is it?" 
Patrick ran both hands through his hair and buried his head in his hands and stared at the fine linen table cloth.
"Shortly before I left — the last argument I had with mother — she told me that Dermot Corcoran wasn't my father.
I had grown up believing that my father had been a great patriot who had died for Ireland, but she told me that Dermot wasn't my father, and that my father was someone who hated the Irish and the idea of Irish independence."
Jane reached out, covering his hands in hers.
 "She wouldn't tell me who my father was." 
Her fingers tightened on his hands, hearing the anguish in his voice.
 "Have you any way of finding out?" 
He shook his head.
"No…
I don't know."
"It must be someone in your mother's past, someone reasonably close to her.
Perhaps someone who knew Dermot."
Patrick nodded numbly.
 "Perhaps if you were to start looking into your mother's past, you might find some lead." 
 "It's a long shot." 
 "It's all you have." 
Patrick looked up, his eyes glittering with moisture, and smiled gratefully at her.
 "Well, it's something — thank you." 
 "For what?" 
He turned her hands, bringing her fingers around to his lips.
"For everything.
For giving me the courage to do what I did."
 "You would have done it sooner or later," she smiled, her eyes deep and dark, the single light they had lit earlier on which kept the room partially in shadow, lending her face a slightly mysterious air.
"Later might have been too late.
If I had left it any later, she would have completely dominated me."
He kissed her fingertips again.
"It's been quite a week.
I've learned a lot."
Jane stood up and moved around the table to stand before him.
She shrugged off the dressing gown and stepped closer to Patrick.
He could feel the heat from her body, smell the soapy scent from her skin.
He could clearly see the outline of one side of her body through the cotton nightdress she wore, her nipples dark spots against the pale cloth.
 "Perhaps you can learn a little more," she whispered.
Patrick awoke briefly during the night and lay awake, confused and troubled for a few moments until he realized where he was.
He moved slightly in the bed, and felt the warm, naked body beside him and smiled, remembering the last few hours.
He slid back beneath the covers, hugging the woman's body close to his, his arm around her waist, and fell into a deep and dreamless sleep.
Jane smiled in her sleep, contented.
It was early morning when Patrick awoke again, and this time he came fully alert.
His arm reached out for Jane — and touched only the still-warm sheets.
He sat up in bed, just as she came out of the bathroom, rubbing her hair with a towel, unselfconsciously naked.
He sat back in the bed, pulling the sheets up around him.
 "What are you looking at?" she teased, "have you never seen a naked woman before?" 
 "Not before last night." 
 "But you lived in a brothel," Jane said, disbelief in her voice, sitting down on the edge of the bed and rubbing vigorously at her hair.
 "I was very young…" 
Jane snorted rudely.
"…
And mother, for all her faults ran the house with a rod or iron.
I don't think I ever saw a nude woman in the house — certainly there were women in various states of undress…but never nude."
He reached out and ran the back of his hand down her thigh.
 "Why don't you start with the brothel then?" she asked, watching him closely.
He looked at her uncomprehendingly.
"You wanted to trace your father, didn't you?
Well, then start with the brothel where you lived — you can find it again?"she asked.
 "I can find it." 
 "Perhaps someone there might remember something…or do the staff at these establishments change quickly?" she wondered.
 "Some of the women were there so long I used to call them aunty." 
He leaned over and reached for her, his arms wrapping around her waist, but she slapped his hands away.
"Not now — later.
I though we were expecting visitors today."
 "Tomorrow," he said.
 "Let's go for a walk them," she suggested.
 "We were told to stay in our rooms," Patrick said doubtfully.
Jane crossed to the windows and stood staring down into the street.
They were quiet at this early hour and the cobbled stones still glistened from the night's rain.
Patrick hopped out of bed and came up behind her, wrapping his arms around her waist, resting his chin on her shoulder.
 "What's wrong," he murmured.
 "Do you always do what your told?" she asked sharply.
Patrick turned her around and looked down into her dark brown eyes.
 "What would you like to do?" he asked.
 "I'd like to go for a walk in that park over there," she said quietly.
 "It's called St. Stephen's Green, or more usually just the Green." 
"I'd like to go there, just you and me, no one watching over us, no-one minding us, or guarding us, or whatever.
I'd go myself, "she added," except that the hotel staff would think it strange if one half of a newly married couple should go for a ramble on her own."
 "We were told to stay here…" 
 "Well, if you don't tell, I won't…" she smiled and then, tilting his head down in her small hands, kissed him.
Less than an hour later, Mr and Mrs Montgomery strolled out of the Shelbourne Hotel and into St Stephen's Green.
Within the hour, a telegram was on its way to London claiming the reward for information as to the whereabouts of Patrick Lundy and his female servant.
 "Just what the bloody hell do you think you're playing at?" 
Patrick stepped back from the door in shock as a tall, broad shouldered man pushed his way in.
A second, smaller man followed.
He immediately closed the door, turning the key in the lock, and leaned back against the wood, arms folded, an expression of unconcern on his face.
 "You were told to remain in your room." 
The man strode into the centre of the room and tossed his hat onto a chair.
He ran his hand through his thick black hair and glared at Patrick.
Patrick's initial shock was now turning to anger.
 "Now look here…" 
Jane laid her hand on Patrick's arm, squeezing slightly, silencing him.
 "What is the problem?" she asked the dark haired man.
He looked at her and smiled slightly, the smile lending his face a certain boyish charm.
Here was a man who would have no trouble with women, Jane thought, strong and handsome, but cruel — perhaps cruel was too harsh a word, but hard certainly, it showed in the set of his mouth.
 "The problem, dear lady," he said quietly, his accent more pronounced now that he had calmed down, "is that a certain Madam Lundy was sent a telegram yesterday informing her of the whereabouts of a certain Patrick Lundy." 
 "Oh no," Jane whispered.
Patrick visibly blanched.
 "You two were spotted on your little perambulation  around the Green — very civilised, I must say, very stupid." 
 "What are we going to do?" 
Jane asked, her voice calmer than she felt.
From the little Patrick had told her, and from what she already knew of the woman, she knew Madam Lundy was quite capable of having them killed as a lesson.
 "Nothing," the broad Irishman grinned.
 "I said Madam Lundy had been sent a telegram — I didn't say she had received it." 
Patrick shook his head, thoroughly confused now.
 "I don't understand." 
"One of our men in the post office pulled it.
Luckily he had been one of those we had briefed and he remembered the name.
Oh, and my name, by the way, Michael Collins."
Patrick started, although only twenty-nine, Michael Collins was one of the prime movers in the Republican Movement now.
He had fought with Pearse in the GPO in 1916, where he had acquitted himself honourably, and he had risen swiftly through the ranks.
He shared Pearse's ideal of a Free Ireland, but his methods were slightly more pragmatic.
He was tall and broad, with a square strong face, his eyes hard and sharp, and when he shook hands with Patrick, his grip was firm and dry.
 "It's an honour," Patrick gasped.
 "It is an honour for me to meet the son of Dermot Corcoran," Collins said immediately.
"I knew him briefly in the last days before the Rising, but I know of his work of course.
He was a great man."
He turned to Jane.
"But you must excuse my manners, Miss.
You must be Jane Bradley?"
"You'll forgive my rudeness, but I an naturally concerned for your welfare, not only because Tom Rooney requested it — and I have a great respect for Tom.
The movement needs more men like him."
As he was speaking he was  looking Patrick up and down.
 "And Joe Hyde speaks highly of you too." 
 "How is he?" 
Patrick asked quickly.
Michael Collins shrugged.
"Coming along, but slowly.
A bad business…"
 "My fault," Patrick said immediately.
"Let's not apportion blame.
What's done is done — and at least the men responsible for it have paid their dues."
He looked around the room.
"Now, come on.
Your bill is paid, you've got to be out of the room by noon."
 "Where are we going?" 
Jane asked quickly.
 "Somewhere safe; somewhere Madam Lundy won't find you — I hope." 
Jane grinned.
 "I hope so too." 
Michael Lee hated the city.
He hated the people, the smell, even the sounds.
It was foreign, alien, and he felt very much out of place.
This wasn't his world — and Madam Lundy knew that — and he knew that his chances of finding the boy and girl were very remote indeed.
At least in London, Manchester, Birmingham, Glasgow or Edinburgh, he had contacts he could exploit, although, he reflected ruefully, his contacts in London hadn't borne much fruit.
But whatever chances he had of finding them in London, he had none in Dublin.
Michael Lee had arrived in Dublin barely four hours ago — he checked his watch again — but already it felt like a lifetime.
he had immediately checked into the Shelbourne, one of Dublin's premier hotels, and spent the next hour soaking himself in a bath, washing away the grime of the rough sea-crossing.
Michael Lee, although born and reared in squalor on London's wharves — or perhaps because of it — was not fastidiously clean.
As he soaked in the warm, slightly scented water, he ran through his options.
Madam Lundy had given him a list of possible contacts in Dublin, people she had known in her days here; some owed her favours, others had exploitable vices or  indiscretions.
Lee privately doubted that the majority of these contacts would be useful: favours had a way of being conveniently forgotten, and vices and indiscretions tended to lose their edge as the years passed.
Also, some of the people on her list might no longer have the connections he needed.
A police inspector in Scotland Yard who owed him a favour — a slight matter of some indiscreet letters — had supplied him with a list of known criminals in Dublin, as well as a separate listing of all known Republican sympathizers.
Therein lay his best chance, he felt; Patrick Lundy would be sure to make his way into the organization.
And assuming he found him — what then?
Madam Lundy's instructions had been explicit.
He was to bring Patrick back, any way he could, but the girl — if she was in Dublin — was to be taught a serious and possibly fatal lesson.
Lee sank deeper into the bath, wisps of white steam rising lazily into the heavy air, and wondered where Patrick Lundy and the girl were.
…less than ten feet away Patrick Lundy and Jane Bradley, followed Michael Collins down the carpeted corridor, while behind them the silent bodyguard carefully locked the door after them.
It had rained again, leaving the streets dark and shining, and the wheels of the car hissed across the damp road.
They were driving around the Green and the smell of damp earth and undergrowth was rich, overlaying even the sharp car fumes.
It was silent in the interior of the car, Patrick and Jane sitting close together, across from Collins who seemed intent on the street scene.
The bodyguard drove, cut off from them by a sliding glass panel.
 "Do you remember the city?" 
Collins asked suddenly.
Patrick started.
 "No…well, a little." 
"Where did you live?
I'm afraid I only got the briefest details on you,"he said by way of explanation.
 "In Monto." 
He saw Collins"look of surprise and hurried on.
 "We lived on the top floor of number eighty-two, Tyrone Street, Lower." 
 "I've heard of the address," Collins said shortly.
 "Some of the 1916 leaders met there," Patrick said quickly, catching some disapproval in the older man's voice.
 "Aye." 
He shifted uncomfortably in the seat, and then turned his head away.
Patrick glanced out the window and caught sight of a troop of British tommies marching around the Green towards them, on the opposite side of the road.
There was silence until the soldiers had passed, and Collins slowly withdrew his hand from his coat pocket; glancing through the sliding glass panel, Patrick saw the driver do the same.
 "I'm told you're a doctor?" 
Collins continued as if nothing had happened.
 "I'm still a student." 
 "But you know a little?" he persisted.
 "A little, yes." 
Collins nodded.
 "Good, we've always use for medical men." 
 "Then you'll take me into the organization?" 
Patrick asked excitedly.
Collins smiled slightly.
"Do I have any choice?
I'm just wondering where we can put you.
With your mother chasing you, we've got to keep you out of sight for a while."
 "How about a disguise?" 
Jane asked, startling them both.
Patrick snorted rudely, but Collins looked interested.
 "What sort of disguise?" 
She shrugged.
"Nothing dramatic.
Change his hair, colour it, give him a beard — it would all help to age him, and Madam Lundy's men will be looking for a young man."
Collins smiled warmly.
 "That's an excellent idea, young woman." 
 "Jane, Jane Bradley," she said quickly.
 "Of course," he said apologetically.
He turned to look at Patrick again.
 "Yes, I think we could do that." 
He leaned back to tap on the glass partition and then slid it open.
 "Take us around to see Eddie." 
The drive nodded.
He swung across two lanes of traffic and turned left into Grafton Street.
Jane sat mesmerised at the array of expensive and exclusive shops that lined the narrow street — this was not how she imagined Dublin.
This street would not look out of place in London's most fashionable shopping district.
Patrick too was watching the shops go by, remembering the last time he had walked down them, it had been early in 1916, and he had gone out with Mickey — God Rest Him — to buy his mother an Easter gift.
He had never found a suitable gift, and there hadn't been an Easter that year, the only gift many families had received had been blood and fire.
At the bottom of Grafton Street, the driver swung around to the left into College Green.
Patrick looked out at Trinity College on his right and the Parliament buildings on is left, but neither seemed to have been scarred by the Rising.
Further down the street, in Westmorland Street, some of the shops bore the scars of the fighting, and many were still under repair.
However, it was only when the driver turned to the left up the quays that the real damage wrought by the 1916 rising could be clearly seen.
Many of the old buildings had been gutted, while others still bore the starred and shattered glass of the explosions that had rocked the city.
Just past the Ha'penny Bridge, the driver turned to the left into Lower Fownes's Street and stopped before the first building on the right hand side.
The man alighted and checked the street first, his hand deep in his pocket, before finally opening the door.
Patrick climbed out first and them helped Jane down; Collins was the last man out, and Patrick heard him murmur to the driver, "Around the block the long way, only stop if you see us on the street." 
Patrick turned to look at the street, wondering what had brought Collins here; but it seemed just another poor tenement side street.
He squinted to make out the figure above the nearest open door, but it was completely encrusted with grime; the name and number above the next building however, was Number Two.
 "Let's not hang about," Collins said, ushering them both into the darkened hallway.
Patrick had drown up in the tenements and immediately recognized their peculiar odour — the smell of cabbage and urine, of burnt food and unwashed humanity.
Although is mother's house had always been spotless, and was considered to be one of the most exclusive brothels in the red-light district, it too had managed to capture some of the essence of the tenements, a lingering miasma that no matter how often the skivvies scrubbed and washed the floors and walls still managed to seep into the house.
The hallway was dark, but Michael Collins made his way without hesitation to the first doorway on the right hand side and tapped once, then twice and once again in an obviously prearranged signal.
The door was opened almost immediately by a tiny grey-haired woman, who looked past Collins to stare hard at the two strangers standing behind him.
 "They're with me," Michael Collins said gently.
The woman nodded eventually and stood back, allowing Collins, followed by Jane and Patrick, to enter.
She immediately closed the door and snapped two heavy bolts across it.
 "It's been awhile Michael," she said, her accent broad and sharp, pronouncing his name in the Irish language as Mee-hawl.
 "You're looking well, Eddie," he said, smiling fondly.
 "How have you been?" 
"Getting old, she grumbled, moving past Patrick to stand before Jane.
"A pretty lass, she muttered.
 "This is Eddie," Collins said, introducing the woman.
 "Eddie has worked in most of the theatres not only in  London but all across Europe as well as our own National Theatre." 
 "I was wondering where the postcards came from," Jane said.
She was staring at the far wall of the small room, which was completely covered in postcards and photogravure cards from just about every city in Europe.
There were also framed pictures of theatrical personalities and playbills on the walls.
Otherwise the small single room was almost bare; a bed in one corner, a dresser before the single window, a small table with two chairs flat against the far wall.
There was a coal fire beside the bed — dangerously close — with no more than a dozen coals piled one atop the other, more smoke than flame.
 "This is Patrick," Collins said,"and Jane.
They are on the run from some particularly nasty people in England who, we have every reason to suspect, have followed then here.
Patrick will join us in the organization, but for him to be able to work effectively, he will need to be able to move around freely."
The tiny woman, her sharp face a mass of wrinkles, gripped Patrick by the arms and spun him around to face her.
 "How do you intend to use him?" 
"He has some medical training, and we won't want to waste that.
He has a good education and will be able to mix with the upper classes."
 "Nothing too rough then," Eddie muttered.
She ran her frail fingers through his nondescript hair, brushing it off his forehead.
 "We can lose some of the hair, deepen the colour, and then add a little silver," she said to Collins and then looked back at Patrick, "how old are you boy, eighteen, nineteen…?" 
 "Nearly twenty," he said quickly.
"Nineteen.
Well, when I'm finished with you, you'll look closer to thirty."
She looked at Jane.
 "Now you sit him down over there and wet his hair." 
She nodded first to the table and then to the ewer on the window ledge.
Patrick looked wide-eyed at Collins, wondering what was going on, by the big man smiled genially and  nodded.
"Eddie knows what she's doing.
She's the best — trust her."
Patrick nodded doubtfully.
He allowed Jane to sit him by the table and then damp down his hair with water — ice cold and brackish!— from the ewer.
She squeezed his shoulder comfortingly and stepped away as Eddie reappeared with a cloth wrapped bundle.
She rolled out the towel on the table, revealing two scissors she turned back to Patrick, looking critically at his hair.
 "How often do you shave, boy?" 
 "Well…ahem…" 
"Not often, I'll wager.
Well, when you do shave in future, don't shave so high, "she touched his cheeks below his ears," and allow your locks to grow and thicken.
It will help change the shape of your face.
Now… "she ran her fingers through his dampened hair," close your eyes."
Patrick obediently closed his eyes, feeling the sun warm and orange on his eyelids, hearing the click of the old woman's scissors, feeling cold strands of hair drift occasionally across his face.
He felt the blade of the open razor scrape against the back of his neck and again on his forehead.
When the scissors stopped, the old woman dragged the comb through his hair several times, trying different styles, and he heard Jane murmur, "That's amazing." 
 "We're not finished yet, my dear," Eddie said quickly.
She tapped Patrick on the shoulder.
"Keep your eyes closed now.
This might sting,"she added.
Patrick was just about to ask what she was going to do when he felt something cold touch his scalp — and then it was as if his head had caught fire.
Eddie splashed more of the liquid against his temples, brushing it back and then rubbing it in with a comb.
 "More water, dear," she asked, and then, obviously speaking to Patrick, whose eyes were now squeezed tight with pain.
 "This is only water." 
The liquid against  his burning scalp was like balm, and then Eddie rubbed his head briskly with a rough towel, before damping it again, and then brushing it back.
 "You can open your eyes now." 
Patrick carefully opened his eyes to find the three faces staring at him; the look of satisfaction on Eddie's face, contrasted sharply with Collins' look of admiration, and Jane's shocked expression.
The old woman picked up a spotted mirror and held it before his face.
Patrick blinked in astonishment.
He raised a hand to touch his face, not believing what he saw.
Eddie had cut away most of his thin nondescript hair, cropping it close to the skull, and she had also cut back the hair on his forehead, giving him a pronounced widow's peak.
She had then bleached his hair along the side and at the temples…and the results, as she had promised, added ten years and more to his age.
 "We could give him a pair of spectacles," Eddie suggested.
Michael Collins wrapped his arm around her shoulder and squeezed affectionately.
 "You've worked wonders, as usual." 
 "Perhaps you should let me do something for you," she suggested.
 "You're far too noticeable as it is." 
 "Some day," he promised.
 "Some day soon," she said.
 "Soon." 
Collins ushered Patrick and Jane back out onto the street — just in time to see the car come chuffing around the corner.
It had barely stopped before Collins had the door open and had bundled then inside.
 "Where to now?" 
Patrick asked.
 "Somewhere safe." 
 "Where?" 
Jane wondered.
Collins nodded.
 "It's not far," he said evasively.
Michael Lee checked the address on the scrap of paper and then the name plate pinned high to the wall of the tenement.
 "Tyrone Street Lower." 
Methodically tearing  the paper into tiny pieces, he casually strolled up the gently sloping cobbled street, looking for number eighty-two.
Although it was early afternoon, the streets were empty, and Michael Lee was conscious that he was probably attracting much unwarranted attention.
This district, with its decaying tenements, its cobbled streets shattered and stinking, the pervasive odour of massed humanity, and their filth, reminded him with almost terrifying clarity of the wharves where he had grown up.
This was more what he had imagined Dublin to be; he had been surprised to find it so obviously wealthy and cultured.
This area — even if he had been a total stranger to the city, and know nothing of its history, would have immediately advertised itself as the red-light district — even the very air seemed tainted by the smells of cheap perfume and sex.
He found the number eighty-two close to the top of the street, looking just as derelict as the rest of the tenements on the shabby street.
And yet this was the house run by the notorious Whore mistress, Bella Cohen, and later by the woman known only as Madam Kitten but who was, in reality, Katherine Lundy.
The reputation of number eighty-two was widespread, and prior to the outbreak of the Great War, it ranked as highly as any of the European brothels, and was reputed to number amongst its clients the very highest in the land.
The steps to Number Eighty-Two were worn, and Lee smiled, wondering how many eager feet had climbed those steps.
Lee's inclinations led in other directions, and he found it difficult to comprehend how men were so easily led by a woman.
The tall thin man paused on the top step, looking casually up and down the street — too many years on the street having taught him what to look for — but he saw nothing suspicious.
He knocked quickly, tapping out the code Madam Lundy had given him.
She hadn't known if it had been changed — it was unlikely — but if nothing else it would help to gain him admittance.
There was no reply.
Lee knocked again, and this time the door was immediately opened and he found himself staring down into the large black barrels of a sawn-off shotgun.
 "Step inside and no tricks now, or they'll be scraping you off the street." 
Suppressing a smile, Michael Lee stepped into the darkened hallway.
It took a few minutes for his eyes to adjust to the dimness, and he remained still, blinking hard, making out the man standing directly in front of him holding the shotgun, while on the stairs to his left another person — a woman?— was also holding what looked like a small pistol on him.
 "The only person likely to use one of the old codes is a police officer." 
The voice was female, Dublin, and came from the stairs to his left.
Lee turned slightly towards the sound — and immediately heard the double click as the hammers on the shotgun were pulled back.
 "Stay where you are." 
 "Are you a police officer?" 
Lee grinned.
 "Well, I'm hardly likely to admit it if I was now, would I?" 
 "Who are you then?" 
 "I don't think…" 
The man with the shotgun hit him with the butt of the weapon, driving it deep into his stomach, doubling him over, dropping him to the floor.
 "Answer my question," the woman continued, as if nothing had happened.
 "The Madam taught you well," Lee gasped, suppressing the urge to throw up.
 "Who are you?" the woman said once more.
 "I won't ask you again." 
The woman came down the remaining stairs and stood before Lee, so close that he could smell the perfume — expensive and subtle — off her.
"My name is Lee, Michael Lee.
The Madam sent me."
 "Who?" 
Lee straightened painfully, his hand massaging his  bruised stomach.
"Madam Kitten, Madam Katherine Lundy who ran this house until Easter week, three years ago.
She sent me."
 "Proof?" 
 "There's a letter in my inside pocket." 
The woman stepped back, and Lee was roughly turned over, and the shotgun pressed into his throat.
The Londoner found himself staring into the expressionless face of the tall and broad, blond-haired, blue-eyed bouncer.
 "Meet Jem," the woman said conversationally,"short for Jemmy.
He's from Germany originally; he doesn't speak much English, but he understands well enough.
His real name is James, or Jim, but he doesn't pronounce it too well,"she continued, as the man deftly extracted the thick envelope containing one of the notes Katherine had written for Lee on the day of his departure.
She had written four introductions to her old cronies in Dublin, in the hope that one, at least, might prove useful.
The woman in the shadows read the brief note.
 "Let him up Jem, he's all right." 
The bouncer — bullies, as they were called in Dublin — stepped away from Lee, and eased the hammers down on the shotgun.
However, he still managed to keep the weapon pointing loosely in his direction.
He made no attempt to help Lee to his feet.
"So Madam Lundy is still around.
I wondered when she would ever return to Dublin — I presume that's why you're here."
 "You're wrong." 
Michael Lee scrambled to his feet.
"Madam Lundy will never be returning to Dublin.
Are you Nuala?"he asked eventually.
The woman turned and walked up the stairs without replying, and for a moment, Lee stood undecided.
Then, glancing quickly at Jem, he slowly climbed the stairs, feeling his bruised stomach muscles protest with every step.
He followed the woman into a room on the top floor.
Compared to what he had seem of the rest of the house, this was luxurious.
Heavy, ugly furniture rested on a blood-red carpet, which matched the flocked design in the off-white wallpaper.
The prints on the walls were dark and undistinguished, and the large, gilded mirror on the wall over the marble fireplace was speckled.
There were numerous gaps in the bookcase at the end of the room, and Lee wondered what had happened to Madam Lundy's collection of books.
The room was exactly as Katherine had described it — only shabbier, neglected.
Lee turned his attention to the woman.
What he had first taken for height he soon realized was a product of high — very high — heels, and he guessed that without the lifts she would be around five foot, pleasantly featured, with a round face and perfectly round brown eyes that looked almost serene until he realized how hard they were.
Her chestnut coloured hair — recently coloured too, he guessed — was tightly curled around her face and her figure was hidden beneath the drapes of an ugly housecoat.
 "Sit, please," she said, her Dublin accent more noticeable now.
 "Drink?" 
He shook his head.
Nuala crossed to the window and perched on the ledge looking down into the street below.
Glancing around at Lee, she said, "Tell me about the Madam." 
Slightly off-balance by the speed of the events, Lee floundered for a few moments.
"Well, eh…well the Madam is fine.
She has continued her business interests in London, and now runs one of the most successful houses in the city, indeed in the whole country.
She also has business interests in Manchester and Glasgow."
 "But she won't be coming back to Dublin?" the woman asked, and Lee suddenly realized where this line of questioning was leading.
He shook his head emphatically.
"The Madam will have nothing to do with either Dublin or Ireland.
This country cost her too much; indeed, she has gone so far  as to refuse to discuss the topic.
No, you may rest assured — this house is yours, Madam Lundy does not want it back."
The woman smiled, and moved away from the window.
 "I was somewhat concerned," she admitted, crossing to the fireplace and pulling the ornate sash that hung down beside it.
The door opened almost immediately and Jem appeared, without the shotgun this time.
 "Some tea for out guest." 
The man nodded and silently disappeared.
Nuala sat down facing Michael Lee.
"When the Madam gave me the keys and deeds of this house in Easter week, 1916, she said that it was mine, that she had no further use for it.
But somehow I always feared that one day she would return to claim what's hers.
I've worked hard for this house over the past three years.
Maybe I haven't kept it up to her standards but I've done my best."
 "You've done a good job," Lee said quickly, recognizing the woman's insecurity.
 "This house is yours, she'll never want it back, and from what I've seen, I think you've done her proud." 
 "You think so?" 
Lee nodded quickly.
 "I run a similar institution for the Madam in London, but I wouldn't be ashamed to say Iran this one." 
Nuala positively glowed, and for a few moments she looked like a child who had been given a present.
But then the smile faded.
 "If you are here though, it must mean trouble." 
"It does, but not for you.
The only reason I came here was because the Madam gave me your name and said that with your underworld connections you might be able to help me find someone."
 "She looking for someone for a job?" 
"Not quite.
She's looking for a young man and possibly a young woman.
Runaways from England."
 "And why would the Madam be interested in runaways?" 
Nuala wondered, looking up as the door opened and a young woman appeared carrying a tray.
Lee waited until the girl had placed the tray down on a small side table and backed silently from the room.
"One of the runaways is her son, Patrick.
And she wants him back."
 "Master Patrick…yes I remember Master Patrick," Nuala smiled fondly.
 "Following the events of 1916, Madam Lundy's control over her children quickly became complete," Lee said, watching Nuala pour tea from a fine silver teapot.
 "Eventually, they became almost prisoners, answerable for their every movement." 
 "You don't approve?" 
"I have spoken to the Madam about it.
I knew it would lead to trouble.
The boy's nearly twenty now.
He should be able to take care of himself — and yet she won't even let him out of the house without demanding to know where he's going, who he'll be with and what time he'll be back."
He shook his head quickly, his lips a thin, hard line.
 "The Madam always loved her children," Nuala said, remembering how proud Katherine had always been of them.
Lee sipped his tea from a cup of pale fragile china and shook his head.
"Well now she's just possessive.
It's bad for business.
It takes her mind off other things,"he said savagely, remembering the note the Madam had received offering her some of the stolen Irish Crown Jewels.
When this affair with Patrick and the servant girl had blown up, she had forgotten all about the stones.
They were gone now — sold to some Russian apparently.
What a waste.
Nuala smiled automatically, re-evaluating the man.
When she had seen him first, she had marked him as a "bully" , one of those who kept the brothel girls in line.
In her years working with the Madam and then running her brothel she had come to know many, and she could usually spot their type.
And Michael Lee was that type: aggressive, cunning, smooth, dangerous, and probably homosexual too, she shouldn't wonder.
She had initially thought he might have come to reclaim the Madam's brothel — in which case he was going to have a mysterious and fatal accident.
But when he had been speaking of Katherine's children, her opinion of him had begun to change, it sounded as if he did have a genuine sympathy for them and their plight.
But he had revealed his true colours now — he considered that the Madam's overwhelming interest in them was merely bad for business.
Nuala decided she didn't like this smooth, sharp man.
 "So how can I be of assistance to you?" she asked, fixing a professional smile to her face, the same smile she used when dealing with difficult customers or when fixing the amount to paid out in bribes.
"In any way you can.
If you could put the word around that a substantial reward will be paid for information leading to the boy's capture."
Lee settled the cup on the saucer.
"And of course, if there is any other information you think might be useful to me.
Perhaps you might even allow me to borrow one of your people as a guide around the city.
I don't know Dublin at all."
Nuala nodded.
 "Of course," she said quickly, her professional mask never slipping.
 "And of course, if you had any clues as to where the boy might have gone…" 
 "We know he has Nationalist sympathies…" 
Nuala smiled, showing white teeth.
 "So has half the city…that gets you nowhere…" 
Lee shook his head as she offered more tea.
 "Where would a young man and woman go — assuming they landed in this city with little money and no contacts." 
Nuala shrugged.
"This is a big city.
And they could just as easily have hopped on a train to any other part of the country."
 "I would imagine they have very little money," Lee supplied.
 "Would they have any compunction about acquiring more?" 
"If you're asking me would they steal for it, well then I don't know.
The boy I know has been brought up to  want for nothing, and has been raised a staunch Catholic.
The girl I'm not so sure about."
 "There are a few cheap hotels close to the stations…" 
Nuala mused, "I'll have someone look into it." 
she finished her own tea and put down the cup.
"I think you're wasting your time, to be honest.
It will be like looking for a needle in a haystack.
Far too may young people arrive from England every day — they're just another young couple, there's nothing special, nothing remarkable about them."
 "Madam Lundy doesn't think so." 
Nuala nodded.
 "And that's the only reason I'll help you look for them." 