

Recollections of Basil by his family — written in 1987
Notes on Basil's relatives by his sister Eileen Wicksteed who was born in 1900
Basil's paternal grandfather, Charles Rocke, brought his family up from Wrexham, North Wales, to London in the last quarter of the 19th century, and with his three sons started Rocke & Sons, leather factors, in Bermondsey.
The family settled in Hampstead, possibly to be near Dr Horton's Congregational Church.
In Wrexham grandfather had been an active Gladstonian Liberal, and concerned himself with the temperance movement and local government.
He had the faculty of meeting everyone on the level, and Father had a story of seeing him at a political meeting, which he was probably chairing, walking arm in arm with the Grand Old Man himself, both talking.
Gladstone would have come over from Hawarden, not far away.
Granny Rocke, who lived to be ninety-two and had seven children, adopting three more who had been orphaned in Australia, could speak Welsh.
She had big feet and one of her daughters was six feet tall, unusual in those days.
Granny wore a swansdown cloak, incredibly soft, as her grandchildren (she had twenty) knew.
As the eldest son, Father shortened his education — or had it shortened for him — and went to help in the family business.
He too was Liberal in politics, non-conformist, a non-smoker and tee-totaller.
We had family prayers before breakfast with extempore prayers from Father, who had the faculty of producing these on demand.
It was quite a gift, but he had no vanity; they were short and suitable and much admired by some people.
He was humble minded and never forced his opinions down other people's throats.
He held them strongly, but was capable of changing them if so persuaded.
The important thing was to do what you thought was right, leaving other people to do the same.
He erected no barriers.
I really know less about Basil's maternal relatives.
That grandfather died before any of us was born.
I think he worked at Lloyds in insurance.
Granny Haycraft was Scottish and numbered ministers, literary men and a China merchant amongst her relatives.
I think there may have been some mental instability on Grandfather's part.
He speculated and they lost all their money before the family grew  up.
An uncle of ours had periods of madness (and a large family), and Mother herself a disastrous period in late middle age, finally emerging into a peaceful and happy old age.
I am convinced that Victorian prudery was much to blame for this, and modern treatment might have much ameliorated it.
To revert to Father…he loved music, but not practising the piano.
When offered the chance of ceasing the practice by ceasing the lessons, he jumped at it.
Later he was sorry for this and taught himself to read hymns and easy accompaniments.
He took me often to organ recitals (Goss Custard and Thalben Ball) and to the Proms, where he sat in the balcony over the orchestra cupping his good ear in his hand.
(After scarlet fever he lost the hearing of one ear altogether.)
He was a strong long-distance cyclist, not a racer, and tended to get off his bike going downhill in case the brakes failed, but ride up everything.
Harry Curwen, his friend and cycling companion, had a story that Father wanted to ride up a very long hill on one of their excursions but fell off near the top.
So he went down and tried again, this time successfully.
It must be remembered that bicycles in Father's day were very different from the modern machine; no free wheel, for instance.
He even rode a penny-farthing.
As an afterthought I have remembered that when I worked in London in the very early twenties I once went, in my lunch hour, to the Temperance Hospital and asked if I could visit a patient, though I knew it was out of visiting hours.
The porter asked my name and when I gave it, asked if I had a relative called Charles Rocke.
I said my grandfather was Charles.
 "Did he go to Australia?" 
 "More than once," I replied, "he visited there with his wife in 1888." 
The porter, who had once been a sailor, told me that of all the saloon passengers only one ever visited the men below decks and his name was Charles Rocke.
He used to come and talk with the crew.
This porter had never forgotten it.
Basil's home as recalled in some memories of childhood by his sister Janet Muriel Livingstone"who was born in 1902
My first memory is of falling off a rather high bed at the age of three years on the evening that my parents had moved into a house near the top of Hampstead Heath, and of my Father going off on his bicycle to search for a doctor as I had cut my head.
The house had been built on the Heath by an enterprising man  who was said to have kept a tethered goat there, then to have put a wall round the goat and then to have built the house before anyone noticed he was purloining the land.
Anyhow, we had open views over the Heath and Vale of Health and it made a lovely family home even if it was badly designed with a huge wasteful "well" in the middle of the house which had the advantage of enabling us to come downstairs in a series of flying leaps, holding on to tall mahogany pillars at the corners of the stairway.
There was also a short second backstairs admirable for hide-and-seek and making our house a popular place for tea parties, and of course there was a large basement with red tiles on the floor and a splendid old kitchen stove which our Marion kept as highly polished as her good shining face.
We had a small walled garden and oblong of grass and, though Father kept a long side bed gay with red geraniums, white marguerites and blue lobelia, capable of standing up to the odd cricket ball and the games we children were able to play in the few remaining square yards behind beggared description but we had the whole Heath beyond.
It was the sort of London garden which grew London Pride and smelt of snails but there was room to play cricket or French cricket on the grass (You can't have five children and a nice lawn, as my Father sagely remarked) and I remember a time when obstacle races round the gravelled path on our bicycles was popular with my sister and me.
We had a remarkable woman for a nurse or "Mother's help" as she was called even in those days, because Mother liked bringing up her own children and was always around, with the nursery the centre of the house, and not tucked away upstairs.
I don't think any of the five of us could ever remember Laura being cross — not that she had need to be, we were good and reasonable children, always having been treated reasonably, but she had her moments of trial.
As further evidence of her good nature: I joined my middle brother Niel, who had a fondness for playing at "hairdressers" , in persuading Laura to sit in as our client one wet afternoon and occupy the barber's chair we had provided.
She was allowed to continue with her mending — she did not know that we had spread a thick layer of gum upon the chair and was surprised at the alacrity with which we saw to all her needs so that she should never move.
When much later in the afternoon she got up to get the tea a tearing sound was heard as her nice blue overall parted with the gummy chair — she let out a burst of laughter.
There was thirteen years difference between my elder sister and  youngest brother — two girls and then three boys, of whom Basil was the eldest — and though this arrangement was not ideal when we came of an age to meet husbands among our brothers' friends, it did mean that we all got along very well together and as sisters were not looked down upon by older and superior male beings as I often saw happen in other families.
Moreover it saved us as a family from being caught in the 1914 — 18 war as my sister and I were eighteen and sixteen years old when it finished and almost all our contemporary male cousins were killed.
Those four years left a black cloud over everything with the ever-recurring casualties among our friends and relatives and the suffocating misery I remember when our parents could no longer hide their anxiety at the big German push in the spring of 1918 when it seemed their advance towards Paris would never stop.
I remember too the suppressed terror I felt one Saturday morning when there was a daylight raid over London and a swarm of black flies appeared in the blue sky and seemed to come on and on as we looked out of our house high on Hampstead Heath.
The night raids with a few sporadic bangs and our own guns, and twice a silver Zeppelin picked out by a search light, seemed fun — because we all came downstairs and stayed up late and weren't expected to be bright at school next morning.
And Armistice Day is the best and brightest memory of all because it had been a war to end all wars and no one would ever allow such a thing to happen again…
I was at a day school in Hampstead, King Alfred School, in its heyday, and we went out to Golders Green and boarded the open top of a No. 13 bus and sat on it till it came back to Golders Green again — such sights we saw!
People laughing and cheering and waving flags, riding on any available vehicle, twenty people draped over a taxi, bus bonnets crowded with people and thousands of happy pedestrians — every window open and crowded out with waving enthusiasts — and I saw no tears, no inkling of what was to come all over again.
But in spite of tragedy around the "first war" , the years were very happy ones at home.
My sister was sent off to boarding school near Bournemouth to improve her health and was near starved, but Mother always managed to find something for the home fare — I remember a great day when she found the butcher's bare and bought a goose that was available and that we certainly shouldn't have had it in normal circumstances and I was quick to see it was an ill wind that did nobody any good!
We had some wonderful family holidays during this time — usually in easy reach of London so that Father could join us from his  business, as a leather factor, at weekends.
My sister and I had a hazy idea that he sold rabbit skins from a sort of tray suspended from his neck — but as he was always beautifully neat and clean I don't know where we got this idea from.
Later we were proud to read in a trade paper that he was "the finest judge of pickled pelts in the world" .
The back of Leith Hill became our Paradise with home-made houses in and under pine trees and we needed no other occupation here while Mother sat near, reading or sewing and happy because we were.
For two summer holidays my parents took a Prep school outside Westerham and from here we bicycled over half of Kent with our Father or played on the small school fields or swam in the local swimming bath.
Father had been a champion cyclist in his youth in Wales and saw that we were all given good bicycles when we reached years of discretion.
He was immensely strong and could ride up almost any hill — he also had scant respect for "rests" so that you needed a vigorous constitution to enjoy it.
But his immense enthusiasm carried us all along.
I remember two very special expeditions to the top of the Heath — not very far from our house which stood at almost the height of the cross on St Paul's Cathedral, a fact that was emblazoned on the house above us in the East Heath Road.
The first was to see Halley's comet, and the second the arrival of was it the "first" aeroplane arriving at Hendon?
We watched all day on both occasions but saw nothing, though the sandwiches and lemonade we brought with us to be quite sure we missed nothing were greatly enjoyed.
I do not remember whether we enlivened the day with a penny ride on a donkey round the White Stone pond but I regarded these donkeys with the respect and admiration rarely afforded by the keenest jockey for his mount and one of my day-dreams (only once realised and then somehow a little disappointing) was to save up three weeks' pocket money and have a 3d ride in place of a Id one, which took you for at least a hundred yards along the Spaniards Road.
We had wonderful and devoted parents and were always sure of a safe, secure background and were aware that we children mattered more to them than anything else.
Both Father and Mother had been through difficult times financially in their twenties but Father had founded a fine family business in London which flourished and while both of them were wise and sensible about money there was never any lack of it and funds were  available for anything that would widen our horizons and education.
They were completely unworldly and thus brought us up to be the same.
My Father was not really fond of children except his own whom he loved dearly.
His deafness cut him off from a lot of things but he never told us to speak up and would sit at family meals with a benign expression on his face while we chattered away.
I think of my Mother still as the best woman I have ever known.
She was selfless and I cannot fault the way she dealt with me — not the easiest of her five children.
I remember in my teens being determined to do something which was not very nice, turning to her for permission and her saying "Well, I wouldn't do that — but I think you are old enough to decide for yourself," and suddenly all the joy in the plan faded away and I didn't do it.
Growing up with Basil by his sister Eileen Wicksteed
I remember Basil as an equable and popular small child with shoulder-length curls.
My sister and I put him to good use.
 "Who did that?" 
Chorus from sisters, "Basil." 
 "Did you do it, Basil?" 
 "Yes," said Basil obligingly.
He hadn't, but no one scolded him.
On the other hand, he was hard to please with his Saturday penny.
Toy shops in those days kept special trays of penny toys.
After prolonged search Basil would say he would like to try the other shop.
This again had its useful side if one was choosing clothes for oneself.
He had 110 hesitation in saying one must try elsewhere, and just why.
He had good taste and was most helpful in extricating one from awkward situations.
I remember when he was trying on shoes for himself.
Shoe after shoe was discarded, while Basil explained the idiosyncrasies of each toe.
 "Yes, sir, it does look a bit wonky," said a patient salesman.
Such remarks made up for our embarrassing waits.
All this is very small change but very typical of our brother.
Oh yes, and he wrote a letter back from school (Leighton Park) saying his bantam would be laying soon, as she had "a fluffy behind" .
I can't swear to the following but the headmaster said Basil was undoubtedly a gentleman, but he'd rather not have his brother in case he turned out the same.
Anyway he was a dear!
Growing up with Basil by his sister Janet Muriel Livingstone
We called him Boy because my elder sister and I were born first and his arrival gave great joy.
Years later he said being called Boy was a disaster because as an old man of fifty it made him feel a fool.
He was a good playmate and he and I enjoyed playing "horses" where one would "drive" the other in turns with string as harness — and he told me years later it was a bitter disappointment to him when I said I'd grown out of the game.
On rather boring walks on Hampstead Heath with a pram containing our younger brother, with Laura and my older sister, all sent out for air and exercise, Basil and I would enliven matters with long conversations, vying with one another over imaginary purchases of imaginary horses the one outstripping the other over the purchase price.
I also remember an enjoyable afternoon when we walked with a bit of grass stem arranged round our front teeth because apparently we envied our friends who had to wear braces on their teeth.
Basil would get very excited at finding tadpoles and caddis worms in the Hampstead ponds but though he once took to fishing in a small stream when we were on holiday, and actually caught a small fish, which Marion cooked for his tea, he was quite unable to eat it, being stricken with remorse at its demise.
He was no good at games — "more long than stop" as he once remarked to my cricket-loving sons — but early on had remarkable control over a bicycle and later in life showed aptitude for skiing in spite of his great length of leg — and he was a beautiful ballroom dancer.
He went to a rather ghastly preparatory school where the headmaster began proceedings with "Good morning, Gentlemen," to which the boys responded with "Good morning, Sir." 
He came home one day reporting that a "gym shoe" was used to administer punishment and that it was very painful.
Interested, I asked him to whack my bottom with the same instrument and urged him to do it properly so that I could feel what it was like — he did so and I was only just able to restrain my tears it hurt so much.
On another day I provoked him in some way and he slapped my cheek.
 "All right," said I, "I turn the other cheek" and I did so.
I'm glad to say that he slapped that too.
He was always loyal and when we had a house maid who adored Basil and had little affection for his sisters and she used to stand up for him as hardly done by, he would have none of it, to my remembered satisfaction.
During the "14 —" 18 war, I started singing "Eternal Father strong to save" at the end of my prayers and Basil got very tired of it and asked Mother to stop me, but this she felt unable to do.
He must have found it very tiresome, although I did sing in tune, and I'm afraid went through several verses.
I have never forgotten that near the end of his life my Father told me that in his loneliness Basil was the one of his five children who had given him most sympathy and understanding.
Recollections of "Uncle Basil" by Dan Wicksteed, nephew
The high point of our holidays was always the visits of Uncle Niel and Uncle Basil.
Having a father who was 67 when I was born, it was marvellous to have our much younger, bachelor uncles who could be pleaded into providing piggy backs, swing-arounds, car rides or visits to the local pubs for ginger beer.
I don't know what view of these events my uncles took as we woke them early and followed them around as faithfully as any spaniel — maybe that was why they often nipped off to the pub in the evenings.
My brother Rollo and I had a consuming interest in cricket and knew the names and performances of all first-class cricketers from about 1946 onwards.
Uncle Basil was amused by this and rigged up a device like a stone age "Comeback tennis" only with an old composition cricket ball.
Having set it up, he said he was going to give us a demonstration coaching session.
He knew and we knew that he was pretty hopeless at ball games, so we readily relinquished the bat to him in the hopes of another of his clowning sessions.
How deliberately he used the wrong names I don't know but he would announce that he was about to demonstrate the "Leg push" .
Rollo and I would immediately ask if he meant the "On Drive" , the "Square drive" , the "Leg glance" , the "Pull" , the "Hook" or what.
 "Just watch," he'd say missing it completely.
Next time he would not only miss it but it would hit him on the leg.
 "Oow," he'd scream, "that ball's HARD." 
 "Do it like Edrich," we'd plead in between hysterical laughter.
 "Edrich, who's Edrich?" he would reply.
 "This is how Simpson would do it." 
 "Which Simpson, the one who opens for Nottingham, or the one who toured South Africa in 1947?" we'd ask.
 "Watch carefully, this is Ethel Simpson, W. G. Grace's aunt who  taught him everything he knew." 
So on would go the self mocking Uncle Basil, punctuating everything with a high pitched giggle that was so appealing I remember deliberately trying to adopt it as a young adult.
Somehow Basil would get everyone into his style.
Once as we invaded his bedroom to get him up we said "Why are you so white when Uncle Niel's so brown?" 
(What poisonous children we seem in retrospect.)
 "Go and tell Niel he rubs coffee on to make himself brown," he said.
Delighted we darted off to Niel to report this scurrilous comment.
Niel's style was drier.
 "Tell Basil he rubs milk on to make himself white." 
Whether I have conveyed anything of the delight we took in his company I don't know and his exact words may have been even better but the magic of his style returns to me and I had another giggle writing this.
Thank you Basil.
Uncle Basil by Sally Lister, niece
My chief memory of Basil, whom I loved dearly, is of laughter.
He would come and stay often at Seaford and we laughed so much we couldn't eat.
Elsie, who lived with us at that time, just sat with tears streaming down her face.
He would put his fork into his mouth and pretend it was stuck, while he pulled and pulled.
And then his teeth — his false teeth.
He would juggle them with his tongue for us children and told us a tale of getting his glasses whipped off by a passing branch.
 "I just had time to think" Thank God it wasn't my teeth "." 
Tales, too, of his prowess at cricket — "More long than stop" — and his magic rhyme which he would only ever say twice to any one person.
It began "A rumskin a bob a diddle" and I can still recite it all — but never more than twice to any one person!
I loved him very much indeed and always felt a special rapport with him.
I remember him taking me for a drive in his car when he told me the joyful news about his forthcoming marriage to Rosemary and feeling so happy that he was going to be happy.
I still miss him.
Recollections of my Father by Clare Pain
In trying to remember my Father I suppose the image that comes most vividly to mind is that of a tall, large-boned man with balding grey hair, a rather beautifully-shaped nose and kind but sad grey eyes.
When gardening he often wore very baggy trousers with braces, gum boots and a waist-length black donkey jacket which hung loose and looked as if it was too short.
I don't remember him doing much digging in the garden but in my memory he is always mowing the lawn and fussing over a particular type of grass which evaded the blades and sprang back upright after the mower had passed over it.
He solved the problem of how to eradicate this grass by commandeering a group of my school friends and myself with instructions to pick as many bundles of thirty of these grasses as we could, for which he paid us three-pence each.
We thought this was a jolly easy way of making money and it must have been, because my Father never repeated this idea again.
My Father was often away on courses and therefore rather in the background of our childhood.
He was a quiet man, not much given to open or abandoned laughter, mainly because he thought laughing made him look like a horse — which it did rather!
He had a very well-developed but dry sense of humour which I often tried to copy and I think that is why people used to say I was like him.
He was very interested in bird watching and kept a large tin of peanuts for the birds in our front porch.
This tin of nuts was a continual source of nourishment to my brother and myself until in his exasperation at the fast-diminishing level of nuts my Father moved the tin out of our reach.
I sometimes used to go and sit and draw with my Father in his study and he would always encourage my work and often pass on his own useful tips on technique for which I was and still am very grateful.
I was eight years old when he died; his death affected me deeply and profoundly and I miss him still.
My father's death by Thomas Rocke
Obviously the death of my father impacted greatly upon my childhood years.
I remember not being greatly shocked by the sad occurrence itself, which followed a lengthy illness.
Although I can't  actually recall being prepared for it by my mother, it was only too obvious even to a child of seven years that something was pretty seriously wrong.
One particular incident which sticks in my mind which brought home to me how ill he was occurred when my mother sent me one morning to ask my father what he wanted for breakfast, to which he replied in a very vague and confused manner "hen mush" (the term we gave to the vegetable matter we cooked up for the chickens).
Thus I was, albeit subconsciously, prepared for his death, and I recall saying to my mother when she broke the, news one morning that "I thought something like this might happen." 
I don't recall any real feelings of resentment, and I don't think I fully appreciated the future implications.
I remember definite feelings of not wanting to be felt sorry for, very much wanting everything to carry on as normal.
I think at that age one is very concerned to be seen to be similar to one's peers and hence not to be singled out for differential treatment.
I recall explaining to my close friends at school, querying why my sister was so distressed, what had happened, but directing them not to tell anybody.
My main subsequent regret is that I only knew my father from the perspective of parent to child and not from that of adult (parent) to adult (son) whence different qualities and traits of personality come to be appreciated.
I have been constantly told what a fine man he was and I regret not being able to experience and appreciate his qualities first-hand as I have grown from a child to an adult.
Passages from Basil's Journal and Papers
Account of a trip to New Zealand, August 1925 London — Cape Town — Melbourne
On August 13th 1925, I sailed from England on the good ship Sophocles, bound for Sydney via the Cape.
This was my first sea voyage of any length and I looked forward with mixed feelings to the life on board ship, alone and with a crowd of passengers unknown to me.
A fortnight before leaving home my sister had developed mumps, but with the advice of two Harley Street specialists to proceed, I did so and hoped fate would be kind.
My destination was New Zealand.
It had been advised by my doctor that a year's holiday in another land would build me up, as I had grown too quickly and had, as the phrase goes, "overgrown my strength" .
Six months in Switzerland was the first suggestion but later it was decided that I could combine business and health by making a trip to New Zealand and learning the pelt fur business from the practical source in the fell-mongeries there.
And so the 13th of August found me waving farewell to my friends and relations at King George V Dock, London.
On arriving at Cape Town we found that the rumours of a seamen's strike were very real, and that several boats were delayed in Table Bay owing to the crews' refusing to take the vessels to sea.
For three weeks we were delayed in Cape Town, with hardly a passenger boat being able to sail, although one or two boats managed to sneak away but with fear of being black/egged on arriving at the next port of call.
There were as many as twenty-four vessels in Table Bay, all anxiously waiting to put out to sea; boats loaded with African fruits for the London Market were in a sad plight, as the extra time on board would not improve the fruit.
After three weeks of uncertainty the Nestor arrived in port and hopes were raised that she would sail the following day.
Many passengers transferred from the Sophocles, I amongst them, and after much anxiety the Nestor actually sailed and it was with happy hearts that we saw Table Mountain gradually disappearing behind the horizon.
On board amongst the passengers was the new Governor General for Australia, Lord Stonehaven.
It was most fortunate that  we sailed from Cape Town at the appointed time as he had many engagements in Australia — most important the Opening of Parliament in Melbourne a day or two after his arrival.
Journal account of an encounter with the Theosophists at The Manor, Sydney, Australia in October 1925
I had been given a week in Sydney before sailing for New Zealand.
But instead of staying a week I stayed six weeks.
Sydney had many attractions for me.
My cousins live amongst a community of some fifty Theosophists.
The Community live at The Manor, a large gabled house at Clifton Gardens, Mosman overlooking the harbour.
Each member of the Community has his or her own room except in the case of families when brothers or sisters can share a room.
There is the common dining room and drawing room, and in the latter meetings are held.
In the basement of the house there is a little chapel of the Liberal Catholic Church.
A dear little chapel with a stained glass window at the altar end, of the Lord Christ.
A simple Altar with its six candles and centre cross.
There is a row of pews on either side of the chapel to seat two in each pew.
The organ is behind.
The Holy Eucharist and Benediction are celebrated daily, morning and evening respectively.
Attendance of course is voluntary.
The services are very simple with the priest celebrating and two acolytes serving.
Communion is administered in the morning and the Benediction given at night.
Both very beautiful services.
At first I found the ceremonial rather strange, but once I realised the significance of the ceremony and ritual I appreciated the service to the full and was able to add my services to the whole — as each member of the congregation can take a very definite part in the service if he or she has the will, and knows what is meant by the different ceremonies performed.
Concentration is essential to the earnest aspirant.
The form alone would be as nothing, a shell, but with the knowledge we have that behind the form is the reality — that behind the ritual on the physical plane there is a spiritual significance.
Now to return to my narrative.
The Manor might be aptly described as a spiritual College.
Pupils are receiving occult teaching, and are studying the science of life — before going out into the larger world to relieve the stress of humanity, to teach mankind the Divine Wisdom, God's Plan for the World, Evolution — to bring happiness to the unhappy, peace to the warring, and the only true happiness is found through service and brotherhood.
I was not a Theosophist when I arrived in Sydney.
I was very sceptical and, being almost entirely ignorant of the truths of Theosophy, thought Theosophists mad in their beliefs.
It is extraordinary how intolerant the ignorant can be.
Ignorance is almost a crime in some cases.
Nevertheless on arriving in Sydney I was brought into the Theosophical Centre, and before I had been there a week found myself a very interested enquirer.
The Theosophical teachings were all new to me but seemed to be most natural and consistent with normal common sense and logic.
I enquired deeper into the Teachings and the more interested and enlightened I became.
Previous to my arrival in Sydney, I was at a stage of uncertainty as to what I did and did not believe.
I had been brought up as a Congregationalist.
But I had not become a member of the church.
I was almost going to join prior to leaving England, but only as a conditional member.
I was in favour of a world religion — an all-enfolding religion rejecting no one, but I did not then know of a church or religion which would include all men.
Fate seemed to be steering my course, as in Theosophy I found what I was seeking.
The first principle in the Society's three main objects is to form a nucleus of humanity, the Universal Brotherhood, without distinction of race, creed, sect, caste or colour.
I found myself entirely in agreement with this principle.
The second is to encourage the study of comparative religion, philosophy and science.
The third, to investigate unexplained laws of nature and the powers latent in man.
All quite excellent.
And Brotherhood was the only object one was expected to conform to in becoming a member.
And who in the world would not readily sign their names to such an object?
Certainly all embracing — what I had been seeking.
 "Knock and it shall be opened unto you" .
My contact with Theosophy has changed the whole course of my life.
It has given me something to live for.
It has explained the why and the wherefore of life.
I have no fear of death; I could die happily today without the slightest dread of what the morrow would bring forth.
Can we all truthfully say the same?
I lived for the six weeks almost as one of the Community except that I did not sleep at the Manor.
I came into contact with nearly all the fifty members of the community and with some intimately.
I will not say that the latter reason was not one of my first pulls towards Theosophy.
About twenty-five of the fifty were young people.
And very charming too.
All so natural and unsophisticated.
They treated me quite naturally from the very first — and I myself felt quite at home.
There I spent one of the most delightful and instructive (or  constructive?) six weeks of my life.
I found I had something in common with all there.
A common belief.
A common purpose, causing harmony and happiness.
Meeting Krishnamurti at Lady Emily Lutyens', April 1st, 1928
Today I was invited to tea at Lady Emily's to meet Krishnaji.
He was busy when I arrived, interviewing a man.
Later he came in and was so delightfully natural and dear.
He went out with Naomi for a few minutes and then it was my turn for a little chat.
I had not expected having this intimate talk.
He was so loving and in a moment I had bared my few troubles, and felt it almost criminal to worry him with one's little difficulties.
But he made one tell him and immediately he had explained or shown one the fallacy of one's doubt.
Why worry as to whether or not there is a God?
What is it that matters?
That one should live to the utmost of one's ability to be big — to be noble, and true and honourable and beautiful.
To live to one's highest ideal conception of mankind.
Then I asked of him concerning the suffering.
We all worry about the things we cannot alter.
He looked into the fire.
 "The spark of the fire," he said.
If that spark is to grow, wood must be added to make the flame grow bigger.
We are like the sparks; to grow, to be capable of greater joy we must go through and experience the suffering and the sorrow.
The wood is the suffering.
The flame is the ultimate joy.
We can worry, we can talk, discuss the meaning of life, the why and the wherefore, but for what use; can we come to any final conclusion?
Surely we cannot; we must accept what we have as data and work to make the best of what we have, our environment and our circumstances.
Right and wrong does not exist, good and evil are but stages, but rungs on the ladder of life.
All life is experience.
And we must mould our lives to the good in us.
The good will grow and will drown what is unhealthy, what is not worthy.
Some thoughts on talking with Krishnaji — Some impressions of what he said.
Nothing new, one might say.
No;— but something fresh, something alive, something burning with life and vitality.
Truth is not new.
Truth is covered up, buried, and he comes and unburies the truth or rather shows us how we can unbury that truth within ourselves, shows us the tools we must use.
He says "I am but a signpost pointing the way" .
A visit to Burghclere and a meeting with Stanley Spencer March 1929
This day I was motored over to Burghclere to see Stanley Spencer's mural paintings which he is now working on in the Memorial Chapel built for the plans of the pictures he has in mind.
We walked into the Chapel and found a little dark untidy-haired man, a woman and child.
Of course it was Stanley Spencer, his wife and child.
The chapel was small, an altar stood at the further end from the entrance we came in by.
The child was playing with her toys.
Mrs Spencer was seated at a table spread with drawings, paint and brushes.
Above the altar rose the back wall and on this was the main painting, the gigantic conception of the painter's mind.
Stanley Spencer had been through the war; he had experienced the horror, the vulgarity, of war.
He had been stationed for a time in a war hospital, once a lunatic asylum.
And at this hospital he had experienced deeply.
He had seen the humour of it all.
And here in this memorial chapel he had painted episodes from his experiences.
The ambulance arriving at the gates of the hospital, two men heaving back the great iron gates.
Another painting on the recessed wall was the laundry.
Sorting the linen, the towels, the sheets, the red handkerchiefs, such as the navvies use.
Again there was the picture of men carrying great tea urns, and as Stanley Spencer said himself, "mad tea urns made for lunatics." 
I said how depressing asylums must be, but he said quickly "I do not mean my picture to be depressing." 
They were not; the paintings were laughing and the laughs had a subtle meaning.
Again there was a painting of men scrubbing the floors.
The large mural painting above the simple altar depicted war.
There were the mules lying in a jumbled mass of undulating backs.
There were the wire entanglements, two horses lying in the middle with heads together — instruments of war here and there.
At the top of the picture in the middle distance lay the far-off peaceful hills and trees, a real contrast.
The foreground displayed men in their destructive mood.
The earth cut up and bleeding, horses and mules and men, passions unruled, awry, tearing at the earth making the world and themselves a bloody slaughterhouse.
Stanley Spencer experienced all this and felt it deeply.
Experience, he feels, can be expressed.
And at Burghclere Memorial Chapel he has expressed what he felt.
Spencer told us of the people who had been to the Chapel to see what he was doing — and told us that several generals had been there.
He smiled and laughed.
 "How did they like your paintings?" we asked.
 "They were very polite while I was here with them, but they must have boiled and fumed with indignation when they left me," he said, chuckling.
 "But they are powerless to do anything; this chapel was built for my mural paintings and I can do what I like." 
He told us that the paintings on either wall faced each other, and he liked to think they carried on a consultation to themselves.
He said the entrance should not have been in the centre, but a little door should have been built at one side.
So that when one entered one would find the pictures talking to each other and you would enter and listen.
But as it was, when the generals entered they had it all their own presumptuous way.
They should be made to stoop to enter.
Mrs Spencer asked us to tea; they pressed us, so we accepted.
At tea we talked of the artist and the musician.
We spoke of teaching and the child.
And Spencer spoke of the ability to understand an experience with the wisdom of a child plus the older experience of later years.
He said that since he was seven he had kept that childlike outlook and attitude to life and this had enabled him to paint and compose.
When he conceived a painting the composition came of itself, the design, the arrangement, the balance was made with the idea; they came naturally.
It was no teaching or learning of a special trick of composition.
He spoke of experience as being the most important thing.
And again, if he wanted to alter a painting later after its completion, if he did not go back to the first idea and atmosphere of conception, he could never make the alteration a success.
He spoke of intellect and said he thought that the mind must be coloured with inspiration.
He said that intellect took one so far but could not take one the whole way.
The intellect could not be forced further, but something else took its place and led one further — intuition, inspiration, spirit?— this last I echo.
One must be unselfconscious to create.
But to create one must be great in oneself.
One must have experienced deeply, known greatness — seen the light, as he said.
Seen at a great distance off, further than the eye can see.
Into the realm of inspiration, contacted perhaps the Universal Mind.
To the casual observer, Stanley Spencer is an untidy, dirty little man.
Painting makes one's hands and clothes dirty but one's mind and being are lifted afar off into regions past human criticism and complaint.
A meeting with Professor Cizek and Dr Viola in Vienna in 1929
October 11th
Met Professor Cizek at 11.00 am with Dr Viola.
He looked at my work.
I could not understand his remarks except that he often said "schon" of the water colours, "sehr schon" .
He said, so Dr Viola interpreted, I had a real talent for colour, a feeling in the use of it.
I should continue with my water colours.
That was plainly my bent and that I would do well to follow up this line of art rather than branch out into some other road of work.
He said also that my "values" were not good, distance and middle distance and foreground all rather muddled, but that was a matter of study.
He liked the sunshine in the paintings and the way I put the colours down.
He advised me to go to the Academy and work with Professor Dachauer.
This coincides with my own wishes.
As I had told Dr Viola, I was not so interested in the applied arts.
All the drawings Cizek liked were amongst those I had done on my own and not under supervision; which I was glad of.
He was very kind and it was a very different interview with Cizek compared to an English Professor such as Seaby, who might nod or grunt, but rarely say what he thought, either remarks favourable or unfavourable.
Tomorrow I am to go to Professor Dachauer at the Academy at 11.00 with Dr Viola.
Cizek invites me as a guest to attend the Juvenile Art Class on Saturdays, as I had wished.
So far so good, excellent!
I should add that Professor Cizek said continue with oil paintings as well as water colour, but he did not like the flat way of painting as taught at Reading.
What Seaby had said was good, Cizek said, was like a decorator painting a door.
Well, there is the difference of opinion.
1 am keen now to get down to work.
I have been in this city a week today.
I have done hardly any work, except keep this Diary up to date for a week, which is something of a record for me!
October 12th
In the morning I went with Dr Viola to the Academy of Arts and there met Professor Dachauer.
He looked at my work and said I had talent, but that I needed "earnest practice in drawing" , to which I wholly agree: He also said he would be glad to take me as his "chela" but that my name and work must go before the council of professors of the Academy, which meets next Thursday, 17th inst. and that if  they accepted me I could start work on the following Monday, 21st inst.
Professor Dachauer knows Seaby's work.
So this may help.
For Austrian would-be students it is very difficult to enter the Academy as there are too many artists in Austria and too few opportunities to sell pictures, Austria being so poor.
The Austrian students have an entrance examination and only a few are allowed to enter annually.
But for foreigners it is different, but they have to pay three times the Austrian fees.
So now I wait with bated breath.
October 16th
And now for sleep.
I dreamt last night that J.R.T. said "You need not worry; you will be accepted all right at the Academy of Arts." 
I was not very grateful I am afraid, because I should be most surprised if I am not accepted.
It has seemed a certainty to me from the beginning; the decision of the Council is tomorrow.
Basil's visit to Cizek's children's classes
The children pay little or nothing for attendance fees, and only pay according to their parent's means.
The School or class is not supported by the State but two societies help to further the work of Cizek, namely the Junior Red Cross and The Society of Friends.
But for the support of these societies the Cizek school could never have carried out the work that it is doing.
Now to speak of the School and the methods Cizek employs.
It would be well to describe an actual class I attended in Vienna.
When I entered the classroom I found the children, from five to nine years, well at work.
The room was not silent.
There was a happy burble of voices which came from a few children discussing some design they were doing.
It was not that each child was continually talking but every now and then a child would speak to his neighbour or another would leave his place quietly and walk over to another child to speak with him.
This exchange of ideas during the class in no way impeded the work of the children, as these conversations never lasted longer than a few minutes and even if two children spoke together they continued their work.
In the room the radio was playing Hungarian folk dance music and I learned that often while they work music is introduced; as Cizek says, "Rhythm involuntarily turns into work." 
The visitor to the class notes the aliveness and interest of the boys and girls.
There is no suppression there; the children are encouraged to express themselves in their work freely.
What of discipline?
Cizek says: "The only discipline is work." 
Children, if they are used to being treated with respect, will behave accordingly.
A review of his life to date written while undergoing analysis in Vienna, October 1930–June 1931
In writing an auto-biography or the story of my life, or the intimate journals or diary of myself, it would be well perhaps to give a few details concerning my birth; a date or two might add a little dignity also.
The only two dates I have ever been able to remember are the date of my birth and 1066, the year that William the Conqueror first visited England.
My birthday is July 5th, 1904.
I was born in Hampstead at 10.00 pm. on a Tuesday night and my Mother was very glad to see me, because I was her first boy; she had already produced two girls with the help of my Father and as the years rolled on she gave birth to another two boys.
So with a little adding up and subtracting you will see that there were five children in the family and I came in the middle, being the third child.
I am told by my Mother that I was a charming baby; I used to he in the middle of the bed, kick my legs into the air and coo all day long.
Until I was four years old this sort of behaviour continued, then a brother was born and when I saw him, my first frightened question was: "Can he read?" 
When my youngest brother was born and I was between eight and nine years old, my troubles began in earnest.
I was a backward child; I was always being ill with colds, coughs and bilious attacks.
I went to kindergarten school when I was four.
I remember nothing there except a girl in the top class, who was fair-haired and had a bright complexion, and I see her now in my mind's eye outstretched, lying upon her back on the floor.
She was the first girl after my sisters to affect me.
I also remember the house-keeper and his wife — Mr and Mrs Berry — does my mind betray me?
Mrs Berry's nose was like a red berry?
I can also remember playing games and singing "Au  clair de la lune" and marching to the sound of the piano.
Both my sisters were with me at this kindergarten school.
Then when I was eight years old, I was sent to a co-educational school.
I did no work that I can remember — I know I was considered hopeless by my teachers and I was quite ready to believe I  was hopeless — I can quite well remember keeping mice at the back of the classroom and I can remember the smell.
I can remember the woodwork master coming up from behind and clapping his hand heavily upon my back and saying "Now, Basil," but that back clapping nearly killed me; it was a shattering blow and I was a skinnily thin creature.
I remember falling upstairs, carrying a glass test tube and running the glass into my hand.
I still have the scar.
I remember how, when I was a naughty boy as I usually was, there being no corporal punishment, I was led about on a bit of string by my Headmaster, and one day when I was being reprimanded I laughed in the Headmaster's face — I have always been defiant to all who tried to control me.
I only remained two years at this school.
I was then sent to an ordinary preparatory school for boys.
I there soon experienced my first dealings with corporal punishment.
The prefects had the power to cane you on the hand with a ruler.
I was late for "call-over" , and every morning I was duly caned.
The masters, when they punished, instructed the prefects to slog you with a gym-shoe; one prefect would hold you like a trussed chicken and the other would give you six of the best.
When the Headmaster wanted a little exercise, you bent over a chair and got six — twelve with a cane on the backside; if you were hit just below the buttocks on the legs, it hurt more.
The prefects also kicked you, as a rule with the inside of the shoe, but occasionally you felt the toe.
A master might also hit you with a pencil box on the buttocks, if you hadn't learnt your "verbs" and I was once shaken so violently for crossing out a word in my exercise book when I had been told not to, that I nearly fell down with giddiness.
That is fourteen or fifteen years ago.
I was always called stick-in-the-mud by one of my masters.
 "Now then, stick-in-the-mud, decline the verb" amo "" .
Of course I never could.
And on one occasion in the gymnasium, I turned round to look at a boy behind me and the master was there and he smacked me with the flat of his hand as hard as he could.
I nearly fell down and boiled with rage — the more I was hit about, the more obstinate I became.
March 2nd, 1931
This week in bed has given me plenty of opportunity for thought or, to be more exact, time to dream — thought is too impressive a work.
I wrote work instead of word; the analyst would deduce from this, that I am lazy, and admittedly he would be right — I have dreamt of many things both by day and by night.
I have, in my mind, retold my  life, epoch by epoch.
Kindergarten, co-education, prep.
school, corporal punishment, bullying, being bullied, public school, the beginnings of my cultural period, the beginnings of my sketching and my love of music.
Then London and its accompaniment of business life, both in Architectural Metalwork as draughtsman, my occasional visits to the Central School of Arts and Crafts, Southampton Row, rather awful hours in an antique class — a rotten system, antique before life.
Then my Father's business leather merchant — but Interesting talks with my Uncle, Father's brother — I must write him.
Difficulties, perplexities, pelts, wool, hides, etc., horrible, but with a certain unbelievable interest; the American, Jewish, hard, business man at first hand — yes, interesting and disagreeable to me.
Health not good; consultations with specialists; advised to go to Switzerland for six months.
Uncertainties.
Beginnings (very late) of perplexities about life, why, wherefore and where to…
Father suggests I should go to New Zealand for change and practical training in the leather business — six weeks voyage — Doctor in agreement.
I come of age.
I sail for New Zealand.
Sydney brings me in contact with Theosophy; I meet my first love.
I lose my heart and my common sense.
I want to throw up everything and go to India to meet Krishnamurti.
I wire home, for £150, flat like that.
My Father is upset and angry, I fancy — he cables me, in honour bound to continue to New Zealand.
In a fortnight I sail for New Zealand — and She sails for India.
I am in New Zealand for eleven months — I travel everywhere and visit all the freezing works.
I hate it, but I am somebody.
I am my Father's son — I am well treated, but out of my depth.
On the other hand I have Theosophy and I am a staunch supporter.
I join the Liberal Catholic Church; I am thrilled with the colour, the show, the vestments and the power.
I am made Deacon; I escape by a hairsbreadth being made a priest.
Gott sei Dank!!
I visit all the towns where sheep are killed by the thousand.
I travel alone and visit all the most beautiful parts of New Zealand; they are beautiful and varied, from the Canterbury Plains to the Mountain and Lake District, from Invercargill to Auckland — and to the geyser and hot lake districts.
Both Napier and Hastings I visited, the scene of the recent earthquakes.
I loved New Zealand and I was happy there.
I had a holiday and studied five weeks in the Art School, Christchurch.
I made many water colour drawings and my Masters and fellow students were interesting.
I happened upon "The New Era in Education" .
I read an article on Cizek's school in Vienna — the apparent chance of reading that one article has arranged my life since then, until the present moment.
I would become an Art Teacher in  schools for young children…
I sailed for London via Sydney.
What should I do without my eyes?
My eyes are my most beloved possession — Take away not my eyes, if everything else crumbles to nothingness, The eyes are not only the windows of the soul but in them reflect the beauty of life.
I left Sydney on January 20th, 1927.
I arrived in London in deep fog.
Alas, I am still immersed in Fog.
In April I took myself to Reading University and began work in the Art School.
Two years I spent there.
I was too defiant to return to such an art school, so cramped, so bunged up with petty authority.
I received a stupid Certificate in Fine Art, which means nothing to me, but it pleases some.
I came to Vienna and studied the classes of Professor Cizek.
I could not work with him; with children he is a genius, the greatest living Art Educational Genius.
But with those grown to man's estate, I think he fails; he failed with me, or to put it more correctly, I failed with him.
I must be absolutely free to work as I like and I cannot compose in public.
And to draw in the class with the children was impossible for me.
I was much too shy; they could all draw far better than I could.
I studied for one year at the Academy in Vienna and this year finds me working on my own in my own studio and I am being analysed by Dr Wilhelm Stekel.
Where am I?
I do not know.
I am now twenty-six — soon I will be twenty-seven and I have done nothing — but change!
I want to draw and paint — sometimes.
I want to write, always, but I lose all my courage when I read Virginia Wolfe or V. Sackville West or…or…
I adore music, but I will not try that.
I love beautiful things, simple things, but they are the most costly.
I have so little money.
I need beautiful surroundings; I love the country.
Basil's writings during his time at Bembridge School, January 1932 — 1936 January 26th, 1932
I am not teaching at King Alfred School Juniors, I started morning and afternoon, but gave this up at 5/ per day and only teach there mornings.
In the same afternoon I teach at Hurtwood, School, Peaslake.
My second term there.
Hurtwood School is going very well; the children love it.
But at King Alfred it is very different and very difficult.
They don't want to work.
When you can hold or find their interest you are all right, or they are, but if not, hell's afire.
But  it's interesting.
I have fixed up to go to Bembridge School as Art Master, live there, half time work.
Board, lodgings, laundry, room etc. £100 per annum.
Now I'm making 12/6d per week.
May 6th, 1932 — A Problem
I walked this afternoon from my room to the School and in the lane I met a cat carrying a hedge sparrow.
I frightened the cat and down dropped the little bird; it was bleeding from the beak and did not move except its legs in a spasm of pain.
I thought I must kill it immediately — but how?
My shoe was the only hard thing to hand (to foot!)
With all my might I stamped at its head, but missed it by a couple of inches; again I stamped with the same extraordinary result; but with the third stamp I caught the poor little creature and crushed it to pulp, and yet it gave one more thrust with its tiny legs and then lay still.
The cat stood a little way off — watching.
I was miserable.
And then I had time to think.
Was it best to interfere with the cat's instinct to play with its catch — or should I have left nature to her cruelty?
I have come to the conclusion I was wrong.
Live and let live, but don't interfere.
Perhaps the cat was killing to satisfy hunger.
Was I the best judge?
No — I did not know the cat.
This evening, returning by the lane, I met the same cat.
I stood and looked at it and it came and rubbed itself against my leg.
Beside it on the path was a fieldmouse, dead…
May 27th, 1936 — Drawing
The Warden requires the boys to record what they see, particularly in nature —
I want to help them to enlightened self-expression, and to develop their imaginations — to rid themselves of repressions through self-expression.
The one is a very limited exercise — the other will influence their whole lives now and later on, whether they take up painting as a profession, business organisation or tea planting in Ceylon!
There was an occasion when I was umpiring a game of cricket.
The juniors were very earnest and keen cricketers and I always found umpiring a ticklish business as I do not know the rules.
In the course  of the game I gave one boy out, run out, I think it's called.
There was immediate uproar and they all said it was the other batsman who was out.
The row was awful, everyone was shouting at me, while I as umpire was trying to keep my dignity and said "The umpire's decision is final." 
But they shouted, this down so, in desperation and to please them, I altered my verdict to "Both out" .
This caused such a burst of indignation from the players that I drew stumps swearing to myself that I'd never umpire again — and I haven't!
Account of Auxiliary Fire Service bar experiences: January/February, 1941
Written at St Dominic's School Southampton Road, London, N. W. 5
January 31st, 1941
As I sit in the sandbag shelter at 10 o'clock on this cold night on gate watch I have time to contemplate the months that I have spent in the Auxiliary Fire Service.
I must state the condition of my mind and feelings before the war, which startled the world from its satisfied life in September, 1939.
The war started for many of us long before that date.
Most saw it coming and in March, 1939 I knew it was inevitable.
We suffer more in anticipation than in actuality, and this came true for me.
The war affected me chiefly as it affected my personal affairs.
For two years previous to the war I had been painting; before that I was a school master teaching drawing and painting.
Those two years of painting independently were the beginning o life for me.
Then the war loomed up black and sinister; my work was going to be interrupted.
That is what chiefly concerned me.
Yes, I had all the other feelings of distress and fear, I thought of the world at war, I remembered the last war of 1914 — 18 when I was still a schoolboy and I had experienced the air raids on London then.
In March, 1939 I pulled myself together sufficiently; I faced up to realities and joined the Auxiliary Fire Service.
I chose this for several reasons.
In the early part of 1939 I was still a pacifist.
I thought and think that war is an evil abominable thing which gets man no further and only lowers him in his search after truth.
But I saw what was coming.
I knew as we all knew that conscription was inevitable, but I did not want to fight.
I was ready to do my part but I wanted freedom to choose what that part was to be.
I thought I must join  some service which is considered sufficiently hazardous, because when I am conscripted I can say I don't wish to fight but I am ready to do my part in National Service.
I am not concerned in what the next man thinks and does, that is his business but I must do what my own conscience dictates.
So I joined the A. F. 5. and hated it.
The officer I saw when I joined said to me: "Are you keen about the A. F. S.?" 
I think he thought me a pretty unlikely applicant.
I replied: "No.
I'm not keen but I must do something."
So the weeks and months passed and I went to the local fire station once and sometimes twice a week and listened to lectures by firemen on firefighting and war organisation and what different officers wear in undress and fire uniform.
It was a nightmarish existence.
February 19th, 1941: "Enemy Planes Overhead" 
Tonight it is dark and wet.
The "alert" is sounded and a plane flies overhead every five minutes or so — the usual monotonous droning sound of the engines is heard and now and then the pop-pop of the guns and occasionally you feel the sensation of a slight earthquake when a bomb drops —
At any moment a bomb may drop on you…
At any moment the bells may "go down" calling you to a job.
A fire, maybe a small local job, maybe a "stand-by" at some other part of the city.
But the drone of the planes is the noise that frightens.
Up there somewhere is a plane full of bombs and who knows where they will be released.
That is the fear.
There is a whistle which lasts long and then a muffled explosion and the earth or house quakes.
And the greater the capacity of the imagination the greater the emotion to fear.
But the imagination can and must be controlled and concentration on whatever one is employed in at the moment will counteract the natural animal instinct of fear.
Alcohol helps.
It gives one Dutch (why Dutch?) courage and the edge is taken off the senses and one says: "Who cares?" or "I can take it." 
In a company of men one must not give way; it is one's duty not to show fear and if one senses fear in another, automatically one becomes braver.
At a fire well alight the high explosives are dropping freely.
There is no cover.
Shrapnel is falling, must fall.
The guns are ack-acking.
 "What goes up must come down." 
One has one's steel helmet, that is all.
The bombs whistle and fall and explode.
You have a job to do, the pump must work, it's your job to see that it does.
You've a job, you are helping to keep the fire at check, you are helping to extinguish the fire, it's a good necessary job.
All right— you can do it — you must do it.
One night when working on a fire at South Kensington, the pump was ticking over, I was waiting for orders: "Down with the pump, 60 lbs pressure" .
The three other members of the crew had just come back to the pump — we were doing "series pumping" — they had brought me a bottle of beer and I was taking a swig.
There was a plane overhead and the A.-A. guns were firing at it.
There was the whistle of a bomb which got nearer and nearer.
We all four ducked, there was a vivid white flash, the road on which I was crouching split in several directions, deep black crevices, then stuff came down on me and numbed my back and head.
(Finished March 11th) I was covered with debris.
I thought: "I am being buried alive" .
I threw away my bottle of beer.
I was buried alive, the pummelling stopped as suddenly as it had started, I heaved myself up and the earth and muck fell off me.
I turned round and there, six feet away, was the edge of a crater twenty feet across; that gave me a shock.
I staggered round the pump to look for the others.
None of us was hurt badly.
One man hurt his shoulder, one his knee, one had a slight cut on the back and I was only bruised — I felt very elated, glad to be alive, amazed and grateful for our miraculous escape.
But as I thought then and it has proved since, it made a good story — The pump and towing car did not fare so lightly; they caught the blast, we missed it.
But we were able to drive home under our own power.
Since the above experience we four men always go down when we hear the bombs whizz, and perhaps we remember that experience when we hear the plane above droning overhead and we wonder where those bombs will drop this time.
Writing during the war, Basil recalls his days of working at the Euston Road Studio:
I rolled out of bed at eight o'clock and went to the bathroom where I turned on the taps for a hot bath.
I lay in the bath and shaved luxuriously.
But that is looking back to pre-war pre-Blitz days.
I breakfasted at anything between eight-thirty and nine.
Travelling by the tube, I arrived at the studio just before ten.
The model sat from ten till one, with usually fifteen minute intervals at the striking of the hours.
On this particular day the model was a seventeen-year-old negress.
She was a half-caste and had a lovely coffee coloured skin.
At this early age she was still attractive.
It was a standing pose and I had been working at my canvas for a week, my problems were not nearly solved, and the painting still excited me.
The studio was full; most of the students were painting from the model, a few were drawing from still life.
At lunch time half a dozen of us would go to a pub at the corner of Fitzroy Street and Euston Road.
There we talked and ate.
Here we met most of the painters who lived and worked in the neighbourhood, and here many discussions took place.
We returned to the studio after lunch and worked from two to four on another pose.
I was painting a portrait of the negress.
Paper read to New Haslemere Art Society, Surrey, on December 3rd, 1931
 "Professor Cizek and his School of Arts and Crafts for Children" 
I have been asked by your Committee to tell you something of Professor Cizek and his School of Arts and Crafts for children in Vienna, reproductions of whose work can be seen exhibited on these walls.
The ideas in child art education I am going to put to your notice may be new to some.
But Professor Cizek of Vienna has been putting these ideas into practice for the last thirty years, with the results you may see exhibited.
I have been asked to tell you how Professor Cizek gets the results he does from his children.
I think it is well to begin by admitting that the Austrian people, as a whole, have more potential artistic ability than have we the English.
But after making this admission we must go deeper into the question.
If you asked Professor Cizek how he got his results, he would in all probability reply — "I just encourage the children to express themselves freely and only stop bad things from originating." 
And you might ask of him — "What are your methods of teaching?" and he would reply evasively: "I have no methods; I do not teach." 
And one is left mystified,
I went to Vienna and asked these questions and was answered in this evasive manner.
But I persevered, I watched him closely.
I visited  his class weekly for three months.
I went on asking questions.
He has no time for interfering adults, but I was not to be daunted; I stuck to him until I saw for myself that he had no methods and did not teach, or rather, did not impose.
Cizek knows that each child is an individual and must be treated individually.
He has no method, or if we insist on the word, a different method for each child.
When a child comes to Cizek for the first time, Cizek gives him materials, and the child draws what he likes.
Every few lessons the class has a criticism, and the children will criticise each others' work.
Cizek's method of criticism is constructive, never destructive.
Pointing to one picture, he will say: "That picture has a good sense of pattern," another, a good sense of form; this picture has fine movement; that picture is lively and expresses much humour, and so on.
And ii, this manner the child learns.
But Cizek never on any account draws on a child's drawing; that would be a sacrilege.
I should state here that Cizek only takes children nowadays whom he thinks have a certain aptitude for drawing and painting.
There are always children on the waiting list and each year Cizek chooses the most promising pupils for his class.
His choice is made entirely from drawings of the prospective children.
The children range in years from six to fourteen.
Cizek does not teach.
Then, what does he do?
He encourages; he gives the child confidence in himself.
And so the child creates fearlessly.
There is no — "That is wrong" .
— with Cizek.
Cizek says: "Child Art and Adult Art are two completely different forms of expression, and no adult can show a child how to draw because of this important difference." 
And now let us consider for a minute what we mean by Child Art, and what difference there is between child and adult forms of expression.
Firstly, Child Art is the expression of an unsophisticated mind.
Not of a mind already steeped in convention and tradition.
The child has his own view point and draws what he knows to be.
While the adult draws what he sees.
For instance, many children when they draw a house for the first time will do their utmost to draw the four sides and the roof of the building all in one drawing, and they generally succeed in portraying three sides and the roof of the house, all laid out flat.
Tile fourth side is usually too much for them.
Well, from Cizek's point of view, it is much better that they should draw as they know to be, than for him to show them by means of perspective how to draw the house as it is seen by the camera's eye.
As the children grow older and see other pictures, they will all too  soon learn how to draw in the conventional manner.
I have been asked to tell you how Cizek's children get such good results in composition, movement, colour, etc. without method in teaching.
I think we are too ready to look upon the child as a nonentity.
Too ready to think that to get any good qualities out of the child, we must first put qualities Into the child's mind, by means of teaching.
We have no faith in the child's innate capacity.
Here is the great mistake; here all the trouble begins; we teachers are much too fond of teaching and imposing our Preconceived and traditional ideas upon the child; too ready to give advice; to show the child how to do it; to teach and improve, always from our own standards, our own conventions.
But the child has his own ideas, and is only too ready to express them by himself if we would but allow him to.
But "No" says the layman, if we do not teach the child, he will never learn to draw.
That is the fallacy.
We can teach the young child to draw, as we draw.
But, why?
The child has his own art.
It is much more difficult not to teach.
It is much easier to show a child how to draw, how to compose a Picture, how to use colour, than it is to allow the child full self expression.
Cizek's results are arrived at by immense patience, by understanding and affection for the child, by encouragement, by fostering interest when needed, by gently resisting bad things from originating.
What I want to show you this afternoon, is that the power of the child's imagination is a factory which we have but to encourage, not to teach.
Once we have realised this, the Possibilities of the child as artist are immense.
It may be, and often is, that when the child reaches adolescence, his interest for drawing and painting may diminish, and he may take up some other form of self expression, but his early adventures in Painting will colour the whole of his later life.
And into every beautiful.
occupation he may enter, he will bring his knowledge of things beautiful.
Basil's Notes for a Teachers' In-Service Course at Hoyland Teachers' Centre February 1953
A Course for Primary School Teachers
1st Talk — Introduction
I will not attempt to tell you what art is — many far more clever people than I am have failed to define it.
But I will tell you that the subject we call Art on the time-table is badly named.
There we are with that simple three lettered word Art.
What are we as teachers to do about it?
You might say "I am no artist" , or "I can't draw a straight line" , or "I haven't drawn or painted since I left school." .
 "How can you expect me to teach art?" 
Bluntly I don't.
But I think I can help you to know what to do about it.
And this is what I am going to try and do on this course.
I am going to offer you an approach to the subject, which you can all work out in your own way, a way that will suit you.
I am not going to tell you exactly what to do, what subjects to give.
I am not going to give you a series of "how to do it" lessons.
I shall discuss some of the problems with you.
I shall suggest some aspects of this very far-reaching subject, which has such a little enigmatical name.
As far as this subject is concerned and the age of child you are teaching, it does not matter very much if you can draw or paint or not.
In this subject you are not faced with the problem of telling or showing children how to draw and paint.
This they must find out for themselves.
But you can create the right environment: the right relationship between you and the children.
And this is very important.
As teachers you can direct them along fruitful lines of approach and discourage them from fruitless ones.
And about this too I hope to help you during this course.
One of the great difficulties a teacher has is to recognise a good drawing or painting from a bad one — or to know when a child has achieved through his effort a simple personal expression.
By discussing children's work and looking at it together I hope to help you to learn to discriminate between the good and the precocious.
Just as the present way of teaching Physical Education has changed, so has the teaching of Art.
P.E.
is no longer a series of drills for the body, it is natural movements of the body which exercise children's limbs in much more rhythmical ways and each individual child is allowed to  develop according to his individual needs.
It is more than this, it develops his mind, his emotion, and it helps him to express his feelings.
All this is a part of character building.
And perhaps this is the Arts' greatest contribution to the education of the child; it helps him develop character and personality.
For too long we have taught him only necessary things both for his mind and his body, but we have sometimes forgotten his spirit or soul.
The expressive part of his nature.
[( "The inspirational part" ) Miss May says].
All aspects of education are necessary to develop a whole personality and every child has a whole personality, even if it is hard for us to see this at times.
Education thrives through enjoyment of the different subjects.
I think you could truly say that education cannot thrive without enjoyment.
And when children enjoy, they are absorbed, and this absorption is important and necessary too.
Another thing the subject can give is the greater enjoyment of the world around, wherever we are.
This too often is not seen.
We appreciate the dirt and muck and don't see further.
Last week I came to this school to discuss the course with the Head.
What room I should need, whether he had water pots, etc.
But I looked out of the window as I spoke to him.
And I wondered at the beauty of what I saw.
I know the muck because I live in it myself.
But Yorkshire is one of the most beautiful counties.
Not only north of Leeds, but here in Hoyland — if you can see.
And this is one of our jobs, to let children see the beauty of their environment.
But do we give them the chance?
Do we let them look at it — contemplating — don't we hustle them all the time?
Giving them work to do or organised games — so that they have no time to stand and stare…but we must help them to see, to look, to observe.
And this is one of the things we rarely do.
And I think one of the things we can — let's go out for a walk.
Let's look.
It is no use giving subjects such as "Pixies on a toadstool" because the child must needs go to a picture book for this.
A second-hand experience.
We want to make him think, experience, translate, for himself.
This subject doesn't give him a chance to do so.
So be careful about the subjects you give.
But this too we will discuss during the course.
Now let me return to you as teacher, because you are a very important part of the art lesson.
The teacher can make or mar the lesson, and your interest in what the child is doing and how he is doing it is all important.
Your lively, mental and imaginative participation, your encouragement and helpful and constructive criticism, is what the child needs.
And your knowledge and understanding of the child counts for a lot.
If you use the art lesson  to check school meal monies, or mark your books, and leave the children to get on, you will not be teaching this subject well; and the children will suffer and so will their work.
A teacher in the art lesson with children is rather like a conductor with his orchestra.
The conductor does not show them how to play, he probably can't play more than one or two instruments, but he understands the purpose of each instrument and its usefulness.
The orchestra cannot play without him.
We could take this illustration too far — but I would like you to look upon yourselves as conductors, setting the tempo of the class, listening and looking for every discordant note — and for every good one — helping by encouragement — and asking questions, for instance "Are you working as hard as you could?" 
The Art lesson is not a time when the child — or the teacher — can relax.
You must both use your minds, your feelings, and you must both think and feel, imaginatively, and creatively.
For you, teacher, it is not just beating out the time, or keeping the class in order; you must show a lively interest and response.
Let us return once again to the enjoyment of the subject.
How can we ensure that children will get the best out of this subject?
We must give them suitable materials to work with — suitable tools — brushes, paper, paints, etc.
We must encourage them to use paint intelligently and give them suitable colours.
And to stimulate their observation we must give them suitable subjects, within their personal experience — and we must see that they get the experience of looking and observing the visual world around them.
A good art lesson must stretch the mind and imagination of the children all the time, just as it must stretch your minds and imagination.
You will not be sitting at your desk, while the children are getting on somehow.
You will be moving round the room from child to child because every child is doing something different, different as an individual — if he is not it is perhaps your fault.
You will get the lazy child who copies what the next child is doing and these copiers must be helped to think for themselves.
You must persuade Jennifer to think and imagine for herself.
And at the first sign of her doing so you must be ready to praise her.
Encouragement at the right moment is as water to a thirsty plant.
The subject of art has for too long been considered by many teachers as a frill,— there it is on the time-table, a compulsory subject; some schools give it a period a week, some a double period, and some even more.
Some junior school Heads think it is a waste of good scholarship studying time.
But I think this is short-sightedness.
If you look upon Art as a frill, it is pretty certain you are not letting it play its proper part in the school.
Art is not just another subject  which must be taught, it is a part of every other subject taught.
It affects or can affect some subjects more than others.
It can also enliven many subjects and you can use a child's interest and enjoyment of drawing and Painting to carry through to his enjoyment of another subject.
Let me illustrate this.
Nearly every child if properly taught loves to draw and paint.
But some children are slow to express their ideas in writing.
We will take John.
He loves drawing and painting but he finds expressing his ideas in writing very difficult.
We know he is interested in trains; the railway runs at the back of his house, and he has often watched the trains and he knows them well.
We ask him to draw a train standing before a signal.
He does so, full of interest in expressing what he has seen and knows.
Now we could ask him to write about what he has drawn, to tell as much as he knows about the trains that run at the back of his house.
We can ask him some questions to start his mind thinking and remembering.
"Are the trains mostly passenger or goods?
What freight do these carry? coal? farm machinery? or what?"
And so on.
His interest in his subject carries over, first into drawing and painting because he enjoys this, then on into writing about it, because he is writing about something he is interested in and at first we must not be too concerned about his writing or his spelling or his grammar.
If he is writing down his ideas and expressing his experiences this is a lot and we must give him his due and his head.
This way of teaching can work the other way about.
The child who likes expressing his ideas in words, but who is not so happy drawing and painting, can be asked to write about an interest.
And then to illustrate it.
The interest in the one form of expression can be carried over into the other.
Your intelligent interest and participation as teacher must be there.
Your words of encouragement and pleasure in what he has done.
Nature study is another subject which lends itself readily to drawing and painting.
A child will learn far more about a dandelion if he has to draw it because to draw it he must observe it very carefully and the drawing of it will implant the shape and colour and texture firmly in his mind, even though his drawing may not be very good or life-like.
If he copies from another drawing in a book the translation from the three-dimensional plane to the two-dimensional drawing will have been done for him, so he will not have had to observe as carefully and think as much as he would have had to do if he had made his own translation.
And even in Arithmetic, art plays its part.
Perhaps you don't realise this?
At school and even now, I cannot add or subtract or  divide easily, but I can write clear figures — this is drawing; and I can arrange my figures neatly in line, and one sum next to the other, i.e. design.
And it is through my understanding of drawing, control of the pencil, and study of design, that I can at least set out my figures well.
You will be able to see for yourselves how drawing and painting can affect other subjects: Religious Education, Domestic Science, History, etc.
And as you teach all subjects in the Junior School, you will be able to let Art enliven all your work.
Art means far more than just learning to draw and paint.
It is a mental and imaginative experience; it is awareness, and it may express itself in drawing and painting, or it may express itself in writing, or in moving, or in singing or in playing.
Two children walk across the hall, they both move, they both put one foot before the other, but one walks clumsily, the other co-ordinates all his faculties — he has balance, and there is a rhythm in his step, there is a lightness.
He has poise.
This can be instinctive and it can also be perfected and developed.
There is art in all of us, in one form or another, but it must be discovered and developed, and this is one of our purposes as teachers to discover the art in children and develop it.
Now for the ways and means
Show some powder colour work
Discuss powder colour arrangement of room for work
Why powder colour is a good medium
Colours to use and why
Bun tins, dry colour and why
Mixing tins or saucers — big enough
Brushes — sizes, type, care of
Paint rags — paper sorts
Water pots, large enough, change water
Pails in room
Demonstrate using powder colour
Experimenting with colour
Using the brush and the paint imaginatively
Thinking of the quality, colour and texture of the thing to be painted — not just the colour
1.
First mix me a nice light green.
Experiment with the colour — I will tell you that white gives extra body to your colour, extra covering power.
Mix the colour nice and thick — not watery — only enough water to make the powder paint.
2.
Now I want you to imagine you have been digging up the garden, ready for planting.
Try and mix the colour of the earth and suggest its rough crumbling quality.
Imagine yourself breaking up the earth with your hands; imagine its feel.
Now paint about 6″ square of it.
3.
Now you are walking by a field where the corn has just been cut, and you see the stubble left.
In between the stubble are weeds, and grass and earth.
The tops of the stubble are hard and sharp and you can see these little bits sticking up, firm and short.
Bend down and put your palm out on to them — "take care, they will prick" .
Try and express in paint what you have felt and seen in your memory and imagination.
4.
Now look up to the sky.
Do you see those billowy clouds overhead?
It's sunny, and the clouds have form and shape, and underneath or away from the sun they are in shadow, greys and even a touch of brown.
Remember what a cloud is — it's vapour intangible — see that your cloud has that quality.
5.
Pick up a chunk of coal.
It will dirty your fingers — you can wash them — feel it, its sharp edges.
Look at it carefully.
What colour is it?
Black?
Look again.
What do those shiny surfaces do?
Yes, they reflect light.
What else?
What is coal?
Layer on layer of carbonised vegetable matter.
See if you can express the hardness and brittleness of coal, the black ruggedness of it.
6.
Finally think of one surface for yourself, and I and your neighbour will try and guess what it is.
Next week: probably using powder colour in a subject.
2nd Talk — Subjects
Last week in my talk I tried to give you an introduction to the subject we call art.
This week I want to talk about subjects.
We talk or hear a lot about free expression.
What does this mean?
Allowing the child to muck about, or does it mean free to express himself in his own childlike way, and not ape the adult's way.
I think the latter.
And also free to express his own visual experiences, in a suitable medium, ii, a way understandable to the child.
There must be progression.
The child can and will learn to express himself better.
He will learn by practice to control the tools he uses and the media that he works in.
These are the skills, and the mastery over the  material but he must also progress in his understanding and widen his experience by looking.
In what ways can he do this and what should we give him to do?
It is often a problem for the teacher.
What shall they do today?
 "Draw anything you like" is too vast a possibility for most children.
You get the child who just sits and can't think what to do.
You get the child who plays for safety and draws what he has drawn before.
You get the child who draws what he knows he can draw well.
So you get no progress or widening of horizons, or new experiences.
So mostly it is wise to direct the child to the subject.
Subjects can be divided up into sub-headings: 1.
Imaginative 2.
Direct observation 3.
Near memory 4.
Long memory 5.
Illustration.
Let us take these in turn.
The imaginative subject — these are the subjects I find most often given in school today.
You will remember last week I suggested "Pixies oil Toadstools" was a bad subject because the child must go to a second-hand source for his inspiration or idea.
It is not likely that he has seen a pixie for himself.
 "Under the sea" is another subject given.
This does at least make him think of the kinds of life to be found in the sea.
Different kinds of fish, seaweeds, sand, rocks on the sea bed, shells, and perhaps an octopus.
But this is a very difficult subject to execute.
There is the sea, and the problem of how to express it.
Some teachers solve the problem for the child and say: "Do the sea first, let it dry, and then paint the fish" .
This I think is bad teaching and interference which is quite inexcusable.
The problem must be solved by the child and there is no right way of doing this, or if you like, several right ways, and the child must find his own right way.
I would suggest that looking through the side glass of an aquarium would be a better subject than under the sea.
Because an aquarium is usually nearer to the experience of a child than under the sea can be.
Most schools, I am glad to say, have aquariums and goldfish, water snails, weeds, stones, shells are to be observed carefully and often and the children can then create a picture from a real experience, not necessarily from direct observation, but with the experience near at hand for reference when needed.
From the drawing or painting of a real aquarium one could go on to an imagined aquarium and allow the children to invent fishes of their own design and colour, and other water creatures, shells, etc.
This kind of subject I think is admirable and much to be encouraged.
Some children will produce drawings and paintings of careful observation of what is in the tank, others will use the tank as a starting off point and they will create and add to their visual experience other imagined ones, and this too is good and to be encouraged.
Remember please that it is the effort of doing and thinking about and trying to find the means of expressing an idea which is most important in art education — not the finished result.
This is worth considering.
We do not want every child to become an artist — heaven forbid, but we do want every child to grow and be enriched by his imaginative experiences, and the study and observation and attempts at expressing these, in colour and form, is one way for him to do this.
The imagination must be fed; we should not expect children to go on drawing from imagination or memory without directing his attention to the things he does and sees, and tries to imagine.
This leads us on to OBSERVATION: so that quite a lot of time should be given over to looking.
Perhaps you bring to school one morning some daffodils.
First you look for a vase to put them in — and remember, Head teachers, quite nice plain vases can be obtained quite cheaply at County Supp lies.
Let us examine the daffodil carefully together.
Let us note the colour of the flower — yellow — is all the flower the same yellow?
Let us examine its shape, the shape of the flower, the shape of the stalk; is it round?
Ideally every child should have a flower to examine and observe carefully.
But this would be too expensive.
But if there could be one flower to every four children you could manage with ten or a dozen flowers.
Let us look at the end of the stalk and look for colour and pattern.
Look at the little brown shrivelled sheath where the flower grows from the stalk.
Now the texture of the petals and the shape, the edges of the petals.
This might take three or four minutes of careful observation.
Subject: "Daffodils in a vase" .
Imagine the background.
Let us suppose we had an art lesson this morning, when it was cold and frosty but fine.
Let us go out of doors, put on our coats of course.
Let us go and look at that tree.
We are always needing to draw trees.
Let us examine it carefully.
Starting perhaps at the bottom where the trunk comes out of the earth or grass.
Are there any roots showing?
Does the trunk come straight out of the ground with parallel or straight sides, larger at the bottom?
Now let your eyes climb up the trunk to the branches, slowly, watching all the time.
Does the trunk go straight up, the same width or is it tapering?
Now let us see how the branches grow from the main trunk; at what angle do they grow from the trunk?
And again in what directions do the branches and smaller twigs grow?
And all the time what is happening to the size and girth of the branches as we look up higher?
Again we can observe the bark and its colour and texture.
Is the bark naturally as black as it is now, or has the dirt from the air soiled it?
Is there any lichen or moss growing on the trunk, and which side of the tree is this, on the sunny side, or on the north?
Now let us stand back and see the main shape and character of the tree.
Are there any dead  leaves on the ground which will tell us the kind of leaf which will soon clothe the tree?
Here in five minutes we have combined an art and nature study experience.
And when we next want to paint or draw a tree we will have some definite knowledge of one species of tree.
And the main character of most trees.
These experiences of directed observation are most necessary and valuable and interesting and not half enough of this kind of thing is done usually.
And this can obviously be done by any intelligent teacher who is not an artist.
In the summer we can go out and draw from direct observation, but in winter it is too cold, but when we get back to the classroom we can draw from memory the tree we have just examined and put down on paper as much as we have learned and remembered about the tree, its form, its colour, and its texture.
This is what I have called Near Memory.
We could also write down other things about what we have noticed which would be better expressed in words than in paint.
Other things we can observe carefully, and then draw, such as a child, how his limbs grow, or his head, to look and see where for instance his eyes come in relation to the top of his head and the bottom of his chin.
Where his ears are placed, etc.
Have you a stuffed bird or squirrel or stoat in a glass case?
Let us get it down from the shelf for close scrutiny.
Let's make some close-up studies of it — say a group of six children.
The others may be getting on with something else, then another six likewise.
Now let us put away the case and draw the squirrel, and imagine the background where the squirrel might be.
This is near memory, and imaginative.
Long Memory is of things seen or experienced longer ago, not immediately after an observation lesson.
When you tell a story or describe an experience the children should illustrate, you must be careful to give a suitable subject.
The poem which leads you on to too many different visual experiences is very hard to illustrate.
It is better to use a poem which elaborates one visual experience and not a whole series of visual pictures.
Therefore I would say a poem such as "I wandered lonely as a cloud" is not a good subject for one picture — because the poet can jump around over such a vast expanse and bring image after image to mind:
That floats on high over vales and hills Beside tile lake beneath the trees Along the margin of a bay Ten thousand saw I at a glance
Poor child — he can see them in his mind's eye, but how can he express them in paint?
The Waves beside them danced For oft when on my couch I lie
So it is too much.
It is a lovely series of images that Wordsworth brings to mind, but it is not a suitable subject to be translated into a picture, and certainly not for a child.
Much more consideration should be given to the environment than is done, for subject matter for pictures.
(Tell them about the class who studied one street in their town and all contributed to one long painting).
Go for a walk when it's warmer.
If it's not too far from your school, to St Peter's Parish Church.
It's lovely there; find a good vantage point and make rough pencil sketches of the church and trees around and the shapes of tombstones, etc., or go into the cemetery and draw that curious old tower which commands such an extensive view.
Then come back into the classroom and work out a picture, using your sketches to help give you information.
Or go where you can see the local pit, and see if this isn't an exciting subject to paint.
Subject for this evening "an owl" .
Get from French,-"sitting on a branch, in the moonlight — no moon wanted, only its light on the leaves.
Select paper you want.
Powder colour.
3rd Talk — Media
Consider the size of paper.
This will be determined by the size of tool you use.
If painting in powder colour and using a large sized brush you will want a reasonable size of paper.
Don't forget though, that powder colour can be done on small paper if the brush used is small in size.
Extracts from letters from family, friends, colleagues and teachers after Basil died in November 1966
From a letter written so that I could read it to Basil before he came home from hospital:
He has in my view done as much for the West Riding as anyone with whom I have worked.
He has played a significant though unsung part in the primary school revolution which has taken place in this country over the last ten to fifteen years.
He started things off in South Kirby years ago and they have gone ahead ever since.
He has been unerring in his choice of assistants and from all this wisdom the county has benefited enormously.
For me personally he has done untold good.
He has educated me in the best sense of the word and I have trusted him as I think I would trust no one else of my own sex.
I miss him greatly and I hope we shall have him back with us soon.
Sir Alec Clegg, Chief Education Officer, West Riding of Yorkshire.
November 1966
I never ceased to be conscious of his very rare and precious honesty, kindness, sensitivity and sincerity.
It was for these qualities that he was so widely and profoundly respected and liked by the many many people whose love and sympathy will I am sure prove to you now an enormous uplift and support.
Goodness and integrity such as his will not pass without widespread grief.
Robin Herbert Smith, brother-in-law, December 1966
I know that Basil saw no simple future at the end of human life because we talked of this last summer; neither can I. But I do believe that we live in a world whose climate of thought and feeling is created by human beings, many of whom have lived before us, often but little recognised.
Your children will inherit a world in which Basil's influence has made a great contribution.
I am very grateful to have  known him, and enjoyed some of that contribution; I shall not live long enough to enjoy all of it.
I cannot think what the Riding, but not only the Riding, will be without him.
Christian Schiller, December 1966
I have been thinking about my nearly twenty years friendship with him and especially what it was that he gave me in terms of belief and understanding of the job.
Every teacher probably derives more from the first teacher with whom he works than any other and I have no doubt in my mind that Basil was by far the most influential person in my first years as a teacher.
His absolute conviction at that time, reinforced by an extraordinary personal charm and magnetism gave me just the right insight and guidance that I needed.
I was sorry that he went to the West Riding after only two terms, although this made me stand on my own feet quickly, which was of itself of value.
It is difficult to assess what one learns from a good teacher — I was so greedy to learn that one cannot always separate what was given from what one has seized upon and made one's own.
It is for this reason that the keen student is always less than generous to his teacher.
I thought that Basil appreciated more than most the essential magic of the child's experience of the world and the expression of this in art — not that he ever said this, but his own manner as a teacher always implied that this was a special, essentially elevated kind of activity — but one in which everyone had the capacity to join.
Sometimes I thought that what was so outstanding was how he taught rather than what he taught, but then one realised that the two were inseparable in their effect, that this was the quality of the medium who spoke to each one of us who was present but who did not selfishly intervene.
Unlike so many brilliant teachers I thought that Basil was completely altruistic — this was born out of his great generosity.
Dennis Davis, who worked with Basil at Berkhamstead School and later as his assistant Art Adviser, January 1967
I have a great thankfulness for having known him and worked with him and learnt so much from him, and somehow I feel we'll always have him with us in his paintings and the West Riding countryside and schools.
It seems to me a definite kind of immortality both to be  remembered with great affection and to give that feeling (which I and so many friends have) that we can't believe he has died.
To have such a strong and lovable personality seems far more persistent and imperishable than anything physical — if you see what I mean.
Ruth Mock, December 1966
He was so strong a character — and he meant so much to me — that although it's many many years since I worked with him, he was in a way always there — it has been a strength in reserve — that there was Basil if you needed him.
Basil was a very potent influence on me — I learnt a great deal from him about art and the teaching of art — indeed, more than from any other single person.
He was difficult sometimes — maddening sometimes — but he had, I always thought, a curious innocence of character so that you couldn't be angry with him for long— and I found him always stimulating to be with — talkative, bursting with ideas and comments — and for a great deal of the time — just plain good fun to be with.
I have often missed him, often felt that if only I could talk over a particular problem with him he would help me to see the way.
His painting gives us much pleasure — he did splendidly to find his way so well with his painting — and I am sure that he must have responded to being appreciated for his work as well as for his teaching.
Dick Field, December 1966
I was vividly aware of the far reaching and vast contribution that Basil had made to education, to values, to the good influences of the Authority on teachers and children, colleges, schools and students, and I am of the privileged few who were able to work with Basil in the early days of struggles, so I know how much, how very much he did — So I felt that at least he had fulfilled — as nearly as we can ever judge — so much of his life's work even to the developments in his own personal creative medium — and this must be a comfort to you as well as to us who knew him as a friend and colleague.
My thoughts, back here in the familiarity of Woolley Hall are all happy ones of Basil and of you both here.
Diana Jordan, Warden of Woolley Hall December 1966
I shall remember him for his magnificent work in the West Riding through many years, and for his naughty and teasing sense of humour which so often cheered us up in the dismal surroundings of the Hemsworth Division and places like that, and which one realised hid a most sensitive and affectionate personality.
I am so very glad to have one of his lovely paintings and feel proud to have worked with such a gifted man.
Elma Casson, Principal of Lady Mabel College of Physical Education.
Formerly a fellow adviser, December 1966
It isn't necessary to tell you that the West Riding owes its position in the vanguard of educational thinking and practice to a few people, of whom Basil was one of the most distinguished, and the work he has done will still go on.
But we shall miss his warmth, and his originality and his concern for the schools, the teachers and the children.
Jean P. Imrie, West Riding School Inspector and Colleague, December 1966
Few people can appreciate Basil's contribution for none of the present generation started with him in the County, and none of those who have come and gone over the years has ever had the same influence with the teachers for he had a diffidence and a modesty which helped then, a lot.
Hugh Armstrong, Educational Psychologist and Colleague, December 1966
From a tribute written for teachers.
He joined the service of the Authority in 1947.
Since that time Art has developed and flourished remarkably in the West Riding, and instead of the lurid paintings of twenty years ago we now have sensitive work stimulated by experience of the environment.
In this development, the world of natural things — the making and conservation of which concerns us in Rural Studies — has been the key to the inspiration which Basil Rocke gave us.
He used it in encouraging  teachers to give children the freedom to discover themselves.
The first startling results which came from his methods at South Kirkby Junior School will long be remembered.
I have worked with Basil Rocke over the years and have done this willingly knowing full well that Rural Studies has so much in common with Art.
Both are bound up with the awareness and sensitivity aroused by looking at a flower or a tree; an insect or a bird; the environment in which they live.
What has pleased me is the way in which the living material of Rural Studies is so avidly used in Art nowadays, not just in primary schools, but in secondary schools, too.
Basil realised that there was a whole lot more to education than training for livelihood with its over-emphasis on examinations.
Children must also learn to live.
Art and Nature are keystones in this learning, and they concern enjoyment and appreciation rather than examinations.
If we wish children to develop awareness and sensitivity, Art and Nature must ramify their schooling from their early days.
The life and work of Basil Rocke was remembered at a service of thanksgiving at Long Preston Parish Church last December.
This little church, beautiful in its simplicity of stone was even more beautiful as the bright winter sunshine flooded through the windows.
The singing of children, the tributes of colleagues, will always be remembered.
We sang "For the beauty of the earth" .
A fitting tribute to a man who opened the eyes of children — and their teachers.
H. Day, Rural Science Adviser, West Riding of Yorkshire.
I didn't know Basil very well, but I liked him so much.
He used to come down to school in the afternoon sometimes, to stay a while talking generally, and I found his visits very helpful.
He had the great gift of making you feel confident in your own ability to do things, and I know he did wonders for the West Riding children.
I shall always remember that self deprecating smile and ironic phrase which I liked so much.
Peter Snape, Head Teacher, December 1966
I first knew Mr Rocke some twelve years ago when on a course at Woolley Hall.
Since first meeting him I learned to admire and respect him for his sincerity, humanity, integrity and his delightful sense of humour.
I was more than delighted at the great success he  achieved with his exhibition at Cliffe Castle Art Gallery, a success which was richly deserved for the poetic quality and atmosphere of his highly individual work.
In the sphere of school work I believe that the high standards of work now being achieved in West Riding Schools are due in very large measure to Mr Rocke's influence.
I owe him much in this regard and shall always be grateful for the interest and encouragement he gave to me on his visits to our school, in particular the visit he paid only a year ago when he addressed my staff and helped them all by his understanding and the depth of his practical knowledge and experience.
John 5.
Bell, Head Teacher, December 1966
I shall always be grateful to Mr Rocke for his ready help and understanding during my early days at Thurnscoe.
His deep sincerity helped me to face the future there.
I always admired his wonderful modest way when running a course at Woolley Hall.
Even people like me became more self-confident in Art when he was the teacher.
Be sure, his influence on those around him will continue.
Mary Clarkson, Head Teacher, December 1966
I shall not forget how your husband helped a new and inexperienced Head to see what was wrong with the school's Art Room, helped also in pressing in the right quarter, for its improvement — all of which resulted in a much-needed tonic for the Art teaching in the school.
There must be very many such incidents in which his influence has made itself felt in the West Riding; and many staff and children who, without knowing it, have cause to be grateful for his work for them.
Miss M. Lorna Howarth, Head Teacher, December 1966
I always felt that Basil was a very shy, warm hearted man with a special sort of honesty and I am glad that I knew him.
Reg Boulton, Teacher, December 1966
When I came to the Riding in 1960 I had been teaching in Leeds  for five fairly empty years.
That I became a more understanding teacher was very much due to Basil and the tradition which he had established.
— But it is for his gift of sympathy and understanding for the teachers who worked with him which far exceeded his obligation that I shall largely remember him.
Brian Waters, Teacher, December 1966
He was the first friend I made in the West Riding, when we were both new to the cold Yorkshire wastes.
His friendship was a great comfort to me in those bleak days.
Walter Jones, December 1966
I can never forget how he used to come over in the evening from Bembridge School to sit with me after my son died of tuberculosis at the age of twenty-seven, only eight months after his marriage.
Often silent and quietly studying a portfolio of my daughter's childish drawings, I was aware of his compassion and deeply grateful for it.
Mrs Winifred Fontana, January 1967
Extract from Bembridge School Magazine, Spring Term, 1967
Basil Rocke was the elder brother of Niel Rocke and Colin Rocke, both of whom were boys at school, although he himself did not come here.
He joined the staff of the School in the summer of 1932 to help with the art teaching and he was more specifically attached to the Junior School.
When "Reggie" Hughes left, he took over the full teaching of art ii, the school.
His lively approach, his own use of clean line and colour and his regard for composition opened the eyes of his pupils to a new power of expression.
His classes ranging the nearby countryside when the weather was suitable, found subjects for treatment in pencil, water colour, pen and ink treatment, and the summer exhibitions showed how much he had influenced his classes.
He left the School in, 1936.
Basil Rocke had a very puckish sense of humour and wryness which veiled a deep kindliness.
He was no respecter of persons or institutions or ideas just because they were vested with a brief  authority, and nothing gave him more pleasure than to prick the bubble of pretension.
Probably much of his success as a teacher sprang from this, for the young greatly enjoyed his moments of iconoclasm, even when it was carried on to the cricket field where he had no knowledge of and certainly no respect for the laws of the game, as a current Member of Parliament may remember.
But perhaps the picture that will remain in the minds of the few now here who knew him will be that of a long, thin figure folded into the driving seat of a small, fast, bright red sports car, his hair billowing wildly, his eyes crinkling through large, horn-rimmed spectacles and his mouth twisted into a mocking, sardonic grin.
It was the picture he loved to give and it concealed all that he really was.
I didn't know Basil very much but I shall always remember with joy and gratitude that painting course at Grantly Hall — what fun it was.
And what I most remember is the wonderfully happy way that you and he taught together — each taking up when the other left off so freshly and amusingly.
It was one of the best experiences of my life.
Peg Higgens (Binyon), December 1966
The last time he called on us after his exhibition at Keighley he seemed a new man, with a delight in having found himself in his painting and amazement that it also gave pleasure to so many others.
Meryl Olive, December 1966 
Recollections of Basil written in 1987/88
The inescapable and undeniable fact, among many that can be remembered, was his insistence and overriding concern for the highest standards of art and craft work at all levels in the West Riding.
The levels of expectation of the advisers and teachers under his guidance achieved memorable and wide-ranging results which, at that time, set the county apart in forward looking educational developments.
His influence will always remain with us.
Donald Barton Wood, Art Adviser.
Basil was quite uncompromising about high standards in Art and required a lot from his teachers, but was encouraging to beginners.
I remember the near panic with which I set about trying to paint at that first Bingley course when we were all made to experience work in another field than our own.
After struggling with one of Ruth's imaginative scenes, I was so relieved when Basil let me attempt to paint a spray of wheat and barley stalks that I almost began to enjoy myself when he made some encouraging remark about my very tentative effort!
Basil used to tease us about movement and chuckle at our claims for its fundamental importance in the education of young children.
But beneath his flippancy was a real sympathy for what we were trying to do and an appreciation of the common aims we shared for work in the schools.
I always enjoyed talking with him both when he was serious and when he would suddenly switch to gentle ridicule with an infectious laugh.
Sometimes he would drift off into some reverie or gaze at something which struck his artist's eye.
I remember lunching with him in that miserable dining-room in Wakefield and seeing him lost in contemplation of the "beautiful way in which the gravy formed a curve" on his plate — at least that was what he said he saw when I asked him!
Alas, I was only just beginning to be visually aware, but to the extent to which I have grown in such awareness over the years I believe it was Basil and Ruth who started to make me look and see.
Those lucky teachers who came under Basil's guidance were helped to be more creative themselves and to bring out creativity in their children with the amazing results which we saw in the West Riding schools.
I found Basil a shy and rather quiet man who had a deep sense of fun under his quiet exterior.
We were all very fond of him and felt just a little protective towards him!
Elma Casson, Principal Lady Mabel College and Adviser, January 1987
Basil Rocke did not care for H.M.I.5!
But when he realised that we both wanted to do all we could to encourage the best art education for the pupils in the West Riding schools the barriers were down and we became friends.
In fact he and his wife Rosemary were extremely kind to me when they lived in South Yorkshire and later when I stayed with then, in North Yorkshire whilst working in that area.
Basil was a very sensitive artist, man and Art Adviser.
He was kind, sympathetic and understanding, even if he was slightly reserved.
He was always ready to help anybody and in this he was greatly assisted by Rosemary.
The three things that I remember most clearly about Basil were, firstly, his great interest in the development of children's powers of observation, to help them with their aesthetic expression.
Secondly, the popular and extremely helpful courses which he organised at Woolley Hall, the West Riding Teacher Centre.
And thirdly, the care and trouble he took to build up a splendid and lovely collection of contemporary, original works of art, to be displayed in schools.
It was a very sad day for me when I visited Basil in a Harrogate hospital, when I knew that I would, probably, never see him again.
His tragic death shortly afterwards was a great blow to me and his colleagues, and the West Riding Education Committee was deprived of an outstanding Adviser.
Thomas Corbin, K.M.I.January 1987
I first met Basil forty years ago.
I had come down from London looking for a job.
It was my first attempt at this and I did not know quite what to expect.
I wasn't hopeful when I turned up, alone, for interview at Berkhamstead School, for jobs then were scarce.
Basil looked seriously through my work.
It was immediately clear that he was sensitive to what I was trying to do.
He talked casually, like a friend already.
I could not believe that I had got my first job.
Unfortunately I was not to be with Basil for long, for after less than a  year he was appointed as Art Adviser to the West Riding.
He was full of idealism about what this post offered in terms of opportunity, and over the odd whisky in his pub of the moment, he would talk about what art education could be and should be.
I was then a disciple of Herbert Read's and his "education of the senses" , but it was Basil, ill the no-nonsense power of his belief, who did much to give me a life-long conviction about the place of art education.
He was intensely serious about the place of art in life, and I can remember painting a picture in the main art room at Berkhamstead, one I was to sell years later in Manchester, and the way in which he valued this gave me a sense of value in my own achievement.
It was his unselfconscious but absolute seriousness about art that so impressed his words upon others.
He was a most gentle person and yet he could appear implacable.
A Friday afternoon class not too prepared to believe that art was the most important thing that they could be doing at that time soon discovered they were wrong.
That he could do this without awakening the slightest resentment ill the boys was a sign that they recognised that it was their work that mattered to Basil, and in no way his self-importance, which, to a quite remarkable degree he did not have.
He had a real love of children's work and a great sensitivity and insight into its many different qualities.
There was a boy called Rooke who worked in a strangely primitive style (I have some of it still).
This work, rather like the reverse of an Anglo-Saxon coin, caused a good deal of destructive amusement among the other boys, but Basil, in the end and in a very clever way made his valuation of this boy's work real to them too.
The boys liked Basil for they felt that not only was he a good teacher, he was also a man.
I did not join Basil again for several years.
Then, after a rather casual interview oil my part, I was appointed to the West Riding staff with Rosemary.
I am sure that Alec Clegg must have been heavily influenced in, my favour by Basil, for I remember a very inconsequential performance before the Committee, caused more by nerves and fatigue rather than indifference.
Basil came into his own in the West Riding.
The marvellous commitment of that Authority under Alec Clegg was his natural environment.
Always a bit of a loner, Basil here found an environment of people committed like himself.
Being able to be himself he could talk to teachers from the heart in a way which was amusing, touching and inspiring.
Although I had respect for Harry Thubron and Frank Lisle, the message of Basic Design was in, many ways much less important to schools of general education than the work which had been developed to such a pitch of excellence by Basil.
The trouble was that Basil's philosophy  was so central to the nature of creative expression in art, it could appear almost too straightforward to the sophisticated.
Although I now believe he over-estimated the importance of the part played by observation, his constant emphasis upon the personal, the sensuous and the experiential (a world illuminated by the child's sensitivity and never dictated by the teacher) gave rise to work of much greater intensity, and much more varied in imagery, than the ultimately stereotyped products of Basic Design.
But Basic Design did deal, if obsessively and in the end mechanistically, with the nature of form and the reality of the work itself, and although Basil's emphasis upon observation was developmentally of great value to the pre-secondary school child where a formal language pre-existed, with the older child it could deteriorate into imitation and realism, and even that deadliest of English diseases, literalism.
This, of course, was not Basil's intention, and was, like the distortions of Basic Design, due more to an unimaginative application of ideas rather than something intrinsically wrong in the idea itself.
Basil's concern was always with a sensory response to the world, and was at this level, essentially expressive.
But the dangers in observation are perhaps implicit in the word, and observation can all too easily become realism, and realism is as Piaget has reminded us a kind of confusion between the inner and the outer — a fixing in the object something which is an activity of the thinking subject.
I would perhaps rather always see the "real" world in respect to art in these terms — that to know an object is to transform it, and it is this transformation which is the form and imagery of art.
It is true that there is a distinction between art as it is used develop mentally in schools and art as we know it in the world, but for most people isn't art what we knew it as in school?
For most people imitation of appearance, or topographic realism, is what art is, that or a sentimentalisation of that.
Sartre said that we must invent the heart of things if we wish one day to discover it, and it is to this end that sensation is the beginning of a transformational process and not an end.
Basil might say, "If a child cries for gold, give it a yellow leaf" — and it is precisely this metaphoric quality that I would emphasise against the purely observational.
Although an intensely private person, and in many ways an unusual one, Basil had a most affecting belief in the place of art in the lives of those culturally much simpler and perhaps more worldly than himself.
In speaking, either personally or to quite large groups, he spoke with an extraordinary simplicity and directness of manner.
Although very nervous, he was open and defenceless when dealing with others in any teaching situation; others could not but be moved by his total belief and desire to communicate.
I tend to think of Basil still driving around the West Riding in his black Morris Minor, but in fact on a most memorable trip to Scotland, buying work for the West Riding schools, he already had a grey station-wagon.
But what a "schools collection" Basil put together for Alec Clegg!
It must be of immense value today, in fact probably some of the work is too highly priced to be allowed out into the schools for which it was bought.
In spite of his work-load, Basil was a painter throughout his life; his early Euston Road work, low-toned, sensitive and subtle, gave way in his later life to work which was genuinely passionate and tragic.
Perhaps because he needed art so much himself, Basil never for one moment doubted the overwhelming importance of art education in the development of ordinary but real people.
Thinking now of Basil sighing deeply as he wrote his reports in Rishworth Street, and seeing again that absolutely personal handwriting that he had, one remembers again that unique charm, gentle but yes, too, at times a bit formidable, as pale, a bit round-shouldered, always smoking, serious but often laughing, dedicated without solemnity to the cause, he ploughed on with his work into the early evening.
Dennis Davis, who worked with Basil at Berkhamstead School and later as an assistant Art Adviser, January 1987
He was diffident, seemingly vague, declaring a lack of knowledge and ignorance of education and of teaching, and that he knew only what he had learned through his own work as a painter.
But, of course, when he talked and lectured, even though he said he was quite unable to lecture, he revealed a wonderful depth of understanding of art and of an artist's attitude to his work.
In his talks he had a gift for turning his diffidence to good humour and they were often amusing as well as being quite profound.
I, personally, was struck by Basil's gift, when he taught children and teachers, for helping them to observe in such a way that detail was noticed and imagination was touched.
Not all found this easy; in my own case, I was asked to imagine myself in a cave and paint what I saw!
I couldn't!
But Basil encouraged and even found some tiny portion of my painting which could be developed though he agreed that I might copy more easily than imagine and he gave me a mounted butterfly to draw.
It was this ability to encourage, to amuse and draw attention to individual potential, however slight, which enabled him to make such an impact on the teaching of art in the  schools of the West Riding.
Margaret Dunn, Colleague, formerly Vice Principal, Bretton Hall College.
January 1987
In 1965 I came to work with Basil as an art adviser in the West Riding after lecturing for eight years at the Froebel Institute in Roehampton.
That college was the stronghold of the "child-centred" approach to teaching young children, but the schools in the London area which successfully demonstrated the Froebelian philosophy were few and far between.
Understandably, I was quite staggered and overjoyed to find, in the West Riding, very many primary schools where the creative energies of children were demonstrably seen to be central to their experience and learning.
Here dance, music, creative writing and (my particular concern) visual art had been developed to a quality which was remarkable.
Perhaps more significantly I was to find out that many Heads and teachers alike believed in the importance of creative experience for children, and so the way schools had developed was genuine, well founded and not a half-baked ill-digested educational "gimmick" .
Basil's influence in this development was of prime importance.
He was one of a small nucleus of highly creative and far-seeing people assembled by Alec Clegg to make an educational vision a practical reality in the primary schools of the West Riding.
Basil had first-hand knowledge arid understanding of the pioneering work of Viola who established Cizek's notion that young children have a pictorial language of their own.
Yet Basil did not subscribe to the view that you leave children to their own devices, uninfluenced and free to do whatever they liked.
He believed that the waters of self-expression were dangerous arid decidedly murky and that children could readily be influenced by chance currents and flounder!
Without being prescriptive he prescribed a carefully considered and well-structured educational programme which teachers could understand.
It was a programme concerned to encourage children's visual awareness through the careful observation of the variety of tangible things in their environment.
He knew that recording this observation in line, tone, texture and colour, using a variety of materials, was essential if the looking was to become keen enough to lead to deeper understanding.
He believed that this recording was one of the essential means to feed the imagination of children and so promote further creative work in a variety of fields.
In his work with teachers, especially through in-service courses, he  put them into a "classroom" situation to experience for themselves the materials of art.
It gave them confidence to introduce these materials to children, but in the teacher's own way and taking into account the particular environment, needs and potential of the children they knew best.
Basil was fastidious in his preparation from the spotless cleanliness of the palettes and water-pots to the care he took over material displayed.
This concern for the "teaching environment" spoke directly and clearly.
He expected no less for the children in the classroom.
He was a patient man: he knew that the attitude of Heads and teachers could not be changed overnight.
He was simple and straightforward in projecting his philosophy and was suspicious of those who used pretentious and high-powered language in, their dealings with teachers.
But to see his face light up with pleasure as his eye lighted on a child's painting or model spoke more to the teacher (and the child) about the sincerity of his concerns than a hundred words would.
Basil was not a great public speaker but what came through was all the more effective because it had not come easily.
He was at his best with a small group informally, over a social pint!
He was a modest and unassuming man who never gave the impression that he knew all the answers.
He was often quiet when he had nothing to say, sometimes taciturn and on occasions could be brusque.
He was a very private man and some mistook this for aloofness.
But once you had found mutual ground for trust, responded to his dry humour or enjoyed his sometimes wicked pranks, the friendship could become deep and permanent.
I remember my first Wednesday in the office at Wakefield.
Two very new and raw advisers were awaiting the arrival of Mr Rocke.
He entered, looked at his heaped up in-tray and emptied the lot into the wastepaper basket with the comment"If there is anything important in that lot it will come round again.
Now we can get on with more important things.
Let's talk."
The joke was that it was sometime later that we learnt the whole affair had been staged by Basil who had been in earlier to go through his in-tray and deal with the important memos, etc.
Basil's concern to bring about change was achieved without any desire to build an Art Empire in the West Riding.
He saw his programme for encouraging visual education as part of a broader creative pattern to further children's total learning.
He was at his best and most at home in the primary sector.
He showed less enthusiasm in tackling the problems in secondary schools.
His diffidence with secondary art teachers, he intimated, was because he  believed that these folk had had longer formal training and more paper qualifications than himself.
Often on his in-service courses for such teachers he cleverly used gifted teachers to set and lead the practical sessions.
But his honesty and modesty endeared him to many who valued his wise advice: not a few he encouraged to posts of greater responsibility and challenge.
Others will speak of Basil's gifts as an artist, which were considerable.
They came to a wonderful peak towards the end of his life where his love of the countryside, its changing weather, lights and moods brought forth a series of remarkable, free-spirited watercolours.
Yet, for me, his greatest creative gifts were used to influence so many Yorkshire teachers who, because of him were changed as were the children they taught.
His like come but rarely.
Donald Marriott, February 1987 Appointed Assistant Art Adviser in 1965 and became Senior Art Adviser on Basil's death in 1967
Basil was a delightful and often surprising mixture as a person.
His light-hearted and amusing banter hid a serious and thoughtful approach to work and to life in general, and one became aware that it was a privilege to know and work with him, both at Woolley Hall and in the early days of Bretton where he came one day each week to teach painting.
I believe he had at one time worked with Cizek and he certainly knew of Tagore's work and writing.
Basil was the exact opposite of those to whom words come so easily that they do a minimum of preparation, and afterwards the listener has difficulty in remembering what has been said.
He disliked lecturing and his diffidence was endearing.
Having struggled over preparation, he managed to give a light-hearted and amusing touch which caught the attention of his audience, so that the message was accepted and gave food for subsequent thought.
I remember him at Bretton lecturing in the small hall where there is a vast mirror facing the speaker oil the oval platform.
He began, "It is bad enough to have to give a talk at 9.00 am, anyway, without having to watch yourself doing it." 
The students were immediately with him, and he was regarded with much affection.
As a new member of Alec's staff in 1957, I was grateful to Basil and his art colleagues for welcoming me and inviting, me to take part in their weekend courses at Woolley on many occasions.
Because of my great respect for them all, I always hoped it would be one of my "better" days.
On one Bingley Vacation Course (I think 1955) I had  a group for Weaving, Spinning and Dyeing which Basil joined as a student and I was scared to death at the prospect.
I half expected him to "clown" a bit and not to be really interested, but he worked seriously and was a great asset to the group and to me in later discussion.
In his own teaching (as Margaret suggests) he could always find something to praise and give a student added confidence.
Christian Schiller also had this gift in his discussion groups.
Any comment which seemed to be irrelevant was accepted seriously and an appropriate question would bring the speaker's thoughts back to the matter under discussion.
Maybe the best teaching is always done by asking questions!
They also shared the quality of humility, seemingly unaware of their real stature, yet neither was afraid to make a penetrating comment if the situation demanded it.
One could add humorous comments — his act of falling flat on his face from a standing position — but you won't need to be reminded of them, Rosemary.
Rae Milne, Colleague Adviser, January 1987
Basil and I were appointed as Art Advisers to the West Riding County Council Education Committee in December 1946 and we started work in 1947.
We were therefore very fortunate in having a part in the years following Alec Clegg's appointment as Chief Education Officer.
It is difficult to convey the inspiration of those times: after the war we were all so full of hope and vision for a better future, and the friendliness and welcome we received from both the County Hall staff and the teachers created an unforgettable atmosphere.
Alec himself was always interested in our ideas and in the development of art in the schools and he had considerable skill in persuading the Education Committee to agree to many of our plans which today would doubtless be rejected as not being cost effective or economically viable.
Coming from teaching in the South, Basil and I found the West Riding stimulating, and I think he would have agreed that we ourselves developed.
As well as working hard, it was all such fun.
We started the collection of pictures for schools, and had many memorable visits to painters; sometimes we visited schools together, which because of the shared observation, interest,(and often amusement) was always enjoyable.
There were the Bingley summer courses, and those at Grantley to which we invited professional painters to meet and work with West Riding teachers.
We were involved in the redecoration of the schools, many of them very dingy  after the war years, and also in the establishment of the new Colleges of Education and Teachers' Centres.
At Wentworth Woodhouse we advised on what we thought the West Riding should buy at the sale to keep in the house.
In all this Basil's sense of humour, kindliness, and perception both of personalities as well as of every aspect of the visual arts, were a great help and encouragement to me, and I shall always be grateful for those years in, the West Riding when I knew and worked with him.
Basil was above all a seeing person of sensibility and perception, responding spontaneously to every aspect of the visual world.
Today when society, and consequently education, is increasingly dominated by national, academic and statistical considerations and visual imagination is neglected, I believe that this was his great contribution, the survival of which is of the greatest importance.
Ruth Mock, Art Adviser
A Personal Appreciation and Reminiscences
There was a knock at the door; I opened it and there he was, a tall, slightly stooping figure who spoke with a gentle voice.
I invited him in and introduced him to my wife.
I was soon to take up my first teaching post in a Secondary School and he had called to ask if I were able to make use of a potter's wheel which he could provide for the new Art room.
The business ended, he began to show a discreet but kindly Interest ill our "one up, one down" home, recently rented for a pound a week; this included, as part of the furnishings, a vase containing the ashes of the previous occupant.
The front door opened directly from the pavement into the living room.
The room had a fireplace, sink, cooker and another feature which seemed to particularly arouse the curiosity of our visitor: an enamel bath below the window.
It had a drop down top which served as a table; when upright it gave privacy to the bather.
This was my first personal encounter with Basil Rocke.
I mention it to record his genuine interest in our home and later, in us as people and our way of life.
It was the beginning of our curiosity about each other which led ultimately to a mutual understanding and respect upon which our friendship became firmly based.
Our backgrounds differed considerably: Basil's that of the public school, a well-travelled Southern English gentleman in the best sense; mine that of Northern life as described in the novels of Stan Barstow and David Storey.
In those early days in our relationship, Basil was still adjusting to the Northern scene and I, a callow young teacher, encountering for the first time a man of impeccable manners, charm and sensibility.
I was soon to realize that there was much else, and at a far deeper level, to be learnt from this man I respectfully called Mr Rocke.
Over the past twenty years, there have been many occasions when as a lecturer or Adviser, feeling uncertain about what course of action to take, I have asked myself, how would Basil respond to this situation?
How would he organise this particular activity?
What would lie do to help this floundering teacher?
How would lie deal with this Philistine Head Teacher?
When I have asked such questions, I have invariably discovered a signpost from the past, which has enabled me to find my own way forward.
I now realize just how much I have been professionally sustained, over many years, by his example and how much I learnt from his convictions.
Sharp pointed pencils, clean brushes with gleaming ferrules and well scrubbed palettes were all part of the thorough preparations preceding practical work on Basil's courses for teachers.
From well ordered stores were carried a selection of papers neatly cut and precisely positioned, alongside such items as pens, pins and paint rags.
Similar careful thought was given to all items made available for schools, amongst which was an economical "limited" palette of colours, personally recommended by Basil: a palette, in fact, fit for use by Van Gogh himself.
Basil realized the importance of providing and caring for "'the right tools for the job" and the Art materials should be presented in an attractive way.
Basil never stood aloof from such practicalities; for him they were all part of being a professional Art Educator.
What lessons here for some others today.
Basil did not preach on such matters; he simply set high standards for teachers to emulate.
I once lied to Basil and this has been on my conscience for a long time.
In a busy Art room, Basil bent over to admire a painting by a second-year girl.
The picture was based upon a construction site in the school grounds and included a complex arrangement of steps.
She had difficulty with the perspective and so persuaded me to help her sort it out.
Basil scrutinized the painting, pointed to the steps and asked, "Is this all Caroline's work?" 
Feeling flustered and guilty that I had departed from my normal custom of never working on a pupil's painting, I foolishly replied "Yes" .
Basil with a characteristic facial expression: his lower lip pressed up behind the upper, then bared his upper teeth and gums, gave a quick flick on his spectacles  and said "Really." 
Nothing more was said.
Basil could read with ease the natural image-making of children and was in fact deeply knowledgeable and perceptive about the developmental stages of children's drawings.
This understanding enabled him to make sound judgements in selecting the work of young children for display to teachers, revealing its natural qualities for them to recognise.
Basil built up a strong healthy tradition in Primary Art in West Riding schools, slowly and firmly, and in so doing never worked against the natural grain of childhood.
How vital it is that those influential in the field possess this necessary understanding of children's imagery and how they learn through what they draw and construct.
Basil's success iii the Secondary field resulted from his undoubted gift in selecting and encouraging the teachers he appointed, the provision of sound basic specialist facilities, and, perhaps, most significantly through his enlightened In-service programmes.
Whether the periodic day courses or the longer, residential courses, both seemed to generate a genuine fraternal feeling amongst Art teachers from a large geographical area.
The relevance and popularity of these courses can be gauged by their full and regular attendance, especially the Saturday day sessions when many teachers were prepared to travel distances of fifty miles to attend.
Basil recognised that the best way initially to engage the interest of Art teachers was through providing the opportunity for the development of their own creative work.
In order to stimulate and really challenge the teachers, he employed a number of talented artist/teachers as Tutors.
In order to broaden interests he also invited to these courses experts from other disciplines: musicians, historians, gallery owners and poets.
Through these excellent Tutors, assisted by very able advisory staff, the Art teachers became motivated and involved in their own work and this, indirectly, had a profound effect upon the teaching in schools where the curriculum was significantly strengthened in three major respects: iii drawing, colour and in an imaginative and inventive response to a wide range of media.
The quality of the Art teaching in West Riding Secondary schools twenty-five years ago would certainly stand favourable comparison with the best practice of today.
There were, in fact, at that time some outstanding teachers, educational innovators, who, in my opinion, were way ahead of their time and would be rarely equalled today.
I am sure that I am not alone when I say that I learned more through the Iii-service courses organised by Basil Rocke than  through my entire period of earlier, formal training.
Through Basil's inspiring courses teachers began to develop a genuine educational commitment and always within an atmosphere of personal fulfilment and happiness.
At the School of Art I attended and earlier in school, it was rare indeed to see colourful collections of objects, still-life groups etc.
Art teaching was not based upon study of the real visual world but upon, so called, "memory and imagination" .
These were the prevailing attitudes towards teaching Art in colleges and most schools at the time Basil, and later Rosemary Rocke, commenced their advisory work in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
In the basic pioneering task before them, one important innovative element was their belief in the value of teaching Art through the use of "direct observation" .
With hindsight, this may not now seem to have been a very remarkable step forward but, in the context of the times, it was highly significant, the beginning of a quiet revolution and one ill which teachers were keen to participate.
The depth and quality of the response by children, reflected in their drawings, paintings and claywork began to surprise everyone.
It was as though previously we only had a limited knowledge of what children were capable of thinking, feeling and making, until encouraged to respond in a personal way to the real world around them.
Implicit in the use of direct observation was the need to work in the outside environment and to bring objects from the outside environment into the classroom.
Teachers began to build up collections of visually interesting objects to stimulate learning, as well as original works of Art and specimens from the "Schools Museum Service" .
Added to this were attractive displays of children's work, to celebrate their achievement.
Thus, the use of direct observation, indirectly, began to enrich and change the appearance of the classroom as a learning environment.
Basil Rocke played a highly significant role in the beginning of this transformation of the ethos of the classroom.
Never again would classrooms and indeed whole schools in the West Riding be the bleak, barren places of my boyhood.
There are a few in the field of Art education today, ill-informed about what really took place in the West Riding in the 1950s and 60s who say, "Oh yes, that was about drawing from observation, with youngsters making copies from natural objects" .
Sadly, such a superficial viewpoint ignores the wider educational context in which direct observation was just one, interlocking part of the whole of Basil's basic beliefs in Art Education.
His advocated use of direct observation was one which also encouraged a thoughtful, sensitive, empirical use of media and which understood, respected and incorporated the natural image-making of childhood.
He placed the process of learning before that of the product: the actual artifact made.
He encouraged an honest, very personal response to things seen and all this, long before terms like "childcentred" and "experiential learning" became fashionable.
Basil believed that students of all ages should be presented with a strong personal challenge, but with the warm support of a sensitive and perceptive teacher.
He considered good personal relationships between teacher and taught to be of paramount importance: the core, around which all other aspects of Basil's teaching philosophy fitted into place.
This being so, Basil's work amongst teachers extended well beyond the technical and creative considerations of teaching Art: to influencing and deepening the quality of personal relationships amongst those around him, especially through the warm human atmosphere he was able to imbue into his own, uniquely directed, residential courses.
He possessed the gift of being able to release in individuals their potential for being more sensitive towards the feelings of others and was able to generate a spirit of loving care: such a vital pre-requisite for creativity, personal growth and self-confidence.
 "Basil and Rosemary" — their names were as inseparable as their professional endeavours.
I was walking down Wood Street, Wakefield with a friend who, with a nudge and a nod, directed my attention to a couple gazing into a shop window.
I recognised the tall, male figure but the female, whose hand he held, was unknown to me.
My glance allowed me sufficient time to register an abundance of well-washed hair, a rosy cheerful face, a loose-hanging tweed coat and heavily-patterned woollen stockings.
This was my first sight of Rosemary at the time of her engagement to Basil.
I got to know Rosemary before Basil; she was my Art Adviser in my earliest days of teaching and how fortunate I was to have such encouragement, support and stimulation.
A good listener, she responded sensitively, with just the right questions.
"Yes, but how about…
Have you considered…
But why did they…?"
 "Why not try…?" — and sometimes "You're so right" or "I agree absolutely" .
In relation to his advisory work, Basil benefited from Rosemary's thought-provoking questions as well as her warm support and when necessary, from her sincere, straight comment.
Their professional achievements are so interwoven that one cannot properly unravel the individual strands which make up the whole.
Implicit in much of  what I express about Basil's achievement is the recognition of Rosemary's very significant contribution within this splendid partnership in Art Education.
In reflecting on Basil as a person, I can only make comment as I knew him, over a dozen years or so and, during which time, I cannot recall one unkind word or act he ever directed towards me.
Quite the contrary, whether it was his professional support, which was total, or through more personal gestures of kindness.
Basil was sensitive and courageous.
In 1939, when war was imminent, he feared he would be unable to face the Wellsian type of disaster that he imagined was to come.
He told me that, at that time, his anxieties were so deeply felt that he sought the advice of his doctor.
Yet amazingly, he later served as a member of the London Fire Service throughout the blitz bombing of the City of London.
Service, under such appalling conditions, is testimony indeed to his courage.
This courage was to later re-emerge when, as an adviser, he fought to bring about educational change and improved resources, or, when against opposition he backed his own judgement at an appointment interview, or the courage to back a teacher in difficulty from whom others had withdrawn support.
Perhaps arising from the close personal comradeship of those war years was Basil's empathy with ordinary working folk.
Whether they be railwaymen, groundsmen, caretakers, cooks or cleaners, Basil showed consideration for the appreciation of the work they performed and warmth for them as people.
All this is not to say that Basil was incapable of showing normal human impatience or intolerance.
If he chose to, he could become quite authoritarian in his manner and cutting in his remarks but then, every Adviser needs some weapons in his armoury to survive!
Basil used his weapons with restraint and on legitimate targets.
He would attack ugliness in all its many and varied forms, whether objects, behaviour or ideas.
Basil was intolerant of pretentiousness of any kind, whether intellectual, creative or personal.
He reacted to the gimmicky, false, cheap or tawdry.
He would not approve materials or equipment for schools unless they were simple, functional, economical and of good quality in material and workmanship.
Pedantry and intellectual theorising were not Basil's stock-in-trade; all such, he seemed to short circuit.
He was thoughtful and circumspect about what others, as teachers, did; about what he experienced and felt inside and then, as though guided by some inner light, he seemed to intuitively arrive at simple, fundamental truths.
It may have been through this same intuitive process that he first  decided to move towards the field of Art Education.
He told me how, at one point in his life, presumably in the 1930s, that he was searching for a new purpose and direction in his life; one offering greater personal fulfilment.
He spent some time in Holland in the company of an Indian guru with whom he had long walks and conversations through which came the realization that he should build a new career around his two key interests: his satisfaction in working with children and his love of Art.
How right this intuitive decision proved to be and how well his intuition served him in the years ahead.
I can only recall one occasion when he expressed a quiet boast; he took delight in telling me that he did not have one paper qualification to his name.
This apart, Basil was a modest and unpretentious person.
His voice, his touch were gentle; his clothes simple, comfortable and restrained, reflecting the soft, earthy moorland colours he was so fond of in his paintings.
He had a plain favourite tweed jacket.
It had moulded itself across his shoulders, hanging elegantly, all lovat with leathered cuffs.
A man with a calling, a, man with a quiet mission, Basil certainly was, but never an over-serious educational zealot.
He had a sense of fun and enjoyed the usual simple pleasures of life: his family, his home, his garden and the world of nature.
He could be content sitting cross-legged, weeding a flower bed, or repairing a broken chair.
He seemed to gain pleasure from the comradeship of Art teachers; their banter and dry North country humour.
He enjoyed a public, after dinner, verbal duel with Dr Strick at Grantley Hall.
They would insult each other without mercy but with great humour.
Through his quick witty retorts, Basil invariably emerged as the victor.
We loved it and he knew it gave great pleasure to the audience.
He derived deep satisfaction from his own creative work in which he engaged in quiet, country places and in the privacy of his own study.
Personal delight and considerable sensitivity is evident in his work; whether the delicate pencil studies of his middle years or, later, in his watercolours in which he seemed to find a new kind of inner freedom.
Whether painting, launching a course, or giving support to a teacher breaking new ground, the same personal qualities pervaded all Basil's endeavours: patience, honesty, love and care.
It was not so much by what Basil said that I remember him but by what he did.
He did what he meant and meant what he did.
Basil the Art Educationalist and Basil the man are inseparable.
In my view, it was the values he upheld and the qualities of the man himself upon which pivots the genius that was Basil Rocke.
He has been a guiding beacon in my  professional life and a touchstone of human integrity.
Accompanied by Archie Sutherland, I last saw Basil in a Harrogate hospital; he was very ill.
Before leaving him, we shook hands and he gave us each a yellow, fine-pointed Biro pen with which he was so fond of writing: a signal and a last gesture of kindness.
If only he had known just how much he had already given.
Geoffrey Sheard
I am very proud and deeply grateful to have known Basil Rocke.
His friendship and understanding will always remain with me, despite the differences of age, experience and history.
Basil would give anything to anyone and could take from anyone.
His love and concern for his fellows was expressed in the most immediate, yet measured and sensitive way.
He was a forthright, critical man whose tongue could be both sharp and blunt, yet despite this his respect for the person rebuked gave a relationship authority and security whatever the situation.
Basil's love of nature expressed itself so forcefully in his responses to people that they shared and accepted them whatever his mood.
With him they had space to express their response, which he nurtured and developed in simple yet effective ways.
He was a born painter and teacher, unpretentious, with a profound humility, observing the natural changes in a landscape and transposing these observations into his understanding of the people with whom he came into contact.
Being with him was like shading under a massive tree with deep roots, during a long hot summer and I shall always cherish that time.
He never talked at you.
A quick almost elusive comment to dwell upon, then his attention would turn to a barman, a stranger, a word about the environment, the weather, the decoration or structure of a particular place; then his attention would return to one's response to his initial comment.
He did not believe that long discussion was of great value, rather that a considered insight or idea produced far more than a wealth of verbal expression.
A man of a few carefully-placed words, not to lose contact with the external world.
The words came into existence but not before he had analysed, accepted them, agreed to make them real.
If he said "No" , It was because his physical being could not say "Yes" !
He censored his statements, however sweet or sour.
He spoke the truth but not until it had been subjected to the most stringent test — himself!
People  were as plants, cultivated or wild, all subjected to growth, only requiring sustenance, a space to live, to exist.
Basil never denied that space to a person.
He gave confidence by being forthright.
He allowed you to think you were worth so much that his own value was questioned — his honesty was his response to your value.
Archie Sutherland, May 1987
My few meetings with Basil were all at Woolley Hall.
It was my practice to arrive a day or two before the opening of a National Course in order to prepare the setting for my part in it; and Basil usually found me in occupation of his normal workroom, setting up displays.
These always seemed deeply to interest him, and we would sit and talk very quietly and seriously about them.
I remember that he liked one in celebration of wool; another was of everything brown or gray, for which I had arranged a large collection of natural objects, of woven and blockprinted textiles, pots, and beautiful bowls and boxes made of wood.
He teased me about the way in which I always created a background for these exhibitions, isolating them from their surroundings, by arranging a roll of six feet high gray or white corrugated card in columns and bays.
It amused him too that I used only pins to mount most of the items on the card.
It must have been rather unnerving for him to see his room thus turned upside down.
But because he knew that I and my group would be careful he happily let me use his basic materials — boards, palettes, etc. — and we brought our own paints and dyes and drawing materials.
Once or twice during the Course he would make an excuse to come to collect something or other, and I think he enjoyed seeing some of the results of the teachers' acquaintance with the displays.
Because of our shared love of water colour we would talk of our favourite painters, and we agreed that Cotman's "Ploughed Field" in the City of Leeds Art Gallery is a very great work.
I cherish one of Basil's own small, swift, sure, and extremely sensitive monochrome paintings.
It has always been one of my regrets that life did not make it possible for me to know this quiet, strong artist and teacher better.
His influence in the West Riding was clear for all to see, and it surely lives on.
Robin Tanner, June 1987
Basil Rocke's instincts were those of a countryman, as is most of his imagery, yet he was in many ways a very urban character.
I first met Basil in Wakefield during the spring of 1959 and was fortunate to find myself working with him on the West Riding vacation course at Ilkley later that year.
He was a highly stimulating person who was questioning of the mind, who created his own techniques and formed his own mode of expression unpressurized by fashion.
Although at this stage of my work I shared interests with him on matters concerning children's learning and Art Education, I quickly discovered that I had so much more to learn from him about ideas, materials and their uses and in the need to create a working environment of a high order.
It was from a firm understanding that everyone is capable of expressing and communicating ideas, through the arts that Basil quietly but firmly challenged existing views.
The West Riding of Yorkshire was certainly a great influence in moulding his mind and manner of the particular artist he became.
His curiosity and detailed pursuits with paint and drawing materials continued throughout his life as a vital source of exploration and communication.
Basil's sensitive appreciation of Art Education in the lives of children, their teachers and in fact all people, made him a most exceptional person in the Education Department of the West Riding County Council of Yorkshire in the 1960s.
His first-hand experience of the work of Cizek in Vienna, together with his personal studies at the Euston Road School, had strengthened his knowledge of the spontaneity of the work of children.
He valued the individual as a person and was patient with those who did not share this view.
Although normally quietly spoken, he would be most courageous in facing hostility in discussion, even from large groups of people.
He had a detailed and active knowledge of a wide range of works by other artists and was responsible for the establishment of an outstanding, and now extremely valuable, collection of paintings, drawings, sculpture and other media, which is enjoyed to this day by children in Yorkshire.
Basil was a true advocate of the view that Art was for all people.
He will be long remembered, valued and respected by me for the development of a movement which firmly established "People's Art" as part of the expectation of education for each person and especially for children.
Ken Thomas, Art Adviser, February 1987 
Basil's Paintings
Exhibition of Watercolours by Basil Rocke at Cliffe Castle, Keighley, June 12th — July 11th, 1965
It must be at least twenty years since I first saw works by Basil Rocke.
They were drawings remarkable for their delicacy in an Arts Council exhibition devoted to the output of the Euston Road School.
William Coldstream, Victor Pasmore, Claude Rogers and William Townsend were among the exhibitors; but I have not forgotten those drawings by Basil Rocke.
I don't know whether Mr Rocke fell in love with the Yorkshire moors on a visit to Wakefield for that exhibition; but for most of the years since that time he has lived and worked in Yorkshire as senior art adviser to the West Riding County Council.
We in the North owe him a considerable debt for the enthusiasm and perception he has shown in building up the schools' collection of works of art now owned by the County Council.
A similar sensitivity and a deep understanding of the resources of the watercolour medium have gone into the painting of the landscapes on view until July 11 at Cliffe Castle, Keighley.
Most of them have been painted amid the West Riding fells that Mr Rocke has come to know so well.
His work has taken him by car to all parts of this wide and pictorially exciting area, and I suspect that lie has carried a notebook with him and jotted down impressions of darkening moors and sunset skies on his way home to Long Preston.
Indeed, one of these sixty watercolours is called "Sunset scene driving home" and it records not only the colours and forms of the countryside but the movement of the car.
But it may well be that, like Whistler, Mr Rocke did not make notes but simply took a steady look and remembered.
Certainly, these landscapes are the result of thorough assimilation and long contemplation.
But they are also full of vivid response to the dramatic changes of atmosphere among the high fells.
You can enjoy these pictures for their truth to nature, their communication of experience which so many of us have shared.
But they will give equal pleasure to those who appreciate refinements of handling.
Here Is a watercolourist who in "Walton, early morning" can approach the exquisite gentleness of Chinese work and then, in "Pennine landscape" can set down with masterful boldness the rugged majesty of moor and sky.
At his best, in such works as "Winter Sky" and "Ribble landscape, 1965" , he achieves an intensity that recalls the visionary dark and light and half-light of Jack Yeats.
W.T. Oliver, Art Critic Yorkshire Post
The Opening of an Art Exhibition for Basil Rocke at Harrogate Art Gallery
Opened by Professor Carel Weight, C.B.E., A.R.A., R.B.A., on April 29th, 1967
I never saw an enormous lot of Basil except when he was passing through London and he wanted to buy pictures etc. and he would then come to see me and we would discuss them.
One of his little projects was that I would send him down some very promising people from the Royal College to teach in the West Riding.
I thought I had sent him some that were very good, but I received a most snarky letter from him saying "They may be very fine artists but they don't know anything about teaching, and I'm not interested in any of your geniuses unless they really take trouble about the job in hand" .
So this forced me (slightly against my will at the time) to organise some special courses for them, and they turned out reasonably well after that.
I am saying this to show you the other side of Basil — this firmness — this absolute integrity — if you believe in a thing lie would say, even if it made him a bit unpopular, which I think is marvellous.
I have known Basil for about thirty years, I knew him shortly after he came back from Vienna.
We had a mutual friend, an old lady, and we frequently met through her.
In about 1935 lie came to Euston Road School when it was just about starting and in no time at all he became a really competent painter in that way.
He had already done some painting in Vienna and it had shown in some of the very early exhibitions at Euston Road School.
I used to remember particularly the Still Life and I am glad to see there is one here in his Exhibition, which I always admire very much.
Then, of course, the other side was his interest in Child Education, and he had been more or less in the outset of the exciting development which had been going on in Vienna, and had come back  with all kinds of ideas.
He realized how far behind we lagged over here in this sort of Child Art Education.
Then Basil soon took a job in a rather unorthodox school, Bembridge, in the Isle of Wight.
Soon after lie came to the West Riding he said to me, "This is the place for me; I have never felt so happy as being in the North." 
He never changed his opinion; he loved every minute up here.
I think the work he has done here is incredible really, the West Riding under his care were probably the first Authority to start a collection of pictures to be bought for circulating in the schools.
Even these courses at Woolley Hall he was doing under great difficulties — he was sometimes terribly handicapped for money, but as they became successful, I think things eased for him.
My astonishment in coming here is to see these later pictures of his, although I always associate Basil with being a very competent, sensitive, and a typical Euston Road type of painter, I do think his association with the North seems to have done something incredible, and these later water colours, with their tremendous feeling for "wind and Yorkshire weather" seem to have given him an absolutely different and much more mature outlook.
I must go back to them and study them further.
I just wish now to say I declare the Exhibition open and to say how pleased I am to see so many old friends here today.
Thank you very much.
From the Catalogue of a Retrospective Exhibition of Paintings and Drawings by Basil Rocke 1904 — 1966 held at the Harrogate Art Gallery, April 29th — May 21st, 1976
Basil Rocke was a Londoner, born in Hampstead.
He studied art first at Reading University and later in Vienna, where he came under the influence of the great teacher Cizek.
It was Cizek's reputation that drew him to Vienna; it was the spirit of this outstanding man that he brought to his life's work in Yorkshire.
He first became known in the West Riding as a member of the Euston Road School.
An exhibition of the works by this distinguished group of painters, who included William Coldstream, Claude Rogers and Victor Pasmore, was organised at Wakefield Art Gallery and later taken on tour by the Arts Council.
Basil Rocke contributed to this show several drawings which were remarkable for their sensitivity.
Later he accepted the post of Senior Art Adviser to the West Riding County Council.
As one of his responsibilities he began to  build up a permanent collection of works of Art for West Riding Schools.
That collection is today one of the County's treasures.
It is not a treasure that is locked in a bank vault or a glass case; it is spread about where its influence can be of the greatest benefit among the schools of the West Riding.
In corridors and classrooms throughout the county it bears silent witness to the perception of the man who formed it, to his generous breadth of outlook and to his integrity.
No one can tell what stimulus it may bring or the fruit it may bear in creative work by later generations.
He bought wisely and he bought adventurously.
Since he had the respect and liking of his fellow artists, he was often able to enter the studios and choose a characteristic work before it was put on show.
It is continuously illuminating to see what he chose.
If I were to seek one word to describe the quality of these works of art many by famous names, many by local artists to whom the purchase brought rare encouragement — I should say that they are alive.
Today Basil Rocke lives on in them.
The same quality is manifest in his own paintings which we have the comfort and delight of seeing in this exhibition.
In his early drawings it was the delicacy of line that caught my attention; there is the same exquisite feeling in many of the watercolours that he painted in his later years.
But the mature work reveals also a deep sense of enjoyment and at times a poetic intensity that puts it in a very high class indeed.
Spontaneous as they always seem, these watercolours speak of long contemplation and of profound love and understanding of the Yorkshire fells.
They remind us that this gentle southerner, who gave so much to Yorkshire, also found in it a sustaining strength and beauty.
W. T Oliver, Art Critic, Yorkshire Post
Abbot Hall Watercolours Exhibition April 20th — May 8th 1968
An exhibition of watercolours, which opens tomorrow at Abbot Hall Art Gallery, Kendal, will emphasise the love of the North of England of two noted artists, Norman Adams and the late Basil Rocke (writes a correspondent).
Both artists lived and worked in the North, although Basil Rocke was actually born iii the South.
Basil Rocke's pictures are concerned with nature and all its elements.
He lived in Yorkshire before his death in 1966.
There he  captured the atmosphere of the West Riding in all its different moods.
A wide range of his pictures will be shown.
He was made Senior Art Adviser for the West Riding County Council in 1947, where he worked among other things, on a policy of buying pictures for schools.
These are still greatly valued in the area.
His own pictures are owned by a large number of people, and illustrate the sincerity which was characteristic of him.
His acute sense of observation was remarkable, and his pictures show how sensitive he was to his surroundings.
 Westmoreland Gazette
Basil Rocke Exhibition at Kendal
The late Basil Rocke was Senior Art Adviser to the West Riding of Yorkshire for nearly 20 years and contributed greatly to the new attitude to the teaching of art in the schools.
He was also one of the first County Advisers to persuade his authority that the impact of original works of art on children was very valuable, and so every year a sum was allotted to buy paintings, drawings, and even pieces of small sculpture, as well as lithographs and engravings, to be used in the schools themselves.
Probably he was so successful in this field because he himself was an artist.
Trained at Reading, and with the Euston Road Group (with Pasmore, Gowing, Coldstream, etc.) and in Vienna, where he met Professor Cizek, who, no doubt, inspired him with his ideas on art education for children — he had a fine appreciation of drawing.
His early watercolours, well represented here, are small, charming, and in the best English watercolour tradition.
Unfortunately his work as art adviser did not allow him much time to paint, but some years ago, moving from urban to country surroundings, he found himself most excited by the wild moors and dales of Yorkshire, and once more began to paint.
These recent watercolours, larger, bolder and stronger than his earlier work, pleased me so much when first I saw them that I offered him an exhibition at Abbot Hall.
Helen Kapp, Guardian April 23rd, 1968