

A SUITABLE JOB FOR A WOMAN?
EARLY ATTEMPTS TO BREAK INTO THE TRADE
Opening up the printing trade to women could be seen either as the unscrupulous recruitment of low-paid labour or as the expansion of opportunities for educated working-class girls.
The question of cheap labour will be explored later.
This chapter looks at the efforts of philanthropists and defenders of women's rights to expand the range of employment for both working-class and middle-class girls who needed to earn a living.
Printing was from the start seen as a promising trade for pilot schemes.
Since the schemes in question paid the male rate for the job, they cannot be tarred with the brush of cheap labour.
But they certainly alerted employers to the possibility of employing women and therefore roused the immediate distrust of the unions.
These were early skirmishes in a long-running conflict.
WORK PROSPECTS FOR SCOTTISH GIRLS
A working-class girl leaving school in the second half of the nineteenth century, whether she was Scottish or English, would have much less choice of work than her brothers.
Although modern research has pointed out that women's paid employment is underestimated by the available records (in particular the census), since it was more irregular and less likely to be recorded than that of men, women's choice of work was certainly in practice severely restricted, first and most crucially by what was effectively segregation by sex, secondly by local opportunities.
To imagine what a girl's prospects actually were, we should bear in mind three by now well-established points about the employment of women in general: by and large women were doing different work from men of similar age and class; women were concentrated in unskilled and low-paid jobs; and a majority of women in paid work were young and unmarried.
Since Edinburgh is the focus of this study, the context will be a Scottish one: there are many similarities between the profiles of women's employment north and south of the border, but they are not identical.
To begin with occupational segregation: in 1851, over 90 per cent of all women registered as active in the labour force in Scotland were accounted for by four categories of employment: agriculture, domestic service, textiles and clothing.
By 1911, the percentage had dropped to a still quite high 60 per cent.
The largest single category nationally   continued to be domestic service, which occupied 22.7 per cent of Scottish women workers in 1911, as compared to 22.65 per cent in textiles and 12.37 per cent in clothing.
These percentages were not uniform across the country: local specialities dictated what was available.
The textile industry was predominantly concentrated in the Glasgow area, but there were woollen mills in the Borders and jute-working in Dundee.
The latter was exceptional in many ways because of its large-scale employment of women rather than men in the jute mills.
But in any case a lower proportion of men were employed in Scottish textiles than in English mills, partly because better-paid jobs were available to them in heavy industry.
Edinburgh had practically no textile workers, men or women; but as we have seen it had a great many domestic servants.
In 1911, no fewer than 17,035 women (but only 624 men) were working as domestic indoor servants in the city, while another 702 women worked as domestics in hotels, and a further 3,500 were registered as charwomen or laundrywomen (see Table 5a).
The advertisement pages of The Scotsman in the golden Edwardian afternoon carried long columns of vacancies for parlourmaids, cooks and housemaids (so it is not surprising, though it must have been a source of irritation, that male printers hostile to women entering the trade often urged them to look for work "in service" ).
Without the option of textiles, the only other really large-scale employer of women in the city was the clothing trade, where women were more likely to be classified as milliner/dressmaker or seamstress than as tailor.
Between 1851 and 1911, the number of Edinburgh women listed by the census as milliner/dressmaker remained constant at about 4,500.
Few industrial occupations (apart from the printing trade) accounted for more than two to three hundred women, and in many single trades the total in the city was less than 100 (see Tables 4b and 4c, and for percentages, Table 1).
Only rarely were women doing similar work to men.
In Scotland as a whole and in Edinburgh in particular, working-class women and girls mostly found themselves in work that in some sense extended their domestic role: housework, laundry, sewing, while better-educated   middle-class women who worked were caring for the young and the sick as teachers and nurses.
True, textile-processing did not echo domestic work, but the French saying "women work on soft stuffs, men on wood and iron" was particularly applicable in Scotland.
Similarly, the increasing employment of women in the growing sector of food, drink and tobacco manufacture by the end of the century, and even the dramatic growth in the number of women commercial clerks (4,467 in Edinburgh by 1911, compared to only 366 in 1881) did little to alter the fact that in Scotland generally (perhaps rather more than England in the same period) there was a very clear division of the labour market and a de facto segregation of "men's work" from "women's work" , which would face any girl looking for her first job.
The sector with which we are here concerned was thus an exceptional breach in a hitherto all-male part of the labour market.
This brings us to the second general point: that women were not working in what were known as "skilled" occupations.
Traditionally, skilled jobs have tended to be defined as those requiring apprenticeships.
Both "skill" and "apprenticeship" are notions which have been challenged by feminist writers as having less to do with the intrinsic nature of the work than with the sex of the people doing it.
Skill, it is argued, like gender, is a socially constructed notion.
For example, "tailoring" , mostly done by men, is usually classified as a skilled trade whereas "dressmaking" , done by women, is usually not, although it did require a formal training.
 "Skilled work is work that women don't do" , as Anne Phillips and Barbara Taylor succinctly put it.
Contemporary perceptions continue to be reflected in historical writing: thus Robert Gray's valuable study of the "skilled workers" in Edinburgh is confined to an all-male sample; no dressmakers for instance are included, and he refers only in passing to women compositors.
Since most women were working in occupations classified as unskilled, or at best semi-skilled, it is no surprise to find that they were almost uniformly badly paid.
They were caught in a vicious circle: in low-paid jobs because they were women, while the jobs were low-paid because women did them.
On the rare occasions when they were doing work comparable to men's, women were regularly paid less.
Explanations both at the time and later have tended to point to assumptions about the lower needs of women, irrespective of the work they were doing.
Women were normally assumed to be dependent members of a family unit: daughters living at home before marriage; wives of employed husbands; or if unmarried, sheltered by parents or siblings.
And as we have already noted, many male workers, especially in "skilled" occupations, were committed to the notion of a male "family wage" high enough to keep wife and children.
Although as Eleanor Gordon has remarked, the family wage was hardly a reality for most   Scottish working-class families, its notional existence had an impact on wages paid to women: if the normal "women's wage" was low, employers taking on women for newly created jobs were unlikely to look to the male rate as a guide.
A further result of the identification of women with unskilled workers was that they were ideal recruits when the de-skilling of a trade was already happening because of technological change.
Dramatic examples of this occurred on Clydeside, during the First World War, in the engineering industry, but the printing and bookbinding industry had already seen the breaking down of the labour process into a number of relatively less skilled tasks.
By the end of the century, quite a few of the less skilled operations in the paper and print sector were being handled by women: machine-feeding, paper-ruling and folding; manufacture of boxes, cartons, bags and labels; and in bookbinding, operations which had gradually been downgraded from "skilled" to "semi-skilled" , such as stitching and collating, were largely being carried out by women.
By 1911, there were about 1,000 women and girls in Edinburgh employed on unskilled work in the printing trade, another 1,219 in bookbinding and over 800 in envelope and paper-bag manufacture (see Table 6a) .9 This development was not unusual.
What was atypical about Edinburgh was the large number of women recruited to the trade of compositor.
Although this certainly coincided with attempts to breakdown the work process, matters were bound to be more complicated in such an unequivocally skilled trade.
It was to be an opening of a very different kind for our hypothetical school-leaver.
Finally, on entering work of any kind except domestic service, she would find herself among mostly young women.
According to the   census, most women in full-time employment in Scotland were in the under-25 age-group.
Twenty-five was about the average age of marriage for Scottish women,— and it does appear to be the case that with the notable exception of Dundee (where a large number of women continued working) it was usual throughout the period up to 1914 to give up regular employment on marriage and to return to it only if widowed or in great hardship.
Domestic servants often remained unmarried, or if they did marry could sometimes carry on working, so their age structure more closely resembles that of male professions (see Table 5b).
But in industrial trades, the number of married women was low.
For the whole of Scotland the official percentage of married women in employment was only 4.1 per cent, compared to 9.6 per cent in Great Britain as a whole.
Sally Alexander and Eleanor Gordon have both pointed out that this is one area where the census figures are particularly unreliable, since they inevitably omit or underrepresent casual, seasonal, irregular or part-time work, which was the only kind many older married women could manage.
In the sector that concerns us though, the figures from within the trade and the individual records of women employees tell a clear story: almost all the women compositors were single, and for as long as normal recruitment continued, up to 1910, the majority of them were young.
In this respect they were typical of most industrially employed women in Scotland at the time (see Table 6b).
The fact that the female work-force in general had a different age profile from that of the male, and that many (though by no means all) women left work in their mid-twenties, was yet another reason for the low pay and status of "women's work" .
From this very brief outline of the main characteristics of women's employment in Scotland and how they related to the Edinburgh context, we can at least form some kind of picture of the 14-year-old Scottish girl's  expectations about her working career during the last half of the nineteenth century.
Looking around her, she would see that while her brothers might follow their father's trade or profession, whatever that was, or perhaps look for an apprenticeship in a traditional craft, or take advantage of the new opportunities in, say, transport — in short choose, within limits, a career that appealed to them — she was not likely to be able to indulge a personal preference.
Her father's trade was probably closed to her; if her mother worked, it was more likely to be in an irregular way as a charwoman than in a regular, let alone a skilled Occupation.
If she lived in a mill town, the choice was more or less made for her.
Otherwise, and particularly if she lived in Edinburgh, she could answer one of the advertisements for a housemaid; or she might, increasingly as the century wore on, try for a coveted job as shop assistant; she might enter one of the monotonous and repetitive unskilled industrial jobs in say paper-bag making; or use her school training in needlework to become a dressmaker.
She would expect to work for at least ten years, but not to continue after marriage.
And she would have little illusion about being able to save anything from the low wages she would receive from any of the available jobs.
It is against this background of restricted choice that one should initially view what was really a middle-class pressure group for women's rights: the campaign to open up the compositor's trade to women.
EMILY FAITHFULL AND THE VICTORIA PRESS: THE EDINBURGH CONNECTION
Apart from the few wives and daughters of master printers who had picked up something of the trade in the family firm, the first women compositors in Britain to receive anything like a "systematic training" were apparently taken on by the firm of McCorquodale of Newton-le-Willows in about 1848.12 It was a little-known experiment that did not last.
Greater publicity and much controversy attended the opening in London twelve years later of Emily Faithfull's Victoria Press, employing a number of women.
From the start, this was an isolated experiment, marked by the middle-class philanthropic circles in which it originated.
But while there was no direct link between the Victoria Press and the later recruitment of women in Edinburgh, the Scottish capital was the one place in Britain where Emily Faithfull's experiment was imitated in the 1860s.
She was directly responsible (by speaking on the subject in Glasgow and Edinburgh) for the introduction of the idea to Scotland, and indirectly for its application on a large scale (as the men's union, the Scottish Typographical Association never forgot: thirty-five years later, in a scathing obituary of Emily Faithfull entitled "A Pseudo-Philanthropist" , its journal challenged the view that "having introduced female compositors to the printing trade" could in any sense be regarded as philanthropy").
A clergyman's daughter, aged only 25 in 1860, Emily Faithfull was one of the "strong-minded women" of the mid-nineteenth century.
Remaining single, she devoted herself to a lifetime of campaigning and was, with Bessie Rayner Parkes, Jessie Boucherett, Barbara Bodichon and others, one of the founder members of an organization specifically designed to find work for women, especially the much-spoken-of "half million extra women" in the population who were statistically unlikely to marry.
The Society for the Promotion of the Employment of Women (SPEW for short, unfortunately) was closely linked to the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science (NAPSS) founded in 1857 and including among its members many prominent academics, reformers and philanthropists.
From the start, the NAPSS had a number of energetic women members, and also concerned itself with the question of women's employment.
Leading members of the SPEW spoke at NAPSS conferences but also had their own headquarters and magazine: they were almost identical with the famous "Langham Place Circle" , and the editorial board of The Englishwoman's Journal.
It was in this context that Emily Faithfull and Bessie Rayner Parkes first became interested in the idea of opening the compositor's trade to women.
SPEW and the NAPSS were both concerned with a whole range of possible openings for women in commerce, the services and industry.
It is not in itself surprising that any mention of industrial employment for women should bring the printing trade to mind.
Typesetting in particular had the reputation of being light work, for which the main requirements were literacy and manual dexterity.
(Gladstone was not the only public figure to join the chorus about women's "nimble fingers" being particularly suited to the trade; "and fifty years earlier, Napoleon on being shown round a printing office had growled that it was" women's work".)
It was Bessie Rayner Parkes who, in order to find out what truth there was in it, first bought a small press and some type, and she and Emily Faithfull took instruction in the trade themselves.
 "A short time [had]convinced them that if women were properly trained, their physical powers were singularly adapted" to such work.
With help from both SPEW and the secretary of the NAPSS G. W. Hastings, a house had been taken in Great Coram Street, off Russell Square, and the Victoria Press was created with five women apprentices in March 1860.
 "Intelligent, respectable workmen" were engaged to do the tasks the women could not: which according to Miss Faithfull meant "lifting of the iron chases…the carrying of cases of weighty type…and the whole of the presswork" , By October there were nineteen women compositors in the office, several of them the daughters of master printers.
The interesting story of the Victoria Press has been told elsewhere.
What most concerns our subject is the effect on her Scottish audiences of Emily Faithfull's lectures about it.
It was the NAPSS which brought both Emily Faithfull and Bessie  Rayner Parkes to Scotland for its fourth annual conference, held in Glasgow in October 1860.
Both speakers gave papers on the employment of women in printing, and such local interest was aroused that they were asked to repeat their lectures in Edinburgh a few days later.
There, the meeting in the Queen Street Hall, although not publicly advertised, was "crowded with a highly respectable audience, chiefly composed of ladies" and also including many well-known male supporters of charitable or progressive causes.
After hearing about the founding of the Victoria Press, the audience took part in an animated debate, in which the question of wages was immediately raised.
Although we know from other sources that Emily Faithfull's London apprentices and journey-women were in fact paid the full male rate (though with some amendment of the apprenticeship system), it was clear that she and other promoters of the scheme did anticipate that the consequence might be to lower wages in the printing trade.
This does not seem to have caused them undue concern.
Emily Faithfull herself rather naively replied to one questioner: Suppose a printer receives from 30s to 36s a week and suppose his wages were reduced 10s per week, and his daughters who before had been in no employment receive each 10s, 12s or 15s…
The family, she implied, would be better off.
Bessie Parkes more prudently replied that she thought it was "undeniable" that it would bring lower wages but "it was only fair to let women have a fair share in the competition" .
G. W. Hastings, who was present, went much further in his hostility to male printers and thought it would be a positive "advantage if wages were lowered in the printing trade" , referring to the London union (the London Society of Compositors) as "one of the most powerful and most structured trade unions in London" , which, unjustifiably in his view, "prevented any printer employing any compositor at less than 33s a week" .
He also made dark references to drink.
Other speakers expressed unease about disturbing the wage Structure, and James Wilkie, an Edinburgh compositor in the hall, warned that the city already had too many apprentices, too low wages and not enough work: "with the exception of a month or two in the winter time, there were always printers looking for work" .
THE CALEDONIAN PRESS IN EDINBURGH
Whether or not as a result of the unease expressed at this meeting, two completely separate organizations were set up in its wake.
The first and more "official" , was the Edinburgh Society for the Promotion of Employment for Women (ESPEW).
This was the new name of a group which had already existed informally for a few years, with a number of representatives from well-known "reforming" Edinburgh families on its committee: the McLarens, Mairs and Stevensons for instance.
ESPEW did not set out to make the printing trade a priority recruitment area.
Its first  public letter to the Scotsman referred to "clerical work" or supervisory jobs as being the best area to concentrate on, but within a short time it had established a register for women's employment of a wider kind.
The annual report for 1862–3, by the Secretary Phoebe Blyth, lists the following occupations as those in which it was trying to place women: Teachers…female missionaries and Bible women, sick nurses, book-keepers, colourists and printers of photographs, hairdressers, shop girls, waitresses, copyists, amanuenses, dressmakers, upholsterers, sewers…from finest embroidery to sewing machines, knitters and daily workers [i.e. charwomen].
It was hoped to add "French polishing and telegraphy" to the list, but printing is conspicuous by its absence.
It was quite a distinct and separate Organization — though one clearly inspired by the NAPSS conference and the Victoria Press — which placed an advertisement in the Scotsman in January 1861, a month or two after Emily Faithfull's visit to Edinburgh.21 Describing itself as the "scottish National Institute for Promoting the Employment of Women in the Art of Printing" , it claimed the patronage of a host of "distinguished persons" , headed by the Duchess of Kent and several other noble ladies, and was supported by a list of professors, provosts, clergymen, mayors etc.
From the lack of overlap between the patrons of the two ventures, it seems likely that the progressive bourgeoisie of ESPEW were not disposed to back the printing initiative supported by a more conservative section of the upper class, nor apparently was the venture connected to the NAPSS, which, as the Scottish Typographical Circular pointed out, "so far as Scotland is concerned, declined to have anything to do with the attempt to introduce women into the printing business" .
The new "scottish National Institute" did however refer in its prospectus to the NAPSS meeting, and went on to speak of the "surplus female population" which required "fresh fields for the employment of their energies" .
It proposed to establish a printing office in Edinburgh, "with eventual auxiliary branches in Glasgow, Aberdeen, Dundee, Perth, etc…for the instruction and employment of women in the art of printing" .
Apparently the only one to be created was the Edinburgh office, christened the Caledonian Press.
Our knowledge about its brief existence is sketchy and comes mostly from one internal, and therefore highly favourable source, the magazine the Rose, Shamrock and Thistle, and one external and extremely hostile source, the union journal, the Scottish Typographical Circular.
The latter denied all philanthropic motives for the new press, describing it as "really a private business speculation" .
The moving spirits behind the Caledonian Press were members of the Thomson family of Lasswade near Edinburgh, described by the Circular as "a father with cash, a son with brains and a daughter as nominal figurehead" .
About Miss Mary Anne Thomson — the shadowy Scottish equivalent of Emily Faithfull- it is certainly hard to find much information, but  then it is often hard to find much out about women in Scotland, even those who were quite prominent in public life.
Perhaps she really did little more than lend her name, but it was to her at any rate that Queen Victoria's secretary wrote with royal support for her venture (the Queen had also supported the Victoria Press, named after her).
An article on the Caledonian Press, in the magazine it later published, attributed the initiative of the whole enterprise to her: "To whatever credit this may entitle her, Miss Mary Anne Thomson may justly lay claim." 
The Caledonian Press was a much smaller concern than its London inspiration.
By 1862 it was established off Princes Street, in a district where many printers already had offices.
Beginning with 8 apprentice girls and three journeymen tutors, by 1863 it was employing 14 women.
The Circular was not impressed.
Referring to it as an artificial "pampered velveteen system" , the union journal was scathing about its "pretentions" : The small office in Edinburgh called the Caledonian Press…was opened a year ago, under the patronage of many of the nobility and members of the learned professions: yet with all its boasting about promoting the employment of women…and opening up a fresh field…to the "surplus female population" …it actually employs fewer women than any simple respectable milliner, of whose philanthropy the world takes little note.
Unlike the Victoria Press, the Caledonian produced little in the way of books.
In one respect at least, however, it preceded Emily Faithfull's London office, by creating a monthly magazine with the express aim of providing a "constant supply of work for the" hands ", all female" .
The Rose, Shamrock and Thistle was launched in May 1862 and ran until March 1865.
Described as a "magazine for the fair daughters of Great Britain and Ireland" it contained a variety of essays, articles, poems and serials when it first appeared, and announced that its aim was to "convince the sceptical that it is wise and well to qualify women to maintain themselves honourably and decently when through illness, death and desertion or bankrupt circumstances [they are]thrown on their own resources" .
Editorials regularly refer to the magazine being produced by an all-women team, from the Editress and her fair, brilliant and chivalrous staff, down to the merry-faced ruddy-cheeked little lassie that in quainter and ruder hives of literature would be represented by a grim-visaged imp in paper-cap and corduroys yclept a"Printer's (This was typical of its style.)
Editorial inspiration for the Rose, Shamrock and Thistle seems to have flagged long before its official end.
By 1864, it was already publishing comparatively few articles about the position of women for instance, and by the time it closed in 1865, the copy consisted almost entirely of serials.
The closure was linked with the failure of the Caledonian Press, and both  were greeted with rejoicing by the Circular.
Having "been got up avowedly…to lower the wages of men" , the union journal reported, the venture was doomed from the start.
It had struggled from beginning to end, had depended entirely on charity throughout its four-year existence, and now the girls working there were being irresponsibly left destitute.
The collapse must have been much commented on in the Edinburgh print and publishing trade, but the local press was discreet.
An advertisement appeared in the Scotsman drawing attention to the sale of "the whole valuable stock of letter-press and printing materials belonging to the Caledonian Press, who are giving up business with the premises No. 31 Hanover Street" .
A CLASH OF INTERESTS
From the widely reported experience of the Victoria Press in London (which survived into the 1880s, though Emily Faithfull had moved on by then) and the lesser known and less successful Caledonian Press in Edinburgh, what provisional conclusions can usefully be drawn?
In the first place, there was not only a sex difference but a gap of glaring dimensions politically, socially and even of age, between those who promoted the introduction of women to printing and those who opposed it.
Emily Faithfull, young, confident and securely middle-class, appears to have been Operating from first principles rather than speaking or understanding the language of journeymen printers.
On the face of it, hand-composition in letterpress printing seemed to be well suited to women's "dexterity" .
And since literacy was a prime requirement, type-setting was of all the manual trades the nearest to teaching, governessing and clerking: traditionally the only hopes for educated girls who needed to earn a living.
It seems indeed that the social categories Emily Faithfull had in mind as "compositoresses" were the educated daughters of respectable tradesmen: the only ones whose origin is known for sure, and who were ideal for the experiment, were the daughters of master printers (rather different from the daughters of journeymen).
She appears also however to have had in mind the entry to the trade of unequivocally middle-class girls, arguing that "the most cultivated class of women could become proof-readers (which was almost like" working in publishing").
But"before the office of proof reading can be properly undertaken, a regular apprenticeship to printing must be worked out…
I would urge a few women of a higher class to resolutely enter upon an apprenticeship for this purpose."
A third category — and here presumably the notion of philanthropy is to the fore — consisted of orphans or destitute girls in institutions — of unclassifiable social Origin but genteel upbringing.
She had herself taken on "a little deaf and dumb girl from the Asylum in the Old Kent Road" 
Thus from the point of view of journeymen compositors in London and Edinburgh alike, there was an immediate sense in which the whole  venture must have appeared socially alien launched in an atmosphere of middle-class philanthropy, pursued by young and perhaps slightly naive women of that class, and seeking to introduce to the trade young girls of perhaps middle-class, perhaps marginal, but not necessarily working-class origin.
The patronage of the liberal intelligentsia (in the case of Emily Faithfull) or of traditional notabilities and aristocrats (in the case of Mary Anne Thomson) did nothing to allay suspicion of this kind.
Class antagonism is in fact rarely expressed openly in the caustic comments of such journals as the Scottish Typographical Circular.
References are generally oblique: for instance in the argument that if a woman had enough education to do the job, she was probably "in a class aspiring to a higher social position" .
The Circular's report of the NAPSS meeting in Edinburgh referred to the confusion over the "class" of the women to be introduced, noting that Miss Parkes had actually said "lower-class" .
More often, the subject lies concealed somewhat under the more visible question of wages.
It was taken for granted that the introduction of women generally to any trade carried the risk of lowering wages; basically because as we have seen, the wages paid for "women's work" were so low.
A woman would be quite prepared to accept a wage lower than a male compositor's, since it would probably still be a great improvement on what she could earn elsewhere.
This worried not only trade unionists but some of the liberal progressive backers of the efforts of SPEW.
It is true that the question remained at a rather theoretical level in the 1860s.
The Victoria Press in fact paid its women workers the "London scale" , that is union rates, as even the Circular admitted, and the Caledonian Press seems to have paid the male rate too.
At the same time Emily Faithfull modified the length and pay of apprenticeships, and the workers had extremely good conditions and shorter hours than elsewhere.
(It is not known if the Caledonian Press did likewise.)
But it was argued by the trade unions that the exceptional circumstances of such pilot schemes permitted these "fantasies" : It is not probable that any attempt will be made in London or Edinburgh to reduce the women's prices, so long as the movement has the sympathy of the benevolent public, but when left to compete by themselves with establishments conducted on commercial principles, the temptation to resort to this course might prove irresistible.
Finally, there is a sense in which these two enterprises in London and Edinburgh were perceived as particularly worrying not just because of the social origins of promoters and beneficiaries, or because of the threat to wages, but because they meant bringing women into the work-place.
After all, in the real world, compositors"wages were already being  threatened by cheap male labour — that of apprentices and non-union men for instance.
But the same anxiety is not present in union objections to  these groups.
When it came to women, there was a flurry of gender-specific arguments: printing was "a calling for which their delicate frames are wholly unsuited" .
Commenting on Gladstone's support for the scheme, the News of the World said: "picking up type is not the same thing as picking up needles and stitches: the mental and physical labour demanded in the compositors" room is infinitely greater than anything that has yet been required of women".
Health and hygiene were also cited, with special reference to women s "future usefulness as wives and mothers" , These arguments had already been well rehearsed in France, where in 1862 there was a major strike by the Paris compositors against the employment of women.
The Scottish Typographical Circular reported of this conflict that "people are beginning to see that making women printers…will only unfit them for the active and paramount duties of female society" .
Since both the Victoria and the Caledonian Press explicitly claimed to be offering work to women who really needed it, and who might never marry, arguments about the appropriateness of married women working were not particularly relevant, but they were made just the same: woman should be "man's helpmeet not his rival" 
Such reactions are a familiar enough story, and the printing trade was by no means the only one where they were found.
But objections to women as women also recognized the specific threat they posed in the printing-office.
Firstly, it looked as if the experiments in London and Edinburgh were introducing a division of labour on sexual grounds within the very "art and mystery of printing" .
The breaking down of any skilled trade into less skilled or specialized components carried a major threat to the whole apprenticeship system and to the notion of the craft as well as damaging the control of the worker over the work process, as Taylorization in the twentieth century would clearly demonstrate.
What was crucial about the "women's offices" was that part of the trade — straight typesetting — was being defined as "particularly" suitable for women; indeed it was being said they were actually better at it than the men, while the other tasks in the compositor's repertoire were variously described as "heavy" (thus by definition not skilled) or on the contrary as highly skilled (make-up and imposition) but requiring fewer persons to do them.
The fragmentation of the trade — the implications of which were only dimly perceived at the time — was to become of crucial importance later and will be looked at in more detail below.
But even in the 1860s, the notion that a "mere girl" might learn the trade very quickly and be doing as well as a man in a short time, was not only a threat to employment but a threat to the craftsman's pride in his skill.
Secondly, the appearance of a woman in the composing room could be seen as a sort of violation of male privacy, which could only be viewed with horror by male comps.
Girls, even if they were the daughters of master printers, had no experience or knowledge of collective traditions.
The language and rituals of the chapel were, as we have seen, so  uncompromisingly masculine that it would have seemed impossible for printing-house life to be the same again once women were admitted to the craft.
It is true that the Victoria and Caledonian experiments did not introduce women into an existing office, but neither were they exclusively all-women affairs.
The journeymen who were employed "to do all the tasks the women did not" , as well as to train the novices, meant that they were mixed offices from the start.
The extension of the project could not but mean bringing a mixture of the sexes to regular printing offices.
Looking back over this early venture, it is easy enough to see in it the seeds of what was to come.
In their earnest and determined way, the promoters of women's employment were calling the bluff of the skilled journeyman, but without appreciating the violence of feelings aroused by the threat not just of cheap labour but of cheap female labour.
The men's fear of change took the form of vociferously defending the status quo in which after all they had everything to lose.
The actual women themselves — or rather girls, for they seem mainly to have been under 18-who worked in these experimental offices, are not heard in the debate, silenced not so much by their sex perhaps, as by their mostly humble circumstances and extreme youth and inexperience.
(After all the voices of male apprentices are not usually heard in the debates over apprenticeship.)
In the event, although the Victoria Press did last for over twenty years, and despite the creation in London in 1876 of the rather similar Women's Printing Society, which also paid the full male rate, women compositors never penetrated the London trade to any extent.
The powerful London Society of Compositors managed to see that women were on the whole excluded from the capital, even if some employers who had moved to the provinces did employ women.
In Edinburgh, where the Edinburgh Typographical Society heaved a sigh of relief when the Caledonian Press failed in 1865, that must have seemed like the end of the matter.
But within a mere eight years, the movement had begun which was to result in the large-scale recruitment of women to the Edinburgh book-houses.
THERE TO STAY: HOW THE FIRST WOMEN ENTERED THE EDINBURGH CASE ROOMS
It was the received wisdom in Edwardian Edinburgh printing offices, and it has been repeated by writers ever since,"that women first entered the trade as strike-breakers during the great print strike of 1872–3 in the city.
When examined closely, this turns out to be a half-truth, and as with many half-truths, exploring the point at which it breaks down can be instructive.
To do so means asking some questions about the relative strengths and weaknesses of the male compositors"trade union, the Scottish Typographical Association (STA) and in particular its Edinburgh branch, the Edinburgh Typographical Society (ETS); about the potential recruits for strike-breaking, whether these were non-union men, apprentice boys or women and girls; and about the circumstances in which the first women crossed the threshold of Messrs Constable's and Chambers's offices in December 1872 or January 1873.
THE STA AND ITS ENEMIES
Until the expansion of heavy industry in the West of Scotland in the latter part of the nineteenth century, most Scottish workers were in a low-wage economy, and trade-union organization was not well advanced.
Certainly it was more localized (by town) than its counterpart in England, and the relative autonomy of local unions may have contributed to weaknesses in the early days.
The old craft trades were on the whole the first to organize trade societies, giving the labour movement in Scotland a particular character and (some have argued) a particular ideology in which the influence of thrift, temperance and respectability was very marked.
Commenting on the composition of the Edinburgh Trades Council in mid-century, Ian McDougall writes: "local trade unionism was predominantly, though not exclusively, that of the skilled workers or labour aristocracy" In printing, a craft trade par excellence, organization went back as least as far as the eighteenth century in Edinburgh and several other towns.
Attempts to set up a national printers"union in Scotland date from 1836, but both the General Typographical Association of Scotland and its successor, the Northern District Board of the National Typographical Association, came to grief after only a few years.
Eventually the Scottish Typographical Association was founded on a lasting basis in 1853, composed of branches in towns where there was a moderate degree of printing activity.
Although the STA had a continuous existence from 1853, there were still imbalances between the different branches in numbers, strength and militancy.
At first there were branches only in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dumfries, Kilmarnock and Paisley: as yet none existed in Dundee, Perth, Inverness or Aberdeen.
Essentially Glasgow and Edinburgh were the two towns which provided the bulk of the membership and carried the burden of administration.
The STA headquarters were in Glasgow (which thus acquired a degree of leadership in the union), but the union journal the Scottish Typographical Circular was written and produced by the Edinburgh branch until the 1900s.
Estimates of the numbers in the trade, or of union membership, are necessarily vague before the union began publishing statistics in the mid-1870s.
Of the estimated 1,500 journeymen and 1,200 apprentices working as printers (pressmen and compositors combined) in Scotland in the 1850s, rather more than half were working in the book and jobbing section of the trade, the rest in newspaper offices."
As we have seen, bookwork tended to be concentrated (though not exclusively) in Edinburgh, and the Glasgow trade contained more newspaper and jobbing printers.
It seems that in Edinburgh the ETS grew from an average of 265 members in the late 1850s to about 650 in the late 18605,6 In Edinburgh, as in the other towns, the membership consisted of compositors and press- or machinemen, side by side, within the same branch.
Even in the early days, when wage differentials between the two cities were not great, the Edinburgh compositors were considered by their Glasgow colleagues to be lacking in spirit: "The printers [i.e. compositors]of Edinburgh had the unenviable reputation of being willing to accept work at a reduced rate in almost any town in the United Kingdom before 1840." 
Whether this was a deserved reputation is not altogether clear, but may be explained by the peculiarities that made Edinburgh a special case long before 1872.
The Edinburgh journeymen compositors had succeeded in 1803 in their appeal to the courts to sanction a document known as the Interlocutor — an extraordinarily complicated scale of piece-work rates — which was regarded as a great victory.
Its long-term effect however was to provoke Edinburgh employers into various devices to evade the high piece-work rates stipulated by the Interlocutor.
The most notorious was the introduction to Edinburgh (as nowhere else) of the "mixed system" referred to in Chapter 1.
To avoid the 1803 rates, employers hired a number of skilled men to do the most expensive work (known in the trade as the "fat" ) and paid them by time or stab (establishment) rates.
The less complicated typesetting ( "lean" )— essentially solid lines of text — was allocated to piece-workers known as "linesmen" , i. e. men paid by the line (in practice by the 1,000 ens).
Whenever trade was slack, employers tried to keep stab men fully employed at the expense of linesmen.
The result was to keep linesmen's wages down: before 1862, when the stab wage was 25s a week, most linesmen averaged 15s 2d; in  1894, when the stab rate was 32s, 24s was the best a piece worker could hope for.
When laid off, the linesman went elsewhere in desperation, thus causing Edinburgh men's reputation for accepting low rates.
The Edinburgh branch of the union faced particular problems from the start, then, with a sub-category of skilled, fully apprenticed but low-paid compositors in the trade well before any mention is heard of women, and with a division of labour between groups of compositors already well established.
The gap between stab hands and linesmen, peculiar to Edinburgh, was not the only division in the work-force with which the union had to contend.
In any confrontation with employers, the ETS had to reckon with the potential split between compositors and machinemen; with the apprentice question; and with the threat from non-union men recruited from outside.
In most branches of the STA, compositors and machinemen were not in conflict.
But in Edinburgh, the mixed system meant that a large number of compositors were on piece-work, while the machinemen were virtually all "on time" .
This led to tensions, uneasily held in check and would eventually, though not until after the 1872 strike, bring about a split within the Edinburgh branch.
Inside the composing-room itself, there was the perennial "apprentice question" .
As the overall Scottish figures show, the ratio of apprentices to journeymen in the trade was high, far too high in the view of the union, which was always trying to get employers to reduce the intake of apprentices.
A root cause of the numbers was the long seven-year apprenticeship at low wages — a restriction of entry to the trade which compositors were reluctant to alter, but which was increasingly becoming a two edged weapon.
Although apprentices wasted a lot of time in their early years, most of them had picked up enough of the trade to be useful typesetters long before the seven years were up.
A particularly vexing category was the "turnover" : the apprentice who had served most of his time but was not yet a journeyman, and who was snapped up by employers to do a man's work at a boy's pay.
The apprentice problem was by no means peculiar to Edinburgh, but it was one more source of cheap labour for Edinburgh employers, and further divided the workforce, this time by age.
Because of their youth and vulnerability, and since they were less likely to be union members, apprentices and turnovers might be persuaded by employers to carry on working during a strike.
But the real strike-breakers usually came from outside.
 "Foreign" or "rat" labour, as it was called in the trade, consisted of unemployed compositors from other towns, who might be tempted to work for lower rates, or to move into a strike-bound area because they were "on the tramp" and desperate for jobs.
Edinburgh, as a large and well-known printing centre, exerted a powerful attraction on all such men in the north of England, who came  flocking when jobs were advertised.
Sometimes the union was successful in persuading newcomers not to take the work, but employers"inducements often proved too strong.
Here then was a further division among male compositors, well established before 1872.
Despite the weaknesses in their position caused by such divisions, and despite their supposed "apathy" , the Edinburgh printers showed a marked willingness to combine, as the history of their confrontations with the employers shows.
But in Edinburgh they were opposed by extremely entrenched resistance from a determined group of employers.
The latter had formed a Master Printers"Association in 1846, with the explicit aim of keeping out unionists and outlawing strikers.
It was the attempt by the men to boycott these employers, energetically undertaken, that had eventually led to the collapse, through debt, of the Northern District Board (the predecessor of the STA) in 1847. "-In later years several of the STA's" forward movements", that is claims for higher pay or shorter hours, began in Edinburgh.
"The 1872–3 strike would be a further example of a determined effort by the Edinburgh branch which met with tough employer resistance.
As in the past, the cost to the union would be high, and an enforced period of recovery and retrenchment would — not for the first time — follow.
THE STRIKE OF 1872–3
During the 1860s, the various branches of the STA had made modest but steady progress towards a higher Wage.
It was in Edinburgh that the question of reducing hours was first raised, in the wake of the nine-hour day movement which had been launched in the building trades.
In 1865, the hours in printing offices were reduced from sixty to fifty-seven per week.
The early 1870s were a time of prosperity for the trade, and the ETS felt sufficiently confident to present a memorial to the employers in 1871 asking for a further reduction to fifty-one hours.
A compromise settlement of fifty-four hours was reached, but the union returned to the fifty-one hour claim, this time combined with a demand for better overtime pay and piece-work rates, in September 1872 (just before the year's busiest season began).
When the employers refused the claim, a "largely-attended meeting" of the men unanimously decided to harden their line (asking for an increase in the stab rate) and to "tender notices" , i. e. to give notice of a strike on 1 November.
Despite some conciliatory moves on both sides (notably, an offer to meet some of the pay claims, though not, significantly, on piece rates) the masters remained adamant on the main demand of reduced hours.
 "On 2 November, 800 employees, inclusive of apprentices, journeymen, readers and men in positions of trust, gave two weeks notice" and the strike began on 15 November.
It started amid much cheerfulness, confidence and good humour.
The men met at Drummond Street Hall for recreation including"chess, draughts and dominoes…and walking parties were organized to  explore the fastnesses of Corstorphine, Braid and Pentland Hills…
The Meadow Park is lively each day with football players".
Only two dozen members of the union did not join the strike.
But the mood did not last long: "rat" labour was soon in town, attracted by the comparatively high wages, combined with the lower cost of living, and the additional inducement of three-month contracts offered by some employers.
The Minute Book of the union strike committee reckoned the number of strike-breakers by 11 February 1872, that is three months into the strike, as 404:253 "foreign comps" and 70 "home comps" ; 43 "foreign machine men" and 39 "home machine men" ."
At a general meeting held on the evening of 13 February, it was reported that there were 475 non-union journeymen at work in Edinburgh and that "additional hands were daily arriving" .
There can be little doubt that the chief strike-breakers were the outside "rats" , contempt for whom was freely expressed in union journals which commented in disgusted terms on their "greasy nondescript attire…blotched faces and unkempt locks…[and]hangdog look" ."
Their capacity to do the work was doubted: "a blackguard horde of broken down incompetents [have been taken on]to take up our work" .
 "Botched…hideous proofs, damaged machinery would be the result" .
The Edinburgh strikers held out firmly, and had the support of other unionists in the town.
The Trades Council recorded in its minutes of 28 January that elements of pressure had been put upon [the Edinburgh printers], enormous sums of money had been expended, rare inducements had been held out, untruths had been circulated, even religion had been abused [?]and brought to play on purpose to shake the men, and yet after all these means had been expended and an income verging on starvation, the men had remained as firm as at first."
But two weeks later, it was clear that the strikers were losing.
Many had been forced to leave town, and even the unusually low subsistence allowance the union was paying had eaten alarmingly into its funds.
At the general meeting of 13 February mentioned above, and on advice from STA headquarters, conveyed by the ETS secretary John Common, the men voted to return to work on "the November conditions" , that is with an extra 2s 6d on the stab rate (to bring it up to the Glasgow figure) plus some concessions on overtime, but no joy on piece rates or on the question of hours.
The voting was 200 for, 131 against (the meeting, 700 strong, included "newspapermen and those currently working" who did not vote).
The letter which the employers sent to John Common, acknowledging the return to work, congratulated him on "the manly and frank tone in which you intimate the termination of the dispute." 
Of the 750 men who had originally walked out, 450 were still in Edinburgh; of these 200 were still unemployed a week later and it was thought that full  absorption would take up to six months; in fact by early April, only 20 strikers were still without work.
In all these "manly and frank" affairs, where were the women?
I have cheated a bit by not mentioning them until now, but the first mention of women by the union does not actually occur until late January and early February, that is when the strike was already entering its final phase.
There is evidence to suggest that they had indeed been introduced before this to some offices — possibly as early as before Christmas 1872 — but it is clear from the strike committee minutes that they were not regarded by the union as a threat of any significance compared with that of outside labour.
The first mention of women — and as a potential threat only — appears in the strike committee minutes for 25 January 1873.
A member reported that a circular had been issued by Mr Constable, a leading employer, "to boarding schools etc., intimating his willingness to receive young men and women and educate them as compositors" .
I The committee decided to pass on this information to the editor of Out On Strike, the strikers"newsletter, to use at his discretion.
A fortnight later, W. & R. Chambers placed an advertisement in the Edinburgh Evening Co it rant (the first of its kind that I have been able to find in the local press), reading: "Printing: wanted: young women of good education and character, to act as compositors" .
However some employers must have moved more quickly, since the Scotsman for the same day carried the following report: The masters say they have engaged workmen from England who have proved equal to the occasion, while for the past few weeks an experiment was made with educated females at the case.
This experiment has proved eminently successful and the largest employers in the city who have engaged these women — varying in number from 4 to 20 — state, we understand, that the females give every promise of great efficiency as compositors. [my italics]
The contemporary evidence is fragmentary, but it is clear enough that the strike was the occasion for certain master printers to revive the idea of employing women.
A later commentator says that the plan "had been cherished by them for years" and it could very well have its roots in the Caledonian Press experiment, which had ended a mere eight years earlier.
All the same it is far from true that they were used to break the strike.
This, as the strike committee's Minute Book, the articles in the STC and the local press emphatically record, was primarily the doing of foreign male labour.
The distinction may not seem an essential one, but there is a difference: "strike-breaking" suggests a degree of capability for the work and willingness to do it which may have been possessed by the "rats" of "London and Liverpool" , 28 but was unlikely to have been displayed by the handful of girl apprentices actually engaged during the strike.
Their appearance in the case-room while the men were absent was little more than symbolic.
They could not have learned the trade in  time to be of any practical use to the employers in keeping orders going.
But it is as strike-breakers — with all that that implies of betrayal of working-class solidarity — that they went down in ETS history.
And the label was retrospectively applied to all "females" in the trade, although it had originally been relevant only to a handful of school-leavers, comparable to the boy apprentices who also worked during the strike.
They were undoubtedly used by the employers, and the strike was seized as a chance to bring them in — but it should be firmly stated here, since it is usually glossed over, that the damage to the strikers"cause was not for the first time, the result of actions by other men.
THE FIRST GIRL RECRUITS
Who were these early recruits?
The fact that "educated females" were the desired targets of the newspaper  advertisement suggests that the "philanthropic" nature of the experiments of the 1860s was uppermost in the minds of the employers.
And we have also seen that the "boarding schools" were to be circulated.
In Edinburgh at the time, there were various schools which might come under this heading, including the Merchant Company schools which provided a good education originally for children of humble backgrounds, but increasingly for middle-class children.
They did take in boarders, many of whom were orphans or the recipients of charity.
The historical sketch included in Macdonald's 1904 survey of women in the printing trades states that it was indeed the pupils of Merchant Company Schools who formed the first recruits, and that these were "a better class of girl" , sometimes described as "stickit" (would-be) teachers.
The heading may also cover orphanages.
In both cases, the girls would have been brought up in a genteel atmosphere, although they might originally have come from very poor families.
One compositor, Jean Henderson whose daughter kindly provided me with information, went into the trade (in the 1890s, that is some time after the earliest entrants) straight from the Dean Orphanage, where she had received a good education (see Plate 1).
Her father, a sailor from Shetland, had been lost at sea, and her mother had to bring her two young children up in desperate poverty until they went to the orphanage.
We do not know whether all the original recruits really were from orphanages and boarding schools, but if so, they were a particularly vulnerable group of people with a very confused class identity and little choice of work when placed under pressure from patrons.
We do know that "they were for the most part young women of eighteen and upwards" in the first instance.
It may well be that the better education of orphan girls was a particular feature of the experiment.
The Education Act (Scotland), making education compulsory for children from five to thirteen, had only just been passed in 1872, and the capacity to read complicated copy could by no means be assumed in all girls (or indeed boys) even from "respectable  artisans" "families, as is illustrated by the remarks of Mr McCrie, the owner of a paper factory, reported in the Edinburgh Daily Review in January 1873.
At a meeting called by a philanthropic group to discuss funding of "education for artisans" , Mr McCrie spoke of the low educational attainments of his work-force: twenty "girls between thirteen and twenty…each girl respectably connected" .
Not one of them, he said, was able to read the Bible correctly, but all could dance a quadrille, sing, and half of them could waltz.
The teacher found that four could read Messrs Nelson's Shilling Book, six the Sixpenny Book, and ten only the Threepenny Book "With the" board schools"in their infancy, it was by no means clear that it would have been possible to recruit many girls of working-class origin into the trade in the early 1870s.
As we shall see, that would quickly change.
It is possible to plot fairly closely the rate at which recruitment of girls increased, once the strike was over.
In June 1873, the STC reported that it was "scarcely possible" to speak with confidence of the numbers employed, "perhaps they may reach 50 [overall]…but the number is increasing at an alarming rate" .
In September that year, the ETS sent out a questionnaire to its chapels, the results of which indicated a total of "63 girls" in employment.
Some partial statistics in February 1874 suggest that in certain firms the number was rising particularly fast.
The largest houses were the ones who most readily hired girls.
There were 13 or 14 at R. & R. Clark, and 22 at Ballantyne's (out of a total work-force of 94 — the male workers being 36 piece, 16 stab and 20 apprentices).
Turnbull and Spears had 6 girls out of a total work-force of 30.
At Neill's, there were already 20 girls to 30 men.
Only one large firm in Edinburgh — Thomas Nelson's — never, throughout the whole period in question, employed any women compositors.
By the end of 1875, the increase was, if not dramatic, still considerable.
By now there were "114 females employed at case" ; they compare with a total of 928 men in the trade (compositors and pressmen included), 434 of whom were members of the ETS.
By this stage it could fairly be said that women had gained a footing in the Edinburgh book-houses.
Whereas the "rats" had broken the strike, its long-term effect was to allow the "mice" to creep into the trade.
WOMAN COMPOSITORS: AN EDINBURGH SPECIALITY
Why was there no protest from the men?
Part of the explanation is that the strike had (like previous disputes) left a legacy of financial burden and division within a much weakened union.
The fullest retrospective account of the union's difficulties at this time is contained in the "statement by the Edinburgh branch on the Female Question" , printed in the STC almost thirty years later in 1904.
This argues that there was a drift away from the union after the strike, although it did not, apparently, happen immediately (and there are some discrepancies between the figures it gives and the 1870s records).
In December 1874, the statement  says, the ETS had 900 members including the 200 machinemen, but by 1880, there were only 342 union men left.
The machinemen had seceded, claiming that the interests of the press section of the ETS were "always subordinated" to those of the compositors.
Gillespie suggests that there were other reasons, including the purely personal, but whatever the immediate causes, the 1872–3 strike was an underlying factor.
The division between compositors and machinemen offered employers an opportunity to play one off against the other, weakening the union's bargaining power.
(Significantly it was only after the definitive healing of the breach — in 1907 — that the ETS made its all-out effort to "resolve the Female Question" : see Chapter 5.)
But the secession of the machinemen was not the only source of weakness.
The STA as a whole was left with debts totalling £6,260 in the 1870s, and "the greater part of this sum was absorbed by the members of the Edinburgh branch…[who]above all others might have been expected to stand by the office-bearers till the debt was at least liquidated" .
As it was, "with a depleted membership, with chapels thoroughly disorganized, the branch for years after the strike, was not in a position to remedy the grievance of female labour" 
It must also be said that during these early years, in the 1870s, there was little hostile reaction from most of the men.
 "At present[the employment of women]is treated with indifference by the great bulk of compositors" .
Evidently the employers were expecting some hostility, as the reminiscences of one elderly compositor suggest: "back in the 70s…
I was just finishing my apprenticeship, and the shop I was in was trying to start female labour.
The girls were being taken in at night after we left and what a mess we got in the morning!
Type was pretty plentiful on the floor and the stuff on the galleys, well "nuff said!" 
But before long, a correspondent of the STC was pointing out that "60 to 70 per cent of the fair intruders are being sedulously drilled into the p's and q's of the art by members of our own society!" 
The Society had asked members not to let their own daughters enter the trade, but now, for a few shillings extra, they were training the girl learners.
The minutes of the ETS executive committee, available only up to 1875, while periodically recording the numbers of women compositors with some anxiety, are more concerned with the pressing problem of money and sliding membership.
The warning voices raised from time to time in the journal appear to have been in the minority.
Most surprising of all, at a quarterly delegate meeting at the end of 1873, "it was generally held that there could be no reasonable objection to their [women's]employment to a certain extent; the main point in dispute being, was it right to put a limit on their number and…to what extent and how to apply the rule" .
It may well have been the case that at this time, only a few months into the venture, the women were being paid much the same wage as boy apprentices at the same stage, and this would therefore explain why the delegate meeting decided merely to try to apply the same rule as, in  theory at least, limited apprentices"numbers.
The threat to adult compositors was not yet clear.
But probably equally important was the fact that the early 1870s was a time of full employment in the trade.
With work plentiful, the women's influence was "not…much felt…but with the start of depression, more attention was focused on them as a threat to the employment of journeymen" By 1879, the STC reported that while "the influx of females" was "not unbearably felt" while trade was good, "now the necessity on purely philanthropic grounds of course, of keeping the ladies supplied with copy" , had led to "dispensing with the services of a large number of journeymen" .
Those out of work quickly reached unprecedented numbers.
 "The number…wholly or partially idle has not been excelled within the memories of most living printers, even the oldest" ."
Trade continued to fluctuate in the 1880s, and from now on worries were regularly expressed in the STC: "however reluctant we may have been to realise the position into which we were slowly but surely drifting" the threat was now a permanent reality."
By this time, Edinburgh had emerged as the recognized centre of "the Female Question" (as it is always known in the union literature).
Elsewhere in Britain, notably in London, women compositors were a small and declining proportion of the total.
There may have been as many as 200 women compositors in London in the early 1890s, but as has been noted, the London Society of Compositors was able to exert pressure on employers and see that on the whole they were vanishing or being expelled to printing-houses in the Home Counties.
In 1899, the authors of an article in the Economic Journal estimated the total numbers of women compositors outside Scotland as about 300, of whom 225 were employed ill firms in the London region, another 35 in two other firms, and the rest scattered in small houses employing single numbers."
By the time of the Fair Wages Committee of 1908, T. E. Naylor of the LSC was able to report that the only "serious competition" between men and women compositors outside Scotland was in "Reading, possibly Dunstable, Wolverton, Bushey and Maidenhead" .
He also remarked, significantly: If it were not for the Union, I venture to think that women would be all over the London trade.
Fortunately the London Union has been strong enough to keep them entirely out but these London houses, as soon as they get beyond the sphere of the…
Union by moving twenty or thirty miles outside, at once they set up conditions that I know they would set up in London if they could do so unchecked (The Women's Printing Society continued to operate, as an exceptional case, with women being paid male rates.)
In Scotland too, apart from Edinburgh there were few women compositors.
Margaret Irwin told the Royal Commission on Labour in 1893 that she did not think many women were "at case" outside Edinburgh."
There were certainly women employed in Aberdeen, and instances  were also reported in Falkirk and Glasgow in the 1880s, and in Perth in the 1890s, where the numbers of women were at least such as to be reduced by seventeen".
In 1908 women were still being employed in both Perth and Aberdeen.
But nowhere were the numbers concerned anything like those in Edinburgh.
We have seen that there were just over 100 there in 1875.
Figures quoted at irregular intervals by the STC and other sources suggest that there were approximately 150 in 1879; 200 in 1885; 300 in 1888; about the same in 1892; 540 in 1899; 651 in 1908; and about 800 in 1910, the year in which the last girl apprentice entered the Edinburgh trade.
In fact the total on the Register of Employees for 1911 was 844.
This seems to indicate that after a fairly steady climb and a certain standstill in the late 1880s, the numbers really took off in the late 1890s and the first decade of the twentieth century.
They were concentrated in the largest firms: Clark's, Neill's, Morrison & Gibb's etc. (see Table 2).
It may be tempting to relate the figures to the general depression of the 1880s and the revival of the nineties, but the figures are too approximate for fine dating, and while the general economic situation undoubtedly played some part, other factors, to be discussed below, had their importance.
From a tentative experiment, bringing in a few girl trainees, mostly from charitable institutions, the employment in Edinburgh of women compositors had by Edwardian times become an institution.
Some of the larger houses now employed more women than men: Clark's in 1911 had 114 women and 89 journeymen (plus 27 apprentices).
Morrison & Gibb had 136 women and 112 journeymen; Neill's had 109 women and only 37 journeymen compositors.
Why had it happened?
The short answer, as far as employers are concerned, is that women were cheap, and increasingly gave good value for money.
As early as 1879, the union secretary was reporting in consternation: "so highly are they prized that one master who employs 20 girls vauntingly said that with his girls and the…foreman, he could carry on the work of his establishment, dispensing with journeymen!" 
The way this worked in detail will be explained in Chapter 4.
For the moment we may note simply that if the experiment had not worked, it would have been dropped.
Women were able to do the job for which they were hired and they cost less than men.
With better education in the late Victorian period, literate girls could easily be found.
One employer remarked in 1902 that: In regard to girls from Board Schools, our experience in regard to their reading powers is exactly the reverse of that of the boys, most of them being able to read both print and manuscript with ease and accuracy."
Why was it so easy for master printers to recruit girls?
Again the short answer is simple, but this time the other way about: because the wages paid to a "compess" , while less than a man's, were high compared to the wages a girl could earn elsewhere.
Chapter 6 will look in detail at the  women compositors and their background, but it is worth making the point here that it quickly became obvious to certain categories of working-class girls in Edinburgh that a new opportunity was open to them.
Family connections — always important in finding the first job for a girl or boy leaving school — could now be used in the printing trade, whatever the union said.
One of the employers interviewed by Margaret Irwin for the Royal Commission on Labour in the early 1890s reported that "the girls in our composing room are in many cases daughters of compositors and machinemen and men employed in other departments of the establishment…they introduce their relations in the form of sisters" .
Thus the original recruits from boarding schools were gradually replaced by younger girls, mostly straight from "board" (that is ordinary elementary) schools, and from ordinary working-class families in the city.
They were likely in the early days to come from families connected with the trade, but as time went on, recruitment was wider.
By the late 1890s and early 1900s, typesetting was apparently well established as a possible career for a school-leaving girl.
In the 1896 article on R. & R. Clark in the British Printer, there is a photograph of "the girls" case-room ": on the wall at the end of every row are the pegs on which the" girls"hung their hats.
By then it looked as if the hats were there to stay.
WOMAN, THE WORK PROCESS AND THE PAY QUESTION
Gentlemen, not only had our trade been inundated with boys, but fortunately or unfortunately, we have had another element introduced, and you know that I have never been a person who ignored the company of the opposite sex.
As the father of eleven children (laughter and applause)— I have not been a disciple of Dr Malthus but you will clearly understand that, while I appreciate the ladies, I am strongly of the opinion that they have their proper station in life (Hear!
Hear!)…
I don't object to ladies being printers, provided they are placed on the same equality as men.
If our young girls are to learn the profession, let them serve a seven years apprenticeship and when they have completed it, I ask for them the same wages as are paid for journeymen…
In his after-dinner speech as secretary of the Scottish Typographical Association, John Battersby was quite jovial and his demand for equal pay (or, as he put it, "female rights" ) impeccable.
The problem was that equal pay was entangled with a restructuring of the work process in the Edinburgh printing trade: increasingly there was a division of labour, with certain men, and almost all the women, directed to straight typesetting, while a few of the men concentrated on the finishing processes.
In this chapter, the everyday division of labour at work is looked at in some detail, in order to understand how all the parties involved -employers, men and women — interpreted the questions of skill and pay.
There is by now a plentiful body of evidence to show how labour processes in nineteenth-century Britain were broken down, particularly after mechanization."
Trades that had once been skilled were being divided into their constituent parts so that less skill was required to carry out any one process.
For women workers, this almost invariably meant that they ended up with jobs classified (whatever the real degree of skill or expertise required) as the least skilled, and certainly the worst paid.
Some detailed examples of how this worked in hosiery and tailoring are described by Nancy Grey Osterud and Jenny Morris in the collection of essays, Unequal Opportunities, edited by Angela John, in which Felicity Hunt also analyses how mechanization affected women workers in the printing and bookbinding trades.
Because she is chiefly concerned with the London trade, from which women compositors were quickly excluded, Hunt does not consider the possible division of labour within  traditional manual typesetting that their introduction brought in Scotland; nor is the subject much discussed by Cynthia Cockburn who is more concerned with the trade after mechanization.
The plentiful records in Edinburgh provide a unique example of the way this classic restructuring of the work process was already operating in the book-printing houses, before the introduction of composing machines.
Since the questions of apprenticeship and pay lie at the heart of the problem, we should first examine the surviving evidence to discover how long an apprenticeship women actually served, and how much they were paid, before going on to analyse the re-organization of the work process.
APPRENTICESHIP AND LENGTH OF CAREER
It was unofficially agreed by masters and men alike that no apprentice really needed seven years to learn the trade.
The journeymen were reluctant to give way on the question though, since the seven years was still a way of controlling entry to the profession — a proposition brutally shaken by the entry of women who hardly ever served "full" apprenticeships.
Even for a boy, it was becoming rare, by the latter part of the nineteenth century, that he had fully mastered the trade.
He would have graduated from sweeping the floor, running errands and being a "reading boy" in his first two years, to distributing type and learning the case, then to typesetting and if he was lucky to making up and imposition, though rarely to the refinements of display work.
 "If at the end of seven years, he can make up the fraction of a quarto forme and impose it, or is able to lay down a sheet of 16's correctly, the apprentice so qualified may considered himself well advanced." 
But a girl was treated differently from the start.
She never wasted time running errands.
Her first employment was likely to be as a "reading girl" , that is to sit on a stool and read out the copy to a compositor.
This is not often mentioned in the documents, but two of the surviving women compositors I was able to interview said they had started this way.
Indeed it seems that girls very quickly replaced boys at this task: "Evidently [the boys" ]tongues do not go so glibly as the girls, "as the STC was already saying as early as 1875," for in most of the offices where girls are employed, reading boys are now unknown."
The next stage was to learn the case.
At Morrison & Gibb, according to one survivor, the girls went up to a special room to learn all the types, and another former Morrison & Gibb "learner" remembered that "you were given a card with the lay of the case" and just had to get on with it, practising until you could pick up the type correctly.
She did not remember being formally instructed by anyone, not even the older girls, though in some houses, men were evidently called in to show girls how to handset.
Girls were sometimes called apprentices, more often simply "learners" : indicating that they were not really acquiring a skill, just "learning on the job" , which was the standard training for most semi-skilled occupations.
Accounts vary as to how long a girl (usually starting, like a boy, at 14) was regarded as a learner.
Macdonald's 1904 account says it could be anything from "two to four years" .
Fraser (of Neill's printing office) said in his evidence to the Fair Wages Committee in 1908 that it was "three years, but they are not expert immediately after the three years" .
One union man giving evidence at the same time, said that it was "not…above twelve months" .
One survivor told me that her apprenticeship lasted about four years and that that was normal at the time (she started work in 1909 at 15 after an unsuccessful start in dressmaking).
What did they learn?
It seems to have been unusual for any girl to go beyond straight typesetting to learn much about the other processes at this stage: a crucial point.
As we have already seen, a boy might not have got beyond typesetting at an equivalent stage either, nor did he automatically get much further anyway; but the girls were almost all set to handsetting for the firm once they were competent at it.
This critical division, between the "basic" skill of the trade (on which many male compositors also spent most of their time) and the "more skilled" processes, was to persist after the "learning" stage, and was much to the employers"advantage.
When challenged on this point, employers always produced a unanimous chorus to the effect that this was what women wanted, because they would not stay long in the trade before they married.
This was a very familiar argument, and one which contains a degree of truth, though not as much as employers (and unions) may have liked to think.
They variously reported: "Most of them get married when they get about 20" .
 "After about 4 years, the lucky ones get married." 
"We have an apprenticeship of seven years to begin with, but 99 out of 100 of these girls when they go to the trade expect that they will be married before that time passes.
's Sometimes the judgement is nuanced: "The pick of the girls get married.
The qualities which make a girl smart and successful at her work would similarly make for her success in the marriage market."
Even Mr Fraser of Neill's, a source of many choice quotations on this issue had to admit that not all the women got married: "there are some who stay a long time.
There is one who has been with us a long time — but then those are old maids of course.
There are a good few of these unfortunates."
An anonymous writer to the Scottish Typographical Circular in 1904 pointed out that "some of the females have been at the trade since 1872 [over thirty years]and were grown-up young women when they started" , so they would more or less count as "veterans" ."
But since the majority were likely to leave sooner, it was argued, "they want to make money at once" .
"They become full wage-earners at a much earlier stage…than their contemporaries among the men.
This practice is said to suit them better since it is probable that they will marry and leave off work and they hardly like to spend seven years out of their wage-earning life in being trained. "" 
And from here it was but a step to  suggesting that women did not take the whole thing seriously as a profession.
 "she has no intention of ever being [a comp]in any sense of the word." 
 "They have no intention of relying on the trade." 
After all as one employer opined, "twelve years is said to be the maximum working life of a woman compositor" .
It is impossible to dodge the question of marriage: as has already been noted, the majority of women did marry, and if they lived in Edinburgh, they almost invariably gave up paid work on marriage.
But wishful thinking sometimes informed the remarks of both employers and trade union officials, whether about the age at which women compositors married or the likelihood of their doing so.
We should remember that it was ill the employers"interests to claim that it was not worth providing women with a long training because they would waste it by leaving early; while it was in the trade union's interest to claim that women were incompetent because they had only received a short training.
Details about the careers and life histories of the women compositors will figure in a later chapter, but a few remarks about the evidence relating to marriage will provide some perspective for the training question.
As it happens, the concrete evidence about marriage in the "1910 sample" analysed in Chapter 6 (those women in the trade in 1910) very largely relates to women who were aged about 18–28 during the Great War, and it could reasonably be argued that the war played such havoc with the marriage chances of this generation that it will have contained an unusually high proportion of women who never married.
The figures actually suggest that of the women compositors employed in 1910, at least 25 per cent never married.
Even if we adjust this figure downwards to say 20 per cent for the pre-1914 period, this still represents quite a large number of women (160 out of 800) who were in the trade for life, which usually meant until well over 60.
Of those who did marry, comparatively few did so as young as 20.
Taking from the 1910 sample only those marriages recorded before 1914, which can therefore be assumed to represent the pre-war pattern, the age distribution of the twenty-nine brides was as shown in Figure 1.
The preferred age of marriage was about 24 or 25 (average 24.6).
This is a small sample: the average age of all brides in Scotland in 1908 was 26.8 years,"and perhaps our compositors were nearer the average than the precise records can show.
But at all events, it must be concluded that, assuming an entry age of 14 in most cases, the average length of time in the trade for those who married was ten or eleven years, while for those who did not it was very much longer.
To speak of twelve years as a maximum then, or to talk airily of "girls marrying when they get about 20" as the employers quoted earlier did, is misleading.
It would be more accurate to say that very few spent less than seven or eight years in the trade, the majority spent at least 10–12 years, while about a fifth remained in the trade for life.
It is true that statistics on marriage are one   thing, expectations of marriage another.
Since most women did marry, most teenage girls assumed that they would do so and that they would give up work then.
Nor could they predict the age of marriage at the outset of their careers, and there is no doubt truth in the employers"point that such expectations coloured their attitude to work.
But the employers who were in fact well placed to have a statistical view of the matter, were not inclined to draw attention to the inconvenient figures.
From their point of view, women were a particularly useful breed of apprentices, to whom the old rules need not apply.
And since they were not "serving their time" in the way a boy did, they could therefore be paid less when their training was complete.
WAGES
Before looking at women's wages, let us consider the men's.
The stab or time rate for a journeyman compositor in Edinburgh in the 1890s and early 1900s was 32s (£1/12/0), while piece workers or linesmen were usually earning considerably less — perhaps 25s to 27s."
The real take-home pay of both men and women can be clearly seen from the wage-books of firms like Oliver & Boyd or T. & A. Constable, which are in the National Library of Scotland.
From these it is easy to follow the career of an individual apprentice through to adulthood.
It was normal for a boy to start at 45 at age 14, and for the next four years his pay went up a shilling a year.
For the next two years after that, it increased at 2s a year, and during the seventh and last year of apprenticeship it moved more quickly, so that at the end of the seventh year, the by now 21-year-old man could be earning more than double his wage of a year before.
Not all apprentices made the smooth transition to the 32s stab rate.
Thus if we compare two male apprentices in Oliver & Boyd's the figures tell different stories.
J. Riley, aged 14, started his apprenticeship on 31 July 1903 at 45 and the wage-book shows him getting the regular rises described above.
At 18 he was earning 8s, at 20 he was earning 14s, then in  August 1910, his seven years being served, he was earning 32s.
Indeed by December of the same year, his take-home pay was over £2 (40s).
But his near-contemporary J. Chalmers, who had begun his apprenticeship in August 1900, found himself still stuck at 14s in 1907, when he was 21 years old, and over the next year or two his pay was usually between 23s and 27s a week: he seems never to have made it to 32s.
In 1909 he left Oliver & Boyd, presumably to seek better fortune elsewhere.
For whatever reason, he had been put on to piece-work at age 21, Here we have a documented example of the difference between the stab hand and the linesman.
If we now compare the fortunes of a girl apprentice in the same firm (and the wage-books describe her as such, rather than a "learner" ), Miss Whyte, she began in 1901 probably at 55.
(The record for 1901 is incomplete, but this is what all other girl apprentices in the book started at.)
Three years later in October 1904, she was earning 11s, while her male contemporaries had only reached 8 or 95, However, she never advanced far beyond this, and in March 1909, she was still only earning 12s 6d, eight years after starting work.
Similarly, Miss Robertson, of T. & A. Constable, who had begun in 1894, was earning 6s a year later, and 13s in 1900, at age 20.
After this, progress was slow, though most women compositors of seven years or so experience could apparently expect to move up to 16s: roughly half the male wage of the time.
A few earned 18s or more, and a handful, who became readers could earn even higher wages, though rarely anything like 32s in the period up to 1910.
If we take the women's case-room wages at Oliver & Boyd, the pattern is as shown in Table 7a.
The wage-scale was revised upwards in 1910 (see Chapter 5), and the printed schedule in the wage-book gives the rates for "female compositors" as listed in Table 7b.
It is clear enough what was happening: a girl was paid more than a boy on entering the trade and continued to earn more until both were approaching 20 years old, when the male rate drew ahead and suddenly leapfrogged to become double that of the female rate.
Almost all women   were in practice put on to piece-work as soon as they had "learnt the case" (that is they followed the pattern of the male apprentice Chalmers).
Their pay, expressed in pence per 1000 ens, varied, but was still less than a man's.
Margaret Irwin reported in 1894 that in one Edinburgh firm the piece rate was 6¾d per 1000 for a man, 3d to 5d for a woman; in another, men got 6½d, women 4½jd to 5d.
Although for a man a stab wage was invariably better than piece-rates, it could sometimes be the other way round for women.
Margaret Irwin refers to some women making between 20s and 30s a week on piece-work on a particular contract (the valuation rolls).
The survivors I have interviewed mostly remembered going straight on to piece-work and staying there, although in larger offices, like Clark's, some experienced Women workers did become stab hands.
's But the majority of adult Women compositors remained earning 16s-18s, perhaps a bit more if they were lucky.
The only possibility of further promotion was to (proof-) reader, a step taken by some of the women who spent a lifetime in the trade.
Putting together what we know about girls"apprenticeships — lasting three or four years — and wage rates, it can be deduced that from the age of say 17 until perhaps 25 for those who married, women compositors were doing the equivalent of full-time typesetting for wages that varied between half and two-thirds the adult male wage, depending on whether stab or piece rates are measured.
Their value to the employer should be obvious.
But Were they doing the equivalent of men's work?
THE DIVISION OF LABOUR: WHAT WOMEN DID NOT DO
There is an almost unanimous chorus, unchanging over the thirty or more years around the turn of the century, about the division of labour that existed in printing houses where women compositors were employed.
When examined in detail, the chorus is not quite in harmony about where the dividing line actually came.
Women, it was generally claimed, were put to do "straight setting" , that is composing lines of type (by hand for most of the period), and only rarely moved from the type-case to do the other tasks regarded as part of the trade (making up, imposition, locking up chases, carrying formes, etc.).
It was usually  agreed that they If id do correcting and distributing (a rather thankless task, left to apprentices if possible).
It would be tedious to quote more than a few examples of the evidence from parliamentary commissions, the STC, union reports and surveys etc., but the following quotations are typical: "About the only work which the women can do is to stand or sit at their formes and set up type; and to distribute the types back again into the cases, but of course this is only a portion of a compositor's work" (an employer); "" As far as mere type-lifting is concerned, she may do, but there is other rough work in connection with compositors "work which I do not think a woman is qualified for" (a union leader); "Women…get the best, i. e. the simplest jobs…they are kept always at pretty much the same kind of work" (an employer).
When a representative of the London Compositors "Society was asked whether this was a" lower class of work ", he replied, with honesty," I do not think that would be a correct term to use.
They are doing work which every compositor is called upon to do at some time or another, that is plain composition, "but he added that the men do" the many operations that go to make up the comp's calling".
However there are sometimes indications that women were doing at least some of the other operations.
Thus a description of R. & R. Clark's works in 1896 commented that "for straightforward setting, ordinary stonework, simple imposition and first proof-reading, the women are found to be fully qualified, though of course they do not attain to the all-round excellence of first-class men" ,
That "of course" tells us that even if women were in reality doing other things besides typesetting, almost all commentators were nevertheless agreed that there was such a thing as a "true compositor" who could handle every process of the trade, and that women were being trained to do essentially the simplest part of the work.
The corollary is obvious: a printing office employing women at low wages to do straight setting could dispense with a number of ordinary linesmen, keeping on only a highly skilled minority of men at rather above normal wages to "service" the type set up by the women.
As the description of Clark's tells us: "Besides the girls, the able foreman is assisted by three or four skilled men who have the direction of matters and see to imposition and locking up, carrying formes and so on." 
The use of the word "skilled" conceals the fact that the work which women were not doing fell into two categories.
One of the tasks always mentioned first in any discussion of the question is the carrying of formes containing set-up type (they were indeed very heavy and it did no one 's back any good to carry them).
Type-cases too were heavy, and if one fell it took a long time to sort out the type again.
But "the heavy work of carrying type in which men alone are employed" , could by no means be described as skilled work.
It could be, and was, done by printer's labourers or apprentices.
One former Edinburgh male compositor who worked at Constable's told me in a letter that "we as apprentices…used to help  the ladies by lifting the formes of type on to the stones, so as they could do corrections, and lift them down" It could in fact have perfectly well been done by a strong woman or by two women cooperating, and in any case took very little time.
One gets a slightly different perspective on the question of lifting formes and chases from the women compositors questioned by Margaret Irwin in 1893.
Thus "an experienced woman worker" told her that men do the same work as women in many cases and at different rates, but there are certain parts of the work that women never do, such for instance as the lifting of the "formes" and "chases" .
Witness could not say how much of a man's time this might occupy per day.
In her shop, one man lifted the "chases" &c. for twenty girls and did his own work in addition.
Another woman, in a different firm, who had been twenty years in the trade (so must have been one of the original beginners) reported in similar terms: "in the regular bookwork, the girls do the same work as the men, but they do not lift their own" formes "and" chases".
Witness could not say how much help in this a girl would need from the men because it varied so much, but she did not think it amounted to much, and no special men workers were employed for it"Lifting is therefore not denied, but its importance is distinctly minimized when a woman is speaking, maximized when a man is.
And all agree that in any case it did not require skill, merely strength.
Rather different is the question of the other processes between setting type and going to press.
The evidence here is often contradictory, and suggests that in practice, there were variations in what was asked of women.
Take correcting and the locking up of formes for instance: Margaret Irwin regarded women as precluded from some of these tasks by physical incapacity.
"
Such for instance is correcting on the stone.
This requires the worker to lean in a doubled-over position on the large table or stone while making corrections."
Irwin had seen a girl in one firm doing corrections, but was told this was not customary.
However as we have just seen, women did correct at Constable's and despite what seems to be an oblique claim by Margaret Irwin that their breasts got in the way, they certainly did correcting in several other printing houses.
Locking up formes did not really require much physical effort either, nor, once you had been shown how to do it, very much skill.
When the union representative Alex Ross was asked by a Royal Commission whether he would "ask a woman to lock up a form (sic)" , he replied spontaneously, "Oh yes, they can do that as far as I understand" .
 "The small forms?" 
 "Yes." 
Macdonald's survey of 1904 claimed that in Edinburgh women were involved in "every process except making up and carrying type" , suggesting that they did lock up formes and do corrections
Other finishing processes posed more problems.
Proof-pulling for instance can perhaps be regarded as a mixed process, requiring both strength and skill.
Margaret Irwin cited it as another process from which women were excluded for what seemed to her good reason: "It requires both muscular strength and a certain" knack".
As for making up and imposition, the tasks most often cited as barred to women, they could certainly not be carried out by anyone who had not received a proper training, and were rightly regarded as skilled work.
In addition, men often insisted on the "heavy" side of all these processes: asked to define the finishing processes, one employer's representative listed "making up into pages and locking it up in the chase, which involves manual heavy labour, lifting and things of that kind — pulling proofs and what I call the heavier labour" .
What all the "finishing" processes had in common, apart from a degree of exertion greater than was needed for hand-setting but not necessarily greater than could be expected from a normal young woman, was that these were tasks an apprentice learned only towards the end of his time.
What women normally did was "what a boy would be at when half-way through his apprenticeship" .
Even so we do sometimes find admissions that women were doing the more advanced tasks.
One of the Edinburgh employers (perhaps inadvertently) revealed that "either very experienced girls or experienced men make it up into pages or make it up into sheets" .
It is a concession of importance, since it indicates a greater convergence between the male and female work pattern than is usually suggested.
But it also makes what is the critical point about finishing processes, namely that in any given office, only a handful of the work-force were actually required to do this.
It was a division of labour among men and other men, as well as between men and women.
The reason for this is not so much that it was beyond some people's capacity to do imposition and so on; but rather that it cost employers money to train people to do such tasks.
While anyone could go off and learn typesetting in a corner, imposition could only be done with "real" matter.
Mistakes and botched work thus slowed down production at what was already a natural bottleneck.
Furthermore, the finishing processes could not be regarded as piece-work.
The unskilful typesetter on piece rates simply took home less pay; bad imposition cost the masters money.
It was therefore greatly in the masters "interests to insist that there was" no point "in the women learning the later skills (because they were not strong enough, because they would leave the trade early, because they would" never be as good as a man"and so on).
But male compositors made it easier for them to do this, and justified the division of labour, when they agreed that women could not attain all the skills of the trade.
They were thus driving the wedge further and further into a division of labour from which they were the first to suffer.
THE DIVISION OF LABOUR: WHAT WOMEN DID DO
Those who suffered most from the new division of labour, it must now be clear, were the linesmen on piece-rates.
In all offices (excluding newspapers) where close-set text was composed — bookwork, government publications, legal and official documents, directories, encyclopaedias and so on— both men and women piece-workers were normally employed.
And what was tending to happen here, as the Scottish Typographical Circular regularly reported, was not so much a division of labour between women on straight setting and men on other processes, but rather the diversion of certain kinds of typesetting from the linesmen (male piece-workers) to the women, who were not only paid much less but who were also considered by some employers to be actually better at it.
One traditional distinction to which male compositors were particularly alert was that between "fat" and "lean" matter for setting.
The "fat" was well-spaced work, with less solid text, and it therefore took less time to set a page.
 "Lean" consisted of lines of close-set text which took the compositor much longer.
One of the major achievements of the journeymen in the nineteenth century had been to succeed in having both kinds of work paid at the same rate.
Thus the distribution of fat and lean work made a considerable difference to the pay-packets of piece-workers.
Here are two ways of describing the system in the context of introducing women to the composing room.
First Fraser, managing director of Neill's: The men are so greedy.
For instance, a page with an illustration on it — a solid page with a picture — the men charge as solid type and if the page is a little bigger than an ordinary page, they will charge extra for putting that page in, besides charging it as setting up so many thousand letters…
Then if there is a half-page or table, we have to pay a whole page for it, which is double the price of a half-page of ordinary type.
Now here is John Templeton, secretary of the STA: In framing the piece scale in printing, you have to frame the scale so that it covers everything, that is so that it covers what we call "extras" as well.
For instance in setting a pamphlet or a book, a half-page would count the same as a full page.
The scale should cover everything between the pages of a book.
Templeton went on to explain how employing women played havoc with this arrangement: When the females get their work to set up, the whole of what we term the "fat" is taken out, that is all the space is taken out and they simply get close matter to set, and they get paid for that.
It is other girls who are on set wages who put in the fat work [i. e. the spacing]and the house gets the benefit of it.
So it is cut to the finest as far as the females are concerned.
To the journeyman, the equal payment of fat and lean, and the inclusion of the precious "extras" in the scale, were hard-won victories of the past, the stuff of union history, to be safeguarded at all costs.
To women, entering the trade without undergoing any of the initiation rites, excluded from the union, the whole business of fat and lean — one of the first things a boy apprentice would learn about — can have meant little.
To the outsider, a priori, it might seem positively unreasonable, or to use a favourite word of the women compositors, unfair, to pay the fat the same as the lean.
To the employers, the entry of women made it possible at last to nibble away at — or do away with — such "restrictive practices" .
The employer delegate Fraser, referring to equal payment for fat and lean said, "of course, we could not agree to that sort of thing" , and significantly there were no male piece-workers at all employed at his firm, Neill's.
A trade-union official had told Margaret Irwin in the 1890s that there was a "growing tendency to give" not only lean but fat work to women piece-workers.
As she put it,"a larger amount of this work can be got over than ordinary work in the same time, and a larger wage is earned by those on piece-work.
Consequently the women get it in preference to the men, because they take it at lower rates".
The point about this particular division of labour was that women, being outside the union and ignorant of the traditional battles over fat and lean, willingly complied with the work arrangements of the employers.
And there was more to come.
A division of labour peculiar to Edinburgh bookwork is described in Templeton's evidence to the Fair Wages Committee: I might explain that there is policy in giving the girls reprint work.
It is simple work and easily got on with.
Unfortunately, some of our best intellects turn out the most miserable specimens of penman-ship conceivable and some of them are almost indecipherable.
The result is that [such copy]is given to the piece work comp and he has got to make the best of it.
If it was a girl, she would throw the "" "hole thing away, put on her hat and away she would go to get other work.
She would not do it at all.
But the stab man, and the man on piecework rates…has got to do it, possibly spending more than half his time in trying to decipher it.
There is good reason why the easier work should be thrown to the girls.
(This is incidentally a good example of a sweeping statement.
One of the survivors I talked with well remembered the problem of working from manuscript: "sometimes you couldna read the manuscript.
Some hands were very very bad"; but she was never tempted to walk out.)
The upshot of these various strategies by employers was to pose a real threat to the future of the male piece-workers, "who in Edinburgh only get as it were the crumbs that fall from the girls" table…the girls get all the work and the men are thrown into the street"(a union man).
What was even worse, the women were unofficially said to be better at it.
They are kept always at pretty much the same kind of work and thus become very skilful at it"(employer quoted by Macdonald).
"
So far as the finger-work or typesetting goes, she is as quick or quicker than a man?— They say she is more deft and better adapted to it"(a trade unionist).
"For their particular work, they are better than men, probably.
(an employer).
As early as 1886, the Scottish Typographical Circular had been moved to remark that "if they could finish without extraneous help the work they begin, they would indeed be very dangerous rivals" .
Not all the evidence by any means concurs with the view that women were actually superior to men in some respects.
It is precisely a feature of the debate that no statement was innocent: employers and unionists used the arguments they hoped would further their own cause and did not appear to be aware of the contradictions in their logic.
Thus we have Macdonald reporting on the "almost unanimous chorus of opinion that women's work as compositors is so inferior to men's that it does not pay in the long run" (the chorus in question being from employers) But the testimony of individual employers is far from unanimous or even consistent.
The evidence given to the 1908 Fair Wages Commission by Fraser of Neill & Co (the Edinburgh printers handling government work) is riddled with contradictions in this respect.
One minute he is boasting that "our girls set Greek, Hebrew, Algebra, indeed anything you like, they are all well-trained girls" ; the next he is saying, "their rate per line is not the same as a man's; their corrections are heavier and that kind of thing, they make more mistakes" .
Another Scottish employer is quoted by Macdonald as saying that "given a certain area of floor space for men and women, on the former would probably be produced half more than on the latter" ."
But Fraser, pressed on the question of value for money resorted to other arguments: "they are more economical, but they are not so satisfactory, they are always going off for sickness of some kind or another, or their mother is ill or something of that kind — that is the greatest trouble, their mother is ill constantly" .
The London employer of women, Straker, similarly claimed that"they come and go more readily, and they want more accommodation…
You get a staff of women together and then they either get married or they leave you".
Yet in the next sentence he says, "I should strongly object to a bar being placed on the employment of women" ."
He argued however that women would actually be more expensive than men if paid the same wages.
Another employer, in the 1890s, rationalized women's lower pay as follows: "the difference between the rate paid to women and that paid to men is almost entirely swallowed up by the additional work which the men require to do for the women, viz. making up, correcting, carrying about formes between the stones and the proof presses, etc." ,
While one has to admire the contortions into which employers forced themselves to go to prove that their current practice was rational, coherent and best for all concerned, one feels they do protest too much.
The margin of profit Edinburgh master printers made from employing women far outweighed the wages they paid the men who handled the finishing processes.
Arguments about absenteeism (not borne out incidentally by the surviving wage-books) are hardly relevant when one is talking about piece-work in large firms.
One has to read all this special pleading against the light so to speak to see what was actually happening in day-to-day practice.
And central to the debate was the question of skill.
SKILL AND EQUAL PAY: WHO SAID WHAT?
What did skill really consist of?
Different groups gave different answers.
Employers for instance tended to reject the view that all men who had served an apprenticeship were skilled.
"Printers you know are not all highly skilled.
There are two classes of printers, one called newspaper hands and set nothing but solid matter; and properly trained compositors who have been taught to do jobbing, tabular work and everything."
Fraser of Neill's claimed that only "a few men can set music and only a few men can do a table and only a few men can do anything out of the way" ."
-Trade unionists would of course be most unlikely to admit that a time-served journeyman was not skilled and such admissions are rare, though they can be glimpsed behind the pleas for the vulnerable linesmen.
They were adamant however that women were not skilled workers.
While the employers tended to cast around for reasons outside the work process when they wished to disparage women workers, unionists spoke more often of the low level of women compositors"skill.
Although the historic Interlocutor scale of rates enshrined the principle that some kinds of setting were more difficult and therefore deserved higher wages than others, the particular specialities of women (such as small type, foreign languages and before long, keyboard work) were not acknowledged.
Since no outside authority — whether the employers, the journeymen or the union — ever gratified women's skills with the respect accorded to men's, women compositors must have found it hard if not impossible to think of themselves as skilled, or to have even a semblance of the mentality of the skilled journeyman and union member.
The women who spoke to Margaret Irwin were themselves inclined to adopt the same low value of their work that they heard expressed by the men.
One woman told her that "the men get the more experienced and difficult work" , while another reported that she thought "the work very pleasant and suitable for women…but has sometimes found working with small type to be a slight strain on her eyesight" .
(A man's reaction about small type would have been to point to the scale and demand it be paid extra!)
This was not just a problem for women in printing: it was one by all women who were drawn into industrial trades just as mechanization was creating a new division of labour.
Women would increasingly in the  future be recruited into the new semi-skilled jobs, often at piece rates, so that employers were able to benefit both from the job's lack of a craft tradition behind it, and from a work-force trained from childhood to regard anything they did as unskilled.
Most women had been brought up to do sewing and dressmaking: it was no accident, nor was it a question of "natural aptitude" that a teenage girl entering the composing-room was likely to be more dexterous at first than a boy, and to apply both the physical and mental habits acquired in sewing to the job in hand.
This might mean for instance rapidity in execution, neatness and correctness, skilful handling of small type and so on.
I deliberately use the word skilful, but this was neither asserted by women, nor granted by men, whether the men were employers or fellow-workers.
Masters and men, although deeply divided over the substantive issue as to whether women should be employed at all, were therefore united in a male solidarity which expressed itself — in public at least — by a discourse disparaging women and the work they did.
One has to be extremely cautious about interpreting past usage of terms like "women" , "girls" , "ladies" and "females" , but it certainly seems to be the case that "females" and "girls" — precisely the terms with either derogatory or patronizing over-tones — are used more frequently than "women" , while "ladies" is generally used if the speaker wishes either to be polite or ironic.
(It is true that to say "women" could at the time, and even today for many people, be regarded as discourteous.)
 "Males" is a term found hardly at all in the language of employers or workers, while "boys" is used only of apprentices.
Both masters and men moreover chose to depict women as wilful and capricious.
We have seen above the image of the "girl putting on her hat" and walking out (from a unionist); or being an absentee because her "mother is ill constantly" (from an employer seeking to prove how unreliable women were).
It was also alleged for instance that women were too docile to make really good workers, too lacking in spirit and ambition: "Boys [i.e. apprentices]would claim to be shifted on to the higher branches of the trade" .
A compendium of assumptions about women is the sometimes quoted list of advantages and disadvantages (to the employer) of the woman worker in the printing trade (not just as a compositor) compiled by the 1904 survey edited by Ramsay Macdonald: The advantages of the woman worker are: 1.
That she will accept low wages; she usually works for about half the men's wages.
2.
That she is not a member of a Union, and is, therefore, more amenable to the will of the employer as the absolute rule of the workshop.
3.
That she is a steady worker (much emphasis must not be placed on this as the contrary is also alleged[!]) and nimble at mechanical processes such as folding and collecting sheets.
4.
That she will do odd jobs which lead to nothing.
Her disadvantages are: I. That she has less technical skill than a man and is not so useful all round.
2.
That she has less strength at work and has more broken time owing to bad health and especially should she be married, domestic duties and that her output is not so great as that of a man.
3.
That she is more liable to leave work just when she is getting most useful [in other words]there are more changes in a crowd of women workers than in a crowd of men workers.32
The collective "she" is presented in this list as if a natural immutable category, ruling out the possibility either of individual traits or of conditions explaining any of the points on the list which might be subject to change.
The voice we hear is, as usual for the period right up to 1910, an external voice: women are a group more spoken about than speaking, if we are to believe the written records.
Only very occasionally is a woman's voice heard and even then it is not always certain.
The Scottish Typographical Circular for instance rather specialized in joke articles over a woman's signature which are obviously not by a woman at all.
But the two communications from "Ella, typelifter" in 1886 do sound authentic and throw a little light on what women may have thought about the central issues here: their being employed as cheap labour and the question of skill.
Ella's first piece was in verse.
It begged male comps faced with a female colleague to "Be kind to her if you can't wed her or shift her," and went on: State broadly and fully wherein we are sinners Remembering that many of us are breadwinners For mothers and sisters whom we must assist, hence We claim with yourselves equal right to existence
After her poem drew one in reply, Ella Wrote an article in prose in the next issue in which she put a point often made in the later period (see Chapters 5 and 7) by women workers, and one which is central to the debate on women's pay generally.
Women compositors did not want equal pay, she wrote, for no girl of sense puts herself on the level of a comp all round but if the division of labour assigns her a task she can perform, what reason is there she should not do so?
And if we recognise our true position as skilled labourers performing with more or less ability a given portion of a comp's duties, it would be utterly absurd for you to propose, or us to expect, equal remuneration with men which I suppose is what you mean by insisting on getting the true value of our labour.
Although women were in practice doing exactly the same work as certain categories of men, they too perceived the division of labour as a gender  division, and took as their point of reference for equality the "all-round comp" , whom both masters and men held up as the exemplar, rather than the humbler linesman.
Consequently they feared that "equal pay" would cost them their jobs.
In this chapter we have been looking at the details of the division of labour to which Ella was referring.
It had the effect of driving all parties to the debate into separate corners: the employers wished to preserve the status quo.
The union really wanted women out of the trade, but in public statements like Mr Battersby's after-dinner speech, said that they were prepared to settle for equal pay; while the women regarded the latter call as unrealistic if not hypocritical, since they felt (and were daily told) that they were not doing the equivalent of a skilled man's work (though even they thought the differentials too high).
The debate became a dispute only in the 1900s, coming to a head in the famous confrontation of 1910, to which we now turn.
SLAMMING THE DOOR SHUT: THE EVENTS OF 1910
The 1910 dispute, when the male compositors finally succeeded in putting a stop to the recruitment of girl apprentices to the trade, was not simply a battle of the sexes.
It was equally a battle over the new technology, as well as over the future of book printing in Edinburgh.
As Jonathan Zeitlin has pointed out in a similar context, there are ways in which the product of an industry can affect the margin of manoeuvre of both employer and trade union.
Newspaper publishing is capital-intensive, and the product is vulnerable to even short-lived strikes.
Machinemen in newspaper offices could (and to some extent still can) exert considerable pressure.
But for the newspaper proprietors, outside competition is not always a problem.
At the other end of the scale, jobbing printing is and was above all dependent on local trade; the office is usually small; and disputes when they occur can often be solved informally.
In neither of these branches, in Edinburgh or anywhere else, were women employed to any significant extent.
The book trade — where they were to be found in large numbers — differed from the other kinds of printing in several ways.
It lent itself, as we have seen, to the various profitable forms of division of labour habitually practised in Edinburgh in the years in question; and the "relatively standardized and durable product" could be stockpiled during disputes.
On the other hand, it was much more vulnerable to outside competition.
A printing centre which could offer good quality work at moderate prices, for instance by paying its work-force less, by being located in a low-rent region and, at the beginning of the twentieth century, by introducing composing machines, could attract work from a wide radius.
The key question here — and it is not easy to answer — is whether Edinburgh, by employing Women in the period from the 1870s to the 1900s, was attracting more work than it otherwise would have from London and other publishers; or whether it was merely managing to prevent the work leaving Edinburgh altogether for cheaper printing centres.
Edinburgh employers tended to express the latter view, trade unionists the former.
To understand why the "female question" came to a head in 1910, we need to look at Edinburgh's competitiveness as a printing centre, in particular after the introduction of Monotype machines; at the changing attitudes of the men in the Edinburgh Typographical Society (ETS); and finally at the history of the 1910 dispute itself.
EDINBURGH'S PRINTING HOUSES AND COMPETITIVENESS INT THE 1900S
Arguments about competition in the printing trade have to be treated with some caution.
It is unquestionably true that the large-scale employment of women made it possible for certain Edinburgh houses to offer competitive terms in the years up to about 1900–10, and the argument was made both at the time and in retrospective accounts.
Thus Alex Ross, representing the STA, told the Royal Commission on Labour in the mid-1890s that"London printers do complain that Edinburgh is underselling them, because wages are low.
A large amount of work is done in Edinburgh for the London publishers".
And Child in his account of the book trade Supports the view that Edinburgh attracted work essentially because of the low wages, owing to the fairly general use of women"
There could be other reasons why work left London though, and in the case of the new firms springing up in the Home Counties and the West Country, low rents rather than low wages appear to have helped Bungay, Frome and other centres to build up a clientele.
As the Macdonald Survey put it in 1904, "a curious point in connection with the work being sent out of London is that, except in the case of Edinburgh, the greater cheapness of the work outside London is not due so much to cheaper labour as to lower rents, etc." .
Macdonald also remarks a contrario, that "while the cheapness of women's work as compositors in Edinburgh seems to have attracted a certain class of work from London, the men's success in keeping up wages in London bookbinding does not seem to have driven bookbinding to the provinces" .
Both these latter points, though Macdonald does not connect them, appear to lend some force to the arguments of Edinburgh employers that by the end of the century, they were not so much drawing extra work to Edinburgh as desperately trying to stem an inexorable decline of the Edinburgh trade, occasioned both by its geographical distance from London (incurring freight costs and inconvenience, which would have affected bookbinding equally) and by its comparatively high rents and cost of living (as compared to country towns like Frome).
Thus in their reply in 1897 to a memorial from the men asking for a 50-hour week, the Edinburgh Master Printers "Association (MPA) pleaded that competition was too intense for them to agree: " The great bulk of printing now done in Edinburgh is for London publishers.
Edinburgh has to compete with London (54 hours), the large provincial towns (56 hours), and Holland and Germany (60 hours)".
In particular, the reply cited the low-rent centres of "Aylesbury, Beccles, Bungay, Frome, Guildford, Lewes, Luton, Plymouth, Tunbridge and Woking" as a threat.
Transport costs for places near London were 105 or 155 per ton, whereas the rate was 455 by rail or 30s by steamer to Edinburgh.
There was no longer any need for London publishers to "send work 400 miles" .
The work at present obtained in Edinburgh was only by dint of "great  energy and hard work by the employers" .
They were still pleading competition in 1910, when Mr Begg for Clark's argued that "without cheap labour, the London book trade must leave Edinburgh, owing inter alia to greater freight rates" .
And Mr Blaikie of Constable's claimed that a lot of scientific and university work had already gone elsewhere."
Their arguments were supported by a former compositor "now in a position to place books for printing" , who wrote in to the Edinburgh Evening News in 1910: "Generally speaking, I can get work done in London, as well as in the English provincial towns, under Edinburgh prices, which proves that even with female labour, the Edinburgh printers have a hard task to keep their men fully employed…
[It is asserted that]in many cases…the only profit on bookwork is represented by the difference between the prices of the women's and the men's composition".
Pleas about competition were regarded with much suspicion and little sympathy by the trade unions.
In the early days, they simply challenged the notion of "excessive trade competition" and were not "prepared to admit that there has been much if any reduction in the price paid [elsewhere]for good bookwork, which has always formed the staple of the Edinburgh trade" .
In later years the argument was grudgingly admitted to have some force: one correspondent to the STC agreed that "50 per cent of the London and provincial work would be lost to Edinburgh and would never have been gained but for the employment of female labour" .
But the following year (1905) William Hamilton declared to a delegate meeting of the STA that "even if it were true that work would be lost to Edinburgh, it would be better to follow the work and get fair wages than to see the bread taken out of our mouths at home" .
And another unionist explaining matters to the Fair Wages Committee in 1908, echoes his words: Take the Edinburgh Gazette.
That is produced by females.
Those girls are getting from 13s to El a week for producing the Gazette and in London they would have to pay 395 at the lowest to the men who are producing government work, so that the competition is not fair.
It is no benefit to us that the work is produced in Edinburgh, because we are not getting it.
We should prefer to see it being done in London so long as it is done by male labour, it is no matter where.
The difference between employers"and men's attitudes could not be put more clearly.
The employers "interests led them to be" nationalist", arguing that to safeguard their share of the market and to maintain the Scottish capital as a printing centre, they had to keep down costs, or go out of business.
The men saw no advantage in Edinburgh remaining a centre of work if they were no longer sure of earning a living wage there.
It was in their interests to be "internationalist" and to move in search of work.
In the printing trade, mobility had long been a traditional element in the organization of mutual support.
The "tramp" was sheltered arid if possible found work by union officials if forced to take to the road.
(Though in fact by this time, "tramping" was dying out as a practice and craft mobility with it.)
THE FIRST MONOTYPE MACHINES
Although both sides continued to use much the same arguments after 1900 as they had before, the question of competition was given a completely new dimension and greater urgency by the appearance of the first Monotype machines.
Some of the very earliest composing machines in Britain had been in use in Edinburgh in the 1860s.
The house of Neill & Co. had patented their own, and since this was one of the offices that most  whole-heartedly recruited women, a number of the women compositors at Neill's in the 1870s were set to work the machines.
But these early models, though ingenious, were no real threat to skilled hand composition, and their use seems to have been sporadic and eventually abandoned.
It was only with the invention of first the Linotype, then the Monotype machines that mechanized competition really threatened hand-setting.
The Linotype, invented in the 1880s, had appeared in the offices of the Scotsman and other Edinburgh newspapers by the 1890s.
As Gillespie remarks, even in Edinburgh, the craft unions were able to see to it that only union men worked Linotypes, and "by the end of the century, it was generally agreed that the effect of machines on employment had not been so bad as feared" .
It is important to note that there was never any question of women working on the Linotype.
It was a machine particularly suited to the fast production of newspapers, and as has already been noted, women were not employed in the composition of daily papers, largely because of the Factory Acts.
There was possibly another reason why they were kept away from it: the Linotype, hot, clanking and oily, looks like an industrial machine.
The keyboard is combined with the casting machine (literally full of "hot metal" ) which casts a slug equivalent to a line of type (hence the name).
Although the action required of the compositor is very little different from that required by a typewriter, the atmosphere surrounding the machine would be perceived as a very "masculine" one.
The Monotype machine on the other hand was regarded by employers as "in their opinion, pre-eminently suited for females" (See Plates 4 and 6).
In the Monotype, keyboarding and casting were separated.
One room could be filled entirely with keyboards, which operated by punching coded perforations on to a roll of paper ribbon.
The ribbon could be fed into a casting machine in another part of the building, where it cast single characters, producing a quality of type much better suited to bookwork than was a Linotype slug.
Even so, Edinburgh employers were comparatively slow to introduce Monotypes, presumably because they felt that their women hand-compositors made it unnecessary.
We know that Monotypes had been introduced to R. & R. Clark's, as early as  1901 or 1902.
Mr Begg later claimed that there had been no protest at the time.
"9 Other houses were seemingly slow to follow suit.
Turnbull & Spears acquired some machines at the end of 1906.20 In February 1908, the manager of the Collins "Edinburgh branch threatened to buy Monotypes and set" girls to work on them"if there was any attempt by the union to stop him recruiting women hand-compositors.
It seems that, just as in the 1870s, the abundance of work masked the new threat.
The Annual Report for 1904–5 of the STA suggests that trade had been exceptionally busy for the previous few years.
By 1907 however, trade was beginning to fall off again for the Edinburgh printing offices.
22 London and Home Counties printers were now increasingly installing machines, and the Edinburgh policy of using cheap hand-setters instead was beginning to look vulnerable,
This is no doubt why we find employers from now on not only buying machines more readily, but also setting women to work on them, a combination which aroused the union to sudden awareness of the threat.
As has been noted, it was round about now that the Encyclopaedia Britannica contract was being fulfilled, and the houses involved (Clark's, Morrison & Gibb and Ballantyne's) all had women working their Monotypes in 1909.23 Fraser, the director of Neill's, had told the Fair Wage Committee of 1908 that he did not think his customers would like the quality of machine work, but that if he did not employ women, he would certainly install machines instead.24 In January 1909 the STJ (the Circular had now changed its name to the Scottish Typographical Journal) was sounding the alarm: "Our trade is going over to machinery, and the machinery is in the hands of underpaid girls." 
By the time the men put their "memorial" to the employers in November 1909, the situation was acute: "Not only has hand composition been lately going over more and more to female labour, but the operating on the type-composing machines has also been practically monopolised by the same class of cheap labour, to the consequent injury of our members." 
There were by now about 50 machines installed in Edinburgh book-houses.
Before exploring the history of the dispute itself, it is worth pausing to ask why no men were working the Monotype machines.
Contrary to what one might expect, it was not simply the result of employer strategy.
Whereas in London and in England generally, it had been a matter of principle from the start that Monotypes should be worked by male union labour,"in Edinburgh, the men do not seem to have come forward to learn the Monotype, even in response to invitations from the employers.
Mr Blaikie of Constable's (a firm which, it will be remembered, did not employ many women) said during talks with the union in 1910: "I delayed for years putting composing machines in my office, partly not to displace labour.
I advertised for male compositors [to work the machines]and got no reply.
The male compositors in my office declined to learn it.
And Amelia McLean, a compositor who played a leading role  in the women's opposition in 1910, said in a letter to the Evening News: "This is the first time the women have heard that the employers want to reserve monotypes for women.
With the exception of one firm which has only males, they have been obliged to employ women on keyboards, because when they advertised for operators, no men came forward.
I believe that one firm is at present training one male monotype operator, who is being taught by a woman, It is true that this evidence comes from the opposing side so to speak, but nowhere is a counter-assertion put forward by the union that men had applied to learn and been turned away.
Clearly (as the employers were quick to point out) keyboarding had nothing in common with what a man had learnt during his apprenticeship: it meant acquiring a new skill, But the men's reluctance is still Surprising, and seems to be unique to Edinburgh.
Was it perhaps because the work did indeed look like typewriting (by this time neither a highly paid nor a highly regarded occupation and mostly done by women) and therefore an effeminate calling and beneath a man's dignity?
One did not get dirty hands working a Monotype.
Was it fear of not being able to perform as well at this new skill as they could with the composing-stick?
Or was it a form of Luddism for fear the machines would displace men?
The Edinburgh Evening News picked up the point during the dispute and commented that "the old story of the men's dislike to machinery appears in this dispute just as it was with the engineers" , 25 Whatever the reason or reasons, the men's unwillingness to handle the machines led directly to the situation of the late 1900s in which Edinburgh master printers were trying to counter the threat of London and southern firms by combining both the employment of women and the use of machines, thus posing a double threat of a new kind to the male compositor, and inspiring a more determined resistance from the latter than had been seen during the previous thirty-odd years.
THE UNION AND THE "FEMALE QUESTION" : THE GATHERING STORM
As was noted in Chapter 3, no very great resistance had been mounted to the employment of women in the early days, partly because the numbers were small, partly because the union had been weakened by the 1872–3 strike, and partly, it must be remembered, because the girls recruited to the trade were often the daughters of print workers.
The tangle of hostile and sympathetic feelings towards the new recruits, while hard for the historian to penetrate, must have complicated everyday life in the printing office.
In later years, one union member pointed out that there was"a new generation of printers who have sprung up since the strike.
When I say that some of them take [women compositors]to be wives, there cannot be ill-feeling toward them".
(Though of course one of the most efficient ways of removing women from the printing houses was to  propose marriage, and this was more than once half-seriously proposed as a deliberate strategy.)
When in the 1880s, anxiety about the question grew more acute, and when exhortation to society members not to instruct "female learners" or to allow their daughters to take up the trade seemed to have little effect, more organized attempts were made to confront the problem.
At the conference held in 1888 by the three compositors"unions, the Typographical Association (English provinces), the London Society of Compositors and the Scottish Typographical Association, specifically to discuss the Edinburgh question, the following resolution was passed: That while strongly of the opinion that women are not physically capable of performing the duties of a compositor, the Conference recommends their admission to membership of the various typographical unions upon the same conditions as journeymen, provided always the females are paid strictly in accordance with the scale.
Cynthia Cockburn calls this "studied hypocrisy" , arguing that as things stood no woman could expect to earn the same wage as a man, because of the Factory Acts among other things, and links it with the undoubtedly fiercely held view among many compositors that women really had no right to "leave the home" anyway.
It is possible to nuance this view slightly as regards the Edinburgh union leadership.
There may just have been some hope of effecting change through organization, especially when the numbers of women were still low (about 300 at the end of the 18805), though the means chosen were not welcomed by the rank and file of the men's union.
Although unfortunately details of the projects are tantalizingly hard to ascertain, at least two attempts were made after 1888 by the Edinburgh Typographical Society to set up a women's union, The first, in the late 1880s, is referred to only in the retrospective "statement on the Female Question" , published in 1904; Miss Black of London [who must have been Clementina Black]a lady who was well-known for her efforts to improve the social condition of her sex, offered to make an endeavour to organise the female compositors in Edinburgh, with a view to remedying the evils complained of by the journeymen.
The branch committee favourably entertained Miss Black's assistance, but on it being remitted to a general meeting of the Society, it was rejected on the grounds that if the females were organised, their position would be improved as an industry for females, which would result in great accession to their numbers in the printing trade in Edinburgh."
What seems to have happened here (as on other matters) is a division of Opinion between the ETS committee who may have been quite sincere in trying a long-term solution — and the knee-jerk reaction of the  membership against the permanent acceptance of women as compositors which the project undeniably contained.
That some compositors, and not only on the committee, took a more sympathetic view of the problem is suggested by one writer to the STC, as far back as 1886, whose attitude seems with hindsight to be the most constructive approach voiced by an Edinburgh man: that the women be treated seriously as colleagues and an attempt made to integrate them into the cultural world of the compositor from which they were decidedly excluded: A trade female society should be organised, having in connection a sick etc. fund; a reading-room provided with illustrated and comic papers and magazines; a library of high-class light literature chiefly and encyclopedias, dictionaries etc.: and an efficient committee to arrange for a grand picnic every summer and social gatherings in winter evenings.
A rather patronising choice of literature perhaps, but the suggestion was a positive one.
Such was not apparently the view of the bulk of the membership however, and the chance was lost to try an experiment in creating greater unity while the numbers of women were still comparatively low.
The strategy of continuing to exclude women from the union did not prevent their recruitment in ever greater numbers by the employers.
So in the late 1890s, another attempt, this time apparently not vetoed by the membership, was made to organize a women's union.
The central figure on this occasion was the more locally known organizer, Margaret Irwin of Glasgow, acknowledged to be an expert on women's trades in Scotland.]"
The delegate meeting of the STA at Dumfries in 1895 had called upon those branches affected by women's employment to "exercise their influence in every way to secure the standard wages and fair conditions of employment for female compositors" .
Accordingly, "with the praiseworthy assistance of Miss Irwin, Secretary of the Women's Federal Council" , and with financial help both from the ETS and the STA, a "Female Compositors Society" was set up as the STC reported in July and August 1898.
Margaret Irwin "paid three visits to Edinburgh to address meetings at the invitation of the Typographical Association" , and the STA Annual Report of 1898 claimed that the new society "bids fair to succeed; if it will be the means, as anticipated, of improving the position of the male comp [sic, my italics]there will be no lack of well-wishers" .
The next report however carried the sad news that the "Female Compositors Society has not survived the ailments of its infancy: it closed at the end of the year" .
The reasons advanced for this failure in the "statement" of 1904 were "the difficulties which female organisers have had to contend with in other trades — apathy and lack of support" .
This is familiar language, and Eleanor Gordon and others have argued that much more investigation of  the circumstances of setting up women's unions is needed before it can be accepted at face value, Material obstacles made union membership difficult for women: their low pay made it hard to pay dues, while their domestic duties as daughters and sisters, not to mention the question of staying out late, made it hard to attend meetings.
These problems have to be weighed along with less tangible factors: what would women (as distinct from "the male comp" ) get out of the organization?
How far did it address their grievances?
How whole-hearted was the men's support?]6 In this case, the lack of details urges us to caution.
The literature (especially Macdonald's 1904 account) is full of references to women's "pessimistic and listless" attitude to the fight for higher wages, but as we have already noted, women were often inclined to agree that they were not doing the "full job" , a view in which they were daily fortified by both masters and men.
Margaret Irwin herself accepted that the lack of success was caused by "the apathy of the women themselves…the woman does not take her industrial work as seriously as a man…[she]does not regard it as the permanent occupation of her life" .37 Margaret Irwin's views are not to be dismissed lightly, but it is worth noting that she herself did not approach the question with any blazing convictions about equal pay.
She argued that if women were paid the same as men "it would result in many women being dismissed from many trades" , and also accepted without demur, when giving evidence to the Fair Wages Committee a few years later, the proposition that women were satisfied with less money because they were earning "pin money" if married, and "pocket money" if not.38 With such pessimism about equal pay entrenched in the mind of their organizers, with such low evaluation being set on their work, one might argue that it would have been surprising if a militant women's union could really be organized in the prevailing atmosphere.
While it would be nice to imagine an alternative history in which either Miss Black or Miss Irwin succeeded in organizing the women compositors, who then ended up with a reading-room full of the encyclopaedias they had themselves typeset, it was not to be.
Since later events were to show that women compositors were by no means incapable of taking action, we may be sceptical about "apathy" as the sole explanation for the collapse of the early attempt to form a union.
But in the mean time, encouraged perhaps by such apparent signs of weakness, perhaps simply by pressure on their order-books, the Edinburgh master printers began recruiting girl apprentices in larger numbers than ever before during the early years of the century, to the growing despair of the ETS and increasing anger from the male trade-union movement in general.
The Edinburgh "female question" clearly had repercussions outside the city, as can be seen from the reasons given by the Arbiter who turned down the Glasgow compositors"pay-claim in 1904.
Arguing that Glasgow wages were already higher than those in Edinburgh, and pointing  out that the Glasgow printers had successfully blacked firms trying to employ women, he went on (in rather clotted prose): I am satisfied that the employment of female compositors in Glasgow, while it would increase the total volume of work done there and admit of the natural development of the Glasgow book trade, would not injure the position of the Glasgow men printers, while it would enable the Glasgow printing trade, employed as well as employers, to obtain and retain work which at present ought to come to Glasgow, or at least might come to Glasgow but now goes to Edinburgh.
The Glasgow patriotism of the Arbiter was more to the taste of the employers than the employed, whose irritation showed itself within the STA.
"
I Branches without women rivals now sided with Glasgow in demanding a campaign to exclude women for good, while branches such as Edinburgh, who had to contend with the problem, tried to go on arguing for some form of recognition of women workers.
The STA delegate meeting of 1905 passed a resolution urging branches to ban any new women entrants to the trade, and over the next year or so Edinburgh became increasingly isolated as first Aberdeen, then Dundee and Perth succeeded in closing the trade to new women recruits (there were far fewer women compositors in these towns anyway).
During 1907–8, although a local committee was formed by the ETS to study the "female question" , priority went to the 50 hours campaign, which was finally settled in February 1909, thus leaving the way clear.
Moves towards unity within the branch, and towards federation within the printing trades as a whole, strengthened the resolve of the Edinburgh compositors.
In 1908, the longstanding split between themselves and the machinemen had been healed: "a happy consummation" and "an event full of promise for the future" , as the local branch of the Printing and Kindred Trades Federation put it.
The NPKTF, which had taken definitive form in 1902, had been pressing for reconciliation within the Edinburgh branch, and was to play a strongly supporting role in 1910.
1910: THE MAIN ISSUES
It was with the new strength born of unity then that the Edinburgh Typographical Society presented the employers with its memorial on women workers in November 1909.
For the first time, this took an uncompromising line; there was no more talk of limiting the damage.
This time they demanded: That from the first of January 1910, there shall be no further introduction of females into our trade in Edinburgh, nor any importation of female compositors from other centres, and that in future, machine composition be solely undertaken by male union labour."
Two things are worth noting at this point.
First, the memorial did not call for the dismissal of any women employed in Edinburgh at the time.
This  was important for relations with the existing women compositors, none of whose own jobs was under threat.
The calculation behind the memorial was naturally that most of the women would leave to get married within a few years.
Secondly, and this became clear in the negotiations that followed, machines were the real key to the whole question.
This was a dispute about future technology as much as about women's labour.
The memorial marks a striking turnabout in the men's approach to composing machines, which must have been the result of a fairly recent appreciation of the double threat posed by women Monotype operators.
It has already been observed that male compositors had virtually boycotted the machines at first.
Now, possibly alerted by advisers from outside (such as C. M. Bowerman, from the London Society of Compositors, chairman of the NPKTF, and member of parliament, who attended the negotiations during 1910), the committee of the ETS on behalf of its members, came into line with compositors everywhere else in claiming the right to work the machines."
It is evident from the progress of the talks between employers and union, that the employers equally recognized this as the heart of the dispute.
With hindsight, one can read from their responses that the days of recruiting women as hand-setters were in any case numbered.
The master printers readily concurred with "the desirability of gradually reducing the ratio of female to male labour employed in hand-setting" in their first reply to the ETS committee in January 1910, but "they did not mention the proposal to replace the monotype keyboard operators by male union labour" ."
Through the winter months, the larger firms gave further assurances that they were willing "to take immediate steps for the gradual reduction of female comps" ; some it seems went even so far as to dismiss women.
The close attention which the union committee gave to every case of a girl being hired in the winter and spring months of 1910 argues that the recruitment had slowed to a trickle, as is borne out by an analysis by age of the sample in Chapter 6: whereas large numbers of the women would have been 14-year-olds in 1908–9, hardly any were younger than this.
(Two surviving compositors, both of whom began work in 1909 told me that they had been among the last recruits.)
The employers did however wish to keep the door open for the future, and proposed a ban of five years on women entrants — something which the union was prepared to accept in the hope that "natural reductions" over this period would leave the men in a commanding position.
On machines however, a tough rearguard action was fought by the employers.
Pressed by the men, they offered various compromises at the April 1910 negotiations of which the minutes have been kept."
Still pleading competition and the greater suitability of women for keyboard work, they proposed first that machines henceforward be given alternately to men and women workers; or, a further concession, that all new machines be given to men until there were 50 per cent worked by  each sex, and attributed alternately thereafter.
Neither of these proposals was accepted by the men who, both in December 1909 and May 1910, voted by two-thirds majorities to reject them.46 The talks remained in deadlock through the summer of 1910, but following energetic efforts by the compositors and the unions representing kindred trades, pressure was mounting for a confrontation, which took place in the last weeks of the summer
 "NOT FOUND WANTING" : THE WOMEN COMPOSITORS WHO JOINED THE MEN
It is during the summer, and before the September denouement, that the voices of the women compositors for the first time become audible to the historian.
Not before time, the reader may think, we can find out something of what the central figures in this dispute thought about it.
Until this date, it has been difficult to escape from a picture of the women compositors as the subject of other people's discourse: employers, trade unionists, parliamentary commissioners, commentators like Macdonald, organizers like Margaret Irwin.
The 1910 dispute, which is particularly well documented in the press as well as in manuscript sources, enables us to see that on this occasion at least, the women did not stand by and wait for it to be resolved over their heads.
They took an active part — but on both sides of the argument.
One section of the women backed the men; another formed a separate union for a short while and tried to resist the ban called for in the men's memorial.
The first definite report of women taking the side of the men comes in early August, when it was announced at the quarterly general meeting of the Edinburgh Typographical Society that in the office of Neill & Co, 51 "female compositors had intimated their intention of tendering notices on Friday 5 August" alongside the men.
Neill's was one of the largest employers of women and therefore one of the main targets of possible strike action.
The same source claims that the 51 women in question consisted of the best workers in that department"(presumably this means the most senior).
Details of the circumstances at Neill's emerged only slowly and selectively, but the women apparently exacted a price for their support.
Not only did they get a promise from the secretary of the men's union that they would be paid full wages by the union if they came out on strike (unusual, if not unprecedented for non-members) but the agreement subsequently signed with Neill's management included some improvements in their piece rates.
 "Female comps" were in future to be paid for "inserting leads [i.e. spacing material]and justification" .
What was more, since "a deputation from the female compositors [had insisted]upon an agreement anent same" , they were to be allowed to do upmaking and corrections on machine-set matter until the whole matter is settled "." 
As a result of the threatened strike — in which the women's participation would have been crucial — Neill's came to a separate  agreement with the men, signed the memorial and thus dropped out of the dispute during the month of August.
They were quickly followed by another large-scale employer of women, Morrison & Gibb.
Less Is known about the Morrison & Gibb case, but again it appears that the women indicated their solidarity with the men.
It may seem odd at first sight that women should actively promote their own exclusion from the trade.
But it should be remembered that the memorial did not call for the dismissal of a single woman.
If in addition promises were made, as it seems they were, of helping to boost wage rates, and if particular grievances were also thrown into the package, it is not necessarily paradoxical that women should have agreed both to the five-year ban on entry (they were not to know that it would really be a permanent one) and to the assigning of all new machines to men.
There was no question of taking away their own machines from women already working as Monotype operators in 1910.
What is also easily overlooked is the appeal to their class solidarity.
When it was put to them that they were taking jobs away from men, many working-class women were prepared to agree that this was "not fair" .
But there may be more to this than comradely debate.
At a subsequent mass meeting, John Templeton, secretary of the STA, referred to these "two great cases" (Neill's and Morrison & Gibb) and said that women workers in these firms had been "weighed in the balance and not found wanting" .
Jean Symonds, one of the women who organized resistance to the men, retorted that"the girls he referred to had been weighed against their will.
In one firm, the girls had practically been compelled to join with the men".
It appeared that she meant Morrison & Gibb.]"
It is hard to know how to measure this kind of evidence.
It is not at all unlikely that some pressure was put on women in these two key firms, but it may have been of a persuasive rather than an intimidating kind.
 "A woman worker" wrote to the Despatch in late August, claiming that "persistent attempts are being made by the men to work on the motives of selfishness and self-interest of the women" .
Another anonymous woman, "a looker-on" claimed that "the men have recently shown a curious and novel diligence in the way of coaxing, bribing or even fighting girls into joining a trade union" .
(The union in question was one of the unskilled unions in the NPKTF, a point developed below.)
Whatever the tactics used, it soon appeared that the men were having some success in winning women over to their side in other firms as well.
The Despatch on 9 September, as the dispute was reaching its climax, reported: It is claimed by the men that they are receiving a very large measure of support from the women.
It is reported that in a large printing office in the city [which can only be R. & R. Clark]where there are about 100 females employed, more than 70 handed in notices to strike yesterday, while correspondingly large proportions of the  females employed in other firms are said to have signified their intention of going on strike, failing a settlement.
Only a "claim" , but one that looked quite likely.
It was not only the female compositors who were being asked for support.
Amelia McLean, who led the resistance to the men, alleged that Mr Alfred Evans, general secretary of the Warehousemen and Cutters "Union, was" trying to organise all the girls in the printing trade, including warehouse, machine room and stationery workers,[to come out]on strike with the men".
Mr Evans and his union were crucial to the men's strategy.
The Warehousemen's and Cutter's Union might not seem the obvious place for compositors — even women — to find a welcome.
But within the NPKTF, it was successfully recruiting a number of the unskilled or "auxiliary" women workers in the printing trade.
It was an English union, based in London and not affiliated to the STA, with whom it had dealings only within the NPKTF.
Soon Alfred Evans was claiming women compositors as members: "We have 420 female workers [in Edinburgh], 280 of them comps." 
And later, "we have 280 women comps enrolled in our society and over 100 fresh nomination papers handed in." 
Ellen Smyth, an experienced organizer, helped in the recruitment campaign.
This was the union which Edinburgh male printers had been "coaxing, bribing even fighting" women to join.
Why did they not rather try to recruit them into the STA in some way, as a separate women's branch for instance, as in the past?
Cynthia Cockburn is probably quite right when she refers to this as a way of getting women to recognize that they were inferior beings.
The "looker-on" correspondent of the Edinburgh Evening News certainly thought so.
She wrote that a woman who had been a comp for eleven years had told her that the subject of a union had never been mentioned to her before.
 "Now a special male organiser from the South has been brought in" to get them to join "not the STA, which by rights skilled workers like compositors should enter, bit an inferior English union, composed of unskilled workers" .
Amelia McLean also pointed out that skill was at stake: "fortunately, the majority of women workers cannot see their way to join that union, as they claim to be skilled workers" .
For the first time, perhaps because by now there was a "critical mass" of older and more experienced women to take a lead, we find some women taking a stand specifically on the definition of skill, and refusing to be absorbed into an "unskilled union" .
The women's resistance movement crystallized around this refusal, drawing hostile comment from Alfred Evans, who praised the "shoulder to shoulder" solidarity with the ETS shown by his own members, while deploring the aid given to the resisters by "middle-class women who are on the warpath on behalf of the employers" .
For it was known and greatly deplored by male unionists, that the women's resistance movement did indeed have support from middle-class women's suffrage groups in Edinburgh.
THE "WE WOMEN" MOVEMENT
So far as one can judge, the women's resistance movement was formed towards the end of June 1910, that is while talks were still inconclusive, and before the events reported above led the management of Neill's and Morrison & Gibb's to sign the memorial.
At a meeting on 1 September, the "Women Compositors" , Readers "and Monotype Operators" Union"was described as having been in existence for some nine weeks.
Its most spectacular action had been the production, in June, of a separate memorial addressed to the employers (referred to as the "We Women" memorial).
Four hundred-odd signatures of women compositors were appended.
This document read as follows: That we, as representing a large number of the women compositors of Edinburgh, feel that a question affecting a considerable body of women should not be settled without these women having an opportunity of giving expression to their views.
That while recognising that the men have had a real grievance in that some firms have employed an unfair proportion of young girls at apprentice wages, or nearly so, we women regard it as a great injustice that one of the main skilled industries open to Edinburgh women should be closed against them.
That we women feel that the fact that women have been employed in Edinburgh as compositors for nearly forty years gives women a claim on the business.
That up to the time in Edinburgh, the Monotype machines have been largely, if not chiefly, operated by women, and that women have proved themselves entirely competent to work these machines, so that it seems a great hardship that women should be debarred from working at them in future.
That since we have realised the position of women in the printing trade is seriously threatened, we women have been trying to organise ourselves with a view to securing justice for ourselves and for the women who may in future desire to practise the business of compositors or monotypists.
That in view of the foregoing considerations we ask you to ask the Masters"Association to delay any decision hurtful to the interests of women compositors until the women's case has been given full consideration.
Unfortunately, no record seems to have survived of the names of all those who signed the document: in an interview with the Despatch on 1 September, one of their leaders said they were mostly from printing offices which had not agreed to the men's memorial, that is on the whole the smaller offices.
The two women named by the local press as leading lights of the women's union — Jean Symonds and Amelia McLean — both worked at Skinners, a firm employing 19 women and 7 men in its composing room.
Skinner's had not signed the men's memorial during  the summer.
I could discover very few details about either of these women.
Jean or Jeannie Symonds was still working in Skinners in 1913, left the trade for a few years but was readmitted in 1927, so it seems safe to assume that she spent much of her working life in the printing trade and did not marry.
Amelia McLean on the other hand, who was the movement's lading spokeswoman — writing articles for suffragist papers and giving statements to the local press — married and left the trade shortly afterwards.
The daughter of a warehouseman, she was 26 years old in 1910, so had presumably been more than ten years in the trade.
Her husband was described as an engineer (probably a skilled engineering worker).
She was thus neither from a printing family, nor from a middle-class background, and felt obliged to counter rumours about her financial status: "It has been rumoured that I am a suffragette and a paid official: as a matter of fact, I an neither.
This fight has been an expensive business for me personally, but I do not mind that.
It is the principle we are fighting for".
It was in part on "middle-class interference" that polemic about the "We Women" memorial centred.
The STJ reported that "the small section [i.e. the women's breakaway union]as has since been openly admitted, was formed and organised under a" West End"[of Edinburgh]suffragette banner…
Altogether from first to last, there was evident much, far too much, of the patronising yet dominant "West End" about this opposition".
Hints were dropped that the suffragettes in question were lady friends of the employers, that invitations to "My Lady's tea-parties" were issued, and so on.
Since the STJ always confined itself to veiled hints of this kind rather than anything more explicit, and since there is little or no literature available on the women's suffrage movement in Edinburgh, it is impossible to say whether there was indeed any personal connection between the Master Printers and the "West End suffragettes." 
What can be confirmed is that both national and local women's suffrage groups took an interest in the dispute.
Although all the groups, "militant" or "constitutional" seem to have followed events with attention, the Women's Freedom League (WFL) seems to have been particularly active, and the columns of its paper, The Vote, were opened to the Women Compositors"Union.
As early as May 1910, the local WFL organiser, Madge Turner, commented more in sorrow than in anger on the dispute, admitting that"the saddest part of it all is that the majority of women in all the departments are supporting the men.
They have been gulled by the promises of the men that they will have better work, better wages, better conditions.
The ugly fact that if women are ultimately shut out of the industry, organisation and better conditions will be of no use to them, has been carefully glossed over".
At the beginning of June, the paper reported that"some of the girls are very indignant at the treatment they are receiving.
A joint committee, formed of the members of the Freedom League, the WSPU and the  NUWSS, has been formed."
At a meeting held at the local headquarters of the WSPU, "Mr Buckner, a prominent official in the STA, who spoke to the question from the men's point of view, was subjected to a very severe heckling." 
On Tuesday 14 June, "representatives of the girls in the composing department of the printing trade, attended to address our [i.e. WFL]members" , and on 25 August a deputation went to see the employers and called for a Board of Trade enquiry.
The women's union quickly ran into trouble though.
In the first place, the 400 signatures were challenged.
 "Three parts of the signatures were no signature at all" , alleged one speaker at a men's meeting.
In private, during talks with the employers, C. M. Bowerman said: "In reference to the new Society and memorial with 400 signatures, we are men of the world and quite know what that is worth and how those signatures were obtained." "
The implication, whether private or public, was that somehow pressure had been exerted by the masters to get the women to sign (we have already noted that counter-allegations were made that the men had done the same to their women supporters).
There is, not surprisingly, no surviving evidence about pressure or incentives from the employers"side.
Miss Symonds, at a women's meeting held in early September, energetically denied the charge: "This is absolutely untrue.
Every one of the signatures was genuinely affixed by a female comp, reader or monotype operator in Edinburgh,"and subscriptions were being paid.
If a rule book was not yet available, that was because it was…at the printer's. 64 But the Edinburgh Trades Council refused to recognize the women's union, describing it as a "bogus association, engineered by women suffragists" and its leaders found themselves beleaguered.
Amelia McLean described how she had been "waylaid…on [her]way home for dinner" by Mr Evans of the W. and C.U., who "after calling her…everything but a lady, had said she was the most unsympathetic woman in Edinburgh" .
The most serious charge against the women's union was that it proposed to carry on working if the men went ahead with their strike.
The Scotsman reported on I September that "members of the Women Compositors" , Readers "and Monotype Operators" Union intend to remain at work in the event of a strike".
"They simply cannot and could not afford to stop work.
Many of the girls depend for their livelihood on their wages."
This was probably what caused most ill-feeling, and the end of August and beginning of September saw a number of well-attended and noisy meetings where each side accused the other of a multitude of sins.
A mass meeting of all the printing and kindred trades was held on 31 August in the Music Hall of the Assembly Rooms in George Street, and over 2,000 people were present.
In retrospect, this seems to have been the meeting which prompted the remaining employers to make their final concessions, but that was not clear at the time, and several of the orators, some of whom have already been quoted, loosed off broadsides  against the women's union on this occasion.
The next day, the breakaway women held a meeting attended by about 150, at which all the charges about bogus signatures, West End suffragettes and so forth, were energetically denied.
Both the WFL and the WSPU held meetings on the issue in early September, but deliberately tried to cool the temperature.
On 6 September however, the Evening News carried a report of a clash between women on different sides in the dispute: "we understand the differences of opinion between the women who have amalgamated with the men's society and those associated with the women compositors, readers" and monotype operator's union found lively expression in a wordy warfare",
The remaining employers, during the negotiations which followed the mass meeting of 31 August and the threat of a strike, were still sticking at a compromise formula, one which Amelia McLean, putting the women's case in The Vote, said she was prepared to accept, viz: a five-year ban on women entrants from 1 January 1911, and the establishment of a 50 per cent distribution of Monotype keyboards between men and women.
Miss McLean also outlined the position of the women's union on equal pay.
This was a central issue, but not mentioned either in the men's memorial nor the employers"statements.
Her attitude was one with which the reader will now be familiar: that women could not reasonably expect the same pay as men: That we know would be impossible, at least in the meantime, as up to now all girl apprentices have only served an apprenticeship of three years, whereas a boy serves seven.
Therefore the woman, not having had the same training as a man cannot possibly demand the same wage; also not being physically as strong, she cannot compete with him where heavy lifting is required.
She also mentioned the Factory Acts as a restriction on women's usefulness to employers.
(While the Factory Acts did not usually greatly affect book-printing, it sometimes happened with legal or government work that compositors had to work longer hours than normal to meet deadlines.)
By thus reproducing arguments in favour of unequal pay which had a long pedigree, Amelia McLean's article showed that she was either unable or unwilling to realize that, apart from anything else, the introduction of Monotype machines within the previous few years had completely redistributed the cards.
Once machines seriously began to replace hand-setting, the argument about apprenticeship would be greatly weakened.
Although she did call for a fuller apprenticeship for women, Amelia McLean did not argue (nor did anyone else) that the Monotype made old-fashioned apprentice ships redundant, and that by a historical reversal of the usual procedure, women compositors in 1910 actually controlled a skilled process while men did not.
The women's resistance movement was inhibited by its own willingness to accept an  undervalued estimate of women's work, whatever the actual work process.
THE CONFLICT "RESOLVED" 
Even if Amelia McLean had made more ambitious claims, it is doubtful whether anyone would have listened to her.
The dispute was being regarded as a trial of strength by the labour movement (in a nationwide context of increased union militancy) and the solidarity of all the trades in the printing industry impressed the employers still standing out against the men's memorial.
Weakened by the capitulation of some of the bigger firms, the remaining master printers conceded their last point, about the machines.
After further talks, another mass meeting on 15 September (the day the strike notices expired) voted to ratify the agreement, which was finally signed on 24 September.
It stated that any women then in composing rooms could remain there, but that no new recruits were to be taken on before 30 June 1916.
All new keyboards of composing machines were to be operated by male union labour, and fifty per cent of upmaking and correction on keyboard material was to be done by men.
In return, the Edinburgh branch of the STA was to maintain peace on all questions of wages and hours for the next three years.
Some small increases in women's pay were implemented, but these did not significantly affect the differential between men and women.
It was later admitted by the men that "unfortunately, in that treaty, they had not been able to obtain any particular conditions" for women.
Although the result was generally welcomed as a great triumph for the men, some ETS members and some political groups thought they should have held out for even more concessions.
Forward, the ILP paper, which was not unsympathetic to women's causes, including suffrage, nevertheless commented sternly: We don't think this quite satisfactory.
For instance, the first point does not hinder the masters from introducing female labour at half rates [i.e. after 1916].
The second allows women still to operate keyboards.
We do not object to women working the keyboards, so long as they are paid the same wages as men.
Until they are, female labour at half rates will have a dangerous effect on the printing trade in general.
As a matter of fact, most of the London publishers send their printing to Edinburgh to get it done at half cost by sweated labour.
Thus while the girls are exploited, the men printers of London are unemployed.
And the Executive's recommendation is not by any means wholly satisfactory.
As it is, we regret that the printers, when they had the opportunity, did not make an end of the half-paid female labour and so established the principle for both sexes of "Equal work, equal pay" .
Very few dissenting voices were heard on the left.
One of these came, interestingly enough from the Socialist Labour Party, the extreme left-wing group of revolutionary socialists who made the work-place the centre of political struggle.
The SLL was opposed to women's suffrage as a bourgeois demand, but fully supported the right of women to work outside the home.
Lily Gair Wilkinson, writing in the Socialist, the SLL paper, in June 1910, had apostrophized the male printers of Edinburgh: What economic or social argument can be put forward to justify the claim that the trade is yours?
Whatever the justification there may have been in the past, when a high degree of ability may have been necessary to acquire and work at the trade, that reason has forever passed away if it ever was more than a trade gild superstition.
The reclaiming of the trade by the men was nevertheless to become a permanent reality, as an editorial in The Vote had correctly predicted.73 It is possible that if the war had not intervened, the men would in any case have been able to secure the prolonging of the ban on women beyond June 1916.
In the event, no effort was needed: the early years of the Great War caused great damage to the Edinburgh printing trade, with several firms going out of business, others laying off workers or releasing them for other jobs since trade was so poor.
In 1916, many of the women compositors found themselves being called to work as Post Office clerks.
No firms were anxious to try to recruit more.
And by the end of the war, the issue had fallen into oblivion.
Several hundred women remained employed in Edinburgh printing houses, but they were destined to grow old in the job, with no girl apprentices joining them.
Edinburgh thus came into line with the rest of Britain, and the trade of compositor became a male monopoly until the Equal Opportunities legislation of the 1970s, which enabled a few women to serve regular apprentice ships as compositors, before the widespread adoption of the new computerized technology convulsed the printing trade, in ways which have been thoroughly discussed by Cynthia Cockburn.
The Edinburgh "female question" was "resolved" by the 1910 agreement, resolved that is, as far as the men of the STA were concerned.
Alfred Evans had claimed that "this is not a sex question, but a wages question, wholly and solely" .
Was he right?
Unequal pay was certainly the heart of the problem.
As Ellen Smyth said, "women did for 14s the same work as men for 32s" .74 (She was actually quoting the lowest rates: Amelia McLean pointed out that "stab girls" made between 15s and 25s, while piece workers got 14s to 16s; "if all the girls in the different occupations in Edinburgh had such a wage, there would not be much to grumble about" .)
75 What neither the men nor the resisting women ever came to terms with was the completely new skill represented by monotyping.
If they had combined forces and demanded that the employers pay equal wages to anyone working a machine, man or woman, might the outcome have been different?
It is at least arguable: the employers did after all give in when faced with a strike, and effectively surrendered  on this very question for the future, since they would have to pay the male rate to all the new (male) monotypists.
Everyone was aware that the days of women hand-setters were in any case numbered.
It looks very much as though this option was ruled out by entrenched feeling on the men's side and inadequate appreciation of their position by the women.
Both sides perceived it as a "sex question" , even if it was "a wages question" .
Unity seemed to be an impossibility in 1910: men's and women's interests were apparently quite incompatible.
Mr Templeton of the STA bluntly stated that "either the men or the women must cease to exist as comps" , 76 while Mrs Pankhurst, speaking in North Berwick, remarked that "the women were between the devil and the deep sea" .77 But that unity did eventually come about.
Hesitantly at first, and in the face of some opposition, the male union leadership, in consultation with the women, decided to set up a women's section of the ETS instead of pursuing the strategy of recruiting the remaining women compositors into the Warehousemen and Cutters"Union.
This story, which deserves attention and is in some ways unique, is told in Chapter 7.
But before that, it is possible, using the sources revealed by the 1910 dispute, to put together a sort of group portrait of the women compositors, as they were in 1910, and as they continued to be over the coming years.
It is often easier to chart the high points of labour disputes than the realities of everyday life.
Here we have a particular group of working women unparalleled anywhere else in Britain.
What were their family backgrounds, their circumstances, their feelings about their work, their daily routines?
Lastly it was possible to have the first-hand testimony of some of the compositors themselves and their relatives.
I was able to trace only four survivors, all over ninety (all of whom have since died) but their first-hand evidence was all the more precious."
It would be presumptuous to call what follows a collective biography and it would certainly be unwise to claim any great statistical value for such findings as there are.
The gaps in the evidence are simply too great, and it is sometimes hard to interpret.
But by piecing together all these different kinds of information, it should be possible, if only very imperfectly, to bring out of the shadows the central actors in the whole story, the women in the composing rooms.
A GENERATION
To begin at the beginning: when were they born?
We know the latest possible year.
Since no apprentices were taken after 1910, and since the age at which girls normally left school and began working was fourteen (give or take a few months), the youngest women in the sample were born in 1896.
In fact, of the 202 cases where a date of birth is known (see Table 8), only 4 were born in that year (as compared with 18 born in 1895).
The reason must be that since the dispute over women had reached a critical phase by the end of 1909, very few girl apprentices were taken on after that.
Two of the survivors assured me they were among the last girls to be admitted to the trade.
As for the earliest date of birth, it is theoretically possible that it could be 1855, since the first recruits to the trade, some of whom were still working in the 1900s, were aged 18 in 1873.
The earliest known date of birth in the sample is in fact 1867 (two cases).
It can be assumed then that by 1910 the age range ran from 14 to 43 for certain, and there will most likely have been a few women in their late forties or early fifties.
But the distribution was far from equal between these limits.
As we have already seen, recruitment of girl apprentices increased during the 1890s and especially the 1900s.
From the ages of the 202 known cases, we can calculate that there was a definite upturn in recruiting in 1902 (girls born in 1888) reaching a peak in 1904 (girls born in 1890).
Then, consistently with a downturn in trade, the numbers fall a little, to peak once more in 1908–9 (girls born in 1894–5).
It is impossible not to connect this finding both with the introduction of machines and with the increasing alarm among the men.
Extrapolating from the known dates of birth, it is possible that as many as 75 per cent of the women employed in 1910 were then aged between 14 and 23, the remaining 25 per cent being between 24 and 43 or older.
So in everything that follows, it should be borne in mind that the sample under discussion is — possibly more than might have been expected — a group close together in age, which could almost be regarded as a generation.
The opportunities in life of these women would reflect their generation's place in history.
To take just one    instance, most of them were of an age to lose brothers, fathers, husbands or the chance of marriage during the Great War,
What were their social Origins?
The normal way of classifying a child is by his Or her father's profession, and this is essentially all we have to go on in this case.
We know the occupations of 161 fathers of women compositors, from their marriage certificates.
The registration records only give the Occupation of the bride's mother in rare cases, illegitimacy for instance.
Women's social identity was assumed by the recording authorities at the time, and still is in most historical and sociological analysis, to depend on that of their fathers and husbands.
Their own Occupations and those of their mothers are allowed no analytical weight.
(Common sense reminds us that given the distribution of women in employment in Edinburgh, most of the mothers probably were or had been employed in some form of domestic service or in the clothing industry; but in what proportions?)
Bearing in mind then that we have only half the story, we do have some indication of the social origins of about one-fifth of the sample, enough to be regarded as reasonably representative,
Edinburgh, as described in Chapter 1, was a city of small trades, with little large-scale industry at the turn of the century.
It was also increasingly a city of white-collar and service workers, but it is the first category — manual workers in small manufacturing enterprises — that is best represented among the 161 fathers.
Their occupations cover at least 76 distinct trades, but within this variety, certain patterns can be identified.
As usual, the word "skill" is a problem.
The usual criterion for skilled work is the serving of an apprenticeship.
Thus a compositor, joiner, tailor or tin smith for instance would normally be identified as skilled, a docker as unskilled.
But there are disputed categories (such as coal-mining).
In what follows, the branch or sector has been used as a category in the first classification of father's occupations, with skill as a secondary and more arguable subdivision.
(See Table 9.)
Whether skilled or unskilled, the vast majority of fathers of brides in the sample were engaged in manual trades (110 of the 161), and most of them could safely be assumed to be skilled workers.
Nineteen fathers were in woodworking trades, all of them in conventional skilled trades: joiners, upholsterers etc.
Seventeen fathers were themselves in the printing trade — mostly compositors, with a sprinkling of bookbinders and machinemen — again all skilled.
Seventeen were in the building trade; mostly in skilled trades such as mason, painter or bricklayer.
A further 17 were in miscellaneous craft trades, such as tailors, boot-makers, potters and so on.
Fifteen were in metalworking; most of them were well paid and skilled, as tinsmiths etc.
And 14 were in trades of a newer kind in which apprenticeships were served: plumber, fitter or engineer.
Only 11 fathers, outside these sectors, were in heavy or what  might be termed Semi-skilled or unskilled jobs: docker, coalminer, dust-man, general labourer, worker in rubber factory.
Of the remaining 51 fathers, 15 worked either on the railway in some capacity (as signalman, guard, driver etc.) or in other forms of transport, old and new (coachman, bus conductor).
Fifteen were tradesmen (grocer, pawnbroker, draper etc.), though it is not always clear whether these were small shopkeepers or employed by someone else.
It might be argued a contrario that the term "shop assistant, draper's assistant etc." which is recorded for some of the bridegrooms, suggests that"grocer does indeed refer to a shopkeeper.
Another miscellaneous group of 14 were in low-paid service jobs (janitor, lodge-keeper, waiter, picture-house attendant).
Finally, only 7 of the whole sample could really be described as white-collar employees (clerk, inspector of works etc.)
The general picture seems quite clear; the families whose daughters entered the printing trade were Overwhelmingly ones where the father was in a manual trade, usually as a skilled worker.
It must be borne in mind that this distribution, while, likely to be typical of the 1910 sample as a whole, does reflect that sample sage structure: the information comes from marriages logged very largely between 1910 and 1920 and obviously tells us more about the families that sent their daughter to the trade in the 1900s than about the earlier decades.
The few references and scraps of information we have about the very early recruits suggests that these may have included more girls of middle-class origin and certainly some from orphanages and boarding-schools — girls sometimes from middle-class families fallen on hard times.
By 1910 however, it seems to have been fairly standard practice for the daughters of skilled manual workers to try to get into printing.
It must be pure speculation as to whether such a father advised his daughter to do so, but he would at least be well aware of the value of a skilled calling.
The largest sine]"Occupational group among the fathers is indeed compositors (10) and these men's daughters were doing exactly the same as their sons: following their father into a trade.
For fathers in say, metalworking or joinery, there was no chance at all of their daughters following in their footsteps, but it made sense for them to seize the chance offered by the printing trade.
It is less evident that such a strategy would appeal to the daughter of a tradesman, who might after all be able to serve in her father's shop, or to the daughter of a white-collar worker, to whom the printing trade might appear to be a step down in the world in some respects: inky and dirty, even if requiring literacy.
This no doubt explains the low number of fathers in these categories.
The comparatively high number of transport and particularly railway workers may reflect the increased opportunities for such work in late nineteenth-century Edinburgh (none of the bridegrooms, belonging to a younger generation, worked on the railways: if in transport they were in more modern motorized jobs like van-driver: see  Table 10 below).
And of course the main printing-offices were still near the town centre and the main railway station.
This raises the question of locality: most data on where our compositors lived come from the registration records.
Many brides came from the registration districts (formerly parishes) in the crowded town centre — Canongate, St George's, St Andrew's, St Bernard's — and there was also a sizeable contingent from Leith.
As might be expected, very few came from middle-class suburbs like Newington, Morningside or the West End, practically none from the squares of the New Town, and very few from outlying villages or districts.
Their homes were mostly in the traditional working-class districts of the city, whether the tenements of the Old Town and South Side, or the lower-built streets north of the New Town between Edinburgh and the port of Leith.
FAMILY, CHILDHOOD, UPBRINGING, SCHOOLING
There is very little direct evidence about the family life of the 1910 sample itself, but at this point it may be permissible to draw on another source, very close in time, and relating to working-class families in the town centre.
The Report on the Physical Condition of Fourteen Hundred School Children ill the City, together with some account of their home and surroundings, was published in 1906 by the City of Edinburgh Charity Organization Society (hereafter CECOS).
Based on interviews carried out by "lady volunteers" in the winter of 1904–5, it surveyed an area of tenement houses in "one of the poorer parts of the city" (in fact North Canongate) and one in which "the less prosperous working class was heavily represented" , although as the survey put it, "there was an admixture of children of the substantially comfortable and thoroughly respectable working class" .
The extent to which the exercise represented a venture into "the policing of families" by well-intentioned outsiders can be appreciated by the method of collecting information.
Apart from interviews with the families, the survey might collect information about them from "the Benefit Society, the Church, the Club, the Schoolmaster, Pawnbroker, Factor [rent-collector], the Doctor and the Police" (family 768).
The survey was as concerned with the moral as well as the physical welfare of the subjects, and was particularly preoccupied with drink.
All this has to be borne in mind when considering the survey as a source, but it also contains a great deal of "objective" evidence about size of family, size of dwelling, wages, etc.
Its interest for us is that out of the 781 families surveyed, "printing and cognate occupations" represented more than any single trade".
Selecting only fathers and daughters described as "compositors" or "printers" , 52 families had a printer father and 38 families had at least one daughter described as "printer" or "compositor" (7 families had two daughters so described).
As usual the term printer "is to be treated with caution, but other evidence, wages for instance, usually indicates that" compositor"is meant.
The girls in these 38 families may not be quite typical of the 1910 sample, since the 1906 survey was skewed towards the"less prosperous working class; the occupations of their fathers were Overwhelmingly manual (no tradesmen for instance).
No fewer than 5 fathers from the 38 families were compositors, and otherwise a range of 20 different trades, was covered: from blacksmith to lamplighter.
Only one, an insurance collector, had a white-collar job.
Bearing in mind the bias of the Canongate survey, it is nevertheless possible to use data from the 38 families with compositor daughters to suggest something of the family background from which a number of our women compositors came.
The memories of the four surviving compositors (none of them from Canongate as it happens) can provide some useful comparisons.
The most immediately striking point is family size.
Almost all the 38 families were what would today be regarded as large, but was fairly normal for working-class families in Edwardian Britain.7 Of the 38, 11 families had 4 children or less, 21 had between 5 and 7, and 6 had 8 or over.
(Several families had moreover lost one or more children in infancy or youth, often from TB.)
Of the surviving compositors I interviewed, one was from a family of 9 children, another from one of 8, one had at least three sisters, and the last was one of only two, whose father had died young.
The survivors were mostly younger sisters, but the striking thing about the teenage girl compositors traced through the CECOS Report, was that they tended to be the eldest children of large families.
5 of the 38 families consisted of a widowed mother with respectively 3,5, 5, 6, and 8 children to support, and in each case the eldest girl or girls were compositors.
In 16 other families the girl compositor was the oldest child.
Although one should not read too much into this, given that the families in the survey had at least one child in primary (board) school by definition, and therefore the oldest were sometimes the only ones of an age to be working, it can safely be said that the openings for girls in the printing trade must have been a godsend for low-income families with several children.
A girl could be earning 10s a week by the time she was 18: better pay than most of the other teenage working girls in the CECOS Report, who were usually in low-paid service (as domestics or laundry-workers) or low-paid factory workers (machinists, paper-bag makers).
a
Unlike the registration records, the CECOS Report does give details of mothers"work both inside and outside the home.
The great majority of mothers were not in paid work, hardly surprisingly since so many of them had large families of young children.
But in the 781 families surveyed, 262 mothers are nevertheless described as wage-earners, 153 on a regular basis.
Most of these were either widows or deserted wives, or as the survey put it "from drinking families" .
In other words, they were compelled by need to seek extra income.
It is assumed by the survey, and accepted by most historians of the period that married women with children did not go out to work unless they had to.
But there was a great  deal of casual working: mostly in cleaning jobs or "taking in washing" , which the CECOS survey recognizes, though possibly underestimating it.a Such work was often not perceived as "work" at all.
One of the survivors told me that her mother "never worked" , but it later emerged that she did go out to clean offices.
In the 38 families with compositor daughters, there was evidence of dire poverty in some cases, but the mother was rarely described as working regularly.
More often she "took in lodgers" or washing, or did charring on a casual basis.
One mother (the widow of a lamplighter) was a machinist at a printer's (bookbinding?), and in this case at least it may have been the mother who introduced her daughter to the trade.
More often the mothers of these large families were being what the survey described as "good" or "bad" managers, trying to hold things together.
Typical comments were "weary-looking, but hardworking and doing her best" (a tailor's wife with seven children); or "how she manages to keep the house so tidy is a marvel, she is dying of pthisis" .
It is reasonable to assume that the daughters, particularly the elder ones, of such families will have been brought up to share in household chores.
 "1 The survey remarked of girls under 14 that" they are often found to save expense by that unremunerative and often heavy task of helping mother about the house ", and" small girls are naturally useful as nurses "for their younger brothers and sisters." 
In the Canongate families, conditions were cramped.
Fifty-five per cent of the 781 families lived in houses consisting of two rooms on a tenement staircase.
Although few of them (only 20) were officially designated as "overcrowded" , bringing up large families in such circumstances was not easy, and activities such as reading would have been particularly difficult.
(In 1911, 41 per cent of the population lived in two-room dwellings, and 71 per cent in three rooms or less.)"
The CECOS surveyors tended to dwell on whether the houses were clean, well-kept and so forth.
But they also noted whether there was reading matter in the house.
It might perhaps be assumed that families sending girls to be compositors would be those where there was some interest in books, but the evidence is very fragmentary.
In one family, where the eldest of the 6 children was a girl compositor, "they are all determined characters and all read a good deal of fiction" .
A younger sister, still at school is described as very bright".
In another family, the surveyor noticed that the eldest girl, a compositor aged 18 "reads novelettes and the People's Friend" .
In another family, where both father and daughter were in the trade, there were plenty of books around the house, but the children were "not good scholars" whatever that meant.
The father in one family, himself a compositor with both a son and daughter following his trade, was described as "a first-class workman, clever, thoughtful and well-read…he is in the Trade Union" and also attended Labour Party meetings  (indicating incidentally that it was not necessarily a sign of disaffection from the union for a comp to send his daughter to the trade).
But in many of the families no particular mention is made of reading habits.
It is hard at this distance to work out whether the family played a great part in the daughter's choice of trade, though common sense suggests that this was probably so.
Wherever we have any hard information, it suggests several forces might have been at work, not least the school.
A former male compositor, apprenticed between the wars, told me that in his school, near Nelson's printworks in Parkside, the foreman used to come to the top class every year and recruit "the brightest boys" .
It seems likely that once the board schools were well established for both sexes, by the 1880s, the same thing will have been true of girls.
One employer as we have already noted, thought board school girls better at reading and spelling than the boys in 1902.
This may have been one way in which a girl could emulate the "lad o' pairts" and improve herself through education.
The few cases where we know how a girl entered the trade show a mixture of influences.
For Jean Henderson, who entered the trade in the 1890s, it was perhaps, her daughter thinks, the orphanage with its "feminist" matron that urged her to take up what in later life she felt to be an intellectual calling.
Jean's own mother, who had been a domestic servant, wanted her daughter to go into service too, and certainly did not push her into printing.
Jean Henderson had been a quick pupil at school; so was one of the 1910 survivors whom I interviewed, Ethel Brechin.
She went to Canonmills School, then Broughton Higher grade, and had always been good at reading and spelling.
In her case there were other reasons too.
The youngest of a large family, who lived right in the book-printing district with Morrison & Gibb, Clark's and Neill's within walking distance, she had two elder sisters already in the trade.
Even so, her choice was not automatic.
First she tried dressmaking, which she liked and was good at, but after "six months with not a penny pay" , her father, a footman at the Caledonian Club, said she wasn't "even getting the shoe leather" .
After a brief spell in a florist's shop, she entered Morrison & Gibb in November 1909, aged 15, and worked there more or less all her life.
Another survivor, who had no fewer than three sisters already in the trade, did not automatically follow them either.
She too had been to Canonmills and Broughton school (though she says she was "not very clever" ) and first of all went to work at a draper's shop in the West End, a job for which she remained still nostalgic.
Alone of the survivors, she had no great affection for the printing trade, which she entered ( "my big mistake" ) when she went to "chum along" a friend.
Another survivor, who was brought up in Leith, where she went to Bell's School, owed her introduction to printing to a neighbour "a Miss Taylor" , who told her widowed mother that young Jenny would be "just suited" to the printing trade, and herself took her up for interview.
She was asked  to read a passage, told "You" ll do", and started immediately as a reading girl.
What other openings were there for these girls?
Dressmaking or working in a shop were possibilities.
Shop assistants in this period were expected to be of "respectable" appearance and speech.
It may have been harder for girls from the Canongate to find such jobs (the survivors were all from slightly more prosperous backgrounds).
The teenage girls and young women recorded in the CECOS Report were more likely to be doing industrial or domestic work.
Quite a few were in the printing and paper trades as folders, envelope makers, envelope stampers etc.
Others were pantry maids, laundry workers, and some were in factory work as machinists or "chocolate coverers" .
Their pay varied, but very few girls in these occupations ever earned as much as the 12s-13s a week, which as we have seen is what a girl compositor could be earning by the time she was about 20, with the (limited but real) possibility of earning more later.
It will have been noticed that it was common for more than one child in a family to enter the same trade, and our sample very strikingly demonstrates the importance of sisterhood.
Two of the survivors had several elder sisters working as compositors.
A third had two sisters in the trade, but working in less well-paid jobs as auxiliaries.
She was the highest earner.
In the sample as a whole, out of every 100 women, there would be as many as 10 pairs of sisters, i.e. about 20 individuals.
And cases of three or more sisters working are not uncommon.
In this calculation, I assumed that if two women worked in the same office and had the same surname (provided it was not a very common one) but different Christian names, then they were sisters.
For instance, Agnes, Jemima and Maria Steele were all working in Morrison & Gibb in 1911.
Very often there is some independent evidence (witnesses to marriage, mention in trade union records) to confirm the sisterhood.
But I have not counted as sisters any women with very common surnames — in descending order, Brown, Henderson, Thomson, Reid, Robertson, Wilson, Scott, Anderson, Walker, Grant, Miller, Munro, Smith and Stewart — unless there was independent evidence.
So the number of sisters is almost certainly an underestimate.
Although it was quite usual for sons to follow fathers into the printing trade, the presence of so many sisters suggests that composing was quickly recognized as a good opening for a girl.
As we have seen from the memories of two of the survivors, younger sisters not initially interested in the trade might end up following their sisters"example.
One survivor recalled that having made up her mind to do this, she asked her elder sister to put in a word for her.
But her sister refused, so the younger one had to go and ask for herself.
Once at work, what was life like for the young apprentice?
We have already noted that she would have started as a reading girl, at 4s or 5s a week, before learning the lay of the type case and eventually starting work setting type.
Though soon earning more than an apprentice boy of her age, she was unlikely to keep much of her wages for herself in the early years.
The Canongate sample is not necessarily typical, but in almost all these families, all children, boys or girls, gave a substantial part of their earnings to their parents, never less than half and usually more.
(By way of indication of what this represented in the family budget, it has been estimated that weekly expenditure on food in working-class families at the time was about 35 per head.)"
Most girls lived quite near their work, and normally walked there, either taking a sandwich for lunch or coming home.
Jean Henderson, who worked until her marriage (at the age of 29) in 1912, walked to work in Rose Street, and later to Canonmills, from her home in the Pleasance which was about a mile away.
It was normal practice to live at home with one's parents until marriage (and women who did not marry usually continued to live with parents, often supporting them into old age, see below).
At work, women compositors were usually, though not invariably, segregated from men in some way.
In some offices there was a "Girls" Case-Room", as the wage-books in Constable's show.
The description of Clark's in 1906 refers to the separate composing-rooms for women disposed differently from the men's to combat "chatter" .
Former women compositors remembered working mainly with other women but all referred to the men who "carried the formes for us" , or "carried away the type to put in galleys" , though one remarked "my immediate boss was a woman" .
They all remembered their main work as straight setting, but also did corrections on the stone.
Miss Brechin, on being asked about this, suddenly recalled how cold the stone was, and how she got chilblains on her fingers in winter.
She had for a while become a Monotype operator, on one of the "women's machines" , and also remembers "trying to do imposition" and doing a little display work in one mainly jobbing firm where she worked for a short time.
Many of the women who remained in the trade until their senior years eventually became readers, with higher pay and status than they had ever enjoyed before.
Some changed firms.
Although workers tended to stay with one firm most of the time, fluctuations in trade meant that it was by no means unknown to move about on a short-term basis.
Miss Brechin for instance, although working at Morrison & Gibb most of her life, had also had spells at Clark's, Constable's, Oliver & Boyd and Simpson's Label.
What was very noticeable about three of the four survivors and about Jean Henderson as recalled by her daughter, was immense enthusiasm for the work.
 "I would have worked weekends if they" d have let me", Miss Brechin told me.
 "I loved my work, we all did" , another survivor said.
What was so attractive about it?
Partly it was a matter of company — despite what the description of Clark's says about "chatter" , former compositors all remember being allowed to talk — "after all, we were on piece work" , as one pointed out.
It was the company that Joanna Martin missed the most when she left to get married: "all the girls helped each other, and if you hadn't the right kind of type, someone helped you" .
Since they were often working on stories or novels, they would call out to each other "What are they doing now?" , if the next chapter was being set by someone else.
Most of my informants retained very happy memories of the atmosphere of the composing-room, possibly a little coloured by the passage of time; but there does seem to have been a good deal of good humour and fun.
 "We had plenty of laughs" was an expression used by two former compositors, one a man, the other a woman.
One thing must be remembered about their experience as part of a group: they would all have started work when there were large numbers of young girls in the composing-room, whose atmosphere would have reflected this, differing from that of the men's composing-room where the spread of ages was much greater.
As time went on, after 1910, and the numbers of women dwindled, those who were left grew old together.
By the 1920s and 1930s, not to mention the years after the Second World War, the women formed an ageing group of unmarried women and widows, once more having little in common with the men at work, who by now would be younger and probably married.
In both cases, their separate experience may well have created a special atmosphere, although my informants all stressed that they got on perfectly well with the men at work.
The content of the work seems to have been another source of enjoyment.
It was "really fascinating" .
 "You learnt a lot" , according to one woman who had worked on the Encyclopaedia Britannica, which was her most vivid memory, as well it might be.
Others remembered setting Greek, Latin, other foreign languages and mathematics (subjects of which they knew nothing, but which were a matter of professional pride).
The one author whom everyone remembered best was George Bernard Shaw, popular editions of whose plays were running off the presses in the early years of the century.
 "The flower girl" (Pygmalion) was the first book that came to mind for one very elderly survivor."
As compositors, one might be working from manuscripts (in "difficult hands" ) or from earlier editions going to reprint.
But — in common with many workers in manufacturing industry at the same time — none of the survivors I spoke to ever remembers having handled the end-product of her work, in this case the completed book.
Not all of them were even keen readers outside working hours, and they preferred relaxing in other ways.
Jean Henderson, about whom her daughter was able to give me many details, was perhaps unusual in her great thirst for reading.
The  daughter of a sailor who was lost at sea, she was sent to the Dean Orphanage where she received a solid education and showed promise.
For her, the trade of compositor was more an intellectual calling, not so much a craft and she found her work fascinating, reading as she went.
It was also a way of moving up in the world.
She stayed in work until she was 29 walking out for five years with her fiance, an engineer's blacksmith who was himself a great reader, while they saved up to marry.
Her daughter remembers her nursing a baby with one hand and holding a book in the other.
She remained serious about reading all her life, taking pains with her five children's education and recommending that they read good books, "not some of the trash she had seen at Morrison & Gibb" .
She and her husband bought second-hand books regularly, and she would always look in the back to see where they had been printed.
Working class intellectuals have often come from the ranks of printers in the past, but it is rare to find one such who like Jean Henderson was a woman.
If, like her, many compositors, male and female, remembered printing offices as quite sociable places to work, they also recalled the organized social activities which are regularly reported in the Scottish Typographical Circular and Journal.
It had long been traditional for offices to hold an annual dinner for staff in the winter and an outing or picnic in summer.
The dinners had always been all-male affairs, with formal suits and speeches, and long continued to be.
The picnics were originally for the printers "and their families" , but once large numbers of young women were employed, they seem to have taken on a more youthful atmosphere, and became good opportunities for courtship.
The STC in the winter of 1904 reprinted a humorous story from the Clark's in-house journal ( "Brandon Backchat and Clarkite Clippings" ) about the rivalry between two suitors (a stab worker and a linesman) for the right to accompany Miss Minion Thinspace, "the goddess of the case-room" , to Peebles on the annual picnic.
The regular reports on outings always mention the jolly atmosphere "which even the weather could not dampen" .
But apart from such outings, much of the organized sociability surrounding the printing-offices was, as we have already noted, segregated.
In Robert Gray's detailed analysis of the leisure activities, in the wider sense, of the Edinburgh "labour aristocracy" including male printers towards the end of the century, almost all the indices he has used -the bowls club, flower show, reading-room, Volunteer Rifles — were all-male organizations.
Male printers had their own organizations, usually based on their place of work and often devoted to sport.
There were football and cricket teams which had fixtures against other offices, or arranged "married vs unmarried" matches.
There was also an ETS male-voice choir and a lecture society, the Typographia.
From all these activities women were not so much excluded as absent by definition.
's
It is sometimes argued that studies of working-class leisure have  concentrated on male activities simply because leisure, a fairly new notion in any case, was very much a male affair in this period.
Women and girls were not expected to go off after work and sing in choirs or play games — they were expected to be at home catching up on household chores.
While this seems to have been as true among Edinburgh printers as anywhere else, there are plenty of indications that it was possible, for girls or unmarried women at any rate, to join societies or practise hobbies.
From the CECOS Report it seems that church-related activities were often the main focus of outings for girls.
Children of both sexes went to Sunday School (one of my informants when I asked her about this said, "Oh yes, everyone went to Sunday School" ).
And many families were described as "regular at Church" , though occasionally the surveyor adds except the father".
But quite a number of the teenage girl compositors in the sample were described as "regular attenders at the Mission" , something rarely or never remarked of their brothers.
One girl aged 16 was described as "going to the Good Templars three times a week" .
In several families, the teenage compositor daughter went to the Band of Hope.
In one family the 16-year-old compositor daughter went to Band of Hope and Bible class and was said to have "guided" her mother away from drink.
The CECOS surveyors make it clear that the drinking problem which most concerned them and was undoubtedly of serious proportions in their sample, was by no means confined to men (indeed their condemnations of drinking mothers are particularly sharp) but one can certainly detect a mainly female temperance counter-current in the survey, apparently connected to religious observance.21 (A male informant remembered during the inter-war period "a lady keyboard operator [who]used to get out her Bible and have a wee read" , at idle moments.)
Less note was taken by the CECOS Report of other ways of spending leisure, but a few mentions indicate that girls might for instance go to sewing classes, sing in choirs, and in one case learn "skirt dancing" .
In one family the daughters "attended dances" regularly, but these can hardly have been like the dance-halls of the inter-war period.
(Then, the dancing craze swept Edinburgh as everywhere else, and Miss Brechin for instance became an enthusiastic ballroom dancer for several years, winning prizes and championships.)
In the pre-war period, music and dancing were nevertheless activities in which girls or women showed particular interest.
This is reflected in the social events for women compositors organized by the printing firms, usually with women only present, when a programme of events was performed by talented compositors.
A correspondent sent me the programme for the Annual Social of the Female Caseroom at the Ballantyne Press, held in Swan's Tea Rooms in April 1906.
The chair was taken by Mrs R. W. Hanson (the boss's wife) and tea was served at 8 o"clock.
The committee of six (nearly all their names turn up in the 1910 sample) organized a programme which included songs such as "The Old Countree" , and "Flight of Ages" , sung by Misses Forrest and Waugh; the opportunity to dance quadrilles and waltzes; and a pianoforte selection by Miss Thomson, who was, like most of the other performers, a compositor.
It was noticeable however that two items (violin solos) were played by "Miss Hanson" (the daughter of the head of the firm?).
Violin lessons were probably beyond the reach of most working-class girls.
It was considered quite an innovation when, after the First World War, the "progressive officials" of R. & R. Clark decided on "a combined" Annual "" in 1921, "instead of one section having a smoker all on their own and the other a high tea and gossip" , as the ST[ put it.
 "A mixed company sat down to tea…presided over by the Father [of the chapel]-the Mother was too busy waiting on the guests to sit down, much less preside." 
(!) A whist drive was followed by a concert and the evening was voted "a great success" 
Life was not all work and no play for women any more than for men; even if they had chores to do at home, the women compositors — who  almost by definition young and/or unmarried — had the chance to escape duty for pleasure from time to time.
One of two of the survivors recalled playing golf and walking on the Pentlands.
The fact remains that men's leisure-time activities are much more visible to history, more organized and perhaps to some extent seen as more legitimate.
Certainly leisure is one of the harder areas of the everyday life of our sample to investigate.
THE GREAT WAR
The printers"picnic that had been arranged for a Saturday at the beginning of August 1914 had to be cancelled because of the outbreak of war.
The very large majority of our sample, having been born between about 1885 and 1895 were in that special, and it might be said tragic, generation who were young adults during the Great War, then spent their middle years living through the Depression and the Second World War.
A certain number became war brides and in some cases war widows in 191418, while others lost fathers, brothers and sweethearts or themselves remained unmarried.
(Nationally, of single women in their late twenties in 1921,50 per cent never married.)
The war was a dislocating experience for the group in other ways too, disrupting families, interrupting working careers, sometimes precipitating emigration.
To take marriage first: of the 54 marriages recorded among the sample during the war years of which details could be traced, 25 were to serving soldiers, mostly local men, a few from colonial forces stationed in Edinburgh.
One might possibly have expected the average age of marriage in our sample to fall a little in wartime, but it does not in the recorded cases.
Although many of the group would still be under 25 in the years 191418, there are only 16 brides under 25 during the period, whereas in 1911–12 alone there were 15 brides under 25.22 (One must of course bear in mind that these figures represent only the retrievable fragments of the marriage pattern for the whole sample.)
Eight of the sample are known to have married soldiers from overseas — almost all from Canada — and eventually emigrated.
It is impossible to estimate the number who were widowed (Scottish losses were heavy in France).
But it seems all too likely that the 21 married women who applied to rejoin the trade and the union in 1919–20 were war widows, although we only know this for sure of three of them.
Normally, married women only applied for re-admission to the union and thus to the trade (which was not granted automatically) when their husbands had either died or were severely incapacitated.
It was not only those who married colonial soldiers who emigrated.
At least 17 women compositors emigrated permanently (12) or temporarily (5) in the years immediately preceding or following the Great War.
Again, this was partly a matter of generation.
Those who did not follow soldier-husbands often emigrated with their parents.
The local Edin  burgh press in 1910–14 had almost a whole page devoted to news from Canada, where so many Scots had relatives.
In the immediate aftermath of the war, a number of families left for Canada.
For those who did not marry or emigrate, the war might bring change of a different kind.
At least 72 of our sample left the printing trade during the war years, according to the records mostly in 1916–17, although it seems likely that some had already left, since the city's book trade went into immediate depression on the outbreak of war.
Thus as early as 1915, "Juvenus" writing in the Scottish Typographical Journal reported that there were "many girls out of work who went to the GPO for Christmas work" (i.e. Christmas 1914).
Until conscription was introduced for men, there was much unemployment, in the trade.
The same article reports that"Woman is now of importance: she is motor mechanic, dispatch carrier, munitions manufacturer…
Quite a number of our own Edinburgh members are "on war service" have been able to trace very few records of women actually doing what is normally regarded as "war work" (one went to be a nurse, "a few" went to work in munitions, one to the RAF, one to "the services" , undefined).
But quite large numbers of women compositors left work in order to replace men in other jobs.
One major recruiter was the Post Office.
At least 24 of the sample (and probably many more) went to work there, either as clerks or sorters.
In several of the marriages at the time, the bride's temporary occupation is listed.
Thus one of Miss Brechin's sisters is described as a "postwoman" on her marriage certificate.
 "Juvenus" remarked that a "girls" chapel"was being set up in the GPO of members of the Edinburgh Typographical Society on temporary secondment.
Some women went to work in insurance offices, again probably as clerks, a few found themselves in railway offices, and one worked in the offices of the Scotsman.
Quite a large group apparently went to work as compositors in the south of England, if that is the right interpretation to put on the mention "gone to Colchester" which is recorded against the names of some women in the trade-union membership registers which are the chief source for this information.
MARRIAGE, CHILDREN, RESPONSIBILITIES
By 1921, most of those in the sample who were going to marry had already done so: there are records of 13 marriages in 1916, 17 in 1917, 12 in 1918, 13 in 1919, 16 in 1920 and 15 in 1921.
Although the records are much more reliable for the later years, the absolute number of marriages declined steadily with the age of the sample.
Can anything sensible be said about the marriages of our women compositors in terms of social equality or mobility?
Robert Gray has analysed marriage patterns in late nineteenth-century Edinburgh and concludes that by the end of the period, patterns of segregated intermarriage as between the families of skilled "and" unskilled"workers were tending to break down.
It does  seem that the social profile of the bridegrooms of our "compesses" displays several significant differences from that of their fathers, though one has to be careful about interpreting them.
The differences may reflect generational change or changing times in the Edinburgh labour market -or mere chance acquaintance in the vertical village formed by the typical Edinburgh tenement — as much as social mobility on the part of the brides.
On the whole, the sons-in-law were in better-paid jobs than their fathers-in-law, though only just (see Table 10).
The 166 husbands whose occupations are recorded do not cover quite such a range of trades as the fathers — 64 as opposed to 76 — but that is hardly surprising since they are much more concentrated in a number of particular trades.
Top of the list — and there are obvious reasons for this — comes the printing trade.
No fewer than 42 of the recorded marriages are between two compositors.
Work-place acquaintance can safely be assumed to explain most of these weddings — though as it happens, two of the surviving women compositors, one who married a compositor from another printing office, and one whose husband worked at Bartholomew's the map-printers, told me that they had met their future husbands at social gatherings unconnected with work.
The second largest group among the husbands is made up of clerks (16 in all).
A further 11 are listed as serving soldiers or seamen (some of the other bridegrooms were in the services at the time of marriage, but since their civilian occupations were also recorded they have been classified differently).
All these marriages took place during the Great War and it is a matter of generation more than anything else if the groom was a serviceman.
The only other occupational group that runs to double figures is made up of shop assistants (11).
The relatively modern professions of engineer and chauffeur or driver account for 7 and 6 respectively, while the skilled traditional trades so common among the bride's fathers are here all down to single figures: 7 in wood, 7 in metal, 4 in building, 3 in plumbing and fitting.
There are no railway workers among the bridegrooms, but there are 4 factory workers and 4 coal-miners.
After this comes a scatter of individuals, but interestingly a different scatter from that of the fathers.
Where among the fathers there had been one representative each of gamekeeper, watchman, pilot, none of these trades was represented among the husbands: instead there were one each of policeman, teacher, minister of religion, prison warder and two farmers: occupations entirely absent from the list of fathers.
Without wanting to draw too hard and fast conclusions from a very partial sample, some differences between our compositors"husbands and their fathers are obvious.
Thus only about 70 or 80 of the brides were marrying skilled manual workers; and 42 of these were in the printing trade, massively skewing the figures.
Nor can one pass over the fact that clerks and shop assistants bulk larger among husbands than among fathers.
In the sample as a whole, it could be argued, there was a  tendency for the brides to be marrying husbands either with white-collar jobs, or in trades slightly better paid than their fathers.
(Among traditional skilled workers, printers came fairly near the top of the pay scale.)
The special circumstances of the Great War undoubtedly played some part in bringing about change: for instance several soldiers from Canada or Australia who married women from Edinburgh were from better-off families than their brides.
And the fact that women compositors were drafted into the Post Office brought them into contact with male clerks there, at least before conscription.
One should also bear in mind the "vertical class mixture" of the Edinburgh tenement.
There are many cases where bride and groom have the same postal address at the time of marriage something that does not indicate premarital living together, quite unusual among the respectable working class of Edinburgh at the time.
It merely tells us that the young people were neighbours sharing "a common stair" .
Thus Janet D., the daughter of a cooper, and James R., a chauffeur and the son of a flourmill warehouseman, were living at the same street number when they married in 1911.
In such cases, neighbourhood rather than milieu may have brought people together.
Sometimes both came together: very few of our sample lived as far out of town as the mining village of Gilmerton, but one woman compositor who did was the daughter of a miner and in due course she married a miner herself.
Some of the marriages could certainly be described as taking place within the traditional milieu of the skilled working class: thus Flora H., daughter of a blacksmith, married the son of a cabinet maker (bride and groom were both compositors).
The two children of a boot-closer, Katie and Andrew S., both became compositors.
Andrew married Chrissie K., daughter of a shoemaker also a compositor, while Katie married an electrical engineer, son of an engineer.
Georgina L., daughter of a tailor's cutter, married William T., a machineman and son of a bookbinder.
Such "mainstream" marriages, though frequent in the sample cannot however be regarded as typical; the variety at this unstable moment in the century was so great.
Thus Maggie C., the daughter of an upholsterer, is a "mainstream" bride, but her husband is less easily classifiable.
A sorting clerk at the GPO, he came from a less settled and respectable background, being the illegitimate son of a domestic servant.
Bride and groom presumably met in the Post Office during the war.
Perhaps least typical of all was Annie J., also the daughter of an upholsterer: aged 31, after 16 years in the trade, she married James T., minister of religion.
(In this case, what looked like a move into the middle class was in fact a prelude to much financial worry.)
Although quite a few of the sample married, like Annie J., comparatively late in life, most of the marriages were contracted while the bride was still in her twenties.
Those who did marry all left the trade, except for a few cases where the husband was a serving soldier abroad during the  war.
( "The war brides among us must labour on till the boys come home" .)"
Did women mind leaving their work to get married?
Some must have.
One survivor, as I have already noted, said that she did mind, mainly because she missed the company, but that her husband would not hear of her carrying on.
All the survivors who married said the same thing: that their husbands "would not have let" them continue to work.
It does indeed seem that the taboo on wives working was still operating among the generation that came to maturity at the time of the Great War.
Jean Henderson, despite being so fond of her work, never for a moment contemplated carrying on after marriage.
She and her husband moved further away from the town centre, to a spot where they could see the fields, and settled down to have five children.
For most of the brides, their farewell party (usually accompanied by a small presentation of wedding presents), was the last they saw of printing office life.
But for some, particularly in a generation whose men fought in the trenches, marriage was a short interval before widowhood.
Left alone, often with children to support, former women compositors could do no better than ask for their old jobs back.
The traditional justification for lower wages for women was always that they were not responsible for the livelihood of a household.
Time and again, witnesses told parliamentary commissions that women workers were either girls living at home with their parents and contributing to a multi-income household, or that if married, they were earning "pocket money" .
Women living alone, or as the sole wage-earner in an all-female household, or widows with children were invisible, though statistically by no means insignificant.
The gaps in our data do not make it possible to say anything of statistical value, merely to point out that the evidence fragmentarily available suggests that it was by no means exceptional for women to be sole breadwinner in a household, usually in three precise sets of circumstances: in widowhood, with or without children; after marriage when the husband was away, unemployed or chronically sick; when unmarried, either living alone or — more frequently in our sample at any rate — caring for and responsible for an elderly parent or sick sibling.
If a woman had left the trade in Edinburgh to get married, she was entitled under the official interpretation of the 1910 agreement, to reapply for a job and a union card in certain circumstances, notably widowhood.
In all a total of 45 women are recorded as having re-applied for union membership between 1919 and 1934 (20 of them in the first two years, 1919 and 1920) and this is probably an underestimate.
Most of them were widows and were re-admitted without problems.
Married women whose husbands were incapacitated were also treated sympathetically.
Thus Mrs B., who had left to get married in 1912, and had 4 children, applied for re-admission in 1919 since her husband was in an asylum.
She was successful, but it was not always enough to be in  difficulties to get the union committee's approval, especially in times of unemployment.
If a woman's husband was able-bodied, permission was rarely granted.
Mrs M.'s husband, a coal-miner, had been out of work for nine months when she applied unsuccessfully for her union card.
And the wife of the congregational minister fared no better when she explained that "owing to falling church membership" , the church no longer paid a living wage.
Her husband had opened a bookshop to support her and their two children, but it was "imperative for her to work" at her old job as reader, "to tide them over for a year or two" .
Despite her long years in the trade, her request was turned down.
We do not know exactly how many of those who re-applied were supporting children, who are mentioned only occasionally in the sources.
Thus a note might reach the union committee asking for exemption from the quarterly meeting (to avoid a fine) such as the one from Mrs K. who in 1922 said "I wish to be exempt from Society meetings as I have to attend to my children in the evenings" .
Connie B. was married in 1917 at the age of 28 and left the trade.
Her husband, also a compositor, died six years later leaving her with three young children, and she was obliged to go back to work (at Macdonalds in London Road, not in her previous job at Morrison & Gibb) until she was over 50, by which time her children were all supporting themselves.
She came from a large family, and it must be supposed that her mother or one of her sisters helped to care for the children while she was at work.
Children were not the only dependents of working women.
Probably more numerous than the widowed mothers in our sample were the single daughters, living with elderly and ailing parents, usually mothers, whom they supported.
The reader may remember Mr Fraser of Neills telling the parliamentary commission, "their mother is always ill" .
It is impossible to put figures on this phenomenon, which has to be guessed at from fragmentary glimpses of life after work: excuses for failure to attend a meeting and so on.
But we know that at least 23 per cent of our sample never married, and carried on working till retirement.
As daughters earning good wages, they tended in their later years to become the sole breadwinners in households containing elderly mothers and, in a surprisingly large number of cases, handicapped or ailing sisters.
Sometimes a mother might have some income or savings of her own to support the family.
Thus Lizzie F. was able to take a few years out of work to nurse her mother, an auctioneer's widow, before returning to work after her mother's death.
Mary Alston, one of the mainstays of the women's union in the 1920s, had to care during this time for a sick sister, who was in and out of a nursing home; much later, in the 1940s, she had to give up work for a while to care for her mother.
Similar cases are scattered through the records.
Jessie B. retired early in the 1940s, "owing to sickness at home" .
Nettie B. was absent from work a great deal in the 1920s, "owing to sickness of mother" .
Flora D. left work then returned, "owing to changed domestic circumstances" , a phrase which usually meant the death of a parent.
Chrissie J. (unmarried), had "domestic duties every evening" .
Rena M., an active union member, nevertheless asked to be replaced on the committee in 1929 because of her mother's illness.
Grace M. was herself ill for three months with exhaustion after the death of an ailing mother in 1945.
Alice P. had been supporting a bedridden sister for years when she herself died in 1952.
And so it goes on: cases which are obviously only the tip of the iceberg since they relate to repeated absence caused by serious illness of a relative.
A DWINDLING BAND
Very few women left the trade before retiring age for reasons other than marriage, ill-health, or care of a relative.
As jobs went, printing was clearly the best option they had.
(One of the very few to leave for other employment was Emily Picken, who had been offered a post as matron of a children's home.
This was obviously an exceptional case.)
It was the 200 or so unmarried or widowed women, who made up rather more than 25 per cent of the original sample, who remained as a solid phalanx of women compositors in the 1920s and 1930s.
By this time, the trade was completely unionized, and the existence of the women's section of the union gave the group a certain coherence and identity; so much so that to avoid overloading the present chapter, the union's creation and activity is discussed in Chapter 7.
But other things bound the experience of this group together as well.
The work had changed in the post-war period, and women were less likely to be employed now at setting pages of books.
Mary Alston, arguing the case for a pay rise, pointed out in a speech as early as 1922 that It may be that prior to 1914, women were employed in book composing only, but we must not forget the introduction of monotypes diverted hand labour to other channels correcting, making up and so forth, and in every large office today, not to speak of the small ones, we find women compositors setting, making up, doing author's corrections and in some offices making ready for machine.
's Thus the women who stayed at work sometimes acquired the skills that made them "fully" trained in the trade.
They never acquired equal pay, but they did increase their wages, and continued to earn what were, for women, good rates of pay.
A number of them ended as proof-readers earning as much or almost as much as men.
Some, through failing health or eyesight, were obliged to go down a couple of rungs on the ladder however, and there are an increasing number of cases in the 1940s of former compositors working as copy-holders for lower pay.
It was the unfortunate experience of the age-groups best represented in the sample to pass their middle years during some of the blackest  periods of the twentieth century.
After its partial recovery in the middle 1920s, the Edinburgh printing trade was hit by the depression.
Although the impact was perhaps less calamitous than in Scotland's heavy industry, the blows dealt by the collapse of orders in the 1930s would eventually lead to the permanent eclipse of Edinburgh as a printing capital.
In the short term, the depression brought deepening unemployment among both men and women.
It seems to have been at its worst among the women, according to the weekly out-of-work register, in 1934–6, when 10–15 per cent of the membership was regularly signing on.
By the late 1930s, the position had improved somewhat, but unemployment soared again during the first two years of the Second World War, when about a quarter of the membership found itself unemployed.29 For these single women in their 40s and 50s, it was not immediately easy to find war work, for instance in munitions factories, nor were they necessarily eager to do so.
They were also hampered from leaving Edinburgh to work in printing on war contracts elsewhere by the dilution agreements of 1934.
However by 1941, almost the entire membership had either found war work or was employed in the surviving Edinburgh printing offices, and by then only 2 members were listed as out of work.
Unemployment might depend on the individual's capacity.
The only survivor I interviewed who had not married and who had always worked, told me that she had only once been unemployed, for a period of 6 months, when she got a temporary job selling insurance.
Otherwise, she went from firm to firm, wherever there was work, and usually managed to find some.
(Her niece told me that she had been particularly good at her job.)
By the end of the Second World War, the youngest members of the group were 50 years old, and the numbers began to dwindle fast, through death or retirement.
The union discontinued its "social evenings" in 1951, but carried on holding occasional events or tea-parties which served as reunions for increasing numbers of retired compositors.
Those who remained at work were likely to find themselves increasingly isolated: Miss Brechin told me that she was the very last woman to work in Morrison & Gibb.
It is probably a fair assumption that towards the end they were increasingly marginal to the operation of the office.
An informant from Aberdeen, where the last women were still working up until the 1950s, told me that these elderly women sometimes had little to do, were regarded rather as passengers and had to put up with rather disparaging remarks, but were kept on until retirement age by the firm, which felt it had obligations towards them.
Some women were proof-readers, but otherwise, being excluded from machine typesetting, they were left with odd jobs to do round the office.
Quietly and with hardly anyone to notice, the last women compositors in both Edinburgh and Aberdeen slipped out of the case-rooms and into retirement.
A very, very few of them may still be alive today, with their memories.
The rise and fall of the employment of women compositors coincided with the rise and fall of Edinburgh as a centre of book-printing.
It also coincided with the rise and consolidation of the labour movement in Britain; and that is a story from which women were for many years absent or in which they featured very much as a minority.
We left our particular section of this story back in 1910, when the male trade-union movement had succeeded in stopping the future recruitment of women.
It did not look as if women would ever be part of the Edinburgh Typographical Society; but in fact, the women compositors did finally gain first admission to the men's union as a subordinate section and finally control (within limits) of their own affairs.
Our 1910 sample did serve its apprenticeship in trade-union organization, and this episode provides the last chapter in the story.
It is no mere epilogue, but a striking demonstration that it was possible for men and women to co-operate in the printing trade.