

Introduction
As soon as it was launched in 1986 the East London Compact attracted a great deal of attention from people wishing to learn how a local Partnership between Education and Industry could work to enhance the educational experiences and vocational opportunities of young people.
Since the announcement of Training Agency support for 30 Compacts in England and Scotland in 1988 this interest has grown dramatically.
In thin book we address questions which are frequently raised by those groups likely to be involved in establishing, promoting and benefiting from Compacts: employers, teachers, students, careers service, parents, education authorities, governors, trade unionists, community organisations.
While these groups share the need for the same basic information about what constitutes a Compact, their particular concerns require specific responses addressing their own interests and sensitivities.
We have therefore produced a standard working definition for the Compact as the basic starting point for each section, which then continues to deal with responses to the questions and concerns which are raised by each group.
We do not attempt to provide systematic instructions or guidelines as to how to establish Compacts.
The Training Agency's Compacts Development Handbook (1988) outlines a framework within which Compacts should operate, and each will develop according to the particular needs and conditions of its local situation.
We hope that this book will help those contributing to a Compact to understand the issues at stake, be alert to potential pitfalls, be sensitive to the needs and concerns of constituent members, and, in the end, develop a creative structure through which Partnership between Education and Industry can provide a positive future for young people.
Definition and Goals
We begin each section with a standard definition of Compacts in which we refer to the Training Agency explanation: "A Compact is founded on partnership and commitment.
It is an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools and colleges, and young people and their parents.
Schools, colleges and young people work to agreed levels of achievement, including qualifications, motivation and attendance.
In return employers make a commitment to provide support for schools and colleges, as well as further education and training and worthwhile jobs for those who reach the agreed targets.
Employers may also offer support and assistance to those who stay on at school or go into further/higher education.
By establishing clear measurable goals, Compacts take business-education partnerships a step further.
They focus action on raising the educational standards of the future workforce, and on giving all young people more incentive to attend school, work harder and achieve more.
The Compacts Development Handbook (1988) The Training Agency framework will be highly influential in the development of all Compacts.
It offers a model which operates on three levels: 1.
strategic, 2. operational, 3. individual.
1.
The strategic level concerns policy and the shaping of a "common vision" through clarifying system-wide objectives which will include commitments:— to increase the motivation of young people in schools and colleges so that their educational achievements are improved, and their vocational aspirations are raised.
— to provide young people, who reach negotiated levels of achievement, with appropriate quality jobs with training.
2.
At the operational level Compacts establish goals for employers and for education.
For employers these goals are likely to include:— a collective guarantee of jobs with training,— a continuing commitment to monitoring progress of students in Compact schools,— support for careers guidance and counselling,— the provision of Work Experience placements, and secondments for teachers,— a commitment to supporting the range of schools/industry activities.
For schools, goals may include commitments:— to improve educational standards,— to increase the number of young people choosing to stay in education,— to develop close schools/industry links which will enhance curriculum  development,— to provide careers guidance and counselling,— to arrange Work Experience for all young people,— to provide records of achievement for all young people.
3.
On the individual level, young people, "the centre of the venture" , will with the support of the wide range of resources and personnel involved in the Compact (including parents, teachers and employers), work towards particular goals for education and for career choice.
In order to become "Compact graduates" students will have to:— reach high standards of attendance and punctuality,— complete designated courses,— complete records of achievement,— participate in Work Experience,— reach individually appropriate targets.
Compacts are targeted at young people who are in transition from education to work.
This means that students must be able to achieve and demonstrate success in Compact terms by the time they reach the compulsory school leaving age at the end of the fifth year of secondary education.
Compacts, therefore, focus on fourth and fifth year students in the first instance.
One of the aims of Compact, however, is to encourage young people to remain in education so that they can acquire the skills and qualifications essential for participating in our increasingly complex society.
It must be made clear to students that they retain their Compact entitlements and may redeem them for employment within Compact companies whenever they leave education, whether at 16+, 18+ or after higher education.
Those students who fail to achieve some or all of the Compact goals during the fourth and fifth years, but who remain in education, may take advantage of further opportunities to achieve Compact goals.
An effective monitoring, or "tracking" system must therefore be established to ensure: I. that students are able to redeem their Compact entitlement when their formal education is completed, and 2. that students can continue to participate in Compact either in a school sixth form or a college of further education.
N.B. Throughout this book we refer to "schools" and "teachers" , since these are involved in the initial phase of Compact, but we hope that the "Questions Teachers Ask" section will prove to be relevant and useful to college lecturers as well.
Background and History
Compacts are a comparatively recent phenomenon.
Though the Boston Compact on which other Compacts have been based was only signed formally in 1982, it represents the culmination of a relationship between Boston schools and local industry that has been developing since the early 1970s.
The Boston economy expanded rapidly during the 1970s and the shift from a manufacturing to a service base accelerated during that time.
The growth in employment is set to rise into the next century.
75 per cent of the new jobs will be white collar jobs in the professions, business, finance, insurance and real estate.
Boston employers are facing an acute labour shortage with potentially serious consequences for economic growth.
However, despite the boom in Boston's economy the participation of Boston residents has been decreasing.
Boston therefore suffers many of the ills which we associate with inner-city decline.
In the 1970s, as a result of the Federal Court desegregation rulings, individual Partnerships were established between the Boston schools and leading companies such as John Hancock Insurance, New England Telephones and the Bank of Boston.
These "twinning" arrangements laid the basis for the Compact.
In 1978 Boston's Private Industry Council (PIC) was established.
The PIC is independent of the school board and focusses on providing access to employment for students in the public school system.
Each high school has its own PIC Careers Specialist working in the school.
PIC began by expanding the Summer Jobs Programme for students who had reached the legal school-leaving age of 16 and by assisting students through the Jobs Collaborative Programme to find quality jobs on graduation at 18.
(Students who leave high school before the age of 18 are regarded as "dropouts" as they leave without a formal graduation certificate.)
These two programmes underpin the Compact.
They recognise the need to provide powerful incentives if students are to remain at school beyond 16 and graduate with a high school certificate.
The Jobs Collaborative Programme makes a realistic offer of quality jobs for high school graduates.
The Summer Jobs Programme offers worthwhile paid work experience, and many students retain their summer jobs on a part-time basis during their last two years at school.
Inner London shares many features in common with Boston.
It too has suffered a long-term decline in the manufacturing industry combined with an accelerating boom in the service sector.
In 1985, over 400,000 people were registered as unemployed in Greater London, and while its unemployment rate of 11.5 per cent was below the national average, registered unemployment in Tower Hamlets, for example, reached 21 per cent .
New jobs, particularly in financial and professional services were being created in the City and in Docklands but were not going to local residents.
There are of course important differences between London and Boston.
Perhaps the most important of these is size.
Enrolment in the Boston schools  stands at around 36,000, compared with 182,000 in the ILEA.
Hackney alone has 20,000 pupils on roll.
Boston has 17 high schools.
Inner London has more than 140 secondary schools.
In addition each London borough has its own characteristics, its own social, political and cultural complexion.
The ILEA had made a commitment to schools/industry curriculum development and had been one of the five pilot authorities in the first phase of the Schools Council Industry Project, now the Schools Curriculum Industry Partnership (SCIP).
Each of its ten divisions has a Divisional Industry Schools Coordinator.
More recently, the ILEA has joined with the London Enterprise Agency (LENTA) to establish the London Education Business Partnership (LEBP).
It was this Partnership which provided the framework in which the London Compact developed.
LENTA organised parties of business people and senior ILEA personnel to see for themselves the achievements of the Boston Compact.
On the political level, the insight was timely.
Here was an initiative that provided inner-city young people from a diversity of cultural backgrounds with access to quality jobs.
The Compact idea was seen to offer a positive alternative to the recently announced plans of the Education Secretary, Kenneth Baker, to introduce City Technology Colleges.
A small working party was established, consisting of senior officers and inspectors from the ILEA and representatives of the business community to conduct a feasibility study.
East London was chosen for the pilot because of its high levels of unemployment and diversity of ethnic groups and because of the opportunities provided by financial deregulation and computerisation in the City (the "Big Bang" ) and Docklands Development.
Just as the Boston Compact engendered the London Compact, the London Compact has inspired the nationwide Compacts Initiative launched by the Training Agency.
How Compacts Work
Compacts are initiated by Partnerships between Education and Industry.
They are committed to enhancing educational provision in order to motivate young people, and to offering good and appropriate jobs to Compact graduates.
It is important that the Compact Partnership exists at senior levels in Education and Industry so that a clear understanding of the value, purpose, and potential of the initiative permeates all the institutions involved, and so that staff at all levels are positively encouraged to offer their support.
Successful Compacts will promote a kaleidoscope of different activities, and will be supported by a wide range of different parties, and so a complex management task emerges.
Every Partnership developing a Compact will design a management structure servicing its particular needs.
Outlined below is an example of how a typical Compact involving six or seven schools, and, say, thirty employers might approach this issue.
(See also the diagram on page 11.) para
Management Committee
A Management Committee should be established.
It should be small enough to be an effective policy, or decision-making group, but large enough to function effectively as a forum where the views and objectives of significant participants can be acknowledged.
This group should include representation from Headteachers, Senior Education Officers and committed industrialists.
It is here that Compact aims will be fixed.
All personnel appointed to administer the Compact should be responsible to this committee.
Directors
The Management Committee will appoint a Director, or Directors who will be responsible for the day-to-day running of the Compact.
This crucial role requires considerable management, leadership and administrative skills as well as sensitivity to the particular views and needs of both Education and Industry.
Since it is vital that the Partnership operates, and is seen to operate, at all levels of Compact involvement, there is a very strong case for co-directors to be appointed, one seconded from Education and the other from Industry.
Many authorities have already established such appointments, and so have emphasised the basic underlying notion of equal partners working together for the benefit of young people.
Co-direction ensures that administrative decisions are made with the full understanding of the implications for all participants.
Delivery Team
Compact Directors will work within a Delivery Team.
This team will contain representatives from Education and Industry responsible for:— coordinating Compact activities in the Schools and Industries;— ensuring that high standards are maintained;— establishing appropriate record-keeping and evaluation procedures.
The team should include:— a Schools/Industry Co-ordinator to promote and arrange industry-based curriculum development, in-service training including teacher secondment to industry and other liaison activities;— a Work Experience Co-ordinator to manage the Work Experience programme in the participating schools in conjunction with the DTI Adviser for Education and Enterprise as appropriate;— a Caters Officer, to collate employers' job offers, and to ensure that these are appropriate to the needs and aspirations of Compact "graduates" ;— an Adviser for Evaluation and Monitoring Procedures to ensure that students' achievements are recognised through, for example, records of achievement, and to provide the Compact with instruments for evaluating its progress and development;— managers of special programmes such as mock interviews, employers' recruitment sessions, and communication procedures.
While the composition of this group should reflect the nature of the Partnership, it is likely that the first three roles will be full-time secondments from education.
The other roles may be performed equally well by educationalists or employers.
School Team
The Delivery Team will co-ordinate the schools' Compact activities through the School Teams.
Each school should identify a Compact Co-ordinator.
This is an important role which requires the authority of a senior staff member, for example a Deputy Head, who can make and follow up decisions regarding curriculum development and in-service training.
Compact Co-ordinators should convene regular meetings to include the following of their colleagues:— Careers Teacher,— representative Head of Year,— representative Head of Department,— Compact Schools/Industry Coordinator.
These teams will promote Compact activities within the schools, and ensure that students' achievements are recognised.
They will also provide mechanisms for supporting and counselling those students who are at risk of failing to reach Compact goals.
Consultation and Information
The Management Committee will establish effective forums for consultation, and procedures for keeping the wider community informed.
A Consultation Committee inviting representation from all interested parties should meet regularly to consider Compact progress, and to inform the Management Committee of its views and concerns.
The Delivery Team will be responsible for ensuring that information about the Compact permeates the whole community through regular newsletters and press releases, as well as through public meetings.
Relationship to Other Initiatives
For students in the fourth and fifth years at school GCSE poses the most immediate challenge.
Compact companies can support teachers in preparing young people for GCSE by enabling them to use the activities, problems and experiences of their firms as a learning base for modules within the syllabus.
This might lead to looking at communications at work in English, distribution problems in Geography, or how a company's product lines have changed over the years in History.
The SCIP can quote examples of such work across the curriculum.
Furthermore, within Compact there is a strong incentive for employers to participate in this sort of curriculum support since it provides insights into the ways the schools which they are partnering approach learning.
For sixth form students or young people in colleges there are further challenges to face, whether on pre-vocational courses or within academic studies.
The contribution of the workplace is fundamental to the Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education (CPVE).
There is an increasing demand for A Level courses to be rooted in practical experience, and Compact provides many opportunities to meet this demand.
Compact should build on work already developed in the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI).
Colleges and schools operating within the TVEI framework are committed to "bringing industry in" , and are likely to have established Partnerships at local or school level.
Employers who have supported TVEI should be encouraged to support Compact, and, where feasible, to guarantee jobs to Compact graduates.
The National Curriculum aims to "prepare pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of adult life" .
The National Curriculum Council Working Parties on Maths and Science outline curricula which will need to be developed through practical and experiential approaches to learning.
Moreover, the cross-curricular Working Party which is looking at a variety of themes including Economic Awareness, will also make demands on the support of the local business community.
Compact provides a mechanism for articulating these needs through Partnership between Education and Industry.
The Youth Training Scheme has done much to educate employers about the importance of training a workforce to meet the challenge of the 21st century.
The Training Agency has made it clear that in order for Compacts to attract its support, they must offer training at least to Youth Training Scheme (YTS) standards, and that jobs offered must be at full employed status.
By covering the Education-Training-Employment continuum, Compacts can provide coherence to Training Agency initiatives in Education and Employment (TVEI and YTS).
Records of achievement also play an important role ill developing this coherence.
By empowering young people to recognise their skills and achievements, providing evidence of how they have put their skills into practice and recording their attainment, records of achievement provide a powerful tool for unlocking and acknowledging human potential.
Through Partnership, Compacts provide an invaluable forum for on-going  dialogue between employers and schools on the most appropriate ways in which achievement should be recorded.
The Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) Education and Enterprise Initiative has set targets for ten per cent of teachers each year to be seconded to industry and for all school leavers to spend at least two weeks on Work Experience.
This interfaces with Compact developments.
Within East London, teacher secondment and Work Experience have proved the two most powerful means of promoting ownership of the Compact.
The DTI's Education and Enterprise Advisers will provide valuable support to Compact schools in ensuring that there are sufficient places available to satisfy demand.
There are many other well-established agencies at work in most education authorities.
SCIP has established a national network of co-ordinators committed to curriculum development using the resources of the Local Economic Community.
Project Trident provides Work Experience and co-ordinates Community Service and Personal Challenge activities.
The DTI Mini-Enterprise in Schools Project aims to establish a Mini-Enterprise in every school in the country.
Understanding British Industry (UBI) has recently contracted to the DTI to manage its pilot Teacher Secondment Programme, but has long been active iii the field and produces regular publications.
The Industrial Society, Industry Matters, Young Enterprise and the Science and Technology Regional Organisation (SATRO) all promote schools/industry liaison.
It is essential that their successes are acknowledged and that Compact development builds on their expertise.
Questions Employers Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
What is a Partnership?
A Partnership is a relationship between interested parties or "stakeholders" in Education and Industry who aim to improve the educational and vocational opportunities of young people.
In some areas, such Partnerships already exist, in others they have yet to be constituted.
These Partnerships need to be representative of the most influential stakeholders, if the Compact is to be a success.
Partnerships exist to foster a variety of activities, e.g. teacher secondment, Work Experience, Mini-Enterprise, as well as Compact.
3.
How much time will Compact take?
How long is a piece of string?
It need take no longer than it takes you to interview a pupil and make a job offer.
Many employers, however, find that they want to get more involved than that.
You might decide to offer Work Experience to pupils to give them a taste of working life while they are still at school, or you might offer a teacher a secondment to industry.
You could offer mock interviews to pupils about to leave school, or a problem-solving activity based on a real life difficulty you have encountered at work.
You might well be able to come up with more ideas of your own.
No fixed standard time will be requested of all participating employers, as this will depend on the size of the company, flexibility of staffing and resources and many other individual factors.
It is worth noting that the Compact will not be fulfilling all of its objectives if it does not regularly ask participating companies to contribute to a wide variety of activities in the Compact schools.
4.
What will it cost?
The major initial cost to employers will be of time.
The aim for those Compacts established by the Training Agency, and for any others that are established independently, is that they should become self financing.
Local education authorities will contribute through staffing and clerical costs they may also provide office space and equipment, etc.
In order that Compacts eventually do become self financing it is very likely that employers will be asked to contribute to central costs.
How this is handled will vary from Compact to Compact.
Employers may be asked, for example, to contribute to a central fund to enable the Compact to develop necessary publicity materials.
Some employers might choose to become involved through offering sponsorship to school leavers, or also to the schools themselves.
Other costs might include:— paying students' Work Experience fees, fares and lunches,— paying for teachers to attend in-house management courses,— hosting Compact social events and meetings,— contributing to prize funds.
5.
What's in it for me?
At the moment we are experiencing a 25 per cent fall in the number of young school leavers.
This, combined with the economic upturn means that increasingly, there are skills and labour shortages.
Clearly now as never before there is a need for a well-trained, flexible workforce.
In order to foster such a workforce it is essential for the whole community, including Education and Industry, to collaborate in supporting young people in their transition from school to work.
This will create a better environment in which to do business.
Increased contacts with teachers will enable you to understand their skills and expertise so that you can recognise their achievements.
It will also provide you with a helpful forum for explaining your particular needs, and your views on the process and content of education.
The student Work Experience programme is always a positive way of learning about the skills and attitudes of young people who may wish to work in an organisation like yours.
Organisations participating in Compact will be asked to ensure that a targeted number of jobs are held for "Compact" students.
Evidence of a young person's success in Compact terms, is evidence of conscientiousness, punctuality and reliability, and of the acquisition of basic skills.
A Compact will provide you with priority access to able and skilled young people at a time when the demographic trends show that there are fewer and fewer school leavers every year.
This will be of crucial importance in 1992 when Common Market deregulation leads to open competition in Europe and a more mobile labour market.
And by encouraging wide participation in Compact programmes such as Work Experience, mock interviews, teacher secondment into industry and  employer secondment you are making available to your colleagues a uniquely valuable staff development experience.
6.
How do I persuade my colleagues to help?
One of the most effective ways to enlist the support of your colleagues is to develop a policy on co-operation with education.
Most of your colleagues will be parents or will know young people; they will recognise how vital it is for these young people to leave school with relevant knowledge and appropriate skills and attitudes.
If you explain that working with teachers and students is a valuable staff development exercise which has the full support of the company management, then there will be no problem about your colleagues' participation.
7.
How can I guarantee jobs?
Your ability to guarantee jobs will depend on the size and nature of your business, and recruitment pattern.
Companies and other organisations participating in Compact contribute to a collective guarantee of jobs with training.
It is likely that large companies will reserve a proportion of the jobs they fill annually, for Compact students.
Smaller companies, whose employment patterns are less regular, may not recruit Compact graduates each year.
Compact should, however, provide a useful source of reliable young people and these companies will offer their jobs to Compact students on a priority basis.
8.
What's the precise nature of the jobs guarantee?
Jobs offered through Compact must: a) be permanent and full-time.
This means that the Compact student has the same job security as full-time employees in the organisation.
b) contain a training component which is at least the equivalent of YTS standard.
YTS itself is suitable as long as employed status is offered.
c) have "prospects" .
It should be possible to show a clear professional progression route.
Compact aims to raise students' awareness of the importance of basic skills and attitudes which will be required of them when they leave school for work.
If Compact goals are framed carefully and sensitively they should demonstrate, for successful students, evidence that they will subsequently prove to be reliable, conscientious and creative at work.
Where students who have achieved their goals are unsuccessful in securing Compact jobs, Compact employers should provide appropriate feedback and counselling with the aim of enabling students to gain appropriate employment.
9.
What am I getting from the schools?
a) Through participating in the Compact you will be able to have regular and varied contact with a number of schools and colleges in your locality.
You will have the opportunity to participate in the students' learning processes, for example, through acting as a consultant to a Mini-Enterprise, or through working alongside teachers on the production and delivery of materials and lessons.
This will give you valuable insights into the kinds of skills and attitudes that young people bring with them to work and help you to understand how their needs and interests can contribute positively to the work place.
b) Compact will provide you with consistent and regular information about the progress of young people in Compact schools.
This will enable you to develop a better appreciation of the skills and aptitudes of young people and may help you to enhance your recruitment procedures.
c) Just as teachers have much to learn from practices in industry regarding time management, and problem solving, for example, so employers can learn a great deal from teachers about curriculum developments, equal opportunities, and new forms of assessment.
Employers who have invited teachers to attend in-house training courses have found that teachers can often provide sensitive insights and shrewd opinions.
d) Compact schools will always be happy to show you how they work and discuss their aims and development plans with you.
Regular visits for employers are arranged in Compacts.
Both educationalists and industrialists find these very stimulating.
10.
What is the precise nature of the school goals?
Each Compact will develop its own goals according to its particular environment and the needs of its participants.
The schools will have goals themselves as institutions and goals for their students as individuals.
These goals are likely to relate to the following areas:— improvement of academic achievement,— improvement of the staying-on rates,— improvement in attendance and punctuality,— development of record of achievement,— commitment to Work Experience for all,— commitment to teacher secondment to industry,— involvement of adults other than teachers in curriculum development,— service to the community.
Students will work towards fixed targets regarding the above, but will also negotiate individual action plans.
It will be the responsibility of Compact schools to provide the appropriate environment for students to achieve their individual and collective targets.
This will involve liaison with the Compact companies, and full and fair monitoring of students' progress.
11.
Do employers have goals too?
Yes!
Employers will be asked to quantify the ways in which they became involved.
This will mean stating the following clearly: a) the number of jobs offered annually; b) defining the nature of the training component; c) reviewing recruitment policies, especially testing, where this is used; d) interviewing young people from Compact schools and offering feedback and counselling to those who do not, for whatever reason, receive the offer of a job; e) stating the extent to which they can become involved in: 1.
Work Experience, ii.
teacher secondment to industry, iii.
employer secondment to schools, iv.
mock interviews, v.Mini-Enterprise, vi.
other curriculum development activities (to be negotiated within Compact schools), vii.
sponsorship.
12.
What happens if I fail to meet my goals?
Everyone appreciates that employers are working in a volatile and sometimes precarious economic environment, and so clearly there will be times when it is not possible to meet pre-set targets on an individual company basis.
However Compact employers make a collective commitment for the provision and support of activities such as those outlined in No. 10 above.
It is vital that the necessary number of jobs, Work Experience placements and teacher secondment placements are offered within the Compact, even when one or more of the employer participants is unable to fulfil all of their individual commitments.
13.
Am I allowed to set my own tests, which we've used for donkey's years?
Many companies participating in Compacts will use a variety of testing procedures in order to select appropriate candidates for jobs.
Testing complicates the issue of fulfilment of the employers' obligations to provide jobs to successful Compact graduates.
It would be desirable if successful Compact graduates could demonstrate their suitability for employment through the positive evidence contained in their records of achievement, thus precluding the need in their case for testing.
However, this raises important questions.
a) How can schools ensure that records of achievement provide evidence of the skills and aptitudes required for specific employers' needs? b) Wouldn't it be unfair if employment tests were waived for Compact graduates, but maintained for non-Compact job applicants? c) If local policies are negotiated regarding this issue, what will be the implications for national companies?
14.
How can I influence what is taught in schools?
There are many ways in which people and resources from the world of work can directly enhance and support students' learning.
Employers' visits to schools, their participation in such activities as Mini-Enterprise, mock interviews, Careers lessons and their contributions to subject-based planning are all very helpful.
Compacts also provide an invaluable forum for dialogue between teachers and employers to discuss and clarify ways in which the curriculum should be developed so as best to provide for the needs and interests of students in and beyond school.
However it is important to be clear that Compact is not a mechanism for enabling employers directly to influence the curriculum in schools.
Teachers are professionals who have been trained to deliver a curriculum which develops the learning and skills of young people while recognising the wider context of the application of this learning.
The National Curriculum, to be introduced in 1990, will define the basic structure and format of the curriculum which will be offered to students.
Remember that governors from industry are required for every school.
As a governor to a Compact school you would be in a strong position to learn about how a school works and influence its management and curriculum policies.
15.
What can I do to raise standards generally in schools?
You need to be clear about what you mean by "raising standards" .
There is plenty of evidence, in fact, to show that standards are improving in schools and recent developments, for example, CPVE, GCSE, and the National Curriculum aim to offer students a more relevant and appropriate set of educational choices.
There is, however, considerable concern amongst employers about basic skills including literacy and numeracy.
It is therefore very important that schools provide a forum for employers to express and explain their concerns.
Regular contact with Compact schools as outlined in No. 10 and No. 12 above will give employers such a forum.
Just as it is important for employers to understand the system and language of education, so it is important for teachers and students to understand the needs and concerns of employers.
And again: stand for election to the governing body of a Compact school.
The experience you will gain as a governor will soon show you ways in which you can support and enhance the system.
16.
Who is in charge of the Compact?
Compacts are a Partnership between Education and Industry.
They are also a medium for promoting change and development in schools, and as such they need "managing" .
The management of a Compact is a very complex business.
The local education authority, and participating employers, in planning to work together for the benefit of young people, will need, early on, to clarify their modus operandi.
Most authorities have recognised that it is appropriate for the Compact Partnership to support co-directors — one second ed from Industry, one from Education.
The Directors need to work with a team of Project Leaders from Education who support various aspects of Compact delivery, including:— curriculum development,— teacher secondment to industry/employer secondment to school,— Work Experience,— mock interviews.
Project Leaders are responsible for co-ordinating the Compact and ensuring that the schools' needs are met.
Naturally each Compact will establish its own structure according to the local situation.
But the basic premise of Compacts based on Partnership between Education and Industry, should be fully reflected in their management structures.
17.
What might schools ask me to do?
There are many ways in which you can help schools provide relevant and interesting learning for young people.
There are "standard" activities such as: a) Work Experience Students spend two or three weeks in a business or other organisation to develop their understanding of the world of work.
b) teacher secondment Teachers spend a period of time (usually a week) in industry.
The placement might involve "shadowing" a manager, or following a programme of meetings and activities in order to learn as much as possible about business processes.
A secondee might focus on a particular issue: for example, training, recruitment or appraisal.
c) Mini-Enterprise Students work in groups running a "business" .
They identify and develop a product or service which they advertise and sell.
One aim of the exercise is to learn about business processes.
d) careers talks Talks by employers enable students to learn about the range of opportunities available to them.
e) mock interviews Students benefit enormously from being "interviewed" by people from industry and then having the opportunity to "debrief" , and so learn ways of improving self presentation.
The Partnership between Industry and Education can be extremely creative too, as the following show.
a) Employers have participated in role play exercises concerning job seeking.
b) Contacts with a hospital have resulted in a new learning module for A Level Physics.
c) A superstore manager has worked with students on a site analysis project.
d) Accountants have worked with teachers coming to terms with local management of finances in schools.
e) Groups of teachers and employers have worked on issues relating to recruitment tests.
f) The use of appraisal in industry has been explored by teachers.
g) Students developing projects on the local environment worked with a professional photographer, and so on…!
18.
Why should I take pupils on Work Experience?
Work Experience gives students the opportunity to learn about adult life.
They are in a situation where they work as peers with adults.
They experience the length and pattern of the working day, and learn about the procedures and techniques related to particular jobs.
Students respond very positively to placements in industry, and teachers find that students' confidence, self presentation and maturity are all enhanced by the experience.
Employers too find the contact with young people useful and a valuable opportunity for their own staff development.
19.
Are pupils covered for insurance?
Many companies operate their own insurance policies which cover students on Work Experience.
In any case the education authority should provide you with an indemnity form for each student on Work Experience.
Make sure you see one for every student you place.
20.
Will I get any feedback?
You should!
A properly-organised Work Experience programme should include the following procedures:— briefing of students,— Work Experience placements, feedback from employers,— debriefing of students,— feedback to employers.
Employers who have attended students' debriefing sessions have found them most illuminating.
21.
Why should I have teachers on secondment?
Teachers find a period of time in industry enormously valuable in staff development terms.
They find, for example, that management techniques and problem-solving procedures are readily transferable to the school situation.
Secondment is an opportunity for them to learn at first hand about the world of work to which their students are aspiring.
Teachers might use the time to develop a general understanding of the function, purposes and procedures of tile host organisation — or they may wish to focus on specific issues: for example, recruitment procedures, interview techniques, management skills, appraisal, and so on .
Most importantly, secondment is a vital resource for relevant and interesting teaching.
You are likely to benefit from the experience too.
Here is the opportunity for your staff to learn about recent developments in the education system: for example, GCSE, the National Curriculum and records of achievement.
Teachers will be asked to record and review the experience, and employers usually find these reports to be very positive insights, and a useful evaluation of their work.
22.
What can I get teachers to do?
The key is to negotiate.
It is really very important that you meet the teachers before the secondment in order to develop a useful programme that meets their needs.
If you provide information about your organisation the teacher will be well enough informed to be able to detect those areas and activities which will be of value.
The pre-meeting is essential to clarify the teacher's aims and objectives and to ensure that as far as possible these can be met.
(See No. 17 and No. 21 above.)
23.
How do I know how the secondment is going?
In your pre-meeting with the secondee you may wish to build in a daily evaluation session to ensure that the secondment programme is working well.
Iii any case some form of debriefing/evaluation discussion at the end of the secondment is very important.
Make sure the secondees know whom to contact if there are any problems, or if they wish to alter the programme.
24.
What sort of things can our people do in schools?
What your colleagues can offer will depend on their particular skills and interests.
They might be asked to contribute information to a careers programme, or technical expertise to a science lesson.
They might be asked to work with teachers on developing materials.
They might be asked to spend time "on secondment" to a school.
If so,— they can take the opportunity to learn about new teaching methods related to recently developed educational programmes such as CPVE and GCSE;— they can shadow a senior manager to learn how headteachers and deputies deal with their problems of management;— they can focus on particular curriculum areas, working with teachers to develop materials appropriate to their skills and experiences, e.g. electronics;— they can act as consultants on a particular problem within the school, e.g. financial management;— they can take the opportunity to "de-mystify" industry.
Again programmes must be negotiated.
25.
What sort of period are we talking about — an hour?
A day?
Two days?
A week?
More?
It depends on the activity.
A careers session might take one lesson, say an hour.
If you are a consultant to a developing Mini-Enterprise you might find yourself spending a whole day in the school.
And a secondment could be any length of time from a day to a week or more.
This would be negotiated according to the aims of the exercise, and the needs and pressures on the potential secondee.
26.
Why should I support mock interviews?
By holding mock interviews you are offering students a valuable learning experience.
Mock interviews should as far as possible mirror the real thing.
Students should fill out applications forms, visit the work place for interview and experience the interview itself just as if there were a real job.
Feedback from employers gives students insights into how to improve their performance, confidence and understanding of the process.
It is also a useful staff development exercise for those involved in personnel recruitment.
27.
Can I recruit directly in schools?
Schools have a professional responsibility to offer guidance to young people in transition to work.
Any recruitment exercises based in Compact schools should be negotiated with Careers Teachers and Careers Officers.
You are very welcome to send recruitment literature into schools for use in Careers guidance and counselling, and Careers Teachers will certainly be  pleased if you offer to spend time with groups of young people explaining the nature of the employment you offer.
It is likely that Compacts will organise such events as careers conventions where you will be able to discuss jobs you have available with students.
28.
What part does the Careers Service play in all this?
The Careers Service will act as a "broker" for the jobs offered to students from Compact firms.
Careers Officers should consult with Compact employers to ensure that only quality jobs with training and prospects are described as "Compact jobs" .
Careers Officers work closely with young people to ensure that they are aware of their skills, aptitudes and interests, so that they can make positive and productive decisions about applying for work.
Careers Officers also maintain contact with young people when they have left school in order to ensure that they have access to appropriate support, until they are permanently placed in work.
29.
What role does the Training Agency play?
a) The Training Agency has agreed to support 30 Compacts in Urban Programme Areas in England and Wales with funding.
Each of these Compacts has been offered up to £50,000 to set up a Compact structure.
Where the Training Agency accepts these structures, funding up to £100,000 per year for 4 years will be made available to each.
The ultimate aim is that Compacts should be self funding.
b) The Training Agency has produced Compact guidelines and other Compact literature which are useful resources also for Partnerships outside Urban Programme Areas wishing to establish Compacts.
c) The Training Agency will exercise quality control on those Compacts which it is funding, to ensure that they enhance the education, training and employment opportunities of young people.
30.
Are the unions involved?
Unions should be involved in 3 ways.
a) Teacher unions should be consulted and advised of the aims and procedures of any Compacts established.
Teacher unions will advise on educational issues related to Compact.
b) Just as employers will be asked to work with teachers and students in a variety of ways, so trade unionists can offer valuable educational support, advice and activities to students.
It is very important that young people learn how industry works and this will involve a clear understanding of the functions and value of trade unions.
Compact employers should encourage their employees who belong to unions to work in schools, and should allow them paid time to do so.
c) Trade union offices can join Compacts as employers and trade unions should be represented on the Consultation Committee.
31.
Are colleges involved in the Compact?
Compacts should be targeted at 14–18 year olds.
Initial goals should be reached at the end of the fifth year (16+) but the Compact entitlement stays with students permanently and can be redeemed whenever they leave full-time education.
In some areas specific further education colleges will be involved as members of the Compact partnership.
In these cases the framework for college membership will have to be negotiated carefully to ensure that students from Compact schools are not asked to work towards targets they have already achieved.
The potential involvement of particular colleges emphasises the fact that Compacts aim to encourage students to stay in full-time education to acquire more of the knowledge and skills required in our technological society.
32.
Who monitors whether pupils have achieved their goals?
Students should be encouraged to self-monitor through using a simple form on which they record their attendance and punctuality.
This gives students responsibility for maintaining high standards in these areas.
It will be the responsibility of Form Teachers and Heads of Year/House to ensure that accurate records are kept of students' achievement of the other goals.
This information should be passed regularly to Careers Teachers and Officers for guidance purposes, and can be the basis for counselling by appropriate teachers when it becomes apparent that some students will be at risk of failing the goals.
33.
Everything you've said sounds marvellous!
Where's the catch?
If it is as good as you say employers would be queuing up to get in!
They are!
There is considerable interest amongst employers in the Compact initiative.
They realise that Compact enables them to have a say in the shape of education for the 1990s and to help them meet their projected employment needs.
34.
O.K., O.K. — you've convinced me.
How do I join?
Contact the local education office.
Where there is a Compact they will direct you immediately to the appropriate contact.
If there is no Compact established yet you might take the lead in local Compact development!
Good luck!
Questions Teachers Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as: improving attendance and punctuality, improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
Who is in charge of a Compact?
It is up to the local Education and Business Partnership to establish a management structure for Compact.
This Partnership will be charged with drawing up specific goals for the Compact and planning a structure to implement their achievement.
It is also likely that the Partnership will appoint directors from both Education and Industry, who will take executive control.
Where the Training Agency is providing funding, it will have an interest in monitoring the progress of the Compact.
In an important sense, however, we are all in charge of Compact.
— Students are responsible for their own progress and the achievement and monitoring of their goals.
— Parents and teachers are responsible for providing the right conditions at home and in school for the achievement of goals.
— Employers are responsible for ensuring that their business gives every opportunity to young people to learn about the world of work and to improve their motivation and the achievement of their goals.
But just as no teacher would go into industry and tell employers how they should be running their business, so no employer would come into school to tell teachers how to teach.
3.
Why should I support Compact?
There are a number of ways in which Compact can enhance your teaching and professional development.
It can make it easier to place pupils for Work Experience, to find partners from industry for curriculum development or advisers for Mini-Enterprise.
It may also provide the opportunity for you to  be seconded to industry to receive additional in-service training, perhaps on an industrial management course.
In addition, if you become more actively involved in Compact, you are more likely to influence its direction than if you sit on the sidelines.
A Compact is an agreement.
If you are part of the agreement you have a share in the ownership of a Compact.
4.
Is there any extra money for classroom use through Compact?
The Training Agency has budgeted up to El 00,000 per year for four years for the 30 Compacts in Urban Programme Areas.
Local Partnerships bid for this motley, and decide where they are likely to get "the biggest bang for a buck" .
It is likely that this money will help to fund administration costs, post and telephone, establishment of data bases, salaries and publicity, as well as additional funding for schools.
With Training Agency Compacts, the funding has to be seen as "pump-priming" .
It should not be used to make good any cuts that have been sustained as a result of falling rolls, ratecapping, etc.
The money is there to support innovation.
It is of great importance that some of this money should go directly to support pupils' learning.
As well as direct funding from the Training Agency, there are other ways that Compacts can bring resources into schools.
Within existing Compacts, companies have funded prizes for attendance, computers, conferences and other activities.
Once the school has formed the relationship many companies will be prepared to take on sponsorship or allocate funds.
In addition, Compact firms make time and people available to schools — and this can be even better than money!
5.
Can Compacts be established without Training Agency funding?
Yes, certainly.
The East London Compact was established before Training Agency funding was available.
There are also examples of Compacts being established outside Urban Programme Areas.
At least one of these is approaching the EEC for funding.
6.
What curriculum benefits does Compact provide?
Simply signing a Compact produces no benefits of any kind, curriculum or otherwise.
It is the will to work together of the people involved that produces curriculum benefits.
A Compact, though, provides great potential for making the curriculum more realistic and relevant and hence for improving student motivation.
Compact activities may include: 1.
Pupil Work Experience, 2. teacher secondment to industry, 3. employers into schools, 4. job seeking skills for pupils, 5. new forms of assessment, 6.
Mini-Enterprise.
1.
Pupil Work Experience
Work Experience is widely accepted as a force for maturing and motivating pupils.
For teachers it can, however, sometimes seem like an administrative chore or merely an unwelcome interruption of the timetable.
It is important therefore to see Work Experience as a curriculum opportunity.
Subject departments can devise tasks for students to carry out.
These may be specifically tailored to the workplace which one individual student will be attending, or more general tasks can be incorporated into a Work Experience diary.
In either case, through careful briefing and debriefing, Work Experience can provide an invaluable opportunity for field work and curriculum enrichment.
2.
Teacher secondment to industry
The secondment of teachers to industry (and equally industrialists to education) is a microcosm of the Partnership in action.
Teachers seek secondment for a variety of reasons:— to find out about industry or management in general,— to enhance their career prospects,— to bring back new ideas and resources to their teaching.
Teachers have made links that have enabled them to write entire modules for GCSE and to involve people from industry in the classroom.
3.
Employers into schools
Just as teacher secondment is most successful when teachers go out with a specific purpose in mind, so employer secondment works best when employers come into school with a particular task to perform.
It is up to the teacher to identify learning activities where the expertise of an industrialist could be of value.
For example:— a distribution manager might debrief a distribution simulation,— a planner might participate in a public enquiry on land development,— a trade unionist might participate in a health and safety audit in a science laboratory.
4.
Job seeking skills for pupils
Since Compact is an Employment and Training Initiative it is likely that the evolving Partnership between Education and Industry will focus on job-seeking skills for those pupils seeking work.
Many schools will already operate such programmes.
Even so, the involvement of experienced personnel managers is invaluable in activities such as completing application forms, writing letters of application and attending mock interviews.
Pupils get to see the process from the employers' point of view.
A bit of feedback on neat hair and clean fingernails from an employer is likely to strike home deeper than similar remarks from a teacher!
5.
New forms of assessment
Many schools are involved in introducing student profiles and portfolios and using these to supplement GCSE and other exams.
A Compact gives teachers the chance to involve employers in dialogue about the use and form of such records.
It also enables teachers to promote local knowledge and acceptance of records of achievement.
It is possible, too, to share ownership of such developments by inviting employers to contribute ideas for statements or reports on pupil Work Experience.
6.
Mini-Enterprise
Mini-Enterprise is already well established in many schools, having been developed within SCIP and promoted since Industry Year, by the DTI's Mini-Enterprise in Schools Project.
Typically, the timetable will be suspended for a week or more and pupils will take responsibility for their own Mini-Enterprise, which may be based on producing goods for sale or providing services.
As well as enabling students to learn something about production, marketing, and book-keeping, Mini-Enterprise is invaluable in helping students learn to work together collaboratively, to explore leadership roles and to find their own solutions.
Compact should make it easier for schools to find industrial advisers for Mini-Enterprise and to increase the range of activities undertaken.
7.
How do students benefit from Compact?
Students benefit from Compact in a number of ways.
First, there is an enormous psychological advantage to be gained from feeling that the school has the support of the community in which it is situated, including the local economic community.
Second, Compact involves students in setting and monitoring their own goals and hence encourages them to take responsibility for their own success or failure.
Third, Compact puts students in touch with local industry.
They get to find out what is going on in the local employment scene.
It helps them to make realistic career choices.
Finally, Compact validates achievement in school and encourages students to push themselves to realise their potential.
For increasing numbers of pupils this means staying on at school and improving their examination results.
8.
How do I know that students are being offered worthwhile jobs?
Jobs offered through Compact must: a) be permanent and full-time.
This means that the Compact student has the same job security as full-time employees in the organisation.
b) contain a training component which is at least the equivalent of YTS standard.
YTS training is satisfactory provided it is offered as employed status.
Training status YTS placements are not suitable as they do not offer permanence.
c) have "prospects" .
It should be possible to show a clear professional progression route.
9.
How is equality of opportunity assured in Compact?
Compact can be regarded as an equal opportunities initiative.
In Boston and East London one of the underlying factors in establishing the Compact was that both cities were undergoing a service-sector boom in employment.
Even so, the jobs located in the cities were not going to inner-city residents but to people who lived in the leafy suburbs.
Needless to say, those who lived in the inner cities had a high index of deprivation.
The original idea behind Compacts was to redress the balance, to provide access to quality jobs for the people who lived next door.
Above and beyond that equal opportunities baseline, all Training Agency funded Compacts have to collect statistics to show who is getting the jobs and where.
That collation of data provides the basis for equal opportunities monitoring.
The long-term aim should be to extend Compact to all schools in the education authority.
10.
What support does Compact offer students failing to achieve Compact
goals?
Compacts should be designed to reward positive achievement, not to reinforce failure.
This is an important consideration to keep in mind when designing Compact goals.
Goals should be flexible so that failure in one term does not preclude redemption and success the next.
Shared design of the goals by pupils, their parents, teachers and employers is therefore probably the most important safeguard and support.
Schools need to establish an "early warning" system that will enable them to identify potential failure before it occurs.
Counselling, the provision of positive role models and other techniques may be introduced at an early stage.
Employers too have a role to play.
In Boston "mentoring" programmes exist where employers release a staff member on a regular basis over a period of months to work with potential "drop outs" to win their commitment.
A similar scheme "Transition to Working Life" , which originated with the Grubb Institute, operates in London.
Each compact is different.
Each Compact needs to work out its own support system.
11.
Will Compact demands regarding Work Experience, Mini-Enterprise etc., mean that my subject teaching suffers in terms of time and commitment?
Compact activities should be seen as a useful curriculum resource rather than as "bolt-on" activities.
It is part of your professional responsibility to ensure that the teaching of your subject is enhanced by the use of these resources.
With the introduction of GCSE, schools are having to produce schedules of deadlines for assignments to enable students as well as staff to plan each academic year as a whole.
Such schedules can form the basis for negotiation between departments to attempt to avoid bottlenecks where many assignments are all due in together.
Compact-initiated activities should be fitted into such a schedule.
Where will Work Experience or Mini-Enterprise be of most benefit to the curriculum?
When can they be planned to feed into GCSE assignments?
12.
If I am seconded to industry (or "host" an industrialist) how can I disseminate what I have learned to colleagues and students?
In the case of secondment to industry, it is useful to look at what the school's short- and medium-term goals are.
How does a secondment to industry fit in with such goals?
If it does not — is there any point in going ahead?
It is worth looking at short- and medium-term goals for staff development and asking the same questions.
Once institutional and staff development plans have been consulted, the identification of potential secondees should become easier and the objectives of the secondment clearer.
This in turn will indicate how the institution plans to make use of the experience.
Having a clear use for the experience after secondment is probably the most effective means of dissemination.
But it is also useful to plan formal dissemination in advance.
This might include offering a verbal report to a staff meeting or circulating a short written report, asking pupils to identify any pieces of information they would like brought back from the secondment, or giving a talk to a tutor group.
The important thing is to create expectations in the school before the event takes place.
Similar considerations apply to "hosting" industrialists.
Why does the school want them in?
What will they do?
Plan for the outcomes and create expectations before the event takes place.
13.
How can I prevent a secondment to industry from disrupting the learning of my students?
If you are considering going on secondment during term time it is obviously important to minimise disruption to the teaching programme.
First, choose the best time.
Don't go when there are important tasks which only you can do.
Second, ensure there is a supply teacher available and prepare a schedule of work for all your classes.
Prepare too much rather than too little.
Third, involve your pupils.
Tell them where you are going and why.
Any disruption they suffer should be counteracted by your enhanced awareness of the world of work.
Finally, if you are still not satisfied, go during the school holidays.
14.
Who is responsible for Compact in school?
You are.
Compact is a whole school initiative that can only succeed with the support and commitment of everyone.
The Head and Governors have a special burden of responsibility as they do for all matters concerned with the running of the school.
It may be in day-to-day terms that the Head will delegate responsibility and designate a "Compact Co-ordinator" .
This is likely to be more effective if the Compact Co-ordinator is a member of the senior management team.
15.
Who in my school will be involved with Compact?
Everyone in the school should be consulted and informed about Compact so that they can be aware of it as an educational resource.
The Headteacher, Compact Co-ordinator, Head of Careers and Heads of Year are likely to have particularly prominent roles.
But everyone should be involved.
16.
What will be my role within Compact?
— Heads — Compact Co-ordinator — Heads of Department — Heads of Year — Careers Teachers — Others
Heads
Heads retain overall responsibility for the way education is conducted within the school.
Their role is to provide leadership and to ensure that other members of the staff receive the necessary support to carry out their roles in the Compact.
Compact Co-ordinators
The School Compact Co-ordinator is a new role and one which is likely to be added to a Deputy Head's job description.
It is important that someone from the senior management team should exercise day-to-day oversight and responsibility for Compact activities.
Heads of Department
Their main responsibility remains the smooth running of the department.
Within Compact they should be looking for opportunities to improve the curriculum offer to students and promote the professional development of members of the department.
Heads of Year
Heads of Year are likely to be at the forefront of Compact development.
They will be the people who play the leading role in monitoring attainment of pupil goals, especially in relation to punctuality and attendance.
They will also be responsible for supporting pupils who are experiencing difficulties in attaining Compact goals.
Careers Teachers
Compact extends the role of Careers Teachers by providing careers education and counselling.
They will work closely with the Careers Service to ensure that school leavers are offered appropriate and quality jobs through Compact.
Others
Once again, let us emphasise that Compact belongs to everyone.
If you do not have a role thrust upon you, go out and grab one for yourself.
17.
How is students' progress through Compact monitored?
The ways in which students' progress through Compact are monitored will vary from Compact to Compact.
There are, however, clear advantages in involving all parties actively within the Compact: the students themselves, their parents, teachers and employers.
This can be done:— through a scheme of student self-monitoring,— through regular reports to parents and parents' evenings in which employers take part,— by guidance and counselling involving teachers and employers.
18.
Does the Compact initiative conflict with the aims and objectives of records of achievement?
No.
Both initiatives share a concern for the needs of the individual student.
Record s of achievement record positive achievements and the student has a large say in selecting what is to be recorded.
Compact also supports the recording of positive achievement.
Like records of achievement, the Compact entitlement is the property of the student, to make use of as he or she wills.
In fact Compact and records of achievement work particularly well together because of the emphasis they both place on celebrating students' success.
19.
How are these students who have achieved Compact goals "tracked" after leaving school?
Once students have achieved Compact goals they have gained an entitlement to an offer of employment from a Compact employer.
The agency which needs to be involved in following this up is the Careers Service.
Many Compact students will decide to continue their studies.
They may do so within a Compact institution, in which case it will be fairly easy to keep track of the Compact entitlement.
They may do so in a non-Compact institution in which case responsibility for "cashing in" the Compact entitlement must rest with the student.
It will be helpful if there is a clearly designated Compact Careers Officer to whom the student can turn for help.
20.
Does Compact persuade students to leave school earlier than they should?
No.
Contact with employers has enabled many young people to see the value of staying on at school to improve their qualifications.
Increasingly, employers are looking for higher levels of skills.
Fewer employers are seeking to recruit at 16+.
21.
How does Compact relate to GCSE?
CPVE?
Compact is a separate initiative which has no direct relationship with any Examination Board.
Quite clearly, though, the aims of Compact are consonant with the aims of the new generation of examinations and Compact will provide new resources and learning opportunities which can be used as a basis for course work and may in some circumstances be eligible for assessment and certification by the examining bodies, e.g. as a module in GCSE or CPVE or as the basis of an entire examination such as the AEB Basic Test "World of Work" .
22.
How does Compact relate to the National Curriculum?
The 1988 Education Reform Act states that the National Curriculum should prepare pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of adult life".
The National Curriculum Council (NCC) Working Parties on Maths and Science have already reported, and both clearly outline curricula which will need to be developed through practical and experiential approaches.
The organisations participating in Compacts will provide an excellent resource for teachers in all subjects aiming to develop in their students a wide understanding of the society in which they will live and work.
The NCC Cross Curriculum Working Party is concerned with the following cross-curricular themes which will also demand the use of contacts and resources beyond school: Careers, Economic Awareness, Personal and Social Education, Health Education.
Compact schools are particularly well placed for ensuring that the demands of the National Curriculum will be appropriately fulfilled.
23.
How does Compact relate to TVEI?
The relationship of Compact to TVEI is potentially a very close one.
Both initiatives are sponsored by the Training Agency and they share similar objectives in attempting to provide greater coherence between education and training, and in making education more aware of the needs of employers and  of young people's needs in the employment market.
They share a common commitment to industry-related curriculum development, including Work Experience.
Compact may be seen as taking the relationship between Education and Industry a step closer, by creating a demand for Partnership.
24.
How does Compact relate to the DTI Education and Enterprise Initiative?
Compact and the DTI Education and Enterprise Initiative share a common launch-pad in the Government's programme of action for the inner cities.
The DTI is funding Education and Enterprise Advisers who are responsible for securing Work Experience placements in sufficient numbers to satisfy demand from the schools.
If a DTI Education and Enterprise Adviser is in post locally, he or she should prove to be an invaluable partner in making Compact work.
25.
How should trade unions be involved in Compact?
There are a number of ways in which trade unions can be involved in Compact: 1.
They can be involved as employers.
They can be encouraged to join Compact and to offer jobs to young people who have secured the Compact goals.
2.
They can be involved as equal members with employers and the education authority within the Partnership.
3.
They can play an active role in many Compact activities including taking part in briefing, monitoring and debriefing Work Experience; supporting Mini-Enterprise and participating in curriculum activities.
4.
They have an important role to play in sessions designed to introduce young people to issues of health and safety, rights and equal opportunities at work.
5.
Teachers' unions will advise on educational issues related to Compact, and they should be informed of the aims and procedures of local Compacts.
Questions Students Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
What sort of jobs do employers offer?
Employers offer jobs with quality training and prospects.
If you leave school at 16 the training should be at least to the standard of YTS.
In some cases jobs offered will be YTS placements, but they will be employed status.
This is very important.
It means that if you are placed on a YTS programme through Compact, you have a real job.
If you stay on at school, or go to a college of further education, you are still entitled to placement through the Compact, provided you have achieved the Compact goals.
3.
How do I know what jobs are offered?
The school Careers Officer, or the Compact Careers Officer will keep your school fully and regularly informed about what jobs are offered.
Your Careers Teacher will make sure you know all the Compact opportunities.
There'll be a noticeboard displaying Compact jobs and giving you information about the companies.
4.
Are they good jobs?
Yes.
They'll be jobs with training and potential for career development.
The Careers Services will monitor the employers' job offers to ensure that they are suitable for the Compact.
5.
Do I have to have a Compact job?
No!
Of course not!
Compact aims to improve your chances of getting a worthwhile job, when you want one.
You are entitled to apply for any suitable job, including Compact jobs, at any time after you have completed compulsory  education .
However you will be encouraged to stay in education to gain more skills and knowledge so that you will be better equipped when you do look for work.
6.
What are my goals?
These will vary from Compact to Compact but you will be expected to show: a) that your attendance and punctuality have been consistently good, b) that you can work reliably at school, c) that you have spent a specific amount of time on Work Experience, d) that you have a positive sense of responsibility to your school and the wider community.
7.
Don't I have any say in setting my goals?
The basic goals will be the same for every student in your school.
Most Compacts will arrange for you to have short-term targets to help you achieve the necessary goals.
This means you will work with your tutors and teachers making regular commitments, for example, to attend well, and to complete your work on time.
You will be able to discuss these "short-term" targets with your parents too.
Aiming at these targets will help you to achieve the goals fixed for all students.
8.
There's a lot of new things happening in school with GCSE and the National Curriculum.
Isn't Compact going to be one more thing they introduce before they've worked it out?
No!
The Compact will not change what you are taught.
It may, however, change l]070 you are taught.
Because your school will have a lot of contacts in industry, it is likely that you will meet a lot of adults from working places in different situations who will help to make your learning more interesting.
9.
Whose idea is it anyway?
The idea started in Boston (USA).
Some teachers and employers in London then set up a Compact in two London boroughs.
A year later the Government through its "Training Agency" , allowed money to 30"Urban Programme  Areas' so that they could set up Compacts.
But Compacts can be established in any area where there is enough interest in the schools and local industry.
10.
Why are employers so interested in attendance and punctuality?
Employers need to know that you will be reliable and responsible when you are at work.
Evidence of good attendance and punctuality at school indicates to employers that you are responsible and conscientious.
11.
Why do I have to do Work Experience?
Work Experience is an excellent way of helping you to understand what work is like.
It enables you to practise finding out where the "job" is, and how to get there.
It gives you a unique chance to work with adults and to be treated as an adult yourself.
It helps you to make informed decisions about your career choice.
It will give you lots of experience and information which will help you in your GCSE course work when you return to school.
12.
Can I choose where I go on Work Experience?
You will probably be able to "negotiate" where you go by talking to the teacher or co-ordinator who is responsible for organising the Work Experience programme.
13.
Will I get paid?
No!
Work Experience is part of your education.
Employers are not allowed to take advantage of your Work Experience by asking you to do jobs which should receive payment.
In fact, providing Work Experience may represent a cost to employers in terms of staff supervision time and loss of productivity.
14.
Who will pay my fares, and what do I do about lunch?
This varies from placement to placement.
Some employers will pay fares for you.
If they don't you will be told how to claim back your fares from the school office.
Some employers provide lunch for you; in other cases you will be expected to fend for yourself, like any other worker!
15.
Will my teacher  be there with me on Work Experience?
No!
It is your Work Experience.
One of the reasons for arranging it is to give you the chance to be responsible for your own learning while you are on the placement.
However, a teacher from school should visit you during your placement to make sore you are happy with the arrangements.
16.
What if I don't like it?
Before you leave school to go on Work Experience you will be told which teacher to contact if you have any problems.
You will be given the phone number of the school so that you can reach this teacher at any time.
It is very important that you do contact this teacher if you are unhappy or have any problems.
Work Experience should be a positive and useful experience.
17.
Will employers come into my lessons in school?
Yes.
Employers know a lot about their businesses, how to apply for jobs and other work-related issues.
Your teachers will be able to ask Compact employers to help them develop an interesting curriculum for you by planning work jointly and inviting "adults other than teachers" to talk to you and work with you in the classroom.
18.
What is a mock interview?
A mock interview gives you a "practice run" before you start going to real interviews.
If you participate in a mock interview programme you will be given an application form to fill in for the kind of job that might be available through the Compact.
It's important to remember that it won't be a real job.
This is practice!
When you have filled in your form you'll be given an appointment for an interview at one of the Compact companies.
There you'll be interviewed just as if you were actually going for the job.
Afterwards the Personnel Officer who interviewed you will give you some feedback.
You'll be told how well you managed the interview and together you'll discuss ways of improving your self-presentation when you start attending real interviews for real jobs.
19.
Will all this Compact stuff count towards my exams?
No, not directly!
But you will find you have more contact with people from Compact companies, who will be providing information and resources to help you to do well in your exams.
20.
Why have employers joined?
a) Employers want to ensure that their businesses will flourish in a healthy community.
Schools are part of this community.
b) Employers need well-motivated and well-educated young people for their job vacancies.
c) They want local people to do local jobs.
d) In most cases they are parents.
Many employers genuinely want to help the young people in their community to make a positive transition from school to work.
21.
Why did they pick my school?
It is unlikely that employers did pick your school.
In most Compacts the education authority sets up a procedure for selecting schools.
This usually requires interested headteachers to make a submission explaining why their schools should be included.
The local education authority selects the most suitable schools on the basis of their "readiness" to operate in the Compact successfully.
22.
Do I have to take part?
All students in Compact schools participate in working towards Compact goals.
When you think about it the Compact goals are just the sort of goals that every school has anyway.
But you don't need to apply for or take a Compact job if you don't want to!
Good luck!
Questions the Careers Service Asks
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
What is a Partnership?
A Partnership is a relationship between interested parties in Education and Industry who aim to improve the educational and vocational opportunities of young people by working together in order fully to understand and support each others' needs and objectives.
In some areas, such Partnerships already exist; in others they have yet to be constituted.
These Partnerships need to be representative of the most influential stakeholders, if the Compact is to be a success.
Partnerships exist to foster a variety of activities, e.g. teacher secondment, Work Experience, Mini-Enterprise, as well as Compact.
3.
How is the Careers Service involved in the Partnership?
The Careers Service should be involved on three levels: First, the Careers Service may use its in-depth knowledge of demographic and employment trends to advise on likely areas where employment opportunities may occur, and on any skill gaps which might properly be addressed at schools or colleges.
Second, the role of the Careers Officer will be important in ensuring that Compact vacancies are properly communicated to young people, and in monitoring Compact jobs to ensure that they offer employed status, quality training and career progression.
Third and most importantly, at the individual level Careers Officers should counsel and support young people in making their career decisions.
4.
Who will organise Work Experience for Compact?
Work Experience should be coordinated on an authority-wide basis, to guard against undesirable duplication of effort, and multiple requests to individual, particularly small, employers.
Co-ordination may be subcontracted to an organisation like Project Trident or to the DTI's Education and Industry Advisers.
If so, it is important that the people actually charged with finding the placements have a good understanding of the requirements of the schools and colleges.
There are advantages in appointing Work Experience Co-ordinators, specifically to serve Compact.
These could come from a background in teaching, the Careers Service or Industry, bringing different skills and experience in each case.
A teacher Would have a good understanding of the ways in which Work Experience can be of benefit to the curriculum.
A Careers Officer would have developed skills in counselling pupils and have a broad knowledge of local industry.
Someone from industry might be seen by employers as speaking the same language as they do themselves.
5.
Will Work Experience be used as the basis for recruitment?
Work Experience should not be used by employers as an opportunity to "try-out" prospective employees.
Work Experience should be seen within the content of general education.
It should be an opportunity for young people to deepen their understanding of the world of work by observing, participating, questioning and perhaps even making mistakes.
Of course, Work Experience should be of benefit to young people in making career decisions and a good Work Experience report from an employer may be a reference in itself.
In a small minority of cases it may be that an employer and 1 future employee find each other through Work Experience.
Both should regard this as an added bonus rather than an outcome to be expected.
6.
Does participation in Compact oblige employers to provide new jobs for Compact students?
Employers who join the Compact make a collective guarantee to offer jobs to young people who have achieved the Compact goals.
This does not impose an obligation on employers to create jobs that would not otherwise exist, and, indeed, it would be undesirable if this were to happen, for such jobs would not be "real" jobs.
What it does mean is that each employer will identify a specific number of vacancies which will be reserved for Compact graduates before being offered more widely.
Small firms may not find it so easy to make this commitment, particularly if they have either a small, stable workforce, or the need to recruit at short notice when vacancies occur.
Larger employers will have a cycle of recruitment with targets set in advance, so they should find it comparatively easy to allocate a specific number of jobs to Compact.
7.
How will quality of job provision be monitored?
In Coin pacts funded by the Training Agency, the Agency will wish to monitor jobs to ensure that they are "worthwhile" , and offer:— full-time employment,— training to at least YTS standard,— career progression.
In all Compacts, the Partnership will also need to monitor the jobs on offer to ensure that they do provide "added-value" as a reward for rising standards.
The Careers Service is the local agency which is best suited to carry out this task which is consonant with the role it already plays in collecting and describing vacancies.
This will be comparatively straightforward in terms of checking the status of the job (i.e. full-time and employed) and the nature of training offered.
It will also be important to commission long-term studies of the career progression of Compact graduates and this may more properly be offered to professional researchers, perhaps located in higher education.
8.
What sort of training will be offered through Compact?
The training offered by Compact must be at least of YTS standard.
We would expect training offered by Compact firms to include both on and off the job training, the opportunity to study for technical or professional qualifications as appropriate, and regular individual guidance and counselling sessions.
Careers Officers will be familiar with practices in local YTS schemes and so are well-placed to comment and advise on employers' proposals.
9.
How will Compact ensure that the jobs offered match school leavers' aspirations?
The Partnership will have to ensure that the jobs offered are "added-value" jobs.
This means that they should offer the going rate for the job, acceptable working conditions, quality training and real career development opportunities.
They should also be jobs that young people might have experienced difficulty in gaining access to, without Compact.
In order to offer the benefits outlined above, however, they will have to be in sectors of the local economy that are growing.
Through Compact, young people's aspirations should become more attuned to economic reality.
10.
Are employers using Compact to fill unattractive jobs?
Employers may well see Compact as a means of filling vacancies, particularly in view of current demographic trends.
Department of Employment projections suggest a 25 per cent decline of 16–19 year olds active in the labour market between 1987 and 1995.
Jobs which are unattractive because of low pay, inadequate training, poor conditions and career progression paths will be hard to fill.
Compact, however, aims to market jobs where levels of pay, working conditions, training and progression are in fact better than young people perceive.
11.
Does this mean that the "best" jobs will only be available to Compact?
Compact will certainly enable some young people to secure better jobs than they would otherwise have done.
Indeed, if it does not, it will have failed in its prime objective.
This does not mean that the "best" jobs, however they are defined, will only be available through Compact.
Employers operate in a competitive market place.
They need to recruit the best possible candidates.
Compacts are one route for recruitment but they exist alongside established recruitment routes, and employers are not likely to abandon these in the foreseeable future.
12.
Will employers abandon testing when recruiting Compact students?
There will, of course, always be certain competencies or aptitudes that may need to be tested, e.g. colour blindness or spatial awareness.
It is hoped, however, that as Compacts increase understanding and trust between Education and Industry, employers will re-examine the appropriateness of administering their own tests.
Testing by employers has been an issue around which, in the past, hostile stereotypes have been constructed.
Employers, for example, may complain that young people cannot convert from fractions to decimals, while teachers may question whether the operations tested are essential for the job or in tune with current educational thinking.
Just as testing allows ample scope for misunderstanding, so it is also one of the most fruitful fields in which employers and educationalists can come together.
13.
How will local Careers Officers co-ordinate Compact jobs and non-Compact jobs?
Both offer opportunities to young people and satisfy employers' needs.
There is no reason why both should not be advertised in the usual way.
The difference is that with Compact jobs, a young person who has achieved the Compact goals will be given priority over one who has not.
At the end of the day, however, the employer will need to fill the vacancy, and if no appropriate candidate comes forward from the Compact, the employer will doubtless be forced to look elsewhere.
A simple administrative procedure needs to be established where a limit is placed on the length of time for which a particular vacancy is reserved to the Compact.
The Careers Service should be informed when the position has been filled whether by a Compact student or by another young person.
14.
What if the employers' job offers are not taken up by the students?
If the jobs on offer are not being taken up, something is very clearly wrong.
First, it is important to check that information about Compact jobs is getting to those young people who are entitled to apply for them, and that they understand the nature of their entitlement.
It may be appropriate for the school's Career Officer to liaise with pastoral and guidance staff at the school on this matter.
Second, it is necessary to check that a good range of jobs is being offered and that these are jobs with "added value" .
The Compact will quickly lose its credibility if the only jobs on offer are those which employers have traditionally found hard to fill.
Finally, it is useful to check that the Compact is targeted at the right cohort of leavers.
Some young people will be seeking work at 16+, some at 17+ and 18+, and others not until they have completed further or higher education.
Remember, one objective of Compacts is to raise the participation rate in education post-16.
15.
What if there are more students achieving Compact goals than jobs available?
It should be possible to predict the number of students likely to achieve Compact goals, and therefore to have a clear number of jobs to aim for.
The best ad vice in order to guard against such a mismatch is to start out by piloting Compact in a small number of schools and to take in more schools only when the Partnership is satisfied that there are sufficient job opportunities available.
16.
Can students claim Compact jobs after sixth form study or higher education?
Yes.
Compacts provide an incentive for young people to improve their skills and qualifications.
Many larger companies that recruit at graduate level have joined Compacts, and they would be delighted to find students cashing in their entitlement after University.
17.
How will achievement of Compact goals be monitored?
The Training Agency has suggested that the mechanism for monitoring Compacts should be the establishment of "performance indicators" to measure change.
These will relate to all the agreed Compact goals: punctuality, attendance, participation in further and higher education, Work Experience, etc.
Iii addition to this collection of data, longer-term in-depth studies of the progress of Compact students in employment, the effect of Compact on the attitudes of young people, their parents, teachers and employers will have to be carried out.
18.
How will Compact support those students who fail to achieve Compact goals?
There are a number of ways in which support may be offered to students within the Compact.
Students who seem likely to fail on a particular goal, for example attendance, may be offered counselling and support.
It is important that Compacts be designed with sufficient flexibility for those students who are failing at a certain stage, to negotiate re-entry and a further attempt at the goals.
If performance indicators are designed to measure change, and goals are expressed in terms of improvement, this process will be easier.
It should also be possible for students who have not achieved their goals by the end of the fifth year to make good in the sixth form or at college.
19.
How are trade unions involved in Compact?
There are a number of ways in which trade unions can be involved in Compact.
1.
They can be involved as employers.
They can be encouraged to join Compact and to offer jobs to young people who have secured the Compact goals.
2.
They can be involved as equal members with employers and the local education authority within the Partnership.
3.
They can play an active role in many Compact activities including taking part in briefing, monitoring and debriefing Work Experience; supporting Mini-Enterprise and participation in curriculum activities.
4.
They have a particular and unique role to play in sessions designed to introduce young people to issues of health and safety, rights and equal opportunities at work.
Questions Parents Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school, going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
Is it compulsory for my child to be involved in Compact?
While it cannot be compulsory for your child to be involved in Compact it is reasonable to assume that most young people would wish to be involved since Compact supports them in achieving standards of attainment and behaviour that schools are striving to raise.
In addition, Compact offers the guarantee of a worthwhile job to students who do achieve these Compact goals.
3.
Does Compact mean that my child will have to leave school for work at sixteen?
Compact aims to motivate young people to improve their educational achievements.
In practical terms this means encouraging young people to remain in education or to seek further training before entering the job market.
Once a young person has achieved Compact goals they have an entitlement to a worthwhile Compact job which they can "cash in" when they are ready.
Young people do not miss out on Compact opportunities by remaining in education.
4.
Will my child be penalised for absence due to ill health?
Schools will record absence in the normal way.
Young people who are genuinely unable to attend because of ill health should not be penalised.
Compacts may, of course, set attendance targets which are expressed in  percentage terms.
If for any reason your child is unable to achieve such targets, it is important that you explain why to the school.
5.
How will I know that my child has a fair chance at Compact opportunities?
Jobs offered by Compact employers will be advertised within each participating school.
Every young person who has achieved the Compact goals will have an equal chance of securing a Compact job.
The school, supported by the Careers Service, will also be offering a programme of Careers advice and guidance.
This should enable individual young people who are seeking employment to find a suitable Compact opportunity.
6.
Is failure to meet Compact goals recorded on reports, records of achievement, testimonials, etc.?
Compact is essentially about celebrating success rather than recording failure.
For this reason schools will not emphasise failure to meet Compact goals, particularly in documents such as records of achievement, testimonials and references which are designed to aid the students' transition to the adult world of work.
Schools should draw to the attention of young people and their parents any areas where it is apparent that greater efforts need to be made if the Compact goals are to be achieved.
7.
Can students try again in the sixth form if they fail to achieve Compact goals during the fourth and fifth years?
Yes.
Compacts are all about the celebration of success whether it occurs in the fourth or fifth years, sixth form or in further or higher education.
Some students may need only to make good on areas where their performance has not been up to the Compact mark, others may need to negotiate the complete range of Compact goals at this level.
8.
Do Compact students have to work in Compact firms?
No.
Compact students of course retain the right to seek employment wherever they wish.
However, the Compact will create new opportunities for a real job, with good training and a future, and these will become the first choice for many leavers.
9.
How do I know that the firms involved in Compact are reputable?
The Careers Service has an important role to play in brokering the jobs on offer to the schools.
The Careers Service has considerable expertise and experience  of local firms; it will ensure that all offers are made in good faith, and that the jobs are worthwhile.
10.
Will I meet Compact employers?
There will be numerous occasions when parents will have the opportunity of meeting Compact employers.
These may include events organised by the school such as regular parents' evenings, careers evenings, prize-givings, Compact meetings or socials.
In addition, some Compact employers may wish to invite parents to visit their premises to see them at work.
Others will invite parents to attend for interview when their son or daughter is applying for a Compact job.
11.
What's the point of Work Experience?
Work Experience is an important educational experience for young people.
It provides them with an opportunity to spend a short period of time, usually two or three weeks, at work, doing a job, but also asking questions and canvassing a range of opinions on a variety of issues.
This may include:— looking at the legal status of a company and its ownership;— how the company is organised;— finding out about health and safety at work;— the role of trade unions;— working on specific tasks.
The school should ensure that students are well prepared for their Work Experience — that they know where to go and what is expected of them, and that they are confident to ask questions and get full benefit from the placement.
While students are on Work Experience, a teacher should visit them to check up that all is well, and they should have the school phone number and a teacher to contact if they have any difficulties.
When they return to school there should be an opportunity for students to share their experiences and explore a variety of themes.
Employers and trade unionists should be invited to contribute to planning and supporting this process.
Parents may be asked or may offer to become involved.
12.
Won't Work Experience take important time away from the teaching of GCSE?
Work Experience should be used to support GCSE.
Most schools ask Work Experience students to complete a diary or to carry out specific enquiries as tasks during their placements.
These may well form the basis for pieces of course work for a number of subjects at GCSE, including English, Maths, Business Studies, Design and Technology and Geography.
There are examples extending to Music and P.E.
as well as Art and Home Economics.
13.
Are young people paid when they go on Work Experience?
The law which makes Work Experience possible for young people in their last year of compulsory education specifically forbids their receiving payment.
This emphasises the educational purposes of the placement to the young people, the school and the employers.
This does not preclude employers from offering help with lunch or travel costs to young people, although this should be negotiated through the school or education authority.
14.
What is "Mini-Enterprise" ?
Mini-Enterprise is an opportunity for a group of young people to come together and make a product for sale, or market a service.
It enables them to gain experience of working collaboratively and of trying out a variety of roles and skills, including leadership, working to deadlines, accepting and offering criticism, negotiation and compromise.
In addition, young people will learn something about starting up and running a business.
A good Mini-Enterprise scheme should also afford young people access to skilled, professional help and support from within the local economic community.
15.
Are there any similar activities that students will be involved in through the Compact?
Work Experience and Mini-Enterprise are both well-established and familiar Schools/Industry initiatives.
They will already be a part of the educational offer iii many Compact schools.
Equally, Careers conventions, activity-based learning, meeting employers and trade unionists, mock interviews, visits to industry, conferences, etc. are all well known and most Compact schools will have experiences of some of them.
It is likely that Compact will give a new focus to such activities and provide new opportunities for student involvement.
16.
How will I be informed of my child's progress through the Compact?
You should be involved in negotiating the individual goals for your child at the outset.
The school should also set up regular times for reviewing progress and should alert you to any difficulties your child may be experiencing.
This may well be done through the normal structures of parents' evenings and reports.
17.
Will I receive any news about how the Compact is working?
You should be kept informed and be consulted about Compact developments.
This may be through formal meetings and newsletters but it is likely to be done most effectively by talking to your son or daughter about his or her progress and following up these discussions with the school.
Questions Education Authorities Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
Which schools should be selected for Compact?
Education authorities should select those schools which will benefit from participation in a Compact.
In practice this is likely to mean those schools which are already participating in school improvement schemes or have shown some other indication of an ability to grapple with problems.
Schools which are already doing very well are probably not the first priority for Compact.
The eventual aim should be to include all schools in the authority.
3.
What are the criteria for selection?
The education authority should establish criteria which relate closely to Compact goals.
For example:— How does the school monitor attendance and punctuality?— What steps are taken to secure improvement in particular pupils' attendance and punctuality?— How successful are these measures?— Does the school operate a record of achievement?— Does the school operate a pastoral, or guidance and counselling system?— What forms of certification are available to the students?— What percentage of students achieve a graded result in English and Maths?
4.
Who will run the Compact?
The education authority retains overall responsibility for the conduct of education in its area and, to that extent, is ultimately responsible for the Compact.
The Compact should, however, be sponsored by a Partnership of Industry and Education.
The setting of Compact goals, the development of  Compact policy and the planning of Compact activities will be most successful where both parties enjoy trust and respect in each other and feel a commitment to the ideal of Partnership.
The Partnership should therefore be encouraged and allowed to take responsibility for the Compact strategy.
5.
How is the Director appointed?
Since Compact is both an Educational and Employment initiative there are clear advantages in appointing co-directors from Education and Industry.
The most important qualification for a Director is that he or she should be able rapidly to gain the confidence of both schools and industry.
As well as requiring highly developed skills of tact, and negotiation, a good working knowledge of industry and education is required.
6.
How can the development of Compact enhance educational provision in our schools?
Compact enhances educational provision in two ways.
First, it enhances the curriculum offer by bringing the resources of industry to the school.
Activities which industry is likely to support include:— Pupil Work Experience,— teacher secondment to industry,— employers into school,— job seeking skills for pupils, including mock interviews,— new forms of assessment,— Mini-Enterprise.
Second, Compact offers an incentive to improved performance within areas which schools are already tackling.
For instance, all schools are concerned with improving and maintaining good attendance.
Good attendance, alongside achievement of the other Compact goals is rewarded by the guarantee of a job offer.
7.
What extra resources does Compact provide for participating schools?
The resources which Compact brings into participating schools are of two kinds.
First and most importantly, there is the time and commitment which people from industry put into supporting the school curriculum.
This is hard to quantify in the abstract and will depend on the demands and the receptiveness of the individual schools, but it could add up to hundreds of hours and dozens of activities over a year.
Second, there are the cash resources available from the Training Agency, for those Compacts funded in Urban Programme Areas.
Those Compacts may receive up to £100,000 per year for four years.
This money has to be bid for, and the Agency monitors how it is spent.
The bulk of such funds is likely to go  towards paying for salaries, administration, post and telephone, and publicity.
Individual Compact schools are likely to benefit by additions to their school allowances.
8.
How will Compact expenses such as Work Experience fares, and cover for teacher secondment to industry, be met?
Arrangements for meeting such expenditure is a matter for the education authority.
Where such expenditure is a new cost incurred through Compact it may be possible to make a case to the Training Agency.
If this is not possible it is up to the Partnership to provide funds from its own resources.
9.
Who will coordinate Compact activities across participating schools?
Compact Directors are responsible for overseeing a programme which involves all the participating schools and employers.
Compact activities may be coordinated by people from Education or Industry and this may mean reallocation of responsibilities or modifications of job descriptions for some education authority personnel.
The following activities will need a lot of co-ordination and imply the need for full-time posts: Schools/Industry curriculum development,— monitoring and placement of students who achieve Compact goals,— Work Experience.
It is important that roles and relationships are clear so that a tightly-knit, visible and dedicated Compact team is formed.
10.
Who is responsible for ensuring Equality of Opportunity through Compact?
The education authority is of course responsible for promoting equality of opportunity and ensuring that its equal opportunities policies are enhanced through Compact.
It is vital therefore that those charged with responsibility for Equal Opportunities are consulted throughout the planning of the Compact development.
11.
How can we ensure that Compact jobs are of high quality and involve worthwhile training?
The success of Compact depends on the provision of high quality jobs and worthwhile training.
Jobs offered through Compact must: a) be permanent and full-time.
This means that the Compact student has the same job security as other full-time employees in the organisation.
b) contain a training component which is at least the equivalent of YTS standard.
YTS is satisfactory provided it is offered as employed status.
Training status YTS placements are not suitable as they do not offer permanence.
c) have "prospects" .
It should be possible to show a clear professional progression route.
Where the Training Agency is involved, it will ensure that quality is maintained and it will not fund Compacts which fall short of the mark.
Elsewhere, it is the responsibility of the local Partnership to exert quality control.
The local Careers Service has an important role to play here.
After all, they have experience of visiting local firms and training schemes and they are best placed to make judgements about quality.
12.
How will communications be established between the schools, the industries and education authority personnel?
Ways of maintaining and improving communications include: a) establishing a management structure within the Partnership, with clear lines of communication into the schools and into employment; b) circulating minutes of management meetings to schools and employers so they know what is being discussed and what is being decided; c) bringing teachers and employers together at both Partnership and school level to plan, discuss and review the progress of the Compact; d) establishing School Compact Teams with regular meetings; e) circulating Compact documents, including such things as pupils' Work Experience reports widely; f) holding Open Evenings for parents to brief them on Compact developments; g) producing a regular Compact Newsletter.
13.
Will Compacts encourage students to leave school at sixteen instead of participating in further education?
Compact should enable students to make a better informed and, therefore, more appropriate decision about their future at 16+.
For some students, for example those who to wish to take up technical apprenticeships, this may mean a decision to leave school.
For many others, contact with the world of work will drive home the increasing demand for more highly-qualified potential employees.
This will provide them with an incentive for continuing their education.
14.
How does Compact relate to the DTI Education for Enterprise Initiative?
Compact and the DTI Education for Enterprise Initiative share a common launch-pad in the Government's programme of Action for Inner Cities.
Beyond that, it is up to local "stakeholders" on the patch to determine the relationship.
For instance, the DTI is funding Education and Enterprise Advisers who are responsible for "exciting" industry about education and, more specifically, securing Work Experience placements in sufficient numbers to satisfy demands from the schools.
Where DTI Education and Enterprise Advisers are in post they will prove to be invaluable partners in making Compact work.
15.
How does Compact relate to such curriculum initiatives as TVEI, CPVE, etc.?
The relationship of Compact to TVEI is potentially a very close one.
Both initiatives are sponsored by the Training Agency and they share similar objectives in attempting to provide greater coherence between Education and Training, and in making Education more aware of the needs of employers and of young people's needs in the employment market.
Compact may be seen as taking the relationship between Education and Industry a step closer, by creating a demand for Partnership and providing an Industry-based resource for the curriculum.
The aims of Compact are consistent with the aims of the new generation of examinations and Compact will provide new resources and learning opportunities which can be used as a basis for course work.
Compacts may in some circumstances be eligible for assessment and certification by the examining bodies, for example as a module in GCSE or CPVE or as the basis of an entire examination such as the AEB Basic Test "World of Work" .
16.
How does Compact relate to the National Curriculum?
The Education Reform Act 1988 states that the National Curriculum should prepare pupils for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of adult life".
The Mathematics and Science Working Parties which have already reported require programmes of learning to be based explicitly on practical experience so that students develop a deeper understanding of the technological society in which they will live and work.
It is very clear that Schools/Industry liaison, as promoted through Partnerships such as Compact, is regarded as an essential resource for all the Core and Foundation subjects which will make up 70 per cent of the National Curriculum.
It is also significant that the National Curriculum Council has established a cross-curricular Working Party focussing on the following themes:— Economic Awareness,— Careers,— Personal and Social Education,— Health Education.
These themes demand continual contacts and resources in the wider community.
Compact schools are particularly well placed for ensuring that the demands of the National Curriculum will be appropriately fulfilled.
17.
What contribution can Compact make to in-service training?
First, teacher secondment to industry, if properly planned and managed, can make a powerful contribution to professional, curriculum and institutional development.
Second, within Compact it may be possible for teachers to attend courses run by industry on topics such as appraisal, leadership or financial management.
Third, people from other walks of life may be invited to support or participate in In-service training sessions run by the education authority or by individual Compact schools.
18.
Who will monitor the progress and success of the Compact?
The Training Agency will be involved in monitoring and evaluating those Compacts which it funds.
Partnerships and education authorities will of course wish to make their own arrangements for monitoring.
The notion of monitoring and recording achievement is integral to Compacts.
Students have to achieve their goals in order to gain entitlement to Compact benefits.
This implies a large data-collecting operation.
The accumulation of such data in itself might form the basis for an evaluation of Compact.
It is likely that most Partnerships will wish to employ more comprehensive monitoring and evaluation techniques.
Education authorities may have the resources to carry out these studies themselves; others may wish to commission research from institutions of higher education or commercial practices.
Questions Governors Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
How are schools selected for Compact?
Education authorities should select those schools which will benefit from participation in a Compact.
In practice this is likely to mean those schools which are already participating in school improvement schemes or have shown some other indication of an ability to grapple with problems.
Schools which are already doing very well are probably not the first priority for Compact.
The eventual aim should be to include all schools in the authority.
3.
Why should my school participate in Compact?
Your school should consider participating in Compact for three reasons: First, Compact improves the employment prospects of those young people who achieve Compact goals.
Second, Compact supports schools in raising standards of achievement by setting and rewarding goals for young people.
Third, involvement with local industry helps to promote a stimulating and challenging curriculum.
4.
Who runs the Compact?
The education authority retains overall responsibility for the conduct of education in its area and, to that extent, is ultimately responsible for the Compact.
The Compact should, however, be sponsored by a Partnership of  Industry and Education.
The setting of Compact goals, the development of Compact policy and the planning of Compact activities will be most successful where both parties enjoy trust and respect for each other and feel a commitment to the ideal of Partnership.
The Partnership should therefore be encouraged and allowed to take responsibility for the Compact strategy.
5.
Will Compact employers expect to have a role in the management and curriculum of the school?
Many schools are currently seeking governors from industry and a Compact employer in this role would bring a particular commitment to the school and its pupils.
The contribution which adults other than teachers, both employers and trade unionists, can make to the school curriculum has gained widespread recognition over the past ten years, through the activities of the SCIP, the Royal Society of Arts Industry Year (1986), and the more recent DTI initiatives.
Partnership has been and remains the characteristic of successful innovation.
Employers and trade unionists should be involved in planning, implementing and debriefing curriculum initiatives, but professional responsibility remains with the teachers.
6.
Will Compact provide extra resources for use in school?
The resources which Compact brings into participating schools are of two kinds.
First and most importantly, there is the time and commitment which people from industry put into supporting the school curriculum.
This is hard to quantify in the abstract and will depend on the demands and the receptiveness of the individual schools, but it could add up to hundreds of hours and dozens of activities over a year.
Second, there are the cash resources available from the Training Agency, for those Compacts it is funding in Urban Programme Areas.
Those Compacts may receive up to £100,000 per year for four years.
This money has to be bid for, and how it is spent is closely monitored by the Agency.
The bulk of such funds is likely to go towards paying salaries, administration, post and telephone and publicity.
Individual Compact schools are likely to benefit by additions to their school allowances of hundreds of pounds towards the increased costs of Compact.
7.
Who will co-ordinate Compact activities in the school?
It is likely that Compact activities within the school will be co-ordinated by a member of the senior management team, probably a Deputy Head.
The Coordinator needs to provide clear leadership and to inspire confidence in the ability of the school team to achieve its goals.
He or she must be confident about delegating responsibility for aspects of the Compact programme to appropriate members of staff.
He or she also needs to demonstrate commitment to curriculum and pastoral development.
8.
What are the benefits to students?
Benefits accrue to students on a number of levels.
Their educational experience is enriched by contact with members of the local economic community.
Such contacts may occur on Work Experience, during Mini-Enterprise, or an industrial visit or within a GCSE project or module.
These contacts are widely reported to improve students' motivation, and all the more so within Compact where achievement of student goals is directly linked to offers of employment.
Compact benefits students by offering them "value-added" jobs when they have attained their goals, and so opens up the realistic prospect of job satisfaction and career progression.
9.
Will Compact encourage students to leave school too early?
Compact is intended to improve the skills and qualifications of young people.
This may well imply an increase in the participation rate beyond sixteen and prove an encouragement to students to work towards academic qualifications.
10.
What are the benefits to teachers?
Some may have the opportunity of a short-term secondment to industry to observe the world of work at first hand or to reconnoitre a promising field for curriculum in-put.
Others may be offered a place on an in-house training course by one of the Compact firms.
Compact should make it easier for all teachers from Compact schools to meet people from industry who would be prepared to share in curriculum development.
Such opportunities and experiences offer great scope for professional and personal development.
11.
How will I learn of the day-to-day progress of the Compact?
Compact should be a standing item on the agenda of governors' meetings.
Head teachers will include news of developments in their regular reports.
The school may also produce a newsletter for parents and governors which might contain short accounts of Compact activities.
The Compact itself may produce a newsletter which will be circulated to governors, teachers, parents and employers.
Questions Trade Unionists Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— Improving attendance and punctuality,— Improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
Is the Trades Union Congress involved in Compacts?
Though there is as yet no national TUC policy on involvement in Compacts, an officer in the TUC Education section has particular responsibility for linking with the initiative.
Trade Unions have been invited to participate in existing Partnerships developing Compacts, and trade unionists from Compact companies have worked with teachers and students in schools.
Trade Union Administrative Offices may join Compacts as employers.
3.
Do the teachers' unions support Compacts?
Teachers' unions have been consulted at both local and national levels.
The Teachers' unions support the initiative, while recognising their responsibility to ensure that Compacts are of educational value, and that they enhance existing educational provision.
At the time of writing the National Union of Teachers is preparing guidelines for its members which will make clear recommendations regarding good practice for teachers in Compact schools.
4.
Are non-union and anti-union companies involved in Compacts?
Employer participation in Compacts should reflect the range and variety of businesses and organisations contributing to the community surrounding the  member schools and colleges, so that a realistic spread of vocational opportunity will be available to Compact graduates.
This means in practice that non-union companies may participate.
Compacts however have certain expectations of participating organisations: a) they should provide good Work Experience places, and allow students to make wide-ranging investigations which will include questions concerning trade unions; b) they should offer permanent jobs with good quality training and prospects; c) they should, as far as possible, co-operate with schools' requests for curriculum and in-service training support.
It is not likely that any organisation participating in these ways will have anti-union attitudes.
Individual Compacts should refuse membership to any anti-union organisation, because Compacts aim to develop in young people as wide an understanding as possible of the opportunities and choices available to them when they leave school.
5.
Do we get the chance to put the union point of view across?
Yes.
a) There should be trade union representation in the Compact Management, and advisory teams.
This will ensure that the trade union perspective is included on the agenda of planning and administration.
b) Schools should recognise their responsibility to ensure that young people understand how and why trade unions work.
Teachers in Compact schools will be particularly keen to ask trade unionists from Compact companies to participate in Careers programmes and in planning for and working with students in such Trade Union focussed activities as simulations and role play, etc.
6.
Will these Compact youngsters be taking the jobs of my members?
No.
Recruitment of Compact students is part of the participating companies' normal annual recruitment programmes.
Compacts are clear in their insistence that jobs offered should be permanent and offer training and prospects.
It is most unlikely that there would be any conflict of interest between existing employees and newly-recruited young people.
If difficulties arise it will of course be the responsibility of the local Trade Union Officer to raise the issue with the employers concerned.
7.
How can we be sure that employers don't use Work Experience to cover for unfilled vacancies?
The Compact Management team should ensure, through prior discussion with employers, that Work Experience placements are of good quality and appropriate to the students' needs.
It will be emphasised to employers that the purpose of the exercise is to provide opportunities for young people to learn about and through work and not to perform tasks which would otherwise be done by paid workers.
In the briefing sessions students will be told what sort of activities they can expect to do while on Work Experience, and whom to contact should any problems arise.
Teachers will make a "monitoring" visit to each student during the Work Experience placement to ensure that there are no problems.
Where there is concern that students might be being exploited by Compact employers, the Compact Directors should raise the issue immediately with the organisation concerned.
8.
Can the Union be involved in briefing and monitoring young people on Work Experience?
Teachers welcome the involvement of trade unionists during the briefing of young people going out on Work Experience.
Trade unionists' advice and explanations concerning such issues as health and safety are invaluable in this context.
Trade union representatives should ensure they meet young people during their placements and in many cases they will take a pastoral responsibility, dealing with any problems they may face.
Trade unionists should be involved in students' debriefing sessions to maximise students' learning.
9.
What are the health and safety considerations on Work Experience?
Exactly the same health and safety considerations obtain for students as for regular employees.
While education authorities are responsible for indemnifying host employers in the case of accidents, teachers and trade unionists should nevertheless take care that adequate health and safety precautions are in operation.
10.
How do you ensure that Compacts provide equal opportunities for all?
Partnerships should develop strategies for promoting equal opportunities.
These might include: a) providing encouragement and support for young women and ethnic minority students to try for jobs they have not traditionally applied for; b) provision by employers of Work Experience placements to schools from which they have not previously recruited; c) reducing sex-stereotyping in Work Experience; d) enriching the curriculum in science and technology subjects in ways which will make them more attractive to young women; e) improving education and training opportunities for young people with disabilities.
11.
How does YTS fit into Compacts?
YTS will often be the appropriate training component of Compact jobs.
The jobs offered are real jobs paid at standard rates.
In the case of employed status YTS it is likely that employers will "top up" the basic YTS allowance.
12.
Who checks up on employers to see that they keep their side of the bargain?
Each Compact will make its own arrangements for monitoring the quality of jobs offered.
It is essential that Compacts consult closely with the Careers Service in this area to agree on appropriate procedures.
Compact jobs will be offered to students through the Careers Service Guidance and Interview programme.
13.
How can trade unionists be involved in the classroom?
a) Trade unionists are often invited into Careers lessons or Social Education lessons to provide students with information about the purposes and functions of trade unions, and advice about trade union concerns such as conditions of employment and health and safety.
b) Trade unionists can contribute their expertise on company organisation and staff relations to such activities as Mini-Enterprise.
c) Trade unionists should be encouraged to support students on Work Experience placements.
d) They offer insights into curriculum areas.
e) Trade unions have developed a wide range of learning materials and processes which can usefully be brought into the classroom.
14.
Do Compact employers guarantee time off without loss of pay for trade unionists to work in schools?
While Compacts cannot dictate policy of this kind it is essential that they raise the issue of involving trade unionists with prospective employers.
Compacts should strongly recommend that trade unionists should be released on full pay to work with teachers and students so that they gain a balanced understanding of how industry works.
15.
Are Compacts an employer-led initiative?
No.
Compacts are led by Partnerships between Education and Industry.
Partnerships aim to improve the educational and vocational opportunities of young people by working together and understanding each other 's needs and objectives.
In order to work successfully the notion of Partnership through Compact must involve all the personnel in the participating organisations including trade unions.
16.
Can trade unions joint Compacts as employers?
Yes.
Any organisation which employs young people and wishes to promote their interests and opportunities can participate in Compacts.
Where trade unions have joined Compacts they are in a strong position to ensure that young people in Compact schools are fully informed about the advantages of joining and supporting the trade union movement.
17.
What is the role of the Government?
The Government is promoting Compacts because it recognises that there will be a shortfall in supply of responsible and qualified young people over the next few years.
It regards Compacts as a means of developing coherence in the area of Schools/Industry liaison and of relating Education and Training more closely together.
The Training Agency is funding 30 Compacts nationally; a maximum of £100,000 a year over 4 years is available to those Compacts submitting acceptable 4 year plans.
Questions Community Organisations Ask
1.
What is a Compact?
A Compact is "an agreement among employers, education authorities, schools, colleges, young people and their parents" .
Students in Compact schools and colleges are expected to work towards "goals" such as:— improving attendance and punctuality,— improving work in school,— going out on Work Experience,— preparing a record of achievement.
Each new Compact will develop its own goals.
Students who achieve their goals will be promised jobs, if they want them, by the employers who join the Compact.
The agreement will also result in employers working more closely than before with students and teachers in schools and colleges, to broaden their understanding of the world of work.
2.
What is a Partnership?
A Partnership is a relationship amongst parties in the community including Industry and Education whose aim is to work collaboratively to improve the educational and vocational opportunities of young people.
Partnerships should reflect as far as possible all the groups in a community which are interested in the welfare of young people.
Thus there should be representation from education, employers, trade unionists, parents and community organisations.
It is important that Partnerships are able to provide contacts and resources for schools, which relate to the whole range of students' educational needs, in terms of both curriculum support and guidance.
Compacts are an excellent mechanism through which Partnerships can work with schools so that students' learning and their vocational opportunities are enhanced.
3.
How can community organisations be involved?
Since Partnerships have a responsibility to achieve equal opportunities for all young people, community organisations should participate at the planning stage.
Community organisations are an essential resource for Partnerships and Compacts to ensure that the needs of girls and boys from different ethnic backgrounds and different abilities are promoted.
Community organisations can also provide Work Experience and teacher secondment placements, as well as support for curriculum development.
In some cases they will be able to participate as employers.
4.
What attempts are being made to ensure that the interests of women, minorities and the disabled are served?
Compacts establish a positive mechanism for communication between disparate groups.
For example, schools can ask Compact companies to provide Work Experience placements and classroom resources which will challenge gender stereotyping with relation to vocational opportunities; young women have often been placed in engineering or construction companies, while young men have been placed in work which has traditionally been associated with young women.
Compacts must be developed with the aim of promoting enhanced opportunities for all students.
5.
Does Compact persuade employers to discontinue discriminatory practices?
Closer contacts between education and places of work through Work Experience, visits to schools, etc., are the best way of ensuring that employers value the skills and aptitudes of young people regardless of gender, race or disability.
Compacts provide an invaluable forum for employers, educationalists and representatives from the community to share experience and information which will demonstrate the disadvantages of any discriminatory practices.
6.
How does Compact fit in with other Government initiatives to benefit the inner cities?
The Training Agency funding has been allocated to Urban Programme Areas since it is in the inner cities that a dysfunction is most clearly perceived between the needs and ambitions of young people, and the ability of the employing community to fulfil these.
Compacts aim to develop coherent and supportive progression for young people in their transition from school through further education and training, to work, using the wide range of resources available in the whole community.
In this way too Compacts can be seen as a mechanism for creating a more collaborative approach amongst all the different agencies responsible for providing education, training and employment.
7.
Have any community organisations voiced reservations about Compact?
Some community organisations are concerned that Compacts might: a) be a means of encouraging young people to leave school too early to perform menial jobs; b) be an opportunity for employers to recruit selectively without using proper procedures; c) allow discrimination according to gender, race and disability; d) discourage the development of different philosophies springing from different cultural backgrounds and points of view; e) develop an unchallenging, potentially exploited, workforce.
However, Compacts are managed by Partnerships which should invite participation from a wide range of the different groups in a community whose aims are: 1) to work together to address the needs and interests of nil participants, and 2) specifically to challenge the assumptions which  underlie the anxieties expressed in a)— e) above.