

THE INTEGUMENT
Reviews of various general aspects of the insect integument have been given by Beament (1961, 1964), Hackman (1971, 1974), Hinton (1970), Lawrence (1967), Locke (1964, 1967), Neville (1967, 1970, 1975), Weis-Fogh (1970) and Wigglesworth (1959).
Structure, Composition and Functions
The integument consists of the following layers:(i) the cuticle,(ii) the epidermis, and (iii) the basement membrance (Fig. 2).
(1) The Cuticle is a complex, non-cellular layer secreted largely by the epidermis and though commonly considered non-living is actually the seat of complex biochemical changes, some at least under enzymatic control.
It forms the outermost investment of the body and its appendages but is invaginated locally to form endoskeletal structures (p. 81) and also provides  the lining of the tracheal system, some glands and parts of the alimentary canal and reproductive tract.
When newly formed it is flexible and elastic and in many larvae it remains so over much of the body.
In most insects, however, the greater part of the cuticle undergoes a process of sclerotization whereby it becomes hardened and darkened to form more or less tough, rigid sclerites separated from each other by membranous zones of unchanged soft cuticle.
Such an arrangement combines rigidity with flexibility and in addition to its protective function the cuticle determines the form of the insect, its relative impermeability to water reduces desiccation and it provides a firm basis for the attachment of muscles.
Two main layers may be discerned in the cuticle, an outer epicuticle and an inner procuticle, both generally compound structures.
The epicuticle is a very thin layer devoid of chitin and of complex chemical composition and ultrastructure.
In the terminology of Locke (1964, 1966) and Filshie (1970) there is a dense outer cuticulin layer about 10 nm thick which is very resistant to acids and organic solvents and probably contains a highly polymerized lipid.
It is the first layer to be secreted in the cycle of cuticle formation, arising on top of the epidermal microvilli as small plaques which subsequently fuse to cover virtually the whole body.
Beneath it lies the main epicuticular layer, the so-called protein epicuticle, also containing bound lipid.
This is a homogeneous, dense refractile layer about 1 µm thick, formed from granules that originate in the Golgi complex of the epidermal cells.
It is the material of this layer to which the term "cuticulin" was originally applied by Wigglesworth (1947).
In addition the epicuticle may include a superficial lipid layer (Lockey, 1960) covered by a protective cement layer of unknown composition; the cement layer is secreted by epidermal glands and poured out over the surface.
Before ecdysis the epicuticle is folded but its shape determines the overall shape of the insect (Bennet-Clark, 1963) and it bears a more or less elaborate surface pattern (Locke, 1967).
Primitively this pattern comprises a network of polygons, each the product of a single epidermal cell, though such a simple arrangement is often replaced by other patterns of special functional significance (Hinton, 1970).
The procuticle, which may be absent from the tracheoles, is secreted by the epidermal cells and makes up the bulk of the integument.
The mechanical properties of insect cuticle are well adapted to its skeletal function and are determined largely by the various procuticular components, mainly chitin and various proteins (Rudall and Kenchington, 1973).
Together they show a high resistance to impact, high tensile, flexural and compressive strengths and a high strengh–weight ratio, the latter associated with the lack of mineral salts.
Typically the procuticle comprises an outer exocuticle, composed of a homogeneous electron-dense matrix, hardened through sclerotization (see below), and shed entirely when the insect moults.
Within this is a softer endocuticle, capable of increasing considerably through postecdysial deposition, and showing an elaborate ultrastructure in which variously oriented protein and chitin fibres form repeated layers 0.1 to 1 µm thick.
Especially characteristic of some endocuticles is the progressive "helicoidal" change of direction of these fibres in successive lamellae, which produces parabolic figures in sectioned material (Neville, 1970).
Deposition of the endocuticle often occurs in daily growth-layers (Neville, 1963).
These are visible by phase-contrast and polarization microscopy and occur in many Pterygote insects; such layers are not found in Apterygotes and are laid down with an irregular rhythm in the Coleoptera.
Two further procuticular layers have been recognized: a fuchsinophil mesocuticle (Schatz, 1952) lying between endo- and exocuticle, and a basal subcuticle (Schmidt, 1956) whose granular ultrastructure suggests that the newly secreted cuticular microfibrils have not undergone orientation.
The procuticle is usually pierced by very numerous pore-canals which run perpendicularly to its surface and are initially occupied by cytoplasmic filaments from the epidermis, though they may later become filled with cuticular material.
They are less than 1 µm in diameter and have a flat or twisted ribbon-like shape, through which the axial filaments run a straight course (Neville, Thomas and Zelazny, 1969; Neville and Luke, 19694).
The procuticle is probably secreted around them and they may also transport material to the outer procuticle and epicuticle.
Pore-canals are absent from the rubber-like cuticle found in some insects.
Sclerotization, whereby the exocuticle acquires its hard, tough, inelastic character, is due to a process of tanning, in which adjacent protein chains are cross-linked by O-quinones.
The events leading up to this have been much studied in the development of the Dipteran puparium, in which the quinones apparently arise by oxidation of a phenolic substrate N-acetyldopamine, itself derived from tyrosine (Karlson and Sekeris, 1966).
Darkening of the hardened regions is a separate but related process; both are involved in the repair of cuticular injuries.
The two major components of insect cuticle are the carbohydrate chitin, which accounts for 25–60 per cent of the dry weight of various cuticles, and a number of proteins.
On hydrolysis, chitin yields acetic acid and glucosamine and is a high molecular weight polymer consisting mainly of anhydro-N-acetylglucosamine residues joined by B-1, 4-linkages, though up to 10 per cent of the residues may be deacylated.
The chains are unbranched and consist of several hundred units with a repeating structure 3.
I nm long.
There are three different crystallographic forms of chitin — a-, B- and y- chitin — which differ in the arrangement of the chains and in the presence of bound water; a-chitin is the most stable and the only one found in arthropod cuticle.
The metabolic pathways through which chitin is formed are not fully established but enzymatic synthesis of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine from glucose has been demonstrated by Candy and Kilby (1962) and there is evidence for polymerization under the control of a chitin synthetase.
In the cutical-chitin chains are apparently joined to proteins by covalent linkages involving aspartic acid and histidine (Rudall, 1963).
The chitin-protein complex is in fact a polydisperse glycoprotein in which rod-like chitin fibres 2–5 to 6.5 nm in diameter are embedded in a protein matrix (Neville and Luke, 1969b).
Chitin is insoluble in water, alkalis, dilute acids and organic solvents but dissolves with decomposition in concentrated mineral acids and sodium hypochlorite.
It has a  specific gravity of about I .4, a refractive index of about 1.55 and is best detected by the van Wisselingh test — treatment with concentrated potassium hydroxide at 160- C for 20 minutes converts it to chitosan which gives a rose-violet colour with 0-z per cent iodine in 1 per cent sulphuric acid (Campbell, 1929).
A more specific histological test depends on the use of conjugates of a chitinase with fluorescent dyestuffs (Benjaminson, 1969).
The main structural proteins of the insect cuticle are sometimes known collectively as arthropodin though they are a complex mixture, more than a dozen components having been identified in some insects by amino-acid analyses, electrophoresis and serological techniques (Fox and Mills, 1969; Hackman and Goldberg, 1971).
The proteins differ in amino-acid composition from one species  to another but those of related species show some resemblances.
Protein deposition in the cuticle is related to changes in the amino acids of the blood though the mechanisms of synthesis are not known.
Of special interest is the distinctive protein resilin (Andersen and Weis-Fogh, 1964; Andersen, 1970).
This resembles the elastin of vertebrate connective tissue, being an isotropic three.dimensional network of polypeptide chains held together by stable covalent cross-links and showing remarkable rubber-like properties.
It is structureless and metabolically inert but forms mechanical "springs" which are readily deformed and show perfect elastic recovery.
It occurs in localized zones where these properties are functionally important, for example near the wing articulation of many insects and in the metathorax of fleas, where it forms part of the jumping mechanism (p. 945).
Other components of the cuticle account for only a very small part of its weight but are of great physiological significance.
Phenolic precursors of the quinones that link amino-acid chains to form sclerotin are widely distributed, though some Apterygotes lack them and harden their cuticles by disulphide linkages (Krishnan, 1969).
There are also various waxes and other lipids secreted by the oenocytes (Locke, 1969a) and responsible for waterproofing the cuticle (Beament, 1964; Gilby, 1965; Gilbert, 1967).
These form a layer at or near the surface or are incorporated into inner layers of the cuticle.
They are a complex mixture of up to 80 per cent hydrocarbons with smaller amounts of fatty acids, alkyl esters and other constituents.
Chemically the waxes found in exuviae of Bombyx mori comprise a mixture of odd-numbered C 27 –C 37 , paraffins with esters of even-numbered C 26 –C 30 fatty acids.
Though the epicuticular lipids play a major role in reducing water loss through the integument, it now seems unlikely that this depends on an oriented layer of wax molecules subject to disruption at a critical transition temperature (Hackman, 1971).
The integument also includes enzyme systems responsible for the synthesis and degradation of the major cuticular materials and those involved in  melanization and sclerotization; many of these systems require fuller investigation.
Inorganic cuticular constituents are rare but calcareous nodules may develop on the outside of Stratiomyid and Psychodid larvae while Rhagoletis cerasi larvae show intra-cuticular calcification (Wiesmann, 1938).
Pigments occurring in the cuticle are discussed below.
(2) The Epidermis forms a continuous single layer of cells, the plasma membranes of which are joined by numerous septate desmosomes.
The ultrastructure of the cells varies with their cycles of secretory activity (Locke, 1969b) but they have a microvillate surface and contain numerous mitochondria, Golgi vesicles and cisternae of smooth-surfaced endoplasmic reticulum as well as cytoskeletal structures in the form of oriented microfibres and microtubules.
Rough endoplasmic reticulum is present mainly in cells secreting resilin.
Scattered among the normal epidermal cells are specialized gland cells and those concerned in the formation of cuticular sensilla (see p. 124).
Muscle attachments penetrate the epidermis, the myofibrillae usually being associated with tonofibrillae that run through the epidermis and into the procuticle, while the oenocytes (p. 256) which originate from epidermal cells sometimes remain closely associated with this layer.
Not only does the epidermis secrete the greater part of the cuticle but it also produces the moulting fluid (Bade and Wyatt, 1962; Jeuniaux, 1963), which dissolves the old endocuticle before the immature insect moults (p. 361), it absorbs the digestion products of the old cuticle, repairs wounds and differentiates in such a way as to determine the surface patterns of the insect (Wigglesworth, 1959; Lawrence, 1967).
(3) The Basement Membrane is a continuous layer about 0–5 µm thick with an amorphous ultrastructure.
It contains neutral mucopolysaccharides and is secreted by haemocytes (Wigglesworth, 1956).
Chordotonal organs (p. 127), tracheoles, and nerves run to it or through It.
Cuticular Appendages
These structures include all outgrowths of the cuticle that are connected with it by means of a membranous joint.
They arise from modified epidermal cells and may be classified into setae and spurs.
Setae or Macrotrichia (Fig. 4) are commonly known as hairs and each arises from a cup-like pit or alveolus.
At its base the seta is attached by a ring of articular membrane.
Setae are hollow structures developed as extensions of the exocuticle and each is produced by a single, usually enlarged, trichogen cell.
The articular membrane is usually produced by a separate tormogen cell.
The arrangement of the more constantly located setae (chaetotaxy) is important in the systematics of some insect groups, e.g. the Diplura, Thysanoptera, Cyclorrhaphan Diptera and larval Lepidoptera.
The main kinds of setae and their modifications are listed below; the structure of some is now known in great detail through the use of specialized optical techniques and of the scanning and transmission electron microscopes (e.g. Baker and McCrae, 1966–67; Evans, 1967; Hale and Smith, 1966; Lippert and Gentil, 1959; Lukoschus, 1962; Picken, 1949).
(1) Clothing hairs — These invest the general surface of the body or its appendages and frequently exhibit various degrees of specialization.
When furnished with thread-like branches as in the Apoidea they are termed plumose hairs.
Setae which are particularly stout and rigid are known as bristles and are well exhibited for example in the Tachinidae.
(,) Scales — These are highly modified clothing hairs and are characteristic of all Lepidoptera and many Collembola: they are also present in some Thysanura, Coleoptera, Diptera and Hymenoptera.
Transitional forms between ordinary clothing hairs and scales are frequent.
(3) Glandular setae — Grouped under this heading are those setae which function as the outlet for the secretion of epidermal glands (see p. 263).
If they are especially stout and rigid they are then termed glandular bristles as in the urticating hairs of certain lepidopterous larvae.
(4) Sensory Setae — Very frequently the setae of certain parts of the body, particularly the appendages, are modified in special ways and become sensory in function.
Sensory setae (see p. 125) are in all cases connected with the nervous system.
Spurs occur on the legs of many insects and differ from setae in being of multicellular origin.
Cuticular Processes
The external surface of the cuticle, in addition to being sculptured in various ways, bears a great variety of outgrowths which are integral parts of its substance.
They are rigidly connected with the cuticle, having no membranous articulation and are therefore readily separable from cuticular appendages.
The principal types of cuticular processes are as follows.
Microtrichia (fixed hairs or aculei)— These are minute hair-like structures found, for example, on the wings of the Mecoptera and certain  Diptera.
They resemble very small covering hairs, but the absence of the basal articulation is their distinguishing feature (Figs. 4 and 26).
Spines — This expression has been used by various writers with considerable latitude but is here confined to outgrowths of the cuticle which are more or less thorn-like in form.
Spines differ from spine-like setae in being produced by undifferentiated epidermal cells and are usually, if not always, of multicellular origin.
In addition to the above there are many other cuticular processes which either take the form of more or less conical nodules and tubercles of different shapes, or of larger projections known as horns which are characteristic of the males of certain Coleoptera.
Coloration
The colours of adult and immature insects may be grouped into three classes:(1) pigmentary or chemical colours,(2) structural or physical colours, and (3) combination or chemico-physical colours.
1.
Pigmentary Colours
— These are due to chemical substances that absorb some wavelengths of the incident light and reflect others.
They may be present in the cuticle, epidermis or subepidermal tissues (usually fat body or blood).
A colour pattern often consists of an epidermal or subepidermal ground colour (which may fade rapidly after death) and overlying areas of more permanent cuticular pigmentation.
Eye pigments occurring in the ommatidial cells of some insects may be of special interest since studies of their metabolism reveal something of the mode of action of genes controlling eye colour.
Biochemical aspects of insect pigmentation have been reviewed recently by Cromartie (1959), Thomson (1962), Kilby (1963), Goodwin (1971), Fuzeau-Braesch (1972) and others.
The substances concerned may be classified as follows.
(a) Melanins.
These are amorphous, highly stable, dark brown or black cuticular pigments which are generally non-granular and are insoluble in the usual solvents though they are rapidly decolorized by oxidizing agents.
Their chemical nature has not been satisfactorily elucidated and it is, in fact; difficult to distinguish between cuticular darkening due to sclerotization and that caused by the presence of true melanins (Richards, A. G., 1967).
The mode of formation of melanins is uncertain (Lerner and Fitzpatrick, 1950) but they probably arise through polymerization of indole compounds which are derived initially from the amino-acid tyrosine by ring-closure and oxidation under the influence of the enzyme tyrosinase.
Thus, Aedes larvae reared on a diet deficient in tyrosine or the related phenylalanine together with the resulting pupae are unpigmented (Golberg and De Meillon, 1948).
Where melanic pigmentation is discontinuous (e.g. dark spots, etc.) this is apparently the result of a localized distribution of the substrate tyrosine, the tyrosinase occurring also in areas which remain unpigmented.
(b) Carotenoids.
These are polyene pigments usually containing 40 carbon atoms in the molecule; they are readily soluble in fat-solvents and are characteristically  synthesized by plants (Lederer, 1938; Feltwell and Rothschild, 1974).
When ingested by animals they accumulate in the blood and tissues unchanged or after minor oxidative alterations and in some cases they form the prosthetic group of a chromoprotein.
B.carotene, derived from the tissues of the potato plant, occurs in the blood of the Colorado Potato-beetle Leptinotarsa decemlineata and is responsible for the red and yellow coloration of the Pentatomid Perillus bioculatus which preys on larvae of the beetle (Palmer and Knight, 1924).
Again, in Coccinella, the red colour is due to the presence of the plant carotenoids lycopene and a- and carotene (Lederer, 1938).
Astaxanthin (3:3 — dihydroxy — 4:4 -diketo — B -carotene) and B-carotene both occur as chromoproteins in the integument of locusts and the green chromoprotein pigment of many insects (known as insectoverdin) is a complex, the yellow-orange component of which may have as its prosthetic group B-carotene (Carausius), lutein (Sphinx, Tettigonia) or astaxanthin.
(c) Pteridines.
These pigments are derived from a heterocyclic pyrimidinepyrazine ring structure and are found more often in insects than in other organisms (Ziegler and Harmsen, 1969).
The majority belong to the class of pterines (2 -amino-4.hydroxy.pteridines) and the natural pigment is often a mixture of two or more of these.
Thus the conspicuous colours of the Heteroptera Dysdercus, Pyrrhocoris, Oncopeltus and Phonoctonus are due to the red and yellow pterines erythropterin and xanthopterin, along with the white leucopterin.
Xanthopterin and leucopterin are also found in the integument of the Vespidae, while the body- and wing.scales of many Pierid butterflies contain leucopterin, xanthopterin, isoxanthopterin and erythropterin.
Some pterines occur characteristically as eye pigments, e.g. a group of so.called drosopterins contribute to the red eye colour of the wild.type Drosophila melanogaster.
Integumentary pterines lie in the epidermis and interlamellar spaces of scales and hairs as ellipsoidal granules about 0–5 µm long.
In the ommatidia they occur as proteinaceous granules in the pigment cells surrounding the crystalline cone and retinulae; they are distinct from and sometimes masked by the ommochrome pigments that may also be present.
In addition to their role as pigments some hydrogenated pterines can act metabolically as co-factors in hydroxylation reactions; in the Pieridae they are not only pigments but also represent the insoluble end-products that accumulate in "storage excretion" of nitrogenous metabolites.
(d) Ommochromes
(Linzen, 1974).
These are best known as eye pigments and comprise two groups of substances, the sulphur.free ommatins of low molecular weight and, the sulphur-containing ommins of high molecular weight.
The latter are the main pigments occurring in the eye of insects from many orders.
Xanthommatin is an eye pigment in Drosophila; its biosynthesis from tryptophane via kynurenine and 3-hydroxykynurenine is under genetic control.
Like other ommochromes it is a redox pigment, yellow when oxidized and red when reduced.
Integumentary ommochromes occur in the wings of Nymphalid butterflies and in Schistocerca and they are also involved in the colour changes of the stick insect Carausius morosus.
In the dragonfly Sympetrum striolatum the scarlet male contains ommatins and the yellow female their reduced equivalents.
(e) Anthraquinones.
These are confined to the Coccoidea, where the best known is carminic acid, the colouring principle of cochineal, found in the eggs and fat body of the female Dactylopius coccus and accounting for half its body weight.
Kermesic acid is the pigment in the dyestuff kermes, from females of Kermococcus ilicis, and laccaic acid is the water.soluble red pigment of lac (p., 66).
(f) Aphins.
These are polycyclic quinones which decompose immediately after  the death of the insect containing them, giving rise to the erythroaphin reported from Aphis fabae, Eriosoma lanigerum and other aphids.
(g) Miscellaneous pigments.
Many other substances play a minor role as insect pigments, occurring either in small amounts or only in a few species.
Among such are haemoglobin, derivatives of chlorophyll, anthoxanthins, anthocyanins, riboflavin (which accumulates as the greenish-yellow "entomo-urochrome" of the Malpighian tubules) and purines.
The bile pigment mesobiliverdin is perhaps more important since it is the prosthetic group of the blue component of the insectoverdins (complex green pigments) mentioned above in connection with the carotenoids.
2.
Structural Colours
— Structural colours differ from those due to pigments in that they are changed or destroyed by physical changes in the cuticle such as result from shrinkage, swelling, distortion or permeation with liquids of the same refractive index as the cuticle.
They may also be duplicated by physical models, are not destroyed by bleaching and all the component wavelengths of the incident light are to be found in either the reflected, scattered or transmitted fractions.
of the many papers on this topic, see especially Mason (1926–27) and Anderson and Richards (1942).
Four types of structural coloration may be distinguished:(i) Structural white is caused by the scattering, reflection and refraction of light by microscopic particles large in comparison with the wavelength of light and which, in themselves, are usually transparent.
Probably most insect whites have a structural basis.
(ii) Tyndall blue, though uncommon, occurs in some Odonata and is due to the scattering of the shorter wavelengths by particles with dimensions of about the same size as the wavelengths of light.
(iii) Interference colours are produced by optical interference between reflections from a series of superimposed laminae or ribs.
This is one of the commonest types of physical coloration and the iridescent appearance is well seen, for example, in the wing-scales of Morpho butterflies, in the Diamond beetles Entimus and Cyphus and in the Chrysididae. (iv) Diffraction colours, resulting from the presence of closely spaced striae, 0–5 to 3 µm apart, occur in the Mutillidae and various beetles such as Serica, several Carabidae and Gyrinidae, Nicrophorus and others (Hinton and Gibbs, 1969, 1971).
It is possible that variations in the colour and intensity of light reflected from these structures help to confuse predators as to the size and distance of the insect.
The beetle Dynastes hercules can change colour quite quickly from yellow to black and vice versa.
This process has a structural basis elucidated by Hinton and Jarman (1973).
Below the transparent epicuticle of the elytra is a very thin spongy layer; when its interstices are filled with air this appears yellow, but when they fill with water the black colour of the underlying cuticle becomes apparent.
3.
Combination Colours
— These are produced by a structural modification in conjunction with a layer of pigment and are much commoner than purely structural colours.
In the butterfly Teracolus phlegyas a red pigment in the scale wall (but not in the striae) combines with a structural violet to  produce magenta: in Ornithoptera poseidon the emerald green is due to a structural blue combined with a yellow pigment in the walls and striae of the scales.
In a number of cases (e.g. Lycaenids) there is no indication of the cause of colour.
The golden iridescence of Cassida and its allies is produced by a film of moisture beneath the surface cuticle.
These insects rapidly lose their colour when dried, but it returns after soaking in water provided the drying has not been too prolonged.
SEGMENTATION AND THE DIVISIONS OF THE BODY
The cuticle of an insect forms a more or less hardened exoskeleton and, although perfectly continuous over the whole body, it remains flexible along certain definite, usually transverse, lines.
Here the cuticle becomes infolded and is membranous in character.
The body of an insect therefore presents a jointed structure which is an example of segmentation, and is divided into a series of successive rings variously known as segments, somites or metameres.
In many cases the definitive segment incorporates part of what was primitively an intersegmental sclerite.
The flexible infolded portion of the cuticle between adjacent definitive segments is the so-called intersegmental membrane whose function is to allow free movement of the body.
Segmentation is not only shown in the external differentiation of the body but also involves many of the internal organs.
In the Annelida and the Onychophora the internal structure of each segment is very similar to that of the segment preceding or following it.
In such highly evolved animals as insects the primitive segmentation, in so far as it affects the internal anatomy, has undergone profound modifications; the segmental repetition of parts is nevertheless retained to some extent in the central nervous system, the heart, tracheal system and in the body musculature.
The cuticle also exhibits localized areas of hardening which are sometimes delimited by sutures.
The latter name has been given to several somewhat different structures.
It may denote (i) the external groove or sulcus corresponding to an internal ridge-like inflection of the cuticle which provides mechanical rigidity, or (ii) a line of thinner, weaker cuticle along which rupture or bending of the integument can occur at ecdysis, or (iii) a narrow, flexible, membranous zone of unsclerotized cuticle, or (iv) a linear impression without any obvious mechanical significance.
In certain regions the sclerites do not come into apposition by sutures and are thus, as it were, islands of cuticle surrounded by membrane.
Complete fusion of adjacent sclerites is common, particularly among the higher orders of insects, all traces of sutures being lost.
The Divisions of a Body Segment
In most adult insects, and in many of their larvae, the body-wall of a typical segment is divisible into four definite sclerotized regions: a dorsal region or tergum, a ventral region or sternum, and a lateral region or pleuron on each side of the body.
Each of these regions may be differentiated into separate sclerites.
In this case the sclerites composing the tergum are known as tergites, those of the sternum as sternites, and those constituting each pleuron as pleurites.
Between adjacent segments there may be present small detached plates or intersegmentalia and such sclerites belong partly to the segment in front and partly to the segment behind them.
According to their position they are termed intertergites, interpleurites and intersternites.
The Segmental Appendages
In the embryo, each body segment may bear a pair of outgrowths or appendages which may or may not be retained in postembryonic life.
Among adult insects, an appendage is normally attached to its segment between the pleuron of its side and the sternum.
Typical appendages are segmented tubes invested with a dense cuticle.
Between adjacent segments, the cuticle remains membranous and becomes infolded to form the articular membrane.
On account of its jointed structure, the whole or part of an appendage is movable by means of its muscles.
An insect appendage consists typically of a limb base and a shaft.
There is no evidence of a biramous condition among the appendages in any insects.
Processes of the Body-Wall
In addition to true segmental appendages numerous other outgrowths of the body-wall are found in various insects.
Unlike true appendages, processes of the body-wall are by no means invariably represented by embryonic counterparts; they may or may not be segmentally arranged, they may be originally paired or unpaired, and more than a single pair is sometimes borne on a segment.
They differ from cuticular processes in containing a definite extension of the body cavity and in some cases they are freely movable.
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between such processes and true appendages but the principal types of organs which have been included under this category are:(I) Pseudopods, which are characteristic of many dipterous larvae.
(2) Scoli, or thorny processes, characteristic of Nymphalid and Saturniid larvae: the anal horn of Sphingid larvae is also of a very similar nature.
(3) Branchiae or gills which are found in most aquatic insect larvae (see p. 226).
(4) Wings (see p. 50), which are always confined to the meso-and metathorax and attain their full development in adult insects.
The Regions of the Body
The body segments of an insect are grouped together to form three usually well-defined regions or tagmata — the head, thorax and abdomen (Fig.
I).
In each tagma certain of the primary functions of the organism are concentrated.
The head carries the mouthparts, which are concerned with feeding, and the organs of special sense.
The thorax bears the locomotor organs, i.e. legs and wings.
The abdomen is concerned with reproduction and may carry genital appendages; it is also the seat of many metabolic processes.
In most orders an intersegmental region, the neck or cervix, connects the head with the thorax and possibly also includes the posterior unsclerotized part of the labial segment and the anterior part of the prothorax.
THE HEAD AND CERVIX
The insect head presents many morphological problems but it is convenient here to give a descriptive account of the head-capsule and cephalic appendages before discussing the more important theories of the segmental composition of this region.
The Head-Capsule
The exoskeleton of the head is composed of several sclerites more or less intimately associated to form a hard, compact case or head-capsule, general works on which include those of Duporte (1957), Gouin (1968), Manton (1964), Matsuda (1965), Snodgrass (1947, 1960) and Strenger (1952).
In the more generalized insects the wall of the head-capsule is reinforced by a number of inflected ridges or sulci which occupy relatively constant positions and delimit to some extent the morphological areas into which the wall of the head can be divided (Figs. 5,6).
In addition, the dorsal and facial surface of the head of immature insects is crossed by a so-called ecdysial cleavage line, often having the form of an inverted Y (Fig. 5).
Here the sclerotized exocuticle is absent and the head-capsule splits open along the cleavage line when the insect moults.
The course of the split varies from one Species to another; in some its lateral arms run dorsal to the antennal insertions, in others it runs to them or below them.
In some insects the ecdysial cleavage line lies concealed along the infolded portion of a sulcus, thus obscuring its real nature.
The cleavage line is only rarely retained in adult insects but some species have a similarly situated sulcus of different morphological and functional significance.
In older accounts the term "epicranial suture" sometimes referred to the ecdysial cleavage line, sometimes to comparably placed sulci; it is therefore best avoided.
The frons is the unpaired upper facial part of the head which often lies between the lateral arms of the ecdysial cleavage line when this is present.
It has been defined more precisely as the region of the head-capsule on which arise the pharyngeal dilator muscles, but even this criterion is not entirely satisfactory.
It usually bears the median ocellus and is often delimited laterally by the frontogenal sulci and distally by the epistomal or frontoclypeal sulcus (Fig. 5), associated with which are the anterior tentorial invaginations.
The clypeus, on which arise the cibarial dilator muscles, lies immediately   anterior to the frons and the two sclerites are often fused owing to the obliteration of the frontoclypeal sulcus.
In other insects the clypeus is partially or completely divided by a transverse suture into two sclerites — the postclypeus and the anteclypeus (Fig. 304).
The former sclerite carries on either side a convex process serving for articulation with the ginglymus of the mandible.
Laterally the clypeus may be delimited from the sides of the head by the clypeogenal sulci.
The labrum is an unpaired sclerite usually movably articulated with the clypeus by means of the clypeolabral suture.
On its pharyngeal surface it bears lateral sclerotized pieces known as tormae.
The epicranium is the upper region of the head from the frons to the neck and may be divided longitudinally into two epicranial plates by the ecdysial cleavage line or median sulcus.
That portion of the epicranium which lies immediately behind the frons and between the compound eyes is termed the vertex.
It sometimes carries the paired ocelli, but is not differentiated as a separate sclerite.
The occiput is the hinder part of the epicranium between the vertex and the neck; it is rarely present as a distinct sclerite.
The gena (Fig. 5) forms the whole of the lateral area below and posterior to the eyes on each side; near its junction with the clypeus is a facet for articulation with the ginglymus of the mandible and proximally it bears a cavity which receives the mandibular condyle.
Crossing the hind part of the cranium there is in some insects an occipital suture.
When fully developed it extends on either side to end between the two points of articulation of the mandible.
The areas posterior to this suture are the occiput dorsally and the postgenae laterally.
The postgenae bear the condylar articulations for the  maxillae.
The dorsal and lateral margins of the occipital foramen are commonly bordered by a narrow rim or postocciput with which the neck membrane is directly continuous.
This rim is marked off from the rest of the cranium by a groove or postoccipital sulcus which ends at the posterior tentorial pit on either side and along which are inserted the dorsal prothoracic muscles moving the head.
The heads of insects are broadly divisible into three types (Fig. 6) depending on the inclination of the long axis and the position of the mouthparts.
In the hypognathous head the long axis is vertical and the mouthparts ventral; the occipital foramen lies in or near the transverse plane.
In the prognathous head the long axis is horizontal, or slightly inclined ventrally, while the mouthparts are anterior in position.
The prognathous condition often involves an inclination of the occipital foramen or the latter may retain its transverse position owing to an elongation of the ventral region of the head.
This may be achieved, as in the soldier caste of Isoptera, by a backward extension of the postmentum and genae.
Or, as among Coleoptera, a median ventral sclerite or gula (not necessarily homologous in all the orders in which it occurs) extends from the occipital foramen to the base of the submentum (Duporte, 1962).
It occupies the area between the postoccipital sulci which, along with the posterior tentorial pits, have extended forwards on the head capsule.
In many Endopterygote larvae, however, the gula is bounded by variously formed ecdysial lines along which the ventral side of the head-capsule bends or splits when the insect moults (Hinton, 1963).
These have no consistent relationships with the posterior tentorial pits and the term "gular suture" is confusing since, like the "epicranial suture" , it has been used to denote a strengthening sulcus or a weak ecdysial line.
The gula and submentum are often fused into a single sclerite, the gulamentum (Fig. 6B).
The third or opisthognathous condition occurs in the Homoptera, where the head is directed backwards so that the specialized mouthparts arise between the anterior legs.
In addition to the foregoing there are other sclerites of less general occurrence such as the following.
(1) The antennal sclerites (Fig. 4).
Each is a ring of cuticle into  which the basal Segment of the antennae of its side is inserted.
(2) The ocular sclerites.
These are also annular in form and each surrounds the compound eye of its side.
(3) The mandibular sclerite.
A small sclerite close to the base of the mandible and separated by a transverse suture from the gena is found in many Orthoptera.
The Antennae
These are a pair of very mobile jointed appendages which are articulated with the head in front of or between the eyes.
Imms (1939, 1940) has distinguished two main types of antennae.
In the Collembola and Diplura all the antennal segments except the last contain intrinsic muscles, the antenna grows postembryonically by division of the terminal segment and Johnston's organ (p. 129) is absent.
In the remaining insects only the basal segment contains muscles, Johnston's organ is present and increase in the number of segments occurs through division of the 3rd segment or sometimes also of some or all of the more distal segments.
In the more generalized insects the antennae are filiform and many-segmented, the segments being equal or sub-equal in size.
They vary greatly in form in the higher orders, however, and some segments are frequently differentiated from their fellows.
In the more specialized insects the antenna is divisible into scape, pedicel and flagellum (Fig.7)
The scape is the first or basal segment of the antenna and is often conspicuously longer than any of the succeeding segments.
The pedicel is the segment which immediately follows the scape.
In geniculate antennae It forms the pivot between the scape and flagellum.
The flagellum forms the remainder of the antenna.
It varies greatly in form among different families in adaptation to the environment and habits of the species concerned.
In some insects, e.g. Chalcidoidea, the flagellum is divisible into the ring-segments, the funicle and the club.
The ring-segments are the basal segment or segments of the flagellum, are of much smaller calibre than the segments that follow, and are ring-like in form.
The club is formed by the swollen or enlarged distal segments of the antenna.
The funicle comprises those segments which intervene between the ring-segments and the club, or between the latter and the pedicel in cases when the ring-segments are not differentiated.
The antennae afford important secondary sexual characters which are particularly well shown in the pectinate or bipectinate organs of certain male Lepidoptera, and in the densely plumose antennae of male Culicidae and Chironomidae.
Functionally the antennae are organs of special -sense (Schneider, 1964; see also p. 139) but in a few cases they are modified for other uses.
Thus in the larvae of Chaoborus and its allies they are adapted for seizing the prey, while those of the male of Meloe and several other insects are used for holding the females.
In larvae of the Hymenoptera Apocrita and the higher Diptera the antennae are often reduced to minute tubercles or are atrophied.
They are wanting in all Protura.
The Mouthparts
Essentially, these organs comprise three pairs of appendicular jaws, the anterior mandibles followed in turn by the maxillae and a second pair of maxilla-like Structures that fuse medially during embryonic development to form the labium or lower lip.
Closely associated with them are two unpaired, non-appendicular structures, the labrum or upper lip and the median, tongue-like hypopharynx.
The mouthparts vary in form to a greater extent than almost any other organs, the variation being correlated with the method of feeding and other uses to which they may be subjected.
An examination of the structure of the mouthparts will therefore give a clue to the feeding mechanism and frequently to the nature of the food of an insect.
The various modifications which these organs undergo are of considerable taxonomic importance and are dealt with in the chapters devoted to the different orders  of insects.
Broadly speaking the feeding habits of insects are of three main kinds.
There are those with mandibulate or biting mouthparts, such as the Orthopteroid orders and the Coleoptera, those with piercing and suctorial mouthparts such as the Hemiptera, Siphunculata, Siphonaptera and some Diptera, and those with more or less elongate, haustellate mouthparts adapted for taking up liquids without piercing (e.g. Lepidoptera and some Diptera and Hymenoptera).
In the Ephemeroptera and certain Lepidoptera and Diptera the mouthparts are greatly reduced or non-functional.
The labrum (Fig. 5) is a simple plate hinged to the clypeus and capable of a limited amount of vertical movement.
It overlies the bases of the mandibles and forms part of the roof of the preoral food cavity (Moulins, 1971).
Morphologically it represents the most anterior region of the head and has secondarily acquired a basal hinged attachment.
Its inner surface is usually provided with chemoreceptors and is produced into a small lobe-like epipharynx in the Hymenoptera and a long epipharyngeal stylet in the Siphonaptera.
The mandibles of insects and Myriapods differ from those of Crustacea in representing entire limbs, biting with their tips, rather than the proximal gnathobases (Manton, 1964).
They are usually adapted for cutting or crushing the food and frequently also for defence; more rarely they are modified into sickle-like or stylet-like piercing organs.
In the soldiers of the Isoptera they assume grotesque and inexplicable forms and in certain Coleoptera such as Lucanus and Chiasognathus they exhibit sexual dimorphism, attaining relatively enormous proportions in the male.
Typically, the mandible of Pterygote insects is a solid compact piece articulating with the head by a ginglymus and condyle.
The former is a groove or cavity which articulates with a convex process of the clypeus and the condyle is a rounded head adapted to fit into a socket placed at the lower end of the gena or postgena.
Each jaw is moved in the transverse plane by powerful adductor and abductor muscles.
In phytophagous insects the mandibles are bluntly toothed and often bear a molar or crushing surface near the base of the biting margin.
In carnivorous forms the teeth are sharply pointed, being adapted for seizing and cutting, and the molar surface is wanting.
In some insects a flexible plate or prostheca, fringed with hairs, is present on the inner border of the mandible.
Mandibles are wanting in many adult Trichoptera and most Diptera, and are absent or vestigial in almost all Lepidoptera.
In the Apterygote insects several different mandibular mechanisms occur (Manton, 1964).
The mandible of Petrobius and other Machilidae (Fig. 9) has a single posterior articulation and is rotated by promotor-remotor movements that bring the molar regions and the apices of opposite mandibles into close apposition.
The Lepismatidae have acquired an additional anterior articulation which, with other changes, enables the mandible to move by adduction and abduction in the transverse plane rather as it does in most mandibulate Pterygotes.
The mandibles of Ephemeropteran larvae are in some respects intermediate between the Lepismatidae and the higher  Pterygotes (Snodgrass, 1950; Brown, 1961).
In the Collembola, Diplura and Protura the mandibles are protrusible, rotatory structures enclosed with the maxillae in a gnathal pouch that is sunk into the head.
Despite view to the contrary (Tuxen, 1959), this entognathous condition has probably evolved independently in the three groups concerned (Manton, 1964.)
The maxillae are composed of the following sclerites.
The cardo is the first or proximal piece and, in many insects, is the only portion directly attached to the head.
The stipes articulates with the distal border of the cardo and is sometimes divided into a basistipes and a dististipes. it bears a lateral palpifer and sometimes an inner sclerite, the subgalea (or parastipes).
The palpifer carries the maxillary palp, the most conspicuous appendage of the maxilla.
It is one- to seven-segmented and sensory in function.
In many insects the subgalea is not a separate sclerite, being fused with the lacinia or merged into the stipes.
Distally the maxilla consists of two lobes: an outer galea and an inner lacinia.
The galea is often two-segmented and frequently overlaps the lacinia like a hood.
The lacinia is commonly spined or toothed on its inner border and when fused with the subgalea it has the appearance  of carrying the galea.
A characteristic muscle, the cranial flexor of the lacinia, runs from the lacinia to the cranial wall and has been used to identify the former in specialized mouthparts (Das, 1937; Imms, 1944).
In many Coleopteran larvae each maxilla carries a single lobe or mala which in some cases represents the gales and in others the lacinia (Das, 1937).
functionally  the maxillae are a pair of accessory jaws, their laciniae aiding the mandibles in holding the food when the latter are extended, as well as assisting in mastication.
In many higher insects the maxillae are so greatly modified that they no longer retain any evidences of their primitive structure.
In piercing insects they are styliform and their palps atrophied.
The insect maxilla is to be regarded as a highly modified walking limb, whose main shaft is represented by the palp and base by the cardo and stripes.
The palpifer is a secondarily demarcated portion of the stripes and of little morphological importance while the galea and lacinia are endites of the stipes.
The labium is formed by the fusion of a pair of appendages serially homologous with the maxillae.
The completeness of the fusion that has taken place varies greatly in different orders of insects, and indications of the original paired condition are clearly seen among the lower  orders.
The labium is divided into two primary regions — a proximal postmentum and a distal prementum, the line of division between the two being the labial suture.
The muscles of the palps and the terminal lobes originate within the body of the prementum and consequently lie interior to the labial suture.
The median retractor muscles of the prementum, on the other hand, arise in the postmentum and have their insertions on the proximal margin of the prementum. the relationships of these muscles, therefore, help in determining the homologies of the main parts of the labium.
The postmentum remains undivided in the Thysanura, Isoptera and some higher orders but in many Orthopteroid insects it is divided transversely into a distal mentum and a proximal submentum.
The mentum is often ill-defined and has few muscle attachments.
Near the base of the prementum, on either side, is the palpiger which carries the labial palp and often resembles a basal segment of the later.
The labial palps are composed of one to four segments and function as sensory organs.
Arising from the distal margin of the prementum are two pairs of lobes which collectively from the ligula; there is an outer pair of paraglossae, and an inner pair of glossae.
More usually, the latter are fused to form a median glossa or the prementum may bear a single median lobe to which the general term ligula is applied.
In Fig. 14 the homologies of the sclerties of the labium with those of the maxillae are indicated.
The glossae and paraglossae are the counterparts of the laciniae and   galeae respectively, while the labial palps are homologous with those of the maxillae.
The two lobes of the primitive divided prementum are clearly traceable as the representatives of the stipites which, in most insects, undergo fusion.
The only part comparable to the united cardines is the postmentum, but it is possible that the median part of the sternum of the labial segment is incorporated in this sclerite.
The true morphological interpretation of the postmentum is unsolved and further data are needed (Matsuda, 1965).
Situated behind the mouth lies the median hypopharynx.
This is usually a tongue-like structure and at its base on the lower side there opens the salivary duct.
In the Diplura, Collembola, Machilidae and Ephemeropteran   nymphs the hypopharynx is 3-lobed, the median lingua bearing a pair of lateral superlinguae.
In the Lepismatidae and Pterygota the hypopharynx is typically a simple lobe with a number of suspensory sclerites but in most Diptera it is a stylet-like structure pierced by the salivary canal and in some cases is used as a piercing organ.
The embryonic development of the hypopharynx shows it to be a composite structure derived from the sternal regions of the premandibular and gnathal segments of the head (e.g. Scholl, 1969).
Segmentation of the Insect Head
After an insect has emerged from the egg the completed head shows few indications of a segmented origin apart from the fact that it carries paired appendages.
There is, however, every reason to believe that the insect head arose by the coalescence of a number of body segments and a non-segmental anteriorly-placed acron homologous with the Annelid prostomium.
Opinions differ on the number and characteristics of the segments involved and most of the hypotheses have been reviewed by Matsuda (1965) and Gouin (1968).
the orthodox theory is based largely on embryological evidence summarized recently by Jura (1972) and Anderson (1972).
It asserts that the insect head consists of the acron plus six segments.
In favourable cases the latter may each be recognized embryologically by the presence of (i) a pair of hollow mesodermal somites,(ii) paired neuromeres (embryonic ganglia), and (iii) paired appendages.
The composition of the insect head according to this theory may be tabulated as follows:
A few comments on this table are necessary, especially in the light of more recent embryological work (e.g. Bruckmoser, 1965; Wada, 1966; Ullmann, 1964, 1967; Malzacher, 1968; Rohrschneider, 1968; Rempel and Church, 1969; Rempel, 1975; Scholl, 1969 and Larink, 1970).
the preantennal segment is often poorly defined or unrecognizable and the protocerebrum is derived largely from the ectoderm of the lateral cephalic lobes.
Such a situation has led Matsuda (1965) to claim that in most  insects the head comprises an acron and only five cephalic segments.
On the other hand, earlier claims that an additional seventh or labral segment is present in front of the preantennal segment now seem unlikely.
The origin of the labrum from paired rudiments, interpreted as limb buds, is very uncommon (occurring only in Locusta, Carausius and Rhodnius) while the allegedly labral coelom sacs of Carausius have been shown on reinvestigation to belong to the preantennal segment (Scholl, 1969).
Other theories of the segmental composition of the insect head are based largely on the comparative anatomy of adult forms, especially of the central nervous system.
They cannot be reconciled easily with the embryological evidence and are not widely accepted.
Four of these theories may be mentioned briefly:
1.
Snodgrass (1963) agrees with the earlier views of Hanstrom (1928) and concludes that the protocerebrum, deutocerebrum and antennae are derivatives of an anterior, non-segmented blastocephalon, followed by four of the segments (premandibular to labial) recognized above.
2.
Henry (1947–48) and ferris (1947) consider that the head comprises six segments, of which the first three give rise ti the labrum, the clypeus plus hypopharynx, and an oculo-antennal region broadly equivalent to the frons.
The remaining three segments bear the mandibles, maxillae and labium.
3.
Chaudonneret (1950) recognizes the six segments of the orthodox theory, together with a so-called superlingual segment, lying between the premandibular and mandibular segments.
His views are based on a detailed anatomical study of Thermobia domestica, but are not supported by the embryology of the head in the closely related Lepisma saccharina (Larink, 1970).
4.
Butt (1960) agrees with Snodgrass in denying the existence of the preantennal and antennal segments, but regards the premandibular segment as bearing appendages that fuse to form the labrum.
His theory has been criticized by Manton (1960).
Finally, it is worth bearing in mind that if, as now seems likely, the process of cephalization occurred independently in several arthropodan lineages (see p.5), interpretations of the head which rely on comparisons between the insects and other arthropod groups no longer have the validity ascribed to them in the past.
The Cervix or Neck Region
The cervix (Matsuda, 1970) is the flexible region between the head and prothorax.
In its membrane are embedded a variable number of cervical sclerites.
These occur in nearly all orders of insects but are best developed in the more primitive groups (Orthoptera, Dermaptera, Isoptera, Odonata); in the higher orders they are more or less reduced.
in their least modified form the cervical sclerites consists of paired dorsal, lateral and ventral plates of which the lateral pair is of special importance.
The lateral sclerites usually comprise two plates on either side, closely hinged together so as to form a fulcrum between the head and prothorax.
The distal plate articulates with the occipital condyle of the head, while the proximal plate is hinged to the prothoracic episternum.
Levator muscles arising from the postoccipital rim and the prothoracic tergum are attached to the lateral cervical sclerites of their side.
The contraction of these muscles  widens the angle between the two plates of a pair and, in this way, causes the protraction of the head.
The morphological nature of the neck is highly problematical and the available evidence suggests that something more than an enlarged intersegmental region may be involved.
the innervation of the muscles inserted on the cervical sclerites suggests that they are derived partly from the prothorax and partly from the labial segment of the Head (Henry, 1958; Schmitt, 1959: Shepheard, 1973).
An embryological study of Carausius by Scholl (1969) confirms this, suggesting that the neck includes a dorsal labial component and a ventral prothoracic part, though Wada (1966) regards the neck of Tachycines as entirely labial in origin.
THE THORAX
Segmentation of the Thorax
The thorax is composed of three segments, the pro-, meso- and metathorax. in almost all insects each segment bears a pair of legs and in most adults both the meso- and metathorax carry a pair of wings.
Where the legs are wanting, their absence is secondary.
This apodous condition is extremely rare among the imagines but it is the rule among the larvae of the Diptera and certain families of Coleoptera.
All Hymenopteran larvae, excepting the vast majority of the suborder Symphyta, are similarly devoid of legs.
The absence of wings, on the other hand, may be a primitive character as in the Apterygota, but among the Pterygota it is always a secondary feature due to the loss of pre-existing organs.
The thorax is exhibited in a simple form in the Thysanura, in certain more generalized Pterygota and in the larvae of many orders.
In these instances the segments differ little in size and proportions, but with the acquisition of wings a correlated specialization of the thorax usually results.
The meso- and metathorax become more or less intimately associated to form a pterothorax and the union is often so close that the limits of those regions can only be ascertained with difficulty.
In orders where the wings are of about equal area these two thoracic segments are of equal size e.g. Isoptera, Embioptera, Odonata.
Where the fore wings are markedly larger than the hind pair there is a corresponding greater development of the mesothorax (Hymenoptera, and also Diptera where the hind wings are reduced in size and not used for flying).
Where the fore wings are small or not used in flight there is a correlated reduction of the mesothorax (Coleoptera).
The prothorax never bears wings and varies in size.
Its dorsal region may be enlarged to form a shield as in the Orthoptera, Dictyoptera, Coleoptera and Heteroptera; in most other orders it is a narrow annular segment.
For general accounts of thoracic morphology see Snodgrass (1927, 1929), Gouin (1959) and Matsuda (1970).
Ferris (1940 and other papers) has an unorthodox theory of thoracic structure while Manton (1972) has brought forward many new functional and evolutionary interpretations.
The Sclerites of a Thoracic Segment
When describing the sclerites and regions of the thorax the prefixes pro, meso and meta are used according to the segment to which the reference applies.
Thus the expression protergum refers to the tergum of the prothorax and mesepimeron to the epimeron of the mesothorax.
The prefixes pre and post are also used to designate certain sclerites of any one of these segments and in such cases the prefixes pre, meso and meta are usually not applied.
For example the prescutum may be present on each thoracic segment in front of the scutum.
The Tergites
— Despite arguments to the contrary (Duporte, 1965; Matsuda, 1970), it may be supposed that the thoracic terga consisted primitively of three simple segmental plates (the nota) between which lay small intersegmental sclerites (Snodgrass, 1927).
In all known insects, however, a secondary segmentation has become established whereby the intersegmental sclerites have become closely associated with the notum in front or with one behind.
In the latter case the intersegmental sclerite forms a narrow band at the front of the notum and is known as the acrotergite.
In the former case, the intersegmental sclerite becomes known as the postnotum and is sometimes a conspicuous plate.
These transpositions of the intersegmental sclerites of the pterothorac differ in different insects.
Thus, in many Apterygota, the Blattids, the Isoptera and many immature forms the meso- and metathorax each possesses an acrotergite but no postnotum.
In most other orders a postnotum is present in both meso- and metathorax, but in the Orthoptera and Coleoptera the metathorax has acquired two intersegmental sclerites, having both acrotergite and postnotum while the mesothorax has accordingly no postnotum.
The notum is typically divided into three sclerites, the prescutum, the scutum and the scutellum (Fig. 16).
At the sides of the pronotum in many Lepidoptera are lobe-like structures known as patagia.
The Pleurites
(Figs. 17–19)— It is sometimes considered that the pleural sclerites were derived from a primitive subcoxal segment of the leg which became flattened and incorporated into the pleural region of the body-wall.
The dorsal elements of the subcoxa thus came to form the definite thoracic pleuron, while a ventral element probably fused with the primitive sternum to form the definitive sternal area.
Support for these views has been sought in the small, variable, pleural sclerites of the Apterygote insects, though recent work on these by Manton (1972) has cast serious doubt on the subcoxal theory.
Whatever its origins, the pleuron of the Pterygotes (Fig. 17) is a relatively uniform structure consisting of an anterior sclerite or episternum and a posterior sclerite or epimeron, the two being separated by the pleural sulcus (also known as the pleural suture).
Many insects show deviations from this simple condition because of the subdivision of the pleurites into secondary plates, or their fusion with other regions of their segment.
The anterior part of the episternum is frequently marked off as a separate plate, the pre-episternum, while in many insects (e.g. Chrysopa, Corydalis, Tipula, Tabanus) the episternum, is divided into an upper and lower sclerite, the anepisternum and katepisternum respectively.
Not infrequently the lower portion of the episternum is fused with the sternum, as in Diptera, and the compound  plate thus formed is the sternopleurite (Crampton) or sternopleura (Osten-Sacken).
The epimeron is also sometimes divided into two sclerites by a transverse suture, giving an anepimeron and a katepimeron.
When the pleuron as a whole is fused with the sternum the combined sclerite is known as the pectus.
In many of the higher insects the pleuron is usually connected and fused with the tergum by downward prolongations of the prescutum and postnotum.
The Sternum
— As in the terga, the sternal region of each segment consists typically of a segmental plate and an intersegmental sclerite, the latter associated with the segmental region in front of it.
The segmental plate or eusternum is subdivided into three sclerites, the presternum, basisternum and sternellum and in generalized forms the basisternum is separated from the sternellum by a transverse suture connecting the apophyseal pits — points of cuticular invagination from which arises a pair of furcal arms forming part of the thoracic endoskeleton (p. 81).
The intersegmental sclerite is known as the spinasternum (or poststernellum) and is produced internally into a peg-like apodeme which, with the furca, provides areas for the attachment of the ventral longitudinal muscles.
Separate laterosternites are sometimes found at the sides of the eusternum and fusion of the sternal and pleural regions may result in the formation of precoxal and postcoxal bridges.
While broad sternal plates subdivided as above may be found in many Orthopteroid insects (Fig. 19) there is often considerable specialization of the ventral region.
Thus, the sterna may be narrow and extensively desclerotized (as in  the cockroaches), the sutures between the various sclerites may be obliterated and the spinasternum may be lost or its spina consolidated with the eusternum.
The apophyseal pits may also become closely approximated, the boundaries between pleuron and sternum may be lost by fusion and a cuticular inflection may be developed along the mid-line of the ventral surface.
In an attempt to account for some of the peculiarities of the sternopleural region, Ferris (1940, etc.) has argued that the greater part of the  ventral side of the thorax of some insects is derived from pleural structures, but further critical study of his theory is necessary.
The Legs
The legs are primarily organs for running or walking and are well represented in their normal condition in a cockroach or Carabid beetle.
They exhibit, however, a wide range of adaptive modifications in different families (Fig. 20).
Thus in the Gryllotalpidae, the Scarabaeidae and some others the fore legs are modified for burrowing, and in the Mantidae, Phymatidae and Mantispidae for seizing and holding the prey.
In certain families of butterflies the fore legs are so much reduced that there are only two pairs of functional legs.
In the saltatorial Orthoptera, and in beetles of the subfamilies Halticinae and Sagrinae, the hind femora are greatly enlarged in order to accommodate the powerful extensor muscles which are used in leaping.
Among the Odonata all the legs are adapted for seizing and retaining the prey and are hardly ever used for locomotory purposes, while in the Bombyliidae the slender legs are used for alighting rather than walking.
In aquatic insects they are often specially adapted as swimming organs.
Each leg (Fig. 21) consists of the following parts — coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia and tarsus together with certain basal or articular sclerites and a terminal pretarsus.
The Basal Articulations of the Legs (Figs. 17 and 19)— The coxa or proximal segment of the leg articulates with the body by the coxal process of the pleuron and with the trochantin when the latter sclerite is present.
A ventral, sternal articulation may also occur.
The coxal process is situated at the ventral extremity of the pleural sulcus.
The trochantin is the articular sclerite situated at the base of the coxa in the more primitive orders.
It frequently unites with neighbouring sclerites, or it may be divided into a pair of plates.
Between the single or divided trochantin and the episternum, or between the trochantin and the precoxal bridge, there is frequently an inner sclerite or antecoxal piece.
The homologies of these small basal sclerites in different insects have been much discussed and it is possible that they are derived from an original subcoxa.
The Coxa is the functional base of the leg.
It is often divided into two lobes by an inflexion of its wall where it articulates with the pleuron.
The posterior lobe thus delimited is the meron (Larsen, 1945) which is usually the larger part of the coxa.
A meron is well developed in Periplaneta, the Isoptera, Neuroptera and Lepidoptera.
The Trochanter is the second segment of the leg; it articulates with the coxa but is usually rigidly fixed to the femur.
In the Odonata it is divided into two subsegments and among the parasitic Hymenoptera a second apparent trochanter, derived from the base of the femur, is present (see p. 1185).
The Femur — The femur usually forms the largest region of the leg and is especially conspicuous in many jumping insects.
The Tibia — The fourth division of the leg is the tibia; it is usually slender and often equals or exceeds the femur in length.
Near its distal extremity it carries one or more tibial spurs.
In the Apocritan Hymenoptera the enlarged apical spur of the anterior tibia fits against a pectinated semicircular pit in the first tarsal segment, and the antennae are cleaned by being passed between these two organs.
The Tarsus consists primitively of a single segment, a feature which is  present in the Protura, Diplura and in some larvae.
More usually it is divided into subsegments, typically five in number, but none of these has acquired muscles and movement of the tarsus as a whole is effected by levator and depressor muscles arising from the apex of the tibia.
At its apex the tarsus bears a group of structures forming the pretarsus (Holway, 1935; Sarkaria and Patton, 1949; Dashman, 1953) which represents the terminal segment of the leg.
In its simplest condition, seen in Collembola, Protura  and many larvae, the pretarsus is prolonged into a single claw.
In most insects the claws are paired and between them, on the ventral side, the pretarsus is supported by a median unguitractor plate to which the apodeme of the flexor muscle of the claws is attached.
In front of and above this plate the pretarsus expands into a median lobe or arolium (Fig. 22).
Among Diptera there are two lobes or pulvilli lying below the claws, often with an arolium between them or, in place of an arolium, the plantar sclerite distal to the unguitractor plate is prolonged into a median bristle or empodium (Fig. 22).
On the underside of the tarsal segments there are frequently pulvillus-like organs or plantulae (Fig. 21).
The arolium and pulvilli are pad-like organs enabling their possessors to climb smooth or steep surfaces: the plantulae also have a similar function.
Such organs are outgrowths of the parts from which they arise and their cavities contain blood.
Various explanations have been offered   as to how they function but attachment probably depends on the fact that the structures concerned are covered with tubular tenent hairs, the apices of which are moistened by a glandular secretion (Fig. 23).
The hairs can be applied very closely to a smooth surface and adhesion occurs, the insect   being held by surface molecular forces (Arnhart, 1923; Gillett and Wigglesworth, 1932).
Leg Movements and Locomotion — The legs of insects are used in three forms of locomotion — walking (or running), jumping and swimming.
Walking is the most widespread form of terrestrial locomotion, during which the fore legs serve mainly as organs of traction and the mid legs as supporting structures while the hind legs exert a propulsive force.
The classical view was that progression occurred in a zigzag fashion by movements of the legs in two alternating groups, the fore and hind legs of one side and the mid leg of the other side being moved forward simultaneously while the insect is balanced on a "tripod of support" formed by the remaining three legs.
In fact, cinematographic analysis shows that the legs move in various sequences and attempts have been made to reduce them to variations on a single basic pattern (Hughes, 1965; Wilson, 1966; see also Manton, 1972).
As Fig. 24 illustrates, the basic pattern can give rise to others by changes in the phase difference between the stepping sequences of right and left sides.
As a result, some legs may step in pairs or there may be three legs in motion at once— two on one side of the body and one on the opposite side.
The last situation is the system of alternating tripods of support, which is thus seen to be only one of a larger number of possible gaits.
Jumping mechanisms vary considerably from one group of insects to another.
They include the unique jumping gait of Machilidae (Manton, 1972) and the leaping of saltatorial Orthoptera (Alexander, 1968), flea-beetles (Barth, 1954), the Auchenorrhynchan Homoptera (e.g. Sander, 1956) and the fleas (see p. 945).
Swimming legs occur in several groups of aquatic insects, especially among the Heteroptera and Coleoptera (Nachtigall, 1965; Schenke, 1965; Larsen, 1966).
Typically the hind legs or the mid and hind legs are flattened or clothed with lateral hair-fringes which increase the effective surface area to several times that of the leg proper.
Propulsion occurs on the back-stroke (when the hairs are erect) and far less energy is expended in moving the leg forward on the recovery stroke (when the hairs collapse against the leg and so reduce the resistance to movement).
In the whirligig beetle Gyrinus natator the elaborately adapted swimming legs have a remarkably high mechanical efficiency of about 84 per cent(Nachtigall, 1962).
In soft-bodied insect larvae, where the appendages are reduced or absent, locomotion occurs through quite different physical mechanisms.
The musculature of the body-wall plays an important role and the haemocoele acts as a hydrostatic skeleton.
In Lepidopteran larvae such mechanisms are supplemented by the action of the thoracic legs and the abdominal prolegs (Barth, 1937).
The Wings
The presence of wings is one of the most characteristic features of insects, and their dominance may be attributed to the possession of these organs.
Owing to their wide range of differentiation, wings provide some of the most useful taxonomic characters.
The wing of an insect presents three margins (Fig. 25): the anterior margin or costa (a-b); the outer or apical margin.
(b-c) and the inner or anal margin (c-l).
Three well-defined angles are also recognizable, viz. the humeral angle (a) at the base of the costa; the apex (b) or angle between the costs and outer margins and the anal angle or tornus (c) between the outer and inner margins.
Although, in most insects, the wings   appear to be naked, microscopical examination often reveals the presence of fine hairs.
On the other hand, in certain groups the wings are obviously clothed.
In the Trichoptera and the Dipterous family Psychodidae, for example, they are closely covered with hairs, while in the Lepidoptera they are invested with overlapping scales.
Tillyard (1918b) has studied the hairs occurring on the wings of the most primitive groups of Holometabola.
Microtrichia are found indiscriminately on the wing-membrane and veins alike.
Macrotrichia or true setae, with annular bases of insertion, are found on the main veins and their branches, on the archedictyon (p. 62), less frequently on the wing-membrane and very rarely on the cross-veins.
On the disappearance of the archedictyon, or of an individual vein, the macrotrichia may persist on the wing-membrane in their original positions; their presence there is regarded by Tillyard as evidence of descent from more densely veined ancestors.
By plotting the positions of the macrotrichia present on the wing-membrane in such primitive foes as Archichauliodes, Rhyacophila and Anisopus, and joining them into a polygonal meshwork, the lost archedictyon can often, to some extent, be reconstructed (Fig. 26).
A conspicuous opaque spot is found near the costal margin of the wing in many insects, and is termed the stigma or pterostigma (Fig. 25).
It is present, for example, in the fore wings of the Psocoptera and most Hymenoptera, and in both pairs of wings of the Odonata.
Within the stigma is a more or less clearly defined blood sinus through which haemocytes move from the lacuna of the costa into other veins (Arnold, 1963).
It seems likely that the stigma can improve the aerodynamic efficiency of the wing by acting as a passive, inertial regulator of its pitch angle, thus raising the speed limits operative both in active flight and in gliding (Norberg, 1972).
The Basal Attachment and Articular Sclerites of the Wings — Each wing is hinged to two processes of the notum of its segment, the anterior  notal process and the posterior notal process (Fig. 27, A).
The Wing also articulates below with the pleural wing process.
The posterior margin of the membrane at the base of the Wing is frequently strengthened to form a cord-like structure known as the axillary cord.
The latter arises, on either side, from the posterior lateral angle of the notum (Fig. 27, A).
Situated around the base of each wing is a variable number of articular sclerites which consist of the tegulae, the humeral plate and the axillaries (Fig. 27).
The tegulae (paraptera of some authors) are a pair of small scale-like sclerites carried at the extreme base of the costa of each fore wing: they are rarely present in connection with the hind wings.
Tegulae are best developed in the Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera and Diptera, being especially large in the first mentioned order.
The axillaries (pteralia) participate in the formation of the complex joint by which the wing is articulated to the thorax.
According to Snodgrass they occur in all winged insects but are much modified in the Ephemeroptera and Odonata, presumably because these insects do not flex the wings over the abdomen at rest.
As a rule, three of these sclerites are present, but a fourth occurs in the Orthoptera and Hymenoptera.
The first axillary articulates with the anterior notal process and is associated with the base of the subcostal vein.
The second axillary articulates partly with the preceding sclerite and, as a rule, partly with the base of the radius (see p. 60).
The third axillary usually articulates with the posterior notal process and with a group of anal veins.
When a fourth axillary occurs it has a double articulation, i.e. with the posterior notal process proximally and with the third axillary distally.
For a more detailed treatment of these sclerites see Snodgrass (1929), La Greca (1947), Tannert (1958) and Sharplin (1963–64).
In addition to the foregoing, there are present in many insects small epipleural sclerites which are located below the insertions of the Wings (Fig. 27).
Although they are regarded as parts of the pleura they may be conveniently referred to here on account of their close association With the wing attachments.
These sclerites are separated into two series by the pleural wing process.
The anterior or basalar sclerites are never more than two in number, and lie just above the episternum, while the posterior or subalar sclerite is almost always single and lies behind the pleural wing process and above the epimeron.
Modifications Of Wings — Although wings are usually present in adult insects many species are apterous.
This condition is a constant feature of the Apterygota, where it is a primitive character, but in the Pterygota the loss of Wings is secondary (La Greca, 1954).
The parasitic orders Mallophaga, Siphunculata and Siphonaptera are exclusively apterous, and the same applies to the sterile castes of the Isoptera and Formicidae, and to the females of the Coccoidea, Strepsiptera and Embioptera.
Among other Pterygota, apterous forms are of more casual occurrence, and often confined to a single sex or species.
Thus, in a few moths (Erannis defoliaria, etc.), the females alone are apterous, while in the Chalcid genus Blastophaga it is the male which has lost the wings.
Transitional forms between the apterous and the fully winged condition are found.
In the moth Diurnea fagella, for example, the wings of the female are lanceolate appendages, little more than half the length of those of the male and useless for flight.
In the winter moths (Operophtera), and in the fly Clunio marinus, they are reduced in the female to the condition of small flap-like vestiges.
Reduction or loss of the wings is accompanied by various changes in the sclerites and musculature of the thorax; much information on this is available for the Heteroptera (Larsen, 1950), Coleoptera (Smith, 1964) and Hymenoptera (Reid, 1941).
Throughout the Diptera, and in the males of the Coccoidea, the hind wings are represented only by a pair of slender processes termed halteres.
Among the Coleoptera, the fore wings are much hardened to form horny sheaths or elytra, which protect the hind wings when these are in repose.
In Atractocerus, and the males of the Strepsiptera, the elytra are reduced to small scale-like appendages.
On the other hand, in certain Carabidae and Curculionidae, the hind wings are atrophied and the function of flight is lost.
In the Heteroptera the fore wings are thickened at their bases like elytra and are therefore termed hemelytra.
Among the Orthoptera, Dictyoptera and Phasmida, the fore wings are hardened and leathery, being known as tegmina.
The Wing-coupling Apparatus — There seems little doubt that in the primitive Pterygota the fore and hind pairs of wings moved independently of each other(as in the Isoptera and Odonata), and that coincidence of motion was a later acquisition associated with the development of a wing-coupling apparatus (Fig. 28).
Among the Panorpoid orders (Tillyard, 1918a) the coupling depends on modifications of the bases of the wings, the fore wing  possessing on its posterior margin a small jugal lobe while the anterior margin of the hind wing is produced into a small humeral lobe.
In the Mecoptera, both lobes bear a few relatively long bristles, the jugal ones lying on top of the hind wing in flight while the humeral bristles form the frenulum which presses against the under side of the fore wing.
In the Trichoptera and some Monotrysian Lepidoptera (Philpott, 1924; 1925), the  jugal area is produced into a lobe-like fibula or more elongate jugum which lies on top of the hind wing during flight but may be folded beneath the fore wing at rest.
Frenular bristles are absent or small in these insects but there is sometimes a more distally placed series of costal spines (the pseudofrenulum) on the hind wing which functions independently of the jugum by pressing against the anal area of the fore wing (e.g. Sabatinca), or a series of interlocking hairs on the basal half of the hind margin of the fore Wing and the fore margin of the hind wing (e.g. Mnesarchaea).
In most higher  Lepidoptera, a pseudofrenulum occurs only in some lower families (Braun, 1919), the jugum is almost invariably lost and the frenulum usually assumes great importance (Braun, 1924).
In females it generally consists of a group of stout bristles which lies beneath the extended fore Wing and engages there in a retinaculum formed from a patch of hairs near the cubitus.
In males, the frenular bristles are fused into a single stout structure which is normally held by a curved process from the subcostal vein of the fore wing as well.
Finally, in the papilionoidea and many Bombycoidea, the wings are coupled simply by overlapping basally — the stalled amplexiform method.
Among other orders, the Hymenoptera have a hamulate type of wing.coupling in which a row of small hooks (hamuli) on part of the costal margin of the hind wing catch in a sclerotized fold along the hind margin of the fore wing.
In many Hemiptera the wings are held together in flight by various small hooks or  folds along the wing.margins (Weber, 1930) while in the Psocoptera the costa of the hind wing is held by a spiny or hooked process of the node where the second cubital vein of the fore wing reaches the margin.
The Structure and Development of Wings — Wings are thin plate-like expansions of the integument which are strengthened by a framework of hollow sclerotized tubes known as veins.
A wing is composed of upper and lower layers which may readily be separated in an insect which has just emerged from the pupa.
The veins are much more strongly sclerotized than the wing.membrane and each usually encloses a small central trachea.
A fine nerve fibre accompanies the larger veins of many insects (Fudalewicz-Niemczyk, 1963) and a degenerate trachea known as "Semper's rib" is present in Lepidoptera alongside the ordinary trachea within the vein cavity (Fig. 29).
When an adult insect emerges the veins contain blood which has been observed to circulate through them, and even in the fully formed wings the circulation is often still maintained (Yeager and Hendrickson, 1934; Clare and Tauber, 1940).
Detailed accounts of the development of the wings are available for the Exopterygote Pteronarcys (Holdsworth, 1940; 1942) and for several Endopterygotes (Kohler, 1932; Behrends, 1935; Hundertmark, 1935; Kuntze, 1935; Waddington, 1941; see also Clever, 1959).
In insects with an incomplete metamorphosis, the wings develop externally and appear in the early instars along a line where the suture between tergum and pleuron later develops.
They are usually so directly continuous with the tergum that they are regarded as postero-lateral outgrowths of that region.
The external changes during growth are comparatively slight and consist mainly of an increase in size at each moult.
In the Odonata and Orthoptera, however, the wing-pads in the later immature instars have twisted about their points of attachment so that the costal margins lie dorsally and the hind wings cover the fore wings.
The wings then resume their normal position when the adult emerges.
Internally, the developing wing-pad undergoes many histological changes.
At first there is merely a thickening of the epidermis overlain by cuticle.
Later, as the sac-like evagination develops, the bases of the epithelial cells become drawn out into  long processes, so imparting a spongy texture to the tissues of the wing-pad, and the basement membranes of the lower and upper epithelia become apposed for most of their area so as to form the so-called middle membrane (Fig. 30).
Blood-filled spaces or lacunae soon develop in the wing-pad (appearing in the and instar of Pteronarcys, for example) and alter as growth proceeds so that in the later instars the lacunae correspond in arrangement to the veins of the adult wings; the veins, in fact, arise by differential sclerotization of the integument adjacent to the lacunae.
While each of the principal lacunae is developing, a tracheal branch and a nerve grow into it from the base of the wing, the lacunae apparently offering the paths of least resistance.
Though the association between tracheae and lacunae — and therefore between tracheae and subsequent venation — is not always exact, the pattern of wing-pad tracheation is often of great value in deciding the homologies of the veins.
A generalized arrangement of tracheae is depicted in Fig. 31.
Two distinct groups of tracheae enter the wing a costo-radial group and a cubito-anal group, and while in some  forms (Blattidae, Plecoptera and Homoptera) the two groups remain separate, it is more usual for them to be united by a fine transverse basal trachea which is part of the basic tracheal framework (Whitten, 1962).
It may be noted that tracheae do not precede the cross-veins of the adult wing and that the tracheal and venational patterns sometimes differ appreciably.
Ontogenetic and phylogenetic changes occur in the tracheal arrangement (e.g. Leston, 1962; Whitten, 1962) without necessarily affecting the venational pattern.
In some cases these changes may be due to the tendency of tracheoles to migrate actively towards areas of high oxygen demand, drawing the tracheae after them (Wigglesworth, 1954; Smart, 1956).
In the final stages of wing.development the epidermis secretes the wing.membrane and the thickened walls of the veins and the folded adult wings take shape within the cuticle of the last pre-imaginal instar.
On the emergence of the adult the wing is inflated to its full size by blood-pressure and the cuticle hardens.
The epidermis degenerates and little trace of its cells remains in the fully hardened wings.
In insects with a complete metamorphosis the wings arise from imaginal buds or thickenings of the epidermis, usually in the neighbourhood of one of the larger tracheae, and are evident in the very young larva or even the embryo.
These buds become enlarged and folded or invaginated in various ways, sometimes forming pocket.like sacs, or peripodial cavities (Fig. 32), from the bottom of which the thickened portion of the bud ultimately becomes evaginated.
At the same time, the walls of the pocket become extremely thin but retain their connection with the   general epidermis.
At a later stage, the evaginated portion elongates and comes to hang downwards; it is this evaginated portion which eventually forms the wing.
Internal histological changes, comparable to those occurring in exopterygotes, take place during the prepupal period and the wing-rudiment becomes pushed out of its pocket and comes to lie just beneath the cuticle.
On the assumption of the pupal stage, the wing-rudiments become evident externally along the sides of the body.
When the imago emerges, the wings appear as small wrinkled sacs which gradually become distended by blood-pressure, and attain their full development usually several hours afterwards.
During their later stages of development the wing-buds become supplied with tracheoles.
In Pieris, for example, during the 4th larval instar a series of tracheoles arise as proliferations of the epithelium of the large tracheae associated with the wing-bud.
These tracheoles may be termed the larval or provisional tracheoles, and they extend in bundles into the developing lacunae.
A little later, the true wing tracheae develop as tubular outgrowths of the large tracheae, and extend into the vein cavities along with the larval tracheoles, which they supplant.
During the early pupal stage the latter degenerate and disappear.
Although the tracheation of the pupal wings has yielded important data for ascertaining the homologies of the wing-veins of the adults, there is in some orders (e.g. Trichoptera) a wide divergence between the two systems.
In such cases, comparisons among the more generalized types and palaeontological evidence may aid in settling the identity of the principal veins.
Venation — The complete system of veins of a wing is termed its venation.
It presents characters of great systematic importance, but unfortunately the various systems of nomenclature in use are confusing both to the student and the specialist.
The older systems were established by entomologists whose work was uninfluenced by ideas of evolution.
As a result the terminology  of an author was usually only applicable within the limits of the particular order of insects which he studied.
Attempts to introduce a common terminology for the venation achieved little success until the work of Comstock and Needham (1898).
By an extensive study of the tracheae which precede, and in a general sense coincide with the positions of the veins, these writers constructed a hypothetical system of venation from which all others might be derived (Comstock, 1918).
While the researches of Comstock and Needham form the basis for the interpretation of venation, their original conceptions have been modified by the later work of Lameere (1922), Hamilton (1972) and many papers by Martynov and Tillyard.
A less exclusive emphasis is now placed on tracheational studies and, in spite of the opposition of Needham (1935), there is a tendency to emphasize the fact that among the lower, generalized orders the wings are longitudinally plicated after the manner of a partially opened fan.
Those Veins which follow the ridges are termed convex veins and those which follow the furrows concave veins.
These features are well exhibited not only in the early fossil orders but also in the Ephemeroptera and Odonata where the alternation of convex and concave veins is probably a mechanical adaptation to provide increased rigidity of the thin wing-membrane (Edmunds and Traver, 1954).
In the higher orders the fluting tends to become obscured by flattening of the wing-membrane or the development of secondary curvatures imposed by mechanical considerations.
The fact that in the lower orders the convex or concave condition is constant for individual veins helps in determining their homologies.
The hypothetical primitive venational pattern recognized here is shown in Fig. 33 which also indicates the nomenclature and abbreviations in common use.
The costa (C) is unbranched and convex while the subcosta (Sc) is rarely branched and concave.
The radius (R) is typically 5-branched: its main stem is convex and divides into two, of which the first branch (R1) passes directly to the wing-margin: the second branch or radial sector (Rs) is concave and divides into four veins (R2 to R5).
The media (M) divides into an anterior media (MA), which is convex and a-branched (MA1, MA2), and a concave posterior media (MP), which is 4-branched (MP1) to MP4).
The cubitus (Co) divides into two main branches, the first cubitus (Cu1) being convex and the second cubitus (Cu2) concave; the first cubitus may subdivide into anterior (Cu1a) and posterior(Cu1b) veins.
There follow three anal veins (IA to 3A) which are usually convex, or 2A may be concave.
In many insects there are two strongly convex veins, R1 and Cu1, which are easily noted and therefore facilitate the identification of the other veins.
A complete media is found in many Palaeozoic fossil insects and in the Ephemeroptera among recent forms.
For the most part MA atrophies and consequently the media in recent insects is generally MP, although it is usually designated by the symbol M. The Odonata and Plecoptera, however, seem to be unusual in retaining MA and not MP, while further research is needed into the constitution of the media in other Orthopteroid insects.
The   anal veins are extremely variable and in wings with a reduced anal area one or more are atrophied.
On the other hand, in insects with a well-developed anal lobe the anal veins may be freely branched, probably through subdivision of 2A.
It may be noted that some modern authorities denote by MA and MP the two main branches of the posterior media, while Cu1 and Cu2 are sometimes known as CuA and CuP respectively.
Forbes (1933) and Snodgrass (1935) have introduced changes in the nomenclature of the cubito-anal veins which do not seem to be widely accepted while Vignon (1929) has an unorthodox modification of the Comstock-Needham system.
Deviation from the primitive venational type has occurred in two ways, by reduction and addition.
In many insects the number of veins is less than in the hypothetical type, and the reduction has been brought about by the degeneration or complete atrophy of a vein, or of one or more of its branches, or by the coalescence of adjacent veins.
Atrophy explains the presence of only a single well-developed anal vein in Anisopus (Fig. 34) and other Diptera, while the occurrence in this genus of a single vein R2+3, in place of the separate veins R2 and R3, is due to coalescence.
Similarly R4 and R5 have coalesced, and the single vein thus formed is referred to as R4+5.
Coalescence takes place in two ways.
The point at which two veins diverge may become gradually pushed towards the margin of the wing until the latter is reached, and only a single vein remains evident.
In the second    method, the apices of the two veins may approximate, and ultimately fuse at a point on the wing-margin: coalescence of this type takes place inwardly towards the base of the wing.
The first type is well shown in the radial veins of Anisopus, and the second method in the apical fusion of 1A and Cu1 in Tabanus (Fig. 35).
The homology of a particular vein is often difficult to determine and resort has to be made to comparison with allied forms (including fossils), which exhibit transitional stages in reduction, or to a study of the preceding tracheation.
An increase in the number of veins may be due either to an increase in the number of branches of a principal vein, or to the development of secondary longitudinal veins, between preexisting veins.
In no instance is there any increase in the number of principal veins present.
For a more detailed acquaintance with the various modifications of the Wing-veins the works by Comstock (1918) and Seguy (1959) should be consulted.
In the wings of some more generalized insects, such as the fossil Palaeodictyoptera, an irregular network of veins is found between the principal longitudinal veins, but no definite cross-veins are present (Fig. 36).
To this primitive meshwork Tillyard (1918b) gave the name archedictyon.
It   appears to have undergone reduction in the Endopterygota, though it is probably represented by the dense reticulation present in certain orders of Exopterygota such as the Odonata.
Needham (1903) from his studies of the wings of the latter order has discussed the transformation of such an irregular network into regular transverse veins (Fig. 36).
Transitional stages in the evolution of definite cross-veins may also be observed in wings of the more specialized Palaeodictyoptera and among living Orthoptera, where both irregular and definite cross-veins occur in the same wing.
According to Tillyard, however, true cross-veins are later developments; they are never preceded by tracheae and are almost always devoid of macrotrichia.
Veinlets, on the other hand, are primitive and constitute the finer twigs of a principal vein; they are preceded by tracheae and carry macrotrichia (Fig. 37).
It is  probable that homologous cross-veins do not exist in many orders but their positions in some cases are so constant that analogies, if not homologies, can be traced and similar names are applicable.
The following cross-veins are the most important and their symbols are given in brackets.
The humeral cross-vein (h) extending from the subcosta to the costa, near the humeral angle of the wing.
The radial cross-vein (r) extending from R1 to the radial sector (R5).
The sectorial cross-vein (s) extending from the stem to R2+3 or from R3 toe.
The radio-medial cross-vein (r-m) extending from the radius to the media, usually near the middle of the wing.
The medial cross-vein (m) extending between M2 and M3.
The medio-cubital cross-vein (m-cu) extending from the media to the cubitus.
The veins divide the wings into spaces or cells.
In the Comstock-Needham system the terminology of the cells is derived from the veins which form their anterior margins.
The cells fall into two groups, i.e. basal  cells and distal cells.
The former are bounded by the main stems of the principal Veins, and the latter by the branches of the forked veins.
Thus the cell situated behind the main stem of the radius, near the base of the wing, is cell R, while the cell behind the first branch of the radius is cell R1.
When two veins coalesce the cell that was between them becomes obliterated.
Thus when veins R2 and R3 fuse, as in Anisopus (Fig. 34), the cell situated behind the vein RQQ is referred to as cell R3, and not cell RQQ, cell R2 having disappeared.
Not infrequently two or more adjacent cells may become confluent owing to the atrophy of the vein or veins separating them.
The compound cell is then designated by a combination of the abbreviations applied to the original separate cells.
Thus, a cell resulting from the fusion of cells R and M is referred to as cell R + M. The advantage of this relatively simple system of nomenclature is evident in the so-called discal cell, a term used in at least four separate orders of insects with reference to a different cell in each case.
Insect Flight — The aerodynamic theory of insect flight is complicated and not fully developed.
For general reviews see Hocking (1953), Johnson (1969), Nachtigall (1974) and Rainey (1976).
Expressed in the simplest terms, however, normal flight depends on the creation by a  propeller-like action of the wings of a zone of low pressure in front of and above the insect and one of high pressure behind and below it, the consequent movement being a resultant of the thrust provided by the insect and forces due to gravity and air-resistance.
The skeleto-muscular mechanisms involved in the movements of the wings are outlined on p. 92 but other aspects of flight are discussed here (Chadwick, 1953; Weis-Fogh and Jensen, 1956; Pringle, 1957, 1965, 1968).
Before flight can occur the thoracic flight-muscles must attain a sufficiently high temperature and for this reason some insects carry out preliminary vibrations of the wings before flight, thereby raising the temperature of the muscles to over 30- C, for example, in Bombus, and some Lepidoptera (Krogh and Zeuthen, 1941; Dorsett, 1962; Kammer, 1968).
Detailed experimental analyses of wing-movements during flight are available for only a few species and probably differ in different insects (Weis-Fogh, 1956a, 1956b; Jensen, 1956; Jensen and Weis-Fogh, 1962; Nachtigall, 1966; Neville, 1960; Vogel, 1966–67).
Generally speaking, however, in normal flight the wing (or coupled wings) moves in a path such that a point on its surface describes an irregular loop or an elongate figure-of-eight with respect to the wing-base, the long axis of the plane of vibration being inclined at an angle to the long axis of the insect (Fig. 38) while the angle at which the surface of the wing is held changes throughout the cycle.
The greater part of the propulsive force is generated on the downbeat and the relative sizes of the vertical and horizontal components of this force vary with the angle of the plane of vibration to the horizontal.
Thus, in insects which are hovering (Weis-Fogh, 1972), the plane of vibration tends to be more horizontal, while the maximum amount of forward movement would be achieved as the plane of vibration becomes vertical.
Another mechanism, producing movement in the vertical plane, is indicated by Hollick's (1940) finding that in Muscina a reduction in the amplitude of the wing-beat causes the thrust vector to intersect the long axis of the insect's body behind the centre of gravity, so altering the cephalo-caudal couple around this centre.
Differences in amplitude between the wing-beats of one side and those of the other  cause a lateral turning movement away from the side with the greater amplitude (Stellwaag, 1916; Govind, 1972).
Finally, some insects are also capable of backward flight by shifting the plane of vibration, sometimes so far that the wings actually move upwards on the "downbeat" (Fig. 38).
There are considerable differences in the speed of different species in flight.
Panorpa communis, for example, has been recorded to fly at only 0.5 metres per second whereas Aeshna mixta can move at 7 metres per second and it is unlikely that any insect exceeds about twice this velocity.
The great metabolic activity of insects during flight is indicated by their greatly increased oxygen consumption under these conditions (e.g. Davis and Fraenkel, 1940) and as flight continues uninterruptedly for many hours in some species, a reserve of oxidizable material is required (Sacktor, 5970).
In Diptera and Hymenoptera this consists mainly of carbohydrates such as glycogen and blood  sugars.
In Lepidoptera and Orthoptera it is usually fat, though some insects use both carbohydrate and fat and Glossina employs the amino-acid proline as an energy-furnishing reserve.
The complicated movements required in flight are coordinated by a number of reflex mechanisms, some of which have now been studied in detail (Pringle, 1968; Wilson 1968).
Fraenkel (1932) investigated the reflex stimulation to flight that occurs when the tarsi are deprived of contact with a substratum together with other tactile stimuli to flight perceived by different parts of the body.
Continuous flight may also require the stimulus of a moving current of air which in Schistocerca is perceived by setae on the head (Weis-Fogh, 1950; Guthrie, 1966) and in Muscina by the antennae (Hollick, 1940).
Reflexes involving campaniform sensilla on the costa and subcosta control various features of wing-movement in Schistocerca (Gettrup, 1966).
Other mechanisms ensure the appropriate orientation of the insect during flight.
Visual stimuli sometimes play a role here and Mittelstaedt (1950) found that Anisopteran dragonflies always fly with the dorsal surface orientated towards the light, while optomotor reactions regulate flight in relation to movements of the visual field in many insects.
Reflexes mediated by the antennae were also discovered by Hollick (1940) to modify the path of the wing, and therefore the flight-characteristics, of Muscina, but the role of the halteres of Diptera and male Strepsiptera in controlling equilibrium during flight is perhaps the best known of these mechanisms (Pringle, 1948; Schneider, 1953).
Removal of the  halteres in Calliphora has little or"no effect or he beat-frequency, amplitude and duration of flight but markedly affects the stability of the flying insect.
The halteres vibrate during flight with the same frequency as the wings but in opposite phase and, by virtue of the relatively heavy terminal knob, they function as gyroscopic organs.
Groups of sensilla at the base of the halteres are stimulated by deformations of the integument when the halteres vibrate and the resulting pattern of nervous impulses is modified by the addition of torques due to the turning movements of the fly.
The system is apparently most sensitive to movements in the "yawing" (horizontal) plane, and deviations from the flight-path in this plane can readily be corrected by the fly.
There is also some evidence that the halteres act as stimulatory organs, increasing the sensitivity with which the fly reacts to other stimuli during flight (von Buddenbrock, 1919) and in some species removal of the halteres interferes with walking.
For certain physiological properties of the flight muscles, see p. 95.
Origin of Wings and Flight — It is now generally accepted that wings arose, perhaps in the early Devonian, as lateral expansions of the thoracic terga (Hamilton, 197 z).
Such expansions, often known as paranota, are found on the prothorax of the Palaeodictyoptera and other fossil insects (Fig. 39), in the early stages of Kalotermes, and in various Mantids, Lepismatids and Hemiptera.
There is, indeed, an inherent tendency towards the development of paranota in various Arthropods (e.g. the so-called pteromorphs of Oribatid mites discussed by Woodring, 1962).
Further, in a few cases such as Lepisma (Sulc, 1927) and Hemidoecus (Evans, 1939) the paranotal expansions are supplied with tracheae arranged in a pattern somewhat similar to that in developing wing-pads (Fig. 40).
It has been suggested that the paranotal lobes of insects were at first connected with epigamic behaviour (Alexander and Brown, 1963) but it is perhaps more likely that they were associated with locomotion from the beginning.
They may, for example, have assisted take-off into the winds or convection currents that disperse small insects in the "aerial plankton" (Wigglesworth, 1963).
Quite small paranota could also control the attitude of falling insects and might subsequently have increased in size through an additional selective process to improve the angle at which a gliding flight occurred (Hinton, 1963; Flower, 1964).
Sustained flight could then arise at a still later stage through the evolution of a basal articulation and the development of flapping movements using tergocoxal muscles that were concerned primitively with leg movements (Tiegs, 1955).
The remains of the earliest winged insect from the Upper Carboniferous give no indications of how and where the Pterygota arose.
The fact that in many insect groups the newly emerged adults show a slow gliding type of flight linked to dispersal suggests, however, that the earliest winged insects may have evolved in temporary habitats of small, erect plants in which dense insect populations sometimes developed Johnson, 1963; Leston, 1963).
For a modern restatement of the theory that wings arose from thoracic gills see Wigglesworth (1973).
THE ABDOMEN
Segmentation of the Abdomen
The abdomen (Fig.
I) is composed of a series of segments which are more equally developed than in the other regions of the body (Matsuda, 1975).
For the most part they retain their simple annular form, the terga and sterna are generally undivided shields, while the pleura are membranous and usually without differentiated sclerites.
Each intersegmental sclerite is believed to have fused with the segmental plate behind it.
Reduction or  special modification of certain segments is evident at the anterior and posterior ends of the abdomen, more especially in the latter region, and this specialization increases from the lower to the higher orders.
The primitive number of abdominal segments as revealed by embryology is eleven, with a terminal non-segmental region or telson (Anderson, 1972).
The telson is present in the embryos of certain insects (Fig. 41), but it rarely persists as a discrete region; it is evident, however, in the Protura, while traces are found in other insects.
The 11th segment is present in the adults of the lower orders where its tergum is represented by the epiproct above the anus (often fused with the 10th tergum), while vestiges of its sternum are seen in the paraprocts which lie on either side of the anus (Fig. 42).
The 10th segment is usually distinct and forms the terminal segment in the higher orders.
The Protura differ from all other hemimetabolous insects in that the number of abdominal segments increases during post-embryonic development, the youngest instars having only eight segments and a telson.
The Collembola  are also exceptional in never having more than six abdominal segments, either in the embryo or the adult.
In most insects the 1st abdominal segment, and more especially its sternum, is reduced or vestigial.
Among Apocritan Hymenoptera this segment becomes fused with the metathorax during the change from the larva to the pupa and is known as the propodeum, epinotum or median segment.
In many Endopterygote insects, more especially those whose eggs are deposited within plant tissue or in other concealed situations, the distal abdominal segments become attenuated and often telescoped to form a retractile tube or oviscapt which is used as an ovipositor.
This modification is particularly well exhibited in the Cerambycidae, Cecidomyidae, Trypetidae, Muscidae and other families.
A true ovipositor is usually regarded as appendicular and is dealt with in the next section.
Appendages and Processes of the Abdomen
In the embryos of most insects evident rudiments of paired abdominal appendages appear at some stage during development.
They are commonly present on each of the eleven segments in the less specialized Exopterygotes but do not occur on the telson (Fig. 41).
A variable number of these appendages may become transformed into organs that are functional during post-embryonic life while the remainder disappear.
The most conspicuous of the persistent appendages are the cerci of the 11th segment, which exhibit wide diversity of form and may even be transformed into forceps, as in the Japygidae and the earwigs.
Among the Apterygota the retention of at least some abdominal appendages is a general feature.
They are well exhibited in the Machilidae, where they are present in a reduced condition on the 2nd to 9th segments, and as cerci on the 11th segment.
The reduced appendages each consist of a limb-base or coxite bearing a distal stylus which is  sometimes regarded as the vestige of the shaft of a typical walking limb but which may conceivable be a "coxal epipodite" homologous with the coxal styles of Symphylan or Machilid legs.
In the Diplura the coxites fuse with the sterna and the styli arise directly from the composite plates so formed (Fig. 43).
In most insects, however, the styli disappear so that the typical abdominal sternum of insects is probably a plate of compound origin- a "coxosternum" .
In adult Pterygota the cerci are retained in the Palaeopteran and Orthopteroid orders but pregenital abdominal appendages are absent and the only other abdominal appendages present are the gonopods which are believed by many to enter into the formation of the genitalia or external reproductive organs.
These are associated with the 8th and 9th segments in the female and with the 9th segment in the male.
A completely developed gonopod consists of a coxite bearing a distal stylus, while on its medial border the coxite is produced into a tubular outgrowth or gonapophysis (Fig. 44).
The term "gonapophysis" is sometimes also used loosely to denote any genital appendage.
The genital aperture is usually located in the membrane immediately behind the 8th or 9th segment.
Among immature Pterygote insects, the gills of mayfly nymphs, the abdominal prolegs if Lepidopteran and Symphytan larvae, the terminal appendages of Trichopteran larvae and the gills of Sialoid larvae have all been regarded as true abdominal appendages) Snodgrass, 1935), but this is not satisfactorily established (Pryor, 1951).
On the one hand, the prolegs or gills develop from what seem to be the abdominal appendages of the polypod embryo (Friedman, 1934).
On the other hand in the Lepidoptera and other Panorpoid orders the prolegs appear to have arisen independently in each group, they are absent or lack muscles in the more primitive Panorpoids, and only in the Lepidoptera do they become important locomotor structures (Hinton, 1955).
Examples of what are certainly secondary abdominal processes include the gills of the Trichoptera and most Plecoptera, the pseudopods and creeping welts found in some Dipteran larvae (Hinton, 1955) and the copulatory organs on the 2nd abdominal segment of male Odonata.
External Genitalia
These include the characteristic ovipositor of many female insects and the diverse male copulatory organs.
The morphological interpretation of these structures presents many problems, especially as there is a basic and long-standing controversy as to whether they are, at least in part, modified abdominal appendages serially homologous with the thoracic limbs, or whether they are simply secondary sternal processes.
Many taxonomists have preferred to avoid a terminology based on uncertain homolgies, so that a large number of special anatomical terms are now applied to the external genitalia of insects (Tuxen, 1970).
In the above brief description of a gonopod we have, in effect, interpreted the genitalia as appendicular derivatives, with homologies existing between the various components of the male and  female organs.
The matter is by no means settled, however, and further information and discussion can be found in recent summaries of the various theories by Michener (1944), Gustafson (1950), Nielsen (1957), Snodgrass (1957), Matsuda (1958), Gouin (1962), Scudder (1961, 1971) and Smith (1969).
In general, the suggested homolgies usually start from the structures found in the Thysanuran genitalia and depend also on evidence from postembryonic developments, the structure of gynandromorphs, and the anatomical relations, musculature and innervation of the various parts.
Scudder (1964), however, has emphasized the need to apply modern concepts of homology based on experimental studies of development; such an approach, combined perhaps with the use of genetic markers for homologous segmental regions may eventually help to resolve some of the persistent difficulties in this field (Sokoloff and Hoy, 1968; Fletcher, 1970).
The Female Genitalia consist typically of three pairs of valves which  collectively form the ovipositor or egg-laying organ.
their degree of development and co-adaption varies according to the uses which that organ is subjected.
In the Mallophaga and Siphunculata, for example, the ovipositor is vestigial or absent; in the Dictyoptera its valves are small and free; in the Tettigoniidae (Figs 46 and 47) those of one side are held together by tongue and groove joints and form, along with their counterparts of the opposite side, an elongate and powerful egg-laying instrument; in most Hymenoptera stinging.
A complete Pterygote ovipositor, according to the interpretation of Scudder (1971), consists of (1) a pair of small coxites of the 8th abdominal segment, each bearing (2) a gonapophysis, which forms an anterior (ventral  or first) ovipositor valve;(3) a pair of small coxites of the 9th segment, which bear (4) the paired gonapophyses that form the inner (posterior or second) ovipositor valves, as well as(5) a coxal extension or gonoplac, forming the dorsal (lateral or third) ovipositor valve.
In addition there is on each side a characteristic sclerite (6) the gonangulum which is derived from the anterior part of the coxite of the 9th abdominal segment and articulates primitively with this coxite, the 9th abdominal tergum and the gonapophysis of the 8th segment.
Essentially the same structures are found among the Thysanura in the Lepismatidae, though the coxites are unmodified there and bear styles.
In the Machilidae the gonangulum has not evolved, so that the appendages of the genital segments are rather similar to those of the pregenital region of the abdomen, with the gonapophyses corresponding in position to the eversible vesicles (see p. 435).
The Male Genitalia present a wide range of variation and are particularly valuable for separating the genera and species of many groups of insects.
When fully developed (Figs. and 48) they consist essentially of a pair of claspers which help to grip the female during copulation and between which lies the aedeagus.
The latter is composed of a penis which is usually unpaired (but may be double, as in the Ephemeroptera and some  Dermaptera) and a pair of more lateral structures which are perhaps best referred to as parameres, though this term has been used in several different senses.
The homologies of these parts have been the subject of much controversy.
The claspers probably represent the coxites and styles of the 9th segment, though in some cases they seem to be composed only of the styles, the coxites having fused with the sternum.
Snodgrass (1957) has argued that the claspers of the Hemiptera and the Endopterygote insects are  non-appendicular parameres, formed from the paired phallic rudiments of the 10th abdominal segment.
Part or all of the aedeagus is held by some authors to be of a secondary, non-appendicular nature but others consider it to be formed by the division of the gonapophyses of the 9th abdominal segment, the two median halves fusing during development to form the penis while the lateral halves constitute the parameres.
Yet another view regards it as formed in a similar manner from the gonopods of the 10th abdominal segment.
Deviations from the typical structure of the genitalia of both sexes are described in the sections dealing with the anatomy of the various orders — they are sometimes supplemented by secondary formations or show various degrees of reduction.
In addition to the general works cited above, recent studies of the morphology and development of the genitalia of particular groups of insects include the following: Qadri (1940), Snodgrass (1941), Neumann (1958), Dupuis (1955), Klier (1956), Scudder (1959), Davies (1961), Menees (1963), Salzer (1968), Smith, E. L. (1970) and Hafner (1971).
THE ENDOSKELETON
In certain regions of the body the integument becomes invaginated and greatly hardened, forming rigid processes which serve for the attachment of muscles and the support of certain other organs.
This internal framework is termed the endoskeleton and its individual parts are known as apodemes or phragmata.
They arise as invaginations of the body-wall between adjacent sclerites, or at the edge of a sclerite or segment.
In some insects the invaginations remain open throughout life but, more usually, they become completely solid through the deposition of cuticular material.
The two most important parts of the endoskeleton are the tentorium and the endothorax, but endoskeletal structures may be developed in almost any part of the body where muscles are attached.
The Tentorium (Figs. 49, 50)(Hudson, 1945–51)
This name is given to the endoskeleton of the head and, in generalized Pterygote insects, it is composed of two or three pairs of apodemes which coalesce at their bases.
The functions of the tentorium are (1) to afford a basis for the attachment of many of the cephalic muscles and, at the same time, to give rigidity to the head;(2) to lend support to the brain and fore intestine;(3) to strengthen the points of articulation of certain of the mouthparts.
The apodemes which enter into the formation of the cephalic ends skeleton are termed the anterior, posterior and dorsal arms of the tentorium according to their positions.
The inner ends of these arms fuse with each other and the median skeletal part thus formed is termed the body of the tentorium.
Despite earlier views to the contrary (e.g. Snodgrass, 1951), it has been claimed by Manton (1964) that an homologous system of tentorial apodemes occurs in the Myriapods, the Pterygote insects and the Pterygota.
Only in the Lepismatidae and the Pterygota, however, has the evolution of transverse biting movements of the mandibles led to the appearance of a strong rigid tentorium.
The Anterior Arms of the Tentorium — The invaginations which form these apodemes usually lie on either side of the frontoclypeal sulcus, when the latter is present, and just above the anterior articulations of the mandibles.
In most insects they appear externally as mere slits but in many Diptera they form intracranial tunnels.
The Posterior Arms of the Tentorium — These apodemes arise as ingrowths from the ventral ends of the postoccipital sulci, generally in close relation with the occipital foramen.
In some prognathous insects they tend to lie more forward on the ventral wall of the head (see p.29)
The Dorsal Arms of the Tentorium — these arise not as invaginations of the wall of the head but as outgrowths either from the body of the   tentorium or from the bases of the anterior arms.
They pass upwards and outwards, often to become attached to the head wall near the antennae or eyes.
They are generally present in Orthoptera, but in some cases (e.g. Blatta) they are tendon-like, while they are often undeveloped in other orders.
The Body of the Tentorium — This is a median plate which is often large and its shape varies to some extent in conformity with that of the head; thus, in the soldiers of many termites it is elongate, while in the workers it is a relatively narrow band.
When an insect moults, the dorsal arms of the tentorium are largely dissolved away by the moulting fluid, the tentorium splits medially, much of the central body is dissolved and the remainder is pulled out as four separate pieces, one from each tentorial pit (Sharplin, 1965).
The Endothorax (Figs.51, 52)
This is composed of invaginations of the tergal, pleural and sternal regions of each thoracic segment.
The several structures may be conveniently termed the endotergites, endopleurites and endosternites respectively.
The Endotergites or Phragmata (Snodgrass, 1935) arise as transverse infoldings of the intersegmental sclerites (see p. 43) and as their main function is to provide increased areas of attachment for the dorsal longitudinal muscles they are best developed in winged insects, especially those that fly actively.
There are normally three phragmata associated with the intersegmentalia between the pro-, mesa and metathorax and the 1st abdominal segment, but owing to the varied transpositions of the intersegmental sclerites (p. 43) the relations of the phragmata to the definitive segmentation differ in different groups of insects.
Thus, they are sometimes situated at the front of the Segment, between the acrotergite and prescutum and sometimes at the back of a segment, behind the postnotum.
Phragmata occupying these two positions have been referred to as pre- and postphragmata  mata respectively and both may be carried by either the meso- or metathorax of some insects; no phragma is ever borne by the prothorax.
The Endopleurites or Lateral Apodemes are infoldings between the pleurites.
In a typical wing-bearing segment of most insects there is a single apodeme on either side formed by infolding along the pleural sulcus and known as the pleural ridge.
It terminates in the wing process above, the coxal process below, and often bears an inwardly projecting pleural arm.
The endopleurites are well developed in the Odonata.
The Endosternites are typically formed of a pair of apophyses arising from pits on the eusterna between the basisternum and sternellum.
Frequently, however, there is also an ingrowth of the sternum near their origin so that they are carried inwards and the whole forms a Y-shaped structure, the furca, whose internal arms may become fused with the pleural arms or are connected with them by short muscles.
In many generalized insects there is also a median, unbranched apodeme or spina which arises from the intersegmental spinasternum.
In the higher orders, the spina is lost or consolidated with the furca.
In the Odonata the endosternites are paired, and are inclined so far inwards, towards the median line, that they almost meet over the nerve cord.
In the honey bee those of the prothorax fuse to form a supraneural bridge, and the combined mesa and metathoracic endosternites together form a second bridge of a similar character.
The Abdominal Endoskeleton
In the abdomen apodemes are developed to provide firm origins for some of the more important muscles.
Most of the terga usually present internal ridges or phragmata, as in the thorax, giving attachment to the chief longitudinal muscles.
On the ventral aspect sternal apophyses are commonly present and in some cases highly developed.
Specialized apodemes may be developed in connection with the ovipositor and the male copulatory organs.
Literature on the Endoskeleton
There is little special literature dealing with the endoskeleton.
Reference may be made to the following and to the papers cited under sections dealing with the skeletomuscular systems in the main regions of the body.
THE MUSCULAR SYSTEM
Insect muscles are mostly translucent, colourless or grey, though the flight-muscles often show a yellowish or brown tinge.
both skeletal and visceral muscle fibres are cross-striated and some older reports of unstriated visceral muscles need reinvestigation.
Insect muscles differ fundamentally from those of Annelids, both in histological structure and in not being incorporated into the body-wall to form a dermo-muscular tube.
In most skeletal muscles, especially those of the appendages, one end of the muscle (its origin) is attached to a movable part.
Cuticular invaginations or apodemes, in the form of cords, bands or plate-like structures, may provide the true sites of attachment and therefore intervene between the muscle and the main structure on which it acts.
For a general review of insect muscle see Usherwood (1975).
Histology of the Muscles (Figs.53, 54)
The skeletal muscles of insects have a complex structure, in which one may distinguish (i) the fibrous contractile system,(ii) the mitochondria,(iii) the tracheal and nervous supply, and (iv) the membrane systems (Smith, 1961 — 66).
variations in the histology and ultrastructure of these components are associated with important functional difference between different groups of muscles.
Essentially, however, a muscle is composed of a number of long fibres, each measuring from a few hundred µm in diameter.
Each of these in turn subdivided into separate, smaller fibrils which are themselves composed of a highly organized array of myofilaments made up of the proteins actin and myosin (Fig. 53).
The fibre is surrounded by an outer membrane, the sarcolemma, which encloses the nucleated sarcoplasm in which the fibrils are embedded.
Each fibril is typically composed of alternating isotropic (I) and anisotropic (A) regions which, under appropriate microscopical illumination, appear as light and dark bands or disks.
Because these appear at about the same level in adjacent fibrils they give to the whole fibre its characteristic cross-striated appearance.
Crossing each isotropic region is a partition, the Z-disk, which thus divides the fibril into short units or sarcomeres, each comprising an anisotropic region (the A-band) and two half I-bands.
The dense A-band is further traversed by a lighter H-band.
These features, easily seen by light-microscopy, reflect the submicroscopic organization of the myofibrils.
An array of thin I-band actin filaments (each some 5nm in diameter) extends from the Z-disk to the edge of the H-band in a relaxed fibre, while thicker myosin filaments (each about 15nm in diameter) run throughout the A-band.
Actin and myosin filaments are linked by temporary cross-bridges, each myosin filament usually being surrounded by 6 actin filaments (Garamvolgyi, 1965; Hagopian, 1966).
According to the well-established theory of Huxley and Hanson, contraction of the fibril is due to the sliding of the actin and myosin filaments relative to each other *Hanson, 1956; Pringle, 1966; Osborne, 1967); the actin filaments move further into the A-disk while the myosin filaments thus approach the Z-disks.
The mitochondria of insect muscle vary greatly in size, shape and distribution, being most extensively developed in the flight-muscles, as one would expect from the extremely high metabolic rate of these actively contracting structures.
They may be scattered randomly throughout the sarcoplasm or arranged between fibrils opposite the Z-disks; in the flight-muscles of the Odonata they form large slab-like structures and in the powerful fibrillar indirect flight-muscles of Hymenoptera and Diptera the giant mitochondria form conspicuous "sarcosomes" .
The tracheal supply of insect muscles also varies with their activity, visceral muscles being poorly supplied while flight-muscles are much more richly tracheated, with intracellular tracheoles penetrating the fibrils.
Of considerable physiological importance are the membrane systems revealed by electron microscopy.
The sarcolemma, about 7.5 nm thick, is a unit-membrane like that investigating other cells.
Transverse tubular invaginations from it form the so-called T-system, while close to these are the longitudinally arranged cisternae of a separate membrane system, the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
The  fibrillar asynchronous indirect flight-muscles of Diptera, Hymenoptera and Coleoptera have a reduced sarcoplasmic reticulum whereas the synchronous flight-muscles of other orders and the remaining skeletal muscles of all insects have both systems well developed.
The T-system may provide a pathway along which the peripheral excitation of a fibre is conducted inwards, while the sarcoplasmic reticulum probably controls the contraction cycle through the activation of myosin ATP-ase by calcium ions.
Further references to the ultrastructure of insect muscle are listed on p.96 ff.
Visceral muscle fibres occur singly or in groups or larger lattice-like arrays around the gonads and their ducts and in the heart, diaphragms and gut wall.
Their properties are in some ways intermediate between those of the skeletal muscles and the smooth muscles found in other phyla.
Histologically they differ from skeletal muscle in having smaller fibres, linked by desmosomes and sometimes containing only one fibril.
They also have a poor tracheolar supply, few mitochondria and a poorly developed T-system and sarcoplasmic reticulum.
On the other hand, the fibres are divided into sarcomeres with A- and I-disks, though each myosin filament is usually surrounded by 12 orbital actin filaments (Davey, 1964; Smith, Gupta and Smith, 1966; Goldstein and Burdette, 1971).
Skeletal muscles are attached to the cuticle in a complicated way, only now being fully elucidated by electron microscopy (Fig. 54).
At the junction  of muscle and epidermis the cells show regular interdigitation, the processes being lined with desmosomes.
Within the epidermal cells microtubules connect the desmosomes of the interdigitating regions with cone-like depressions of the outer epidermal plasma membrane.
Then, from each cone, an electron-dense muscle attachment fibre or tonofibrilla runs through the procuticle in a pore-canal and finally inserts on the epicuticle.
The tonofibrillae are only slowly dissolved when the old cuticle is digested by moulting fluid.
New tonofibrillae become attached to the epicuticle only when it is growing.
For further details see Lai-Fook (1967) and Caveney (1969).
Arrangement of the Skeletal Muscles (Myology)
In general arrangement, the skeletal muscular system corresponds with the segmentation of the body and is shown in its least modified form in some apterygotes, the lower Pterygota and many larvae.
There are usually very many muscles — up to 2000 or so in some Lepidopteran larvae — and the system is bilaterally symmetrical.
Though detailed descriptive accounts of the muscular system of many insect species are available, the homologies of the muscles are sometimes difficult to decide and no uniform terminology exists.
The older tendency to classify muscles according to their probable functions is giving way to a system of naming them from their positions, origins and insertions.
Neither method is entirely satisfactory since apparently homologous muscles may change their sites of attachment during evolution and alter their functions.
It seems rare, however, for muscles to transgress the limits of the segments to which they originally belonged.
Despite the difficulties indicated above, general schemes are available in the works of Weber (1933), Snodgrass (1935), von Keler (1963) and Matsuda (1965, 1970).
Among the more recent myological studies are those by Alicata (1963), Chadwick (1959), Ewer (1967), Ewer and Nayler (1967), Manton (1964, 1972), Mickoleit (1962, 1968, 1969) and Parsons (1959, 1960, 1962, 1963).
A simplified list of the principal skeletal muscles is given below, based to some extent on conditions in the more generalized Orthopteroid insects.
A. Cephalic Muscles
— The principal muscles of the head may be divided into (a) cervical muscles,(b) muscles of the mouthparts, and (c) muscles of the antennae.
(a) The Cervical Muscles.
These control the movements of the head and are classified into levators, depressors, retractors and rotators according to their function.
They take their origin from the prothorax and cervix and are inserted into the tentorium and epicranium.
(b) The Muscles of the Mouthparts.
Associated with the labrum are (Cook, 1944):
1.
The labral compressors, running between the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the labrum.
2.
The posterior labral muscles which run from the tormal sclerites of the labrum to the wall of the head.
3.
The anterior labral muscles (retractors) which run from the anterior margin of the labral base to the wall of the head.
The mandibular muscles (Snodgrass, 1950) include:
4.
The dorsal abductors which originate on the upper lateral part of the epicranium and insert each on an apodeme connected with the outer, basal region of the mandible.
5.
The dorsal adductors have an extensive origin on the postero-dorsal part of the head and each inserts on an apodeme connected with the inner, basal region of the mandible.
6.
The ventral adductors are present only in the Apterygotes and some lower Pterygotes.
The principal maxillary muscles are as follows:
7.
Dorsal basal muscles arising on the dorsal part of the head and forming the anterior and posterior rotators of the cardo and the cranial flexor of the lacinia.
8.
Ventral basal muscles which are inserted on the cardo and stipes and which  originate on the tentorium in most Pterygotes and on the tentorial apodemes in the Apterygotes.
9.
Stipital muscles.
These all originate on the stipes and include the levator and depressor of the palp, the flexor of the galea and the stipital flexor of the lacinia. to.
The intrinsic palp muscles.
The muscles of the labium are:
11.
Extrinsic labial muscles.
These arise on the tentorium or cranial wall and insert on the prementum.
They correspond to the ventral basal muscles of the maxilla.
12.
Median labial muscles.
When present, these run from the back of the prementum to the postmentum and have no homologues in the maxilla.
13.
Labial salivary muscles.
There are usually two pairs, arising on the prementum and converging on the labial wall of the salivarium near the opening of the salivary duct.
14.
Muscles of the endites and palps.
From the prementum there run the levator and depressor muscles of the palps and a flexor of each glossa and paraglossa.
These are homologues of the stipital muscles of the maxilla but it should be noted that the glossae possess no muscles corresponding to the cranial flexors of the laciniae.
15.
Intrinsic palp muscles.
Inserted on the suspensorium of the hypopharynx there are typically the hypopharyngeal adductors of the mandible and two pairs of frontal muscles (the so-called "retractors of the mouth angles" ).
(c) Muscles of the antennae (Imms, 1939).
These are:
1.
Extrinsic antennal muscles.
A levator and, usually, two depressors are inserted on the base of the scape.
They arise from the dorsal and anterior arms of the tentorium or from the dorsal arm alone or from the wall of the head.
2.
Intrinsic antennal muscles.
In all insects with normally developed antennae there is a pair of muscles arising in the scape and inserted on the base of the pedicel.
In the Collembola and Diplura similar muscles also occur in all other segments except the last, but in the Thysanura and Pterygota the flagellar segments are devoid of muscles.
B. Thoracic Muscles
— The muscles of a typical alate segment are set out below, following a simplified version of Snodgrass's (1935) scheme, but it should be noted that the prothorax differs in the absence of some flight-muscles.
(a) Longitudinal.
As in the abdomen, these are divisible into tergal and sternal groups, the former being important indirect flight-muscles.
(b) Dorsoventral.
Two main groups occur here, the tergosternals, which are the principal levators of the wing (acting antagonistically to the longitudinal tergals) and the tergocoxal muscles, which act as the tergal promotors and remotors of the leg.
(c) Pleural.
Three sets of pleural muscles, may be distinguished.
The tergopleural muscles are very variable in development and include the axillary muscles; the pleurosternals are short fibres linking the pleural and sternal apophyses while the pleurocoxals act as abductors of the coxae.
(a) Sternal.
These include two muscle groups.
The sternocoxals are the sternal promotors and remotors of the leg while the lateral intersegmental muscle runs from the sternum to the pleuron or tergum of the succeeding segment and is best developed in larval forms.
(e) Intrinsic Leg Muscles.
In addition to the various extrinsic leg-muscles mentioned above, whose function it is to move the whole limb, there are also muscles  lying within the segments of the leg.
They include the levator and depressor of the trochanter, tibia and tarsus and the levator of the pretarsus.
As well as these, there are the spiracular muscles and the epipleural muscles, the latter inserting on the subalare and basalare.
C. Muscles of Flight
— Although the flight of insects has been referred to on p. 64, the coordinated activities of the skeletomuscular system of flying insects need further brief discussion (Tiegs, 1955; Pringle, 1957, 1965, 1968).
The flight movements are caused by three sets of muscles, the indirect, direct and accessory indirect flight-muscles (Figs. 56, 57).
The indirect muscles are usually the largest in the body, and are attached to the thorax and not to the wing-bases.
In most insects they consist of two groups of muscles:(1) a pair of dorsoventral muscles by whose contraction the tergal region of the thorax is depressed, with the result that the wings are forced upwards  owing to the peculiar nature of their articulation with the thorax;(2) a pair of longitudinal muscles by whose contraction the tergal region becomes arched upwards which results in the wings being forced downwards.
The rapid alternate contraction of these two groups of muscles consequently raises and lowers the wings by their action upon the dorsal wall of the thorax.
The direct muscles (Fig. 57) are typically the epipleural and axillary muscles and generally consist of four pairs:(a) the 1st anterior extensor arising usually from the sternal region and attached to the basalar sclerite (p. 54);(b) the and anterior extensor arising from the rim of the coxa, just in front of its pleural articulation, and similarly inserted into the basalar sclerite;(c) the posterior extensor arising from the rim of the coxa, just behind its pleural articulation, and inserted into the subalar sclerite;(a) the flexor arising from the pleural ridge and inserted into the 3rd axillary sclerite.
The accessory indirect flight-muscles are the pleurosternals, tergopleurals and lateral intersegmentals; they act by bracing the cuticular skeleton or by changing its elastic properties in various ways.
Fuller analysis of the skeletomuscular mechanisms that operate in flight shows that these are complicated and vary appreciably from one group of insects to another.
Schistocerca, for example, has well-developed indirect flight-muscles with  the usual functions, but their action in producing the downstroke of the wings is reinforced by the direct muscles attached to the basalar and subalar sclerites.
These direct muscles also cause pronation and supination of the wings while the dorsoventral indirect flight-muscles also have an additional role as promotors and remotors of the legs.
In the Odonata a different situation occurs: the direct muscles attached to the basalar and subalar sclerites are very large and mainly responsible for the downstroke, whereas the small dorsal longitudinal indirect flight-muscles are of little functional importance.
In the bees and the higher Diptera only the indirect muscles of the mesothorax generate the power needed for flight; the metathoracic indirect  muscles are capable only of tonic contraction and act so as to control the amount of power transmitted from the mesothorax to the metathorax.
The extent to which insect flight-muscles are developed is, as one would expect, correlated with the capacity for flight.
Related species may differ appreciably in this respect in some groups, as in the Orthoptera discussed by Atzinger (1952).
Alary polymorphism and associated flight-muscle polymorphism may also occur within a species, e.g. in some aquatic Heteroptera like the Corixidae (Young, 1965a, 1965b; Acton and Scudder, 1969) and others mentioned on p. 54.
D.The Abdominal Muscles
— The principal muscles of a typical abdominal segment may be grouped into the following series, simplified and altered somewhat from Snodgrass (1935).
(a) Longitudinal.
These may be divided into (a) tergal and (b) sternal longitudinal muscles.
In each case they run between the intersegmental folds or antecostae of successive segments.
Acting together, the two groups serve as retractors by telescoping  the abdomen.
Acting alone, the sternal muscles curve the abdomen downwards and the tergals straighten it or bend it upwards.
(b) Lateral.
These typically run dorsoventrally and are both inter- and intrasegmental in position.
They are usually tergosternals, but when distinct pleurites are present there may also be tergopleural and sternopleural muscles.
By contraction they tend to compress the segment and are therefore important in respiratory movements.
(c) Transverse.
These lie internal to the longitudinals on both ventral and dorsal sides and are better known as the muscles of the dorsal and ventral diaphragms (see p.234).
In addition there are special muscles concerned with the movements of the genitalia, cerci and spiracles.
Physiology of Insect Muscles — Various aspects of the physiology of insect muscle, reviewed by Pringle (2966), Usherwood (1967, 1969, 2975), Aidley (1967) and others, can only be touched on here.
In many respects the  properties of insect skeletal muscles do not differ greatly from those of vertebrates, such features as absolute muscular power and the characteristics of the simple contraction (twitch) being similar in the two groups.
Most insect muscles are phasically responsive (i.e. they contract and relax relatively quickly) but some skeletal and all visceral muscles undergo sustained tonic contractions.
In some muscles both phasic and tonic fibres occur (Cochrane, Elder and Usherwood, 1972).
Unlike vertebrates, insects have muscles that contain relatively few fibres and to achieve smooth contractions they are supplied by multiple nerve endings some 30–80 µm apart, each inducing local contraction.
There is also a dual innervation, with a "fast" axon supplying all or most of the fibres in a muscle while a "slow" axon innervates a proportion of them.
The motor end-plates have a complex structure (e.g. Osborne, 1970) and the -neuromuscular transmitter substance of insects is probably i-glutamate.
The muscles of the legs and abdomen, and in many insects all the flight muscles as well, respond synchronously to the nervous impulses that reach them.
The duration of such responses would, however, be too great to allow the rapid succession of contractions needed to maintain the high frequency of the wing beat in many efficient flyers.
The Diptera, Hymenoptera, Coleoptera and Hemiptera have therefore evolved the characteristic fibrillar type of asynchronous indirect flight-muscles (Cullen, I 974).
Here the frequency of contraction is not determined by the central nervous system, but is directly controlled by the loading on the muscles.
So long as they are stimulated by low-frequency nervous impulses, such muscles can respond directly to stretching.
The resulting twitch is of a duration controlled by the conditions of loading and contraction causes direct stimulation of the antagonistic muscles.
The oscillatory rhythm resulting from repetition of the cycle is therefore myogenic and its frequency depends on the mechanical properties of the cuticular thoracic wall.
A similar mechanism operates in the rapid contractions of the tymbal muscle of cicadas.
Metabolism of Insect Muscle — Some of the metabolic events occurring in active muscular tissue, especially in flight-muscle, are now known in considerable biochemical detail (e.g. Sacktor, 1965, 1970).
The oxygen consumption of an insect may rise a hundredfold when flight begins and if it is to continue for long periods a reserve of oxidizable respiratory material is needed.
In Diptera and Hymenoptera, with asynchronous fibrillar flight-muscles, a respiratory quotient of unity during flight indicates that carbohydrates are the main substrate.
In Lepidoptera, Homoptera and Orthoptera on the other hand, R.Q values of about 0–7 occur and fat reserves are depleted.
Some species, such as locusts and aphids, use glycogen and the disaccharide trehalose at first, but then consume fat during prolonged flight.
Much more unusual is the occurrence of the amino-acid proline as an energy reserve for flight in Glossina (Bursell, 1966).
Flight-muscle homogenates of Hyalophora cecropia and Locusta migratoria will actively oxidize fatty acids by mechanisms not unlike those occurring in vertebrate tissues (Gilbert, 1967) but much more is known of flight-muscle metabolism in the species that use carbohydrates.
Here the processes of breakdown are qualitatively similar to those in vertebrate skeletal muscle.
Enzymatically controlled equilibria involving various reserves such as glycogen in the fat-body, trehalose in the blood and both substrates in the muscle itself, lead to the appearance of glucose in the muscle.
This undergoes anaerobic glycolysis, with concomitant formation of energy-rich adenosine triphosphate (ATP), through the Embden-Meyerhof pathway, followed by further degradation to carbon dioxide and water in the tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle.
Several of the dehydrogenases that participate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle have been identified in the mitochondria of insect flight-muscle and the cycle can also accomplish the terminal stages of lipid and amino-acid breakdown.
There are important biochemical differences in the metabolism of different muscles; in Locusta flight-muscle, for example, lactic dehydrogenase is virtually absent and lactic acid is not an end-product of glycolysis, whereas in the leg-muscle lactic acid accumulates after exertion and is slowly removed by oxidation and conversion to glycogen.
Degeneration of Musculature — Degeneration of the flight-muscles occur after sexual maturity in many species, notably among queen ants and termites (pp. 617, 1237), where the process promotes reproduction by releasing amino acids that can be used in egg-formation.
The alate forms of Brevicoryne brassicae, Myzus persicae, Aphis fabae and other aphids also undergo flight-muscle histolysis after settling on their host-plants.
These changes and the accompanying hypertrophy of the fat-body and resumption of embryo development in the ovaries are caused by hormonal changes Johnson, 1957, 1959).
A comparable process is also found among Scolytid beetles in which, after moving to a new tree, the insects (of both sexes) do not fly and their flight-muscles are reduced to functionless ribbons.
The fibrils become small, many mitochondria and most of the myofilaments disappear and little is eventually left beyond tracheoles, lysosomes and some granular sarcoplasm (e.g. Atkins and Farris, 1962; Bhakthan, Borden and Nair, 1970).
Degeneration of the indirect flight-muscles also occurs in adult females of Dysdercus, where it coincides with oocyte growth and is under endocrine control (Edwards, 2969).
Other interesting changes take place in the segmental muscles of the abdomen of Rhodnius, which undergo periodic regressive and regenerative changes associated with the moulting cycle (Wigglesworth, 1956; Toselli and Pepe, 1968).
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The General Nervous System
Introduction
— The nervous system forms an elaborate connecting link between the sense organs, which respond to various external and internal stimuli, and effector organs such as muscles, glands and luminous structures, through which the insect reacts to the stimuli by coordinated behavioural changes (Schmitt, 1962; Roeder, 1963; Smith and Treherne, 1963; Gouin, 1965; Horridge, 1965; Treherne and Beament, 1965; Treherne, 1966, 1974; Hoyle, 1970).
In addition, some nerve cells have a special secretory role (p. 273) and the integrity of the nervous system may be required for normal development and regeneration of other tissues (Finlayson, 1960; Nuesch, 1968).
The nervous system is composed essentially of ramifying neuroglial cells with supporting and nutritive functions (Wigglesworth, 1960; Smith, 1967) and the more numerous neurons, which are highly specialized for the relatively rapid generation and conduction of electrochemical nervous impulses (Pipa, 1961; Landolt, 1965; Chiarodo, 1969; Sohal et al., 1972).
Processes of each neuron put it into contact by synaptic junctions with other nerve cells (Chiarodo et al., 1970) or with sensory structures or effector organs.
One or more of these processes forms a long conducting fibre or axon (Narahashi, 1963) ending in a group of fine, branching fibrils; the number of axons enables the neuron to be classified as uni-, bi- or multipolar.
Functionally the nerve cells may be sensory (afferent) neurons, conveying impulses inwards from the sense organs (p. 123 ff.), motor or efferent neurons, conveying them outwards to the effector organs, and association neurons (interneurons) that link the other two types.
Over most of the nervous system the neurons are grouped together into ganglia (p. 102), all with a more or less complex histological structure (Wigglesworth, 1959, and other references cited below).
The axons of many neurons are organized into fibre tracts within the ganglion or run out, arranged together, as peripheral nerves (which also contain the incoming axons of afferent neurons).
Neuroglial cells occur within and around the ganglia and nerves, forming an outer layer of cells, the perineurium, that secretes an external, more homogeneous, sheath-like neural lamella (Ashurst and Chapman, 1961; Madrell and Treherne, 1967; Lane, 1968, 1972).
This contains neutral mucopolysaccharides and collagen fibres and is primarily a supporting structure, while the perineurium helps to form a physiological barrier between the ionic and  other constituents of the blood and those of the nervous tissue (Treherne and Pichon, 1972).
The axons are wrapped around by specialized neuroglial cells (Schwann cells) which fob a thick myelin sheath in places.
Individual axons vary greatly in diameter, the largest forming "giant axons" adapted for very rapid nervous conduction over considerable distances (Seabrook, 1970b, 1971; Parnas and Dagan, 1971; Harris and Smyth, 1971).
The very large number of neurons (around a million in the brain of Apis according to Witthoft, 1967), and the multiplicity of possible connections among them means that the nervous pathways between and within the ganglia are extremely complicated.
Some of the coarser ones have long been known from simple histological studies, but more recent mapping of the nerve tracts and individual axonal connections has required a variety of specialized techniques.
These include modern silver impregnation methods, electron microscopy, tracing degenerating fibres after surgical transection of peripheral nerves, intraneuronal injection of dye-stuffs and the use of electrophysiological recording after experimental stimulation.
The integration of such physiological and histological results is still actively in progress.
It is convenient to divide the insect nervous system into (a) the central nervous system,(b) the visceral nervous system, and (c) the peripheral nervous system, all three parts being connected with each other.
The Central Nervous System
This is the principal division of the nervous system and consists of a double series of ganglia joined by longitudinal and transverse strands of nerve fibres (Fig. 59).
The longitudinal cords are termed connectives and join a pair of ganglia with those which precede and succeed it.
The transverse fibres or commissures unite the two ganglia of a pair.
Typically there is a pair of ganglia in each segment of the body, but the members of a pair are usually so closely united that they appear as a single ganglion, the commissure being no longer evident externally.
The connectives may be separate and distinct throughout the body as in Machilis and Corydalis, or in the thorax only as in the Orthoptera, Coleoptera and many Lepidopteran larvae, but usually they are so closely approximated as to form a single longitudinal cord.
In many cases the ganglia of adjacent segments coalesce to form ganglionic centres.
Two of these are always present in the head, and varying degrees of coalescence of the thoracic and abdominal ganglia are revealed by a comparative study of the nervous system in different orders of insects.
Transverse Sections through a typical ganglion show the outermost perineurium and neural lamella enclosing groups of neurons that form the ganglionic cortex and enclose a central neuropile.
The neurons include the usually large, unipolar, motor neurons and the generally smaller interneurons, which may be massed locally into globuli.
Some of the larger motor neurons are arranged in bilaterally symmetrical pairs and can be identified from one insect to another (Cohen and Jacklet, 1967).
The neuropile is  composed of axons, collaterals and dendrites, the latter often grouped locally into dense glomeruli.
The central nervous system is divisible into the brain or cerebral ganglion, the suboesophageal ganglion and the ventral nerve-cord.
1.
The Brain (Figs. 60–63) lies just above the oesophagus between the supporting apodemes of the tentorium.
It is the dorsal ganglionic centre of the head; its nerve-cells are almost entirely association neurons and it is formed by the coalescence of the first three neuromeres in the embryo.
This threefold division is maintained in the completed organ which is divided into corresponding regions which are designated the protocerebrum, the deutocerebrum and the tritocerebrum respectively, though the division is not always apparent externally.
Among general works on the structure of the brain are those by Jawlowski (2936), Hanstrom (2940), Ehnbohm (1948), Goossen (1949), Satija (2957, etc.),
Guthrie (1961), Abraham (1967), Groth (2971) and Strausfeld (1976); various more specialized accounts of its component parts are listed below.
The Protocerebrum represents the fused ganglia of the acron and the preantennal segment.
It forms the greater part of the brain and innervates the compound eyes and ocelli.
The protocerebrum is divisible into (a) the protocerebral lobes and (b) the optic lobes.
(a) The protocerebral lobes are fused together along the mid line to form a bilobed ganglion.
The two lobes are connected by a median commissural system termed the central body, towards which fibres converge from various parts of the brain.
In addition to the central body there are two smaller commissures, the anterior and posterior dorsal.
The anterior dorsal commissure passes in front of and above the central body.
The posterior dorsal commissure is a t-shaped fibre-tract lying behind the anterior commissure.
The most conspicuous formations in the neuropile of the protocerebral lobes are the paired mushroom bodies or corpora pedunculata which are important association-centres (Landolt and Ris, 1966; Mancini and Frontali, 1967; Steiger, 1967; Frontali and Mancini, 1970; Schurmann, 1970, 1972; Pearson, 1971).
Each mushroom body consists essentially of one or two dorsal cup-like calyces of neuropile containing masses of neurons, the so-called calyx cells or globuli cells.
The calyx (or joined calyces) then continue into a stalk or pedunculus of nerve fibres which ends deep in the brain by a complicated root system composed of a recurrent alpha-lobe, a beta-lobe and sometimes even a third gamma-lobe.
In the Lepidoptera another separate group of globuli cells gives rise to a tract that leads to an additional tripartite Y- lobe (Pearson, loc. cit.).
The axons of the calyx cells send branches to the stalk and the lobes of the root, where they form synapses with fibres from interneurons lying outside the corpora pedunculata.
In the region of the brain between the mushroom bodies are four small ocellar centres from each of which an ocellar nerve takes its origin.
The two outer nerves supply the paired dorsal ocelli, while the two inner nerves unite just outside the brain to form a single nerve supplying the median ocellus.
(b) The optic lobes (optic ganglia or optic tract) form a complex region of the brain and their degree of development is related to that of the compound eyes (e.g. Zuberi, 1963).
Their immensely complicated histology was revealed in classical studies by Cajal and Sanchez (1915).
This aspect, and the important role of the optic   lobe in processing the sensory input from the compound eye, still requires full elucidation and has attracted many recent workers (e.g. Boschek, 1971; Campos-Ortega and Strausfeld, 1972; Collett, 1970, 1971; Horridge and Meinertzhagen, 1970a, b; Strausfeld, 1970, 1971a, b; Strausfeld and Blest, 1970; Strausfeld and Braitenberg, 1970, Trujillo-Cenoz, 1965; Varela and Porter, 1969; Varela, 1970; Williams, 1975).
Each lobe consists of three principal zones or tracts of nerve tissues which are connected by a similar number of layers of nerve fibres (Figs. 62 and 86).
The lamina ganglionaris is the zone nearest the eye and is connected with the inner ends of the ommatidia by the layer of post-retinal fibres.
The middle zone is the medulla externa and is connected with the lamina by the external chiasma which is formed by the crossing of nerve fibres.
The inner zone is the medulla interna or lobula, united with the preceding zone by the internal chiasma.
The fibres of the optic nerve issue from the inner aspect of the medulla interna and divide into anterior and posterior bundles, which pass to the centre of the protocerebrum.
Studies of the finer detail show that each major zone includes several types of neurons and a great variety of nervous connections.
Short axons from the receptor cells of each ommatidium join those from other ommatidia in the lamina to form a regular array of optic "cartridges" .
The resulting projection of the retinal mosaic on to the lamina is then further projected by other cells into an array of medullary cartridges, while tangential nerve processes intersect the parallel, perpendicularly oriented neurons at various characteristic levels.
Links also occur between the two optic lobes and run from the medial part of the protocerebrum to each medulla separately.
Electrophysiological techniques have revealed units within the optic lobe mediating different  visual functions: some respond to movement of small parts of the visual field, others react to long, contrasting boundaries moving in a preferred direction; some subtend monocular visual fields, others cover the whole receptive area of both eyes, and so on.
The Deutocerebrum represents the fused ganglia of the antennal Segment.
It is chiefly composed of the paired antennal or olfactory lobes which are prominent swellings situated on the anteroventral aspect of the brain and Innervate the antennae.
For their detailed histology and ultrastructure see Schurmann and Wechsler (1969, 1970), Pareto (1972) and Masson (1972).
The so-called dorsal lobe is chiefly represented by a transverse fibrous tract situated above the antennal lobes and joining the latter together.
Each half of the dorsal lobe is connected with the protocerebral lobe of the opposite side by a chiasma and the antennal lobe is connected with the mushroom body of its side and the central body by the optico-olfactory chiasma.
Arising from the deutocerebrum are four pairs of nerves: the antenna/nerves are the longest and most important, and are the sensory nerves of the antennae though the motor fibres mentioned next are also present in the same nerve; each has two roots, one of which is derived from the antennal lobe of its side and the other from the dorsal lobe.
The accessory antennal nerves issue from the antennal lobes and are the motor nerves of the antennae.
The tegumentary nerves are a pair of slender strands arising from the dorsal lobe and passing to the vertex.
The Tritocerebrum is formed by the ganglia of the third or intercalary segment of the head and is composed mainly of fibres and synapses between the brain, suboesophageal ganglia and frontal ganglion connectives (Willey, 1961).
It is divided into two small widely separated lobes which are attached  to the dorsal lobe of the deutocerebrum and receive nerve fibres from the latter.
The tritocerebral lobes are joined together by means of the postoesophageal commissure which passes immediately behind the oesophagus.
They also give origin to (2) the para-oesophageal connectives which unite the brain with the suboesophageal ganglion, and (2) the labro-frontal nerves.
Each of the latter consists of two bundles of fibres, one of which passes to the labrum as the labral nerve, and the other forms the root of the frontal ganglion.
2.
The Suboesophageal Ganglion is the ventral ganglionic centre of the head and is formed by the fusion of the ganglia of the mandibular, maxillary and labial segments.
It gives off paired nerves supplying their respective appendages and may also connect with the corpora allata and contribute to the labral nerves (Willey, 2962).
3.
The Ventral Nerve-Cord consists of a series of ganglia lying on the floor of the thorax and abdomen.
They are united into a longitudinal chain by a pair of connectives which issue from the posterior border of the suboesophageal ganglion.
The first three ganglia are situated one in each of the thoracic segments, and are known as the thoracic ganglia; the remainder lie in the abdomen and form the ganglia of that region.
The thoracic ganglia control the locomotor organs.
Each ganglion gives off two pairs of principal nerves, one of which supplies the general musculature of the segment and the other innervates the muscles of the legs.
In the meso- and metathorax an additional pair of nerves is present and controls the movements of the wings.
The abdominal ganglia are variable in number; in Machilis and in many larvae there are eight ganglia in the abdomen but as a rule there are fewer.
The first abdominal ganglion frequently coalesces with that of the metathorax and the terminal ganglion is always composite, being formed by the fusion of at least three segmental nerve centres.
Each abdominal ganglion gives off a pair of principal nerves to the muscles of its Segment.
The histological structure of the ganglia of the ventral chain has been studied by Cohen and Jacklet (2967), Crossman et at.
(2971), Huddart (1971a), Milburn and Bentley (2971), Pipa, Cook and Richards (1959), Seabrook (1968, 1970a), Young (2969) and others.
Fielden (2963) has shown that the roots of the segmental nerves in Anax imperator arise from separate dorsal and ventral tracts in the neuropile; sensory activities predominate in the ventral tract and motor activity occurs almost entirely in the dorsal part.
Further comparative studies are needed.
The Visceral Nervous System
The visceral or sympathetic nervous system is divided into (2) oesophageal sympathetic,(2) ventral sympathetic, and (3) caudal sympathetic systems.
1.
The Oesophageal Sympathetic (or Stomatogastric) Nervous System is directly connected with the brain and innervates the fore and middle intestine, heart and certain other parts.
It is dorsal in position, lying  above and at the side of the fore intestine and its structure is described in a wide variety of types by Cazal (1948), two common arrangements being shown in Fig. 63.
Typically, a small triangular frontal ganglion lies above the oesophagus, a short distance in front of the brain.
The frontal ganglion controls movements of the fore gut (Mohl, 1972).
Its removal from immature stages reduces their growth and increases the osmolarity of the blood, apparently through hormonally controlled diuresis (Clark and Anstee, 1972; Penzlin, 1972).
Anteriorly the frontal ganglion gives off a frontal nerve which passes to the clypeus, and a pair of lateral roots connect the frontal ganglion with the tritocerebrum.
Posteriorly it emits a recurrent nerve which extends along the mid-dorsal line of the oesophagus and, passing just beneath the brain, expands a short distance behind the latter into a hypocerebral gang/ion.
The recurrent nerve leaves the hypocerebral ganglion as a median or paired lateral oesophageal nerve and passes back to the hinder region of the fore gut, where it (or each branch) terminates in a ventricular ganglion.
This innervates the adjacent region of the fore and middle intestine.
A pair of corpora cardiaca lies on the oesophagus just behind the brain, each joined with the hypocerebral ganglion.
They are also connected with the protocerebrum,
and include both nervous and endocrine structures (p. 274).
Connected with them by nerves are the non-nervous corpora allata, with important endocrine functions (see p. 276).
Among variations on this generalized Pterygote plan may be mentioned the connection of the frontal ganglion with the protocerebrum by a median nervus connectivus, the regression of the hypocerebral ganglion and varying degrees of fusion between the hypocerebral ganglion, the corpora cardiaca and the corpora allata, culminating in the condition found in the larvae of Cyclorrhaphan Diptera where all three fuse to form a composite structure known as Weismann's ring which encircles the aorta just behind the brain (p. 278).
2.
The Ventral Sympathetic Nervous System (Fig. 64), when typically developed (Zawarsin, 1924), consists of a pair of transverse nerves associated with each ganglion of the ventral nerve-cord; each pair is connected with the ganglion preceding it by a median longitudinal nerve.
The transverse nerves pass to the spiracles of their segment (Case, 2957; Miller, 2967).
In many orders of insects, each transverse nerve is also connected in various ways with the so-called perisympathetic system, consisting of neurohaemal organs that release the products of neurosecretory cells in the ventral ganglia (Raabe, 2972).
3.
The so-called Caudal Sympathetic Nervous System arises from the posterior compound ganglion of the ventral nerve-cord and supplies the reproductive system and posterior part of the gut; it is, however, difficult to draw a clear distinction between such a system and the visceral branches of the peripheral nervous system considered below.
The Peripheral Nervous System
Strictly speaking, this includes all the nerves radiating from the ganglia of the central and sympathetic nervous Systems.
The ultrastructure of the larger nerves resembles that of ganglia, with an outer lamella of collagen fibres in a mucopolysaccharide matrix secreted by perineurial cells, and with other glial cells lying most abundantly near the larger axons (Osborne, 1966; Huddart, 1971 b).
Micro-anatomical accounts of peripheral nerve distribution are generally fragmentary, dealing only with the innervation of particular organs but for more detailed descriptions of thoracic and abdominal innervation in selected species see Nuesch (1954, 2957), Wittig (1955), Pipa and Cook (1959), Schmitt (1962) and others.
Of morphological interest is their evidence that the nervous system is not very much more conservative in its evolution than are the muscular and exoskeletal systems: muscles which seem to form an integral part of one segment may in part be innervated from the ganglia of other segments.
In some viscera, such as the salivary glands of Periplaneta, which are supplied from both the suboesophageal ganglion and the stomatogastric system, nerves reaching an acinus form a plexus on its surface and the axons then penetrate between the acinar cells to end in close contact with the  gland-cell membranes by specially differentiated terminations (Whitehead, 1971).
The junctions between peripheral nerve-endings and muscles are also specialized regions (Osborne, 2967), as are the stretch-receptors that form part of the proprioceptor sensory system (p. 230) and from which connections join the central nervous system.
Various regions of the gut are elaborately innervated (e.g. Zawarsin, 1916; Orlov, 1924), with multipolar neurons in or on the intestinal wall.
In the blowfly Phormia this system helps to regulate feeding: a group of 4–8 neurons are located in branches of the median abdominal nerve and respond to changes in the volume of the crop (Gelperin, 1971a, b).
The reproductive system, too, has a complex innervation concerned in copulation and oviposition (Rehm, 1939; Degrugillier and Leopold, 1972; Grossman and Parnas, 1973).
Lastly, the integument is supplied with a delicate plexus of nerve fibres and sensory neurons; these differentiate from epidermal cells and acquire connections distally with cuticular sensilla and proximally with the central nervous system (Zawarsin, 1912a, b; Rogosina, 1928; Wigglesworth, 1953; Finlayson, 1972, Hasenfuss, 2973).
Modifications of the Nervous System
There are many degrees of cerebral development in insects, more or less clearly correlated with the complexity of the insect's sensory equipment or behaviour (Howse, 1975).
Thus, the volume of the brain is th of the body volume in Apis and th in Formica, but only th in  Melolontha and th in Dytiscus.
Again, the optic lobes are developed in proportion to the size of the eyes and the antennal lobes related to the development of the antennae and the senses mediated by them.
Internally, the mushroom bodies attain great size and complexity in Hymenoptera with elaborate behaviour.
Structural differences in the brains of drone, worker and queen bees appear to be correlated with the degree of development of the special instincts and activities of the three forms.
Further, by comparing the size of the mushroom bodies to the brain as a whole it has been shown in the Hymenoptera that the sawflies come lowest in the scale and the social Hymenoptera highest, while the solitary bees occupy an intermediate position (Hanstrom, 1926; Pandazis, 1930; Gejvall, 1936; Goossen, 1949; and earlier workers; cf. also Zuberi, 2963, on termites).
In the ventral nerve-cord (Fig. 66), the most generalized condition occurs in the Thysanura, many larvae and some lower Pterygotes where the Suboesophageal ganglion, three thoracic and eight abdominal ganglia are separately visible, the most posterior being a composite ganglion.
Most Orthopteroid insects, Mecoptera, Trichoptera and Hymenoptera show only a little more concentration than this, but the metathoracic ganglion commonly fuses with   the first 1–3 abdominal ones and the 7th and subsequent abdominal ganglia form a compound centre.
The other orders show various increasing degrees of fusion, often reaching extremes.
Thus, in many Heteroptera, the suboesophageal and prothoracic ganglia are distinct but all the others have fused together.
In many Sternorrhynchan Homoptera and higher Diptera, only the suboesophageal ganglion and a single compound thoracico-abdominal gang-lion are to be seen while in the Coccoidea, Aphidoidea and some Coleopteran larvae all the ventral ganglia (including the suboesophageal) are united in a single centre.
Data amplifying these generalizations will be found in the chapters dealing with individual insect orders.
Physiology of the Nervous System
A detailed treatment of this topic cannot be attempted here and reference should be made to the reviews and selected papers cited on p.
I 15 If.
The biophysical processes involved in the conduction of nervous impulses in insects seem to be essentially similar to those in other invertebrates (Narahashi, 1963).
The resting potential of a giant axon of Periplaneta is about 80 mV; when the neuronal membrane is. depolarized temporarily (mainly through an increase in its permeability to sodium ions) an action potential of 85–100 mV, lasting about 1 ms, is produced.
The passage of such momentary changes of potential along an axon represents the propagation of the nervous impulse.
The velocity of conduction varies somewhat; in the giant axons of Periplaneta it occurs at about 7 metres per second, while in the afferent nerves from the paraprocts of Anax nymphs it is about 2 m -I (see, for example, Chapman and Pankhurst, 1967).
Synaptic junctions between neurons lie in the ganglionic neuropile (especially the glomeruli), where associations occur between axon branches or dendrites.
Interneuronal junctions between cell bodies (Landolt and Ris, 1966) or between axons and somata are rare or absent.
The synaptic zones are without glial processes, the participating axon branches or dendrites are separated by a synaptic cleft about 20 nm wide, and the presynaptic knob contains mitochondria, glycogen granules and vesicles.
The latter vary from about 30 to 70 nm in diameter with cores that may be electron-dense or electron-transparent (Boistel, 1968; Chiarodo, 1969; Chiarodo et at., 1970; Schurmann, 1970, 1972; and others).
In addition to the above chemical synapses, where the vesicles indicate the role of transmitter substances, other interneuronal contacts are formed by ephapses or tight junctions between the pre- and post-synaptic membranes; the ultrastructure of such contacts suggests that they are synapses across which electrical transmission occurs (e.g. Steiger, 1967; Huddart, 1971b).
The identity of the chemical transmitters in the insect nervous system has been discussed extensively (see Pitman, 1971; Gerschenfeld, 1973; McDonald, 1975).
Acetylcholine (ACh) and the enzymes that hydrolyse and synthesize it (acetylcholine esterase and choline acetylase) are present in relatively large quantities in insects (Smallman and Mansing, 1969) and it seems likely that acetylcholine is a transmitter at neuropilar axo-axonic synapses; y-aminobutyric acid (GABA) may also play a part in synaptic transmission in the neuropile.
Transmitter substances appear also to be released at neuromuscular junctions: there is evidence that glutamate is responsible for transmitting excitation from nerves to muscle (e.g. Beranek and Miller, 1969) and that GABA may act as an inhibitory transmitter at these sites.
In addition to the more or less complex pathways mapped histologically, several simpler pathways have now been analysed by electrophysiological recording techniques.
For example, in Calliphora flight starts after a jump due to the contraction of muscles running from the tergum to the trochanter of the mid leg.
Mulloney (1969) has shown that these muscles are activated by a motor neuron in the thorax which in turn is driven by two interneurons in they brain, from which descending paths synapse with the motor neurons in the thorax.
A more intensively studied pathway is that leading from the cerci or paraprocts through the last abdominal ganglion up ascending giant axons in the ventral nerve cord.
In the nymph of the dragonfly Anax imperator the giant fibres run the length of the cord (Fielden, 1960); they synapse with efferent fibres in the segmental nerves of the thoracic and abdominal ganglia and a rapid evasion response can be elicited by stimulating the afferent nerves from the paraprocts.
In Periplaneta the cercal nerve tracts lead directly into the extensively ramifying dendritic processes of the interneurons from which giant axons run forwards through the thorax to activate the antennae and a general alarm system, though the accompanying leg movements are controlled by separate motor neurons with more slowly conducting pathways (Dagan and Parnas, 1970; Milburn and Bentley, 1971; Harris and Smyth, 1971.
See also Seabrook, 1970b, 1971, for the giant fibre system of Schistocerca).
An important function of the nervous system is the central processing of information derived from the sense organs, especially from the compound eyes and auditory organs, which respond to stimuli with relatively elaborate spatial or temporal patterns.
In the ventral nerve cord of Locusta, for example, electrophysiological recording has detected several types of symmetrically arranged"acoustic interneurons dealing with impulses from the auditory tympanal organs in the first abdominal segment (Kalmring, Rheinlaender and Rehbein, 1972; Kalmring, Rheinlaender and Romer, 1972).
Three of these types depend on input from the organ of the same side, another responds to stimuli received by both sides, while a third type is unusual in simply measuring the repetition rate of the sound pattern.
Comparable mechanisms have been found in several other insect species (e.g. Fraser Rowell and McKay, 1969; McKay, 1969; Roeder, 1969).
The central processes involved in vision are likely to prove much more complicated (Horridge et at., 1965) but it is already clear that electrophysiological units in the optic lobes of selected Orthoptera, Diptera and Lepidoptera respond differentially when a variety of visual stimuli is presented to the insect.
Collett (1972), for example, found several directionally sensitive movement detectors in the brain of the hawkmoth Sphinx ligustri.
These included (a) medial protocerebral neurons with large binocular fields, projecting to the optic lobe or to the ventral nerve cord;(b) movement detectors projecting from the medulla interna of one optic lobe to the opposite medial protocerebrum, and (c) optic lobe output cells which excite the binocular movement detectors centrifugal to the medulla.
For other examples see Dingle and Fox (1966), Collett (1970), Mimura (1971) and Northrop and Guignon (1970).
The many interesting and sometimes elaborate forms of instinctive behaviour shown by insects have often been described and some have also been explained as simple taxes and kineses or interpreted in more complex ethological terms (Tinbergen, 1951; Baerends, 1959; Fraenkel and Gunn, 19612; Thorpe, 1963; Haskell, 1966; Evans, 1966; von Frisch, 1967; Sudd, 1967; Ewing and Manning, 1967; Manning, 1972).
The neural mechanisms that underlie this behaviour, and especially those by which a simple act is incorporated into a larger biologically  significant behaviour pattern, are now being studied increasingly, despite the many difficulties (Hoyle, 1970).
Most attention has been paid to the nervous control of motor activity in respiration, walking, flight, stridulation and mating behaviour.
In Locusta, for example, there is one neural pacemaker controlling spiracular opening and closing and another centre that controls ventilatory movements of the abdomen (Miller, 1966, 1967).
the centres are synchronized by interneurons that run from the ventilation centre to other interneurons which are antecedent to the spiracular motor neurons in the ganglion of the same segment as the spiracle concerned.
Apart from simple evasive and defensive reactions, in which they play a dominant role, reflex arcs seem mainly to be involved in perfecting movements that are initiated by central mechanisms or in helping to maintain the nervous system in a state of adequate excitation.
Studies on the nervous control mechanisms of insect flight (Wilson, 1968) suggest that a simple pattern of neural output to the flight-muscles, produced centrally, can support a form of flight, even in the absence of sensory input from wing receptors.
Similarly, in a physiological preparation of Periplaneta in which all sensory input from the legs had been eliminated, centrally generated patterns of activity could be demonstrated in the motor neurons that control the coxal levator and depressor muscles (Pearson and Iles, 1970).
Normal locomotion involves local reflexes, however, as is clearly shown in Carausius (Wendler, 1964).
Here the proprioceptor hair-plates of the legs lead to a "negative feedback" loop which moderates the exaggerated steps caused by a separate, centrally generated motor sequence.
The neural mechanisms involved in stridulation and epigamic behaviour of several species of Orthoptera have been intensively studied (Huber, 1965; Elsner and Huber, 1973).
By ablation experiments and the local electrical stimulation of parts of the brain of Gryllus campestris it has been shown that sites near the mushroom bodies control the production of normal song-rhythms, while stimulation of the central body leads to abnormal songs through the changed temporal pattern of sound-pulses.
In the grasshopper Gomphocerippus rufus elements of the male courtship pattern can be related to the activities of single motor units and sound production may be described quantitatively by reference to the efferent discharge to known groups of muscles (Elsner, 1968).
It is interesting that in Stenobothrus rubicundus the same nervous mechanism can induce two different activities: thoracic motor neurons produce identical firing patterns in controlling leg and wing movements so that certain fundamental features of the wing-beat pattern recur in stridulatory movements of the leg (Elsner, 1974).
Some insects are known to show simple forms of learning and memory (Alloway, 1972).
They can be trained to run simple mazes or to associate food with colours or other visual stimuli.
Bees, ants and some other Aculeate Hymenoptera remember the visual landmarks they use in following routes to and from their nests.
The neurophysiological basis of such reactions is unknown, but some analysis of very simple forms of learning has been made (Horridge, 1962: Hoyle, 1965).
Headless Periplaneta and Schistocerca can be trained to flex their legs for long periods in order to avoid an electric shock.
The response depends on continuous excitatory discharge to the coxal adductor muscles by only one or two neurons.
If a spontaneous fall occurs in this background discharge, a further electric shock causes the frequency to rise again several minutes or more; conversely, training to reduce the spontaneous discharge may also be accomplished.
Simple learning processes of this kind can occur in preparations containing only a single isolated ganglion (Eisenstein, 1972).
Lastly one may note the role played by the nervous system in controlling circadian behavioural patterns.
Circadian rhythms show persistent, stable periodicities of about 24 hours and may be observed in developmental, metabolic and behavioural events.
Behavioural periodicity of this kind has been found in locomotor, feeding and reproductive activities and are all likely to be controlled through the central nervous system (Brady, 1974).
The best studied example is the circadian rhythm of locomotor activity in Periplaneta, which is normally more active at night time than in daylight.
In order to maintain this circadian rhythm it is only necessary that one protocerebral lobe and the ipsilateral medulla externa and lobula should be in nervous connection with the thorax.
The simplest adequate interpretation of the evidence suggests that a driving circadian oscillator in the optic lobe is coupled electrically to the leg muscles via the protocerebrum, nerve cord connectives and thoracic ganglia, the whole system being modulated by sensory inputs which are integrated with the circadian oscillator output in the corpora pedunculata.