

2.
Swaledale
Beautiful Swaledale the land of rest,
Beautiful Swaledale I love thee the best,
The land it is set in a cultivate style,
The extension of Swaledale is twenty long mile.
(Old Yorkshire Ballad)
SWALEDALE has been called by many the most beautiful of all the dales and though I would argue with that definition, it is certainly one of the finest.
At the western head of Swaledale, Birk Dale, West Stones Dale and the beautifully named Whitsun Dale are tributary to the main dale, their becks joining below Wain Wath Force to become the river Swale, supposedly the fastest flowing river in England.
It is near this point that the Pennine Way crosses Swaledale from Tan Hill over the bleak mass of Stonesdale Moor, falling down into Keld and on by Thwaite to Shunner Fell.
If you've never seen the Tan Hill on a bleary winter's day when winds are driving wet sleet over the hellhole of Sleightholme Moor and the sky and the land are welded together in one sullen, sodden grey, then you've missed a treat.
The Tan Hill Inn is the highest public house in England and for my money just about the loneliest.
I remember staggering in there one afternoon after crossing Sleightholme Moor.
It had been raining all day and by the time I got to the inn I looked like a pink sponge in a cagoule.
In the pub were twenty or so other walkers, similarly soaked, all crowding round a massive wood stove.
By closing time the place was like an alcoholic Turkish bath, and leaving it for the trip over Stonesdale Moor in the lashing rain was a sore wrench indeed.
Possibly one of the finest views of upper Swaledale is the view from the Butter Tubs Pass above Cliff Side, where the narrow upper dale begins to widen out towards Thwaite.
The valley, homely and tree clad, is spread below you and as you drop down from the pass, just above Thwaite, you can see Muker down the dale looking like a toy village.
From Muker by Ivelet and on to Gunnerside the dale is steep sided but pleasantly  wooded while Gunnerside itself is on the site of an Old Norse settlement.
Its name comes from "Gunner's sett" , the word "sett" meaning upland summer sheiling, so Gunnerside was the summer pastures of a man called Gunner.
The area from here to Reeth is rich in the history of lead-mining and the moors about are riddled with shafts and workings.
Reeth is a fine Dales town more typical of an old East Riding town than a town of the Craven dales.
It has a broad village green, a Post Office stores and a good selection of pubs and cafes.
Reeth has always been a good walking centre, particularly for walkers from Tyneside and Teesside, and on many occasions I've heard the hills round about echoing to a sound I love so well, the lilt of Geordie accents.
Swaledale is most famous, I suppose, for its sheep, a hardy black-faced breed that survive the winters well and cross well with other breeds such as Suffolks.
According to Billy Mason of Deepdale, they are also good sheep to keep because they "heugh" easy.
That is, they keep to their own area of fell and don't wander.
Swaledale is one of my favourite little dales, secret and full of character.
Thwaite to Keld, back by Crackpot Hall to Muker
THWAITE hides itself away at the upper end of Swaledale as though it were trying to shelter from the rush and madness of twentieth-century life, and I can't say that I blame it.
Little cottages line lanes that jut off from each other as though they too were trying to hide away.
It has a telephone box, a bed and breakfast place or two, and a shop-cum-guesthouse called the Kearton Guest House.
The Keartons were two brothers who were pioneers in the study of nature and wildlife photography.
Richard was born in 1862 in Thwaite and when he was twenty years old or so he left Swaledale to work for a London publishing firm.
He retired in 1898 and devoted the rest of his life to nature study and wildlife photography.
His brother, Cherry, joined him in his work and together they became the first men to illustrate books on natural history throughout with photographs.
Richard died in 1928.
Cherry went on to become a popular radio broadcaster and was sadly killed when leaving Broadcasting House during an air raid in 1940.
Thwaite is also on the Pennine Way and it was the Pennine Way route I took one August cloudy day lip and out from the village towards Keld.
It would be hard to miss the path out of Thwaite, because it is well signposted by a farmer who has painted "Pennine Way, single file" on every stone or stump available, and why not?
A crowd walking eight abreast can trample a good-size swathe through a hay meadow and single file just makes common sense, although I must admit the signs did seem to be something of an overkill.
I followed the path through the grass and flowers, and Bill the dog, who has no aesthetic sense at all, occasionally attacked a clump of cranesbill by rolling oil it.
At a wall corner I stopped to look back at Thwaite's collection of stone houses shimmering in the dale.
Behind them hulked the great mass of Shunner Fell below the flanks of which the Butter Tubs Pass wormed its way over into Wensleydale.
The fields between my viewpoint and the village were typical of Swaledale.
Each field had its own small barn for wintering stock, a custom said to be typical of the early Norse settlers that came to this dale, leaving on the landscape the marks of their hands and on the speech the sound of their tongue.
At this end of Swaledale many of the place names are of pure Norse origin.
 "Thwaite" means "clearing" , "keld" means "spring" , and "muker" , where this walk would end, means "small cultivated field" .
Above Thwaite the Pennine Way branches off towards the right, behind the intake wall, while a signpost to the left reads "Bridleway to Keld" .
This is part of the old corpse road that leads from Keld over the flanks of Kisdon Hill and turns above Thwaite to follow a line above the river, passing by Muker and on to Grinton.
Before ground was consecrated at Muker in 1580, the nearest ground to Keld consecrated for the burial of corpses was at Grinton.
The dead were carried in wicker coffins from Keld along the corpse road, stops being made along the way for food and drink, and every so often there were great "coffin stones" at the side of the way where the pallbearers could rest the body (one such stone still stands at the side of Ivelet Bridge).
Much of the old corpse road is still there and can be traced on the map.
The route stretches some twelve to fifteen miles and parties often took two days and a night to make the journey, leaving the corpse in the "deadhouse" at Blades (now ill ruins) overnight.
The corpse road avoided the villages along the route for fear that the spirit of the dead should be enticed to return, a fear that in fact stemmed from Norse mythology, in which the corpse way was thought to mirror the last journey of the soul from the earth into the underworld.
The spirit was dissuaded from returning to haunt the living by the relatives placing soil on the corpse to fasten it to the ground, putting burning embers outside the door to bar its path and whispering in its ear the plea that it would not return.
The myth of the returned loved one is rooted deep in both Celtic and Norse mythology and has carried over into more recent times.
 "The Unquiet Grave" , "The Grey Cock" and "She Moved Through the Fair" are just three examples of folk songs that deal with the subject.
In a version of "The Unquiet Grave" collected from an old singer in 1906 the ghost of the dead lover returns after a year and a day and asks:
What do you want of me, sweetheart,
Or what is it you crave?
I want one kiss of your lily-white lips
And that is all I crave.
My lips they are as cold as clay,
My breath be heavy and strong,
If you have one kiss of my lily-white lips
Your life will not be long.
When the corpse arrived at Grinton churchyard it was buried without a coffin in a linen shroud.
In the seventeenth century a law was brought in which forbade the burial of the dead in any but woollen shrouds, because it was hoped by this decree to support the failing woollen trade of the Dales.
Further to the west the Ingleton Parish Register for the period records after many burials that the dead were "buried in wool according to the act" and in Swaledale itself, when Ann Baker was buried in 1692 at Grinton Church, her father, Adam, a lead-miner from Oldgang, was fined five pounds for not burying his daughter in wool.
Corpse roads exist throughout the Dales.
There is one on Cross Fell and another that runs from Cotterdale by the ruins of High Dyke Farm to Lunds Chapel.
The most famous of all is the one that runs from Osmotherley to Raven Scar known as the Lyke Wake Walk, along which corpses were carried forty miles.
Today I was following not the valley path of the corpse way but the pathway to Keld that runs above Northgang Scar from which the views across to Black Hill and up to Swinner Gill are wonderful.
In fact one of the great things about this walk is that it keeps for most of the time to the shoulder of the fells so that they fall away steep sided below you giving you clear views out and down.
Approaching Keld I dropped down into the dale where Great Sleddale Beck falls over a succession of stairs, hard bands of limestone that have resisted the action of the water to form an impressive series of falls all of which are within a mile or so of Keld village.
Downstream from the village are Ease Gill Force and Kisdon Force while upstream are Catrake Force and Wain Wath Force.
At Kisdon Force, Bill the dog fell in the river and, because I had laughed at him, shook himself all over me.
Keld, like Thwaite, is a sleepy little place and will be forever remembered by me as the milkless village.
I had made a flask of tea and some sandwiches but had run out of milk at home, so I brought a stoppered bottle along planning to buy some milk in Keld.
The youth hostel was closed, the only shop was disguised as a garage and had no window, a local quaker family had helped to close the only pub in the village in the 1950s, and a farmer I asked said he had none.
As the ancient Mariner might have said,
Cows, cows everywhere
Yet ne'er a drop to drink.
Keld is more famous, however, in Dales folklore for being the birthplace of Neddy Dick.
Neddy was an old Dales character who played the harmonium and who found an old bell one day which he placed on top of his harmonium because he liked the sound of it.
Eventually he built up a collection of bells which he played in time to the tunes he would play on his harmonium.
His most famous invention, however, was a stone xylophone, invented when Neddy noticed that a stone he had found in a beck gave out a clear note when struck.
He built up a complete instrument and travelled round the Dales on a horse and cart playing it.
After his death his "rock band" disappeared and was last seen, rumour says, broken and tumbled together in an old wash-house.
From Keld to Wain Wath Force was a quarter-mile of road-walking and, leaving the road below the force, I sat by the bridge on the track to West Stonesdale Farm with my milkless tea and sandwiches.
The beck falls away under the bridge here in a short cascade and it was a pleasant spot to sit watching clouds crossing the sky and the breeze shaking the delicate water avens on the bank.
Lunch over, I walked on to where the Coast to Coast Path and Pennine Way cross above Ease Gill Force.
It was two years since I had stood on this spot on the way from Tan Hill to Hawes; then the force had been a sluggish trickle after a dry spring, now, two years later almost to the day, it was a respectable torrent.
From the force the path left the Pennine Way and climbed towards my next port of call, Crackpot Hall.
Crackpot Hall is in ruins now, with its roof gone and floors crumbled in, leaving bedroom fireplaces suspended crazily high above the ground.
Behind the hall and further to the west at Beldi Hill are the great humps of spoil heaps left behind by the lead-mines.
 "Crackpot" comes from the Old Norse meaning "pothole of the crows" , and there is a fine view from its ruins downdale to Muker.
It's hard to imagine now the armies of men working here  and at Beldi Hill, but at one time the area must have been loud with the noise of men and their picks, crowbars, shovels, barrows, crushing hammers and water-wheels.
Although not as devastated as Gunnerside by the effects of mining, this end of the dale none the less has its scars and wounds.
Beldi Hill was the scene of pitched battles between rival gangs of lead-miners in the 1770s when workings were flooded, and Spoutgill Smelt Mill became the scene of violent fighting when a man called David Brunskill was thrown bodily into the hush, a deep gully scoured out of the fellside during the search for lead-bearing veins.
From Beldi Hill and Crackpot Hall I walked below Buzzard Scar into the deep gash of Swinner Gill where more lead-mine workings, spoil heaps and ruined huts lent an air of sad majesty to the valley.
A fine stone bridge spans the beck below Swinner Gill Kirk and I crossed it to follow the gill back below Moss Dam Hags and out along the top of Arn Gill Scar.
The sun had moved towards the west now and the cloud had broken, sweeping sunlight along the Dales, silvering the river and cutting hard shadows by walls and hedges.
I dropped down following a lovely track through the woods below Ivelet Boards and followed the pathway down to Ramps Holme, disturbing a weasel on the way.
Across the bridge the track followed the old corpse road back to Muker through meadows fuller with flowers than I had ever seen before.
Purple patches of cranesbill lay amongst lakes of buttercups, clover and sweet cecily, the whole hay meadow looking like a painting by Monet.
Bill, no lover of the scenic, ran ahead to Muker where the Farmer's Arms had just opened.
Bill and I sat outside, in the sun, and wetted our respected throttles, he with water, I with a pint of Theakstons Bitter — well, it's wasted on a dog.
Gunnerside and the lead-mines
THE area of fell and moor that strikes north from Swaledale towards Tan Hill, Stainmore Gap, Keld and Reeth is a scene of some of the worst devastation visited by man on the landscape of the Dales.
Derelict buildings, old workings, dams and hushes scar the land and everywhere there are the cones of spoil heaps that stretch acre upon acre in some places, so that you feel at times that you could be standing on the surface of the moon.
This is the area where, like Grassington in Wharfedale, lead was mined from pre-Roman times until early this century.
We know that lead was mined by the Brigantes because after the battle of Stanwick and the defeat of Venutius in AD 74 by the Ninth Spanish Legion under Petilius Cerialis, many of the defeated warriors were taken as slaves to work the lead-mines at Hurst in Swaledale and Greenhow Hill in Wharfedale, where lead pigs bearing Roman markings, probably stolen by native workers, have been unearthed from their hiding places.
During Anglo-Saxon and monastic times, lead continued to be mined throughout Swaledale, although on a small scale and a  fairly unorganised basis.
The rise of the Elizabethan merchant class, however, meant that capital and management were available for the exploitation of both land and people.
Under their stewardship and that of their descendants, development of the lead-bearing fields expanded until by the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the pattern of lead-mining in the Dales had become established.
Landowners such as the Earl of Cumberland and the Duke of Devonshire employed agents to develop the mining fields, bringing skilled men from Derbyshire and Cornwall with their knowledge of mining and mine drainage.
Since so many of the walks in this area are dominated by the old lead-mine workings it's probably worthwhile looking for a little here at the history and techniques of lead-mining.
At the time of mountain building in the development of the earth, molten granite was injected into the earth's crust from a great depth.
These intrusions caused the limestone and sandstone rocks above to buckle, crack and fault over the subterranean peaks of granite.
As the granite cooled it squeezed out hot fluids containing mineral ores in solution.
These filled the cracks and crystallised to form veins of quartz and lead-bearing ores, mainly sulphites.
They lay within the cracked rocks like the jam in a crazy sponge cake.
The heart of the Swaledale mining field is a vein called the Friarfold Vein running from the neighbourhood of Keld across to Arkengarthdale.
From the Friarfold Vein complicated branch veins run off in all directions in what is called a ribbon deposit.
The standard way of exploring fur lead was by searching for veinstone pebbles in the becks of gills, and when enough of the veinstones were found to indicate a good deposit of lead-bearing ores a dam was built up above on the fell at the head of the beck.
When the dam had collected enough water behind it, it was smashed apart letting tons of water race down the gillside to scour out the bed of the stream, exposing the lead-bearing rocks.
These manmade gullies, some massive sears on the landscape thirty feet deep or more, are called hushes.
The miners would then search the hush for the vein and would cut trenches in the hillside, herring-boning outwards from the hush to discover the direction in which the vein led into the hillside.
From then on there were three ways of winning the ore.
Open cast, the earliest form of working, usually led to the second method when shafts were sunk into the hill.
When the ore got too deep to be raised by surface workings, the third method was tried and levels were driven into the valley side.
Once won, the "bouse" , a mixture of rock spar and ore, had to be separated ready for smelting.
This was done on dressing floors.
Firstly, the ore was hand picked over to take out "deads" (that is, any rock that bore no ore whatsoever); then it was crushed by hand or by machines to a workable size; then last of all it was washed on racks that shook heavy ore to the bottom while the lighter spar came to the top and was washed or scraped away.
It was now ready for smelting.
Lead in the Pennine area exists largely in the form of lead sulphide, or galena.
The sulphur was burned off, thus producing a lead oxide which then had to be reduced leaving behind the pure lead.
The smelt mills had long flues that in some cases snaked up the hillside and across the fell.
The flues induced fierce draughts and also, because of their length, allowed vaporised lead to condense within them.
When the vaporised lead cooled, it was collected by small boys with brushes and shovels.
Fortunes were made by some mine owners and millions of pounds'-worth of lead was taken.
From one mine alone in this area, Blakethwaite Mine, lead worth more than £120,000 (£48 million in today's money) was taken in the early nineteenth century.
For the miners, however, life was hard and short.
A walk of often three or four miles across wild and featureless moorland to some of the furthest workings would be followed by hours of bone-twisting work in the most miserable conditions.
Then, at the end of the day, wet and tired, they would have to make the same walk back again.
In winter that walk back home must have been hell: sleet, rain, snow and ice blowing across the moss, wet clothes clinging to chilled skin and ahead and behind a long  line of miners' lanterns "bobbing like glowworms in the dark" .
Lung complaints from working in foul, damp mines or from inhaling the sulphurous fumes from the smelting mills were widespread.
In the 1940s Ewan McColl, the folksinger, and Joan Littlewood, the playwright and theatre director, recorded an old Dales lead-miner singing a song called "Fourpence a Day" which tells more truthfully than the industrial archaeologists' sometimes ebullient picture of the grandeur of Victorian enterprise, the real benefits of lead-mining for the many — simply hardship and poverty.
The ore is waiting in the tubs, the snow's upon the Fell,
Canny folk are sleeping yet but lead is reet to sell.
Come me little washer lad, come let's away,
We're bound down to slavery for fourpence a day.
CHORUS
Fourpence a day me lads, and very hard to work,
And never a pleasant word from a gruffy-looking Turk.
But his conscience it may fail him and his heart it may give way,
Then he'll raise our wages to ninepence a day.
It's early in the morning we rise at five o'clock,
The little slaves are at the door to knock, knock, knock,
Come me little washer lad, come let's away,
It's very hard to work lad for fourpence a day.
Me father was a miner he worked down in the Town,
Hard work and poverty, they always kept him down.
He aimed for me to go to school but brass he couldn't pay,
So I'd to go to the washing racks for fourpence a day.
Me mother gets up at five o'clock with tears upon her cheeks,
She packs me bag upon me back which has to last a week.
It often breaks her great big heart when she to me doth say,
 "I never thought you'd work lad for fourpence a day." 
Because of rising costs and the import of cheap foreign lead in the late 1800s, the market collapsed and by the early years of this century the mines had all closed.
Thousands left Swaledale to work in the pits of Durham and the mills of Lancashire.
Some even went to America across "t'Girt Dub" (the Big Pond), while others went to work in lead-mines in Spain.
It's a sad story but not one without some humour, for I can't help but wonder if in some tiny village in Spain there is a child with the name Jesus Francisco Brunskill or Jose Fothergill.
There are so many paths and old miners' tracks around this area of Swaledale that you could spend years walking them and exploring the old workings and still not cover them all.
One classic route follows Gunnerside Gill to the dams at Blakethwaite and returns back to Gunnerside by Hard Level, Old Gang and the track over Brownsey Moor by Long Brae to Potting.
I walked this path one July Sunday with Tony, Bill the dog, my wife Pat and Matt (Matt is a lugubrious Yorkshireman with a very droll sense.of humour and together with Tony has been a walking companion for many years).
Tony and Matt had brought lamps to look in some of the levels and we left the car in Gunnerside and followed the sign by the bridge that said "Public Footpath to Gunnerside Gill" .
It was a pleasant walk along well-trodden paths through Birbeck Woods beyond which we came upon the first set of workings in Gunnerside Gill: the remains of dressing floors belonging to the Old Gang Mining Company.
Across the gill a rusting compressed air chamber and a few ruined walls were all that remained of the Sir Francis Level, one of the last and most mechanised mines driven in the dale.
The miners used rock drills and compressed air to drive through hard rock and the level had a hydraulic engine, worked by water from the dam at Sun Hush, which had such a head of water that it developed up to fifty horsepower and worked both the water pumps to drain the deep levels and the winding gear.
The mine was opened in 1864 and closed in 1882, by which time the company had mined almost £40,000-worth of ore, which at today's prices is perhaps the equivalent of £16 million.
Matt muttered something about the Sir Francis Level and said he had been here before.
"If I remember rightly there's a way into the Sir Francis Level and I think that a lot of the old machinery is still down there.
There's a big engine room a couple of hundred feet underground or so with all the winding gear and the cages and the hydraulic pumps."
Matt often says things like that and he's usually right.
His remarks start, "If I remember rightly," and finish,"Ah yes!
There it is."
Tony and I reckon that when Matt goes to heaven he'll have his nose in an  Ordnance Survey Map and he'll be saying,"If I remember rightly there should be an old bloke around here with long grey hair and a grey beard and a long white nightie on.
Ah yes!
There he is."
As we walked further upstream, the gills showed increasing evidence of the works of man and at Friars Hush and Bunton Hush the old levels, the tailings of spoil and the ruined buildings haunt the landscape.
Looking across the"alley to the scars of North Hush, it seemed hard to believe that these deep gouges in the earth were manmade and were not the result of some massive upheaval in the earth's crust.
We stopped for a while and, leaving Billy well secured outside with Pat, took our headlamps and torches and walked into the level.
I hate the sort of book that says, "Now a word of warning here," but I've got to say that all these old mine workings are dangerous.
Some are in a state of imminent collapse and in others, side passages branch off in all directions and shafts can suddenly appear at your feet dropping down hundreds of feet into the darkness.
Tony and Matt are both experienced cavers, they have the right equipment, have had a guide to the mines produced by the Northern Association of Caving Clubs, and, more importantly, Matt at least has done this sort of thing before, or as he said, If I remember rightly…"
Had I not been with Matt and Tony I wouldn't have considered setting foot inside the level.
Knowing I had two members of the local cave rescue team with me, I followed them in.
The first hundred yards or so of the level were stone dressed and arched over our heads in a well-made curve.
Water some six inches deep or so was running along the old rail bed.
After eighty yards we came to the rails and sleepers themselves under a foot of water leading onwards into the blackness.
A few yards further in, the lining of the tunnel finished and we were on good ground.
Straight, clean-cut stone walls and a steady slabbed roof led on into the hill.
A side tunnel branched up slightly into a chamber that must have been worked as an exploration into the vein.
On the roof I could see the marks of the picks of long-dead miners cut into the rock as they crouched here in the dark, hacking out the ore with no light other than the dim wicks of the oil lamps or the candles stuck on their helmets.
We carried on for a few more yards, then retraced our steps down to the main level and back out into the sunshine.
It was easy to imagine what relief the miners must have felt at the end of a long day's work in those conditions when they saw the mouth of the tunnel framing the daylight before them.
At the head of Gunnerside Gill beyond the ruins of Blakethwaite Mine are the ruined dams of Blakethwaite, and it was here that we stopped for our lunch.
The dams themselves have long been disused.
The lower dam has been breached and most of the signs of its previous existence are gone, while the upper dam, though it still has a fine water race below it, is silted over and is now a peaty, muddy reed-bed.
From Blakethwaite Dams we walked on south past the shooting box belonging to Lord Peel's estate through a landscape which was now a desert of lead-mine spoil, called on the map by the strangely incongruous name of Merry Field.
A broad Land-rover track led us down to Hard Level where lived poor Adam Baker who was fined for not burying his daughter in a woollen shroud "according to the law" .
Coming to Old Gang Smelting Mills we stopped to look for a while at the most complete collection of buildings still standing in the mining field, although comparing them now with photographs taken in the 1930s it's obvious that they're slowly falling apart.
They're still impressive, with the chimney, flues, dressing floors and the remnants of the smelting hearths clustered together in a valley whose sides are covered with heaps of spoil.
Far above on the moor we could see some new machinery which meant that someone was working out the tailings for spar and barytes for the North Sea oil industry where they're used in the drilling Processes.
The Old Gang Smelting Mills reminded me of an old deserted coal pit I played around as a child.
It had the same air of dereliction and sadness, but something else too.
Old colliers used to say that in the mines sometimes you could hear noises that  were not just the noise of settlement or movement but something different, the feeling that someone else that you couldn't see was working near you.
It's something that runs through mining folklore and can be traced right back into the lore of medieval German miners.
In England they called the noises "the old man working" .
Now, at Old Gang there's that same air that certain places have, as though what has gone on before has left on the landscape not just scars but a presence.
There's a poem by Percy Bysshe Shelley about a traveller in the desert who finds in a vast empty plain the feet of what once was a colossal statue, and engraved on the plaque below the feet are the words,
My name is Ozymandias, king of kings: Look on my work, ye Mighty, and despair!
That same air of confidence that has ultimately come to nothing but dust pervades the area of the Old Gang Smelting Mills and the workings and hushes roundabout.
We cut out from Old Gang across the grouse moor of Lord Peel of Gunnerside Lodge with its shooting butts and its newly cut Land-rover track, a great scar bulldozed across the moor, and followed the path down to Potting.
Swaledale opened up below us as we stepped down off the tops.
Gunnerside lay dozing in the Sunday sunshine and the new-mown fields patching the valley towards Muker had on their best Sunday golden-green.
As we dropped down towards Gunnerside, rabbits exploded in all directions and Bill had so many to choose from he lay down confused, unable to make his mind up, looking at us pitifully as though we could make up his mind for him.
 "If I remember rightly," said Matt, "there's a tearoom in Gunnerside that sells strawberry scones about this time of the year." 
He was dead right.
Later on in the year I went back to Gunnerside with some friends and explored the Sir Francis Level.
Richard Chambers, a fine caver who had helped me photograph the Yordas Cave main chamber, Jeff Clegg and Matt Kirby of the Earby Mines Research Group and myself left the road near Gunnerside Lodge and clanked our way up the old miners' path along the west side of Gunnerside Gill one damp late September evening.
We were wearing wetsuits, helmets and lamps and carrying ex-army ammunition boxes that were watertight and into which had gone the cameras and flashguns we were going to use to photograph the mine.
A short ladder pitch from one of the ventilation shafts led down into the level.
It was flooded with water that in my case came up to my armpits and in Jeff's case the back of his knees.
Ploughing through this for almost an hour brought us well into the hillside and at length to where the rail bed rose out of the water and into the old engine room.
There, two hundred and more feet below the moor, is a truly amazing relic of the Industrial Revolution.
It had taken us an hour to walk but had taken the men who drove it thirteen years of drilling and blasting through 748 fathoms of solid rock to build it.
Some 4610 feet from the side of Gunnerside Gill lies the engine room and hydraulic engine that pumped the mine clear of water and wound up the tubs of lead ore from the levels another 130 feet below the engine room.
The passageway here splits into two, one branch leading to the engine sump where a cage lies jammed for ever, the other leading to where a small spiral stairway runs up from a hole in the wall, over the tunnel, to the engine room which, apart from a few acts of vandalism and the ravages of time, is very much as it was on the day it was left.
The hydraulic pump and the winding gear, the great pipes which brought the water down from the fell above to drive the engine, were almost intact, although somebody (a famous industrial museum, it is rumoured) has pinched some of the valve rods.
We stayed for an hour and a half taking photographs and looking round before wading back for another hour with our ammo boxes again.
Then, emerging to a night full of stars with our helmet lamps lighting our path before us, we walked across the fell back to Gunnerside and closing time.
Old "If I remember rightly" had been right again.
3.
Wensleydale
WENSLEYDALE is a big, fat, friendly dale, full of green fields, waterfalls, brass bands and cows.
It has two castles, a Roman fort, a giant, the Devil and a sunken town.
Rightly called Yoredale in the Middle Ages after the river Ure which flows through it, the dale later came to take its name from the little market town of Wensley, further down the dale.
From the heights of Newby Head the old turnpike road sweeps down through Widdale and over the foot of Ten End to where Hawes marks the head of the dale.
At Hawes there are shops, cafes, pubs, a rope works, the biggest sheep mart in the Dales and a cheese factory where the traditional Wensleydale cheeses with their distinctive mild flavour and crumbly flesh are made.
Across the river from Hawes is Hardraw with its much-visited waterfall, while further down the dale lie two bonny villages, Askrigg and Bainbridge.
Askrigg, the village that was the setting for the television series "All Creatures Great and Small" based on the books by James Herriot, was also the centre of a great clockmaking tradition that was begun by John Ogden, who came there from Halifax in 1681.
His brass-faced clocks had only one hand and a calendar because, in the years before bus and train timetables and television programme times, all the Dalesmen needed to know was the hour and the day.
Ogden's craft was carried on by Christopher Caygill, who made brass-faced clocks with minute hands, and one of his apprentices, who married his master's daughter, took over the business and made clocks with painted faces.
Bainbridge has a lovely village green which was the setting for nothing more remarkable than the fact that I arrived there one day to walk over from Bainbridge to Cam Houses with Tony and Eddie, the landlord from my local pub, only to discover that I'd left my walking boots back at home in Dentdale and had to do the entire walk in a pair of fur-lined cowboy boots, which earned me the nickname of Roy Rogers for the rest of the week.
A mile and a kick south-west of Bainbridge itself are "the shining levels" of Semer Water and above them the flat-topped hill of Addlebrough, where the Devil and a giant are said to have thrown stones at one another.
Further down the dale lies Aysgarth, with its National Park centre and spectacular falls.
Where what is now a carriage museum was once a woollen mill where the red shirts for Garibaldi's army were made.
So the man who unified Italy and gave his name to a biscuit bought his shirts in Aysgarth.
Fame indeed for such a little village!
Across the dale from Aysgarth, Penhill Beacon and West Burton lie at the northernmost end of that beautiful secluded dale, Waldendale.
Waldendale means the dale of the Welshman, Welsh being a word once used to describe any foreigner, though in this case it probably refers to the last remnants of the Celtic peoples who retreated to this dale in the face of Norse and Anglo-Saxon expansion.
Where the main dale leaves the National Park and opens out into the flatter farmland of the old North Riding is Wensley itself, now a tiny village compared to its bigger neighbour of Leyburn, a busy typical northern Dales town with its wide main street and broad pavements laid out for market stalls.
If I was asked what I felt characterised the walking around Wensleydale, I would say that it has all the expanse and sweep of the bigger dales like Wharfedale but that it also has jewels of villages like West Burton and Askrigg and the fine falls of Hardraw and Aysgarth.
It's a friendly rolling dale, green and fertile, yet with limestone scars, gritstone crags and high ridges, giving miles of walking along the high wild peaks or the gentler riverside paths.
Bainbridge, Semer Water and the Roman Road
BAINBRIDGE is a handsome little village on the Hawes-Leyburn road with a broad village green, complete with village stocks, where miscreants of olden days, instead of being fined or having their licences endorsed, were pelted with rotten garbage and sometimes even worse.
The rolling forest of Wensleydale that surrounded Bainbridge has gone now, with its deer and wild boar, but the horn that was blown at dusk every evening between Holyrood and Shrovetide to lead travellers out of the forest to safety still hangs behind the bar of the Rose and Crown, although it is blown now only at village weddings.
Just out of Bainbridge by the road that snakes up by Brough Hill are the remains of a Roman camp built by Agricola in the first century AD to police the area.
A fast marching road led from Bainbridge to Cam High Road to meet up with the Roman road running from Chester to Carlisle.
Legionaries would be marched up the road on and under Ingleborough to quell the troublesome Brigantes.
They were not always successful, however: the fort was rebuilt in AD 158 and was sacked again in AD 197.
There's a grand walk that begins and ends at Bainbridge, travelling along the Roman road, cutting across to the bottom end of Raydale by Marsett and Stalling Busk to Semer Water and back along the river Bain to the village green.
It's one I first came across in one of the handy little circular walk leaflets published by the National Parks and, though I generally like to devise my own routes, it's a cracking walk and at ten miles of easy walking a good stroll for hot high summer day or days when low cloud and drizzle make high fell-walking a grey punishment.
I've walked the Roman road on wet windy December days when clouds have sailed across Drumaldrace and the stone walls have been silvered with rain and I've sat by Semer Water on sweltering August days when the shimmering haze has turned the wild summer colours into pastel shades.
But the best day of all was in high summer when the sky was a deep blue spattered with shoals of small flat-bottomed clouds and the sun turned the flowers and leaves in hedgerow and field into a giddy mosaic.
I left Bainbridge by the lane leading out of the village from the Post Office.
The path took me under trees in full leaf and out across open fields where below me to the left the river Bain, the shortest river in England, flowed on its two-and-a-half-mile journey from Semer Water to the river Ure.
Somebody (a clever "university type" , so it is said) in a pub in Bainbridge once loudly informed one of the locals, "Do you know that the river Bain is  the shortest river in England?" 
 "Aye," said the old farmer, "that's cos it smoked when it were little." 
After crossing several fields I turned down to the right to follow a metalled road for a while until I reached the first real treat of the day, the Roman road.
It is not bard to imagine legionaries marching briskly along this track because, even though it is now walled as a result of the nineteenth-century enclosures, it runs straight as a spear across the fell, totally unlike the whirligig roads of the drovers and packmen.
The breeze which before had been cooling the morning, dropped now and the lane grew loud with bees and heavy with the scent of summer.
Ahead of me, to my right, the humps of Yorburgh and Drumaldrace shimmered in the heat as I dropped down following a kink where the road crosses a beck.
I climbed a wall to drink at the beck, sitting for a while on its banks in the sun before walking on up the legionaries' highway crossing the Burtersett road under Green Scar Mire and heading up towards Fleet Moss and Kidhow Gate.
Some day, I decided, I would walk the entire length of the road in the opposite direction from Gearstones by Cam Fell to Bainbridge.
Not today, however, and now my route took me off the road by a stile and up over the hill by an old quarry track.
A dip in the hill, much like those at Sulber Nick and Kirkby Nick, led over the crest by an outcrop and as I walked out from the dip I saw ahead of me Raydale with, to my left, Semer Water and Addlebrough behind it.
Below lay my next goal, Marsett.
A green lane, on this day made even greener by the sunlight filtering through the leaves, led to a farm drive and the road to the village.
The one part of this walk that I dislike is the short but sodden path that leads from the rough lane out of Marsett towards Stalling Busk.
In the driest of summer days the bottom meadows are a ducks' paradise.
In winter, unless they're frozen over, they're a lagoon.
I picked my way across the bottom meadows like a clockwork ballerina dancing from dry tuft to dry tuft and followed the footpath to Stalling Husk Old Church.
The church is a ruin now.
Built in on the site of an older church, it once had a central pulpit with pews arranged round it in a circle.
It was abandoned when the new church was built in 1909 and in less than severity years has fallen into complete ruin — a good indication of how severe the Dales weather can be and how quickly buildings succumb to its assault.
I stopped at the church for my lunch, sitting on a hot tombstone looking out across the fields to Semer Water.
Semer Water is one of the few natural sheets of water of any size in the Dales.
It would be difficult to build water-gathering reservoirs of the size of those found in other Parts of the Pennines in the Dales because of the many eaves and potholes that would carry the water away.
The water authorities have not ruled out the possibility of flooding large Parts of the Dales, however, and, ever greedier in their search for uplands to despoil and destroy, will have to be watched carefully.
It was the water authority of Bradford that was largely instrumental in keeping Washburndale out of the National Parks.
Semer Water was formed when the last glacier to carve its way down Wensleydale melted, leaving behind a bank of moraine that formed the nether end of a lake that is now nearly three miles in circumference and, at its deepest part, forty-five feet deep.
Like many lakes, Semer Water has its legendary sunken village or town, complete with underwater church bells tolling as storm winds move the surface of the lake.
The story of the sunken village under Semer Water has been repeated so many times that it may be pointless me telling the story once again, yet there may be some of you who won't have heard it, so if you're sitting comfortably, I'll begin.
Once upon a time, an angel came down to earth to test the charity of man.
Where Semer Water stands now there stood a fine city with towers, domes and spires reaching to the sky, and its streets, houses and shops were full of busy people.
The angel, disguised as an old man, went from door to door begging for food and drink.
At all of them he was turned away empty-handed and was cursed at as a beggar by the proud townspeople of Semer Water.
On his way out of the city he came to a poor crofter's cottage.
He knocked on the door and begged for aid.
The old couple, poor as they were, took pity on him and gave him food to eat and water to drink.
Then, throwing off his tattered rags and appearing in "bright, shining raiment" , the angel raised his staff and cried:
Semer Water rise, Semer Water sink,
And swallow all save this lile [little]house
That gave me meat and drink.
At the far end of Semer Water is a ruined building that is said to be the dwelling place of the charitable old couple.
On summer evenings rowers on the lake have claimed that they have heard far below them through the still waters the sound of church bells tolling.
There may be a basis of fact in the legend of Semer Water in that the lake is known to be the site of an Iron Age lake village built on piles out from the shore.
Its destruction and decay may have lodged in folk memory and been Christianised into the version we have today.
I finished my lunch and walked along the track above the lake at the northern end.
There lies a group of stones deposited by the glacier, the largest of which, the Carlow Stone, is said to have been used by the druids for human sacrifice.
To be honest, the evidence for druids having ever performed such grisly ceremonies is very dubious and the whole thing is probably nothing other than a piece of Romano-Christian propaganda aimed at destroying the pagan religion of the Celts.
The Romans were known to have accused everybody they didn't like of having committed human sacrifice in the same way that nations have always labelled their enemies "Frogs" , or "Nignogs" , or "Argies" .
I remember that the first time I came to Semer Water was as a boy on my bike.
It was a day much like today, hot and sunny, but unlike today there were no tourists about and Dave and I had stripped off to the skin and stepped through the shallows with mud squidging between our toes to the pebbly beach, swimming out into the cool water.
You couldn't do that now.
Even on a quiet mid-week summer's day the beach is fringed with people picnicking or sleeping in their cars, while the lake itself is often used for windsurfing or water-skiing.
I like watching windsurfers with their brightly coloured sails skimming the water.
Their sort of sport harms nobody, adds colour to the scene, and doesn't fill the air with noise, tearing the peace and tranquillity apart as water-skiing does.
Before you accuse me of being a spoilsport I think there's a place for water-skiing, but it's not in a National Park.
More than that I will not say.
From Semer Water I crossed the road and followed the track above the river Bain through summer meadows, by stiles, some of which were gated and had the rubber soles from wellington boots for hinges.
Past Bracken Hill beyond Out Brough I looked down at Bainbridge snoozing in the sun before dropping down the last half-mile to the green and the Post Office for something to still the dust.
The Giants Hill and the Crusaders' Chapel
IN the Dales, history and legend are welded into the landscape as firmly as the rocks beneath.
Iron Age tribes, the legions of Rome, the Norsemen and Danes, the monks, and the lay landowners who followed them: all of them, from the great lords and princes of Christendom to the little men who kept their huts on the commons, along with Quakers, Methodists, travelling packmen, lead-miners, quarrymen and rail men, all have left the print of their passing on the land.
When you look at maps of the Dales, particularly the new 1 to 25,000 series, you can read in the patterns on the landscape and the names given to settlements and landforms, the intricate story, incomplete as it must of necessity be, of the pageant of life in the upland valleys.
In Wensleydale, Bolton Castle looks across the broad valley to Penhill, which, legend has it, was once the haunt of a fierce giant, while the castle itself is the place where Mary Queen of Scots was placed under house arrest before she was taken to London to be executed.
Almost midway between the two and marked on the map as "Chapel (remains of)" is the ruined church of a settlement of Knights Templars, a military organisation formed to protect pilgrims travelling to the Holy Land.
They were an organisation of "warrior monks" who became so powerful that they were eventually disbanded by the Crown.
There is a walk that takes iii two of these sites of history and legend and gives you grand views across the Dales to the third.
The route begins at the bonny little village of West Burton, climbs on to Penhill and then descends by drove road and field path to the ruined Crusaders' chapel, returning at last by leafy lanes to the village.
West Burton has been called by many "the prettiest village in the Dales" , and though I think that Dent village has them all beat hands down for style and atmosphere, West Burton runs a close second.
Dent, with its narrow cobbled main street and its white buildings, could almost be taken for a Westmorland village, whereas West Burton, by-passed by the Bishopdale road and standing with its houses clustered round a broad wedge of a village green with cross, stocks and children's swings, is very much a village of the eastern Dales.
The local stone here is gritstone, much of it brought down I suspect from the quarries on the flanks of Penhill, and on a summer's evening, when the children are playing on the swings and people are sat talking quietly in the dying sunlight outside the pub while an old dog wanders across the green sniffing his way towards the children, then, when every building is tinted with amber and the gardens are heavy with blooms, it could well be said to be "t'prattiest lal spot i't'Dales" .
One July morning I left the car and, with a heat haze  softening the details on the hills in the further distance, turned down the lane at the village's north-eastern end marked "To the Waterfalls" .
The falls are the upper and lower Cauldron Falls.
Here, Walden Beck drops into a deep stone hollow fringed with trees before it flows downdale to join Bishopdale Beck and finally the river Ure by Adam Bottoms.
It was cool in the shade and I stayed for a while by the deep pool below the falls before turning back to the path and climbing through the heat of the late morning past Poor's Land towards Knarlton Knot.
As I climbed higher, the dales of Walden and Wensley began  to appear below.
Walden away to my left was patterned with meticulously regular fields built during the time of the later enclosures.
Across the dale, through the haze, the flanks of Brant Lea above Bishopdale and the edge of Carperby Moor above Aysgarth came slowly into view.
The climb continued by Knarlton hoot to Hudson Quarry, where wild sage was growing thickly amongst the limestone and grass, until I came at last to the rougher pasture below Hazely.
There was no footpath from here on, so I followed the boundary wall and fence dividing West Witton and Melmerby parishes until I came, dripping and thirsty, wet oil the outside and dry on the inside, to the Height of Hazely.
Bill the dog always seems to walk at least twice as far as I do, running ahead for a while and coming back to check that I'm following before he dives down a hole after rabbits that he never catches.
I always keep him under tight control when I'm walking and make sure that he never goes near sheep or lambs, and on the open fell he's usually on his best behaviour.
However, ever since an incident with a chicken which resulted in a bald-arsed chicken and a dog with a mouthful of feathers, I've kept him on a lead whenever I've been near a farmyard.
On Hazely Peat Moor Bill waited for me, grinning as I slogged through the heather in the heat.
Cloudberries, or knoutberries as they're known in the Dales, studded the moor, set amongst the dark fleshy green leaves like clusters of red beads.
The sun, which had been hidden all day, broke through the cloud at the very moment that Bill fell tail first into a peat hole filled with boggy water and couldn't get out.
His front paws rested on the heather as his back legs thrashed about in the dog-sized hole.
He gave up after a bit and just stayed there looking at me.
I've never been one for crediting animals with human feelings, but the expression on that dog's face definitely said "Stop laughing and get me out of here" .
I pulled him out and, taking a compass bearing, walked across the moor towards Hodge Holes.
As we walked, grouse rose from the heather, calling out in alarm,.
This call has been said to sound like "go back, go back" , but to me it always sounds like a duck laughing (to be honest I've never heard a duck laughing, so I'm probably totally wrong).
At the Hodge Holes it was "baggin time" (a Northern word for lunch break) and this was very fitting because Bill, who is a pedigree Bitzer (bits'er this, bits'er that), rejoices in the name of Bilbo Baggins, a name given to him by my daughters on the day he was bought from the dogs' home.
Much as I love the works of J.R.R. Tolkien, I refuse to call any dog Bilbo Baggins, so Bill he has become; anyway, the only resemblance between Bill and a hobbit is that both have hairy feet and a liking for grubbing around in sandy holes.
From the Hodge Holes, where the views across Coverdale, even through the heat haze, were grand, we climbed up through waist-high bracken, where Bill disappeared completely, to the cairn on Penhill End.
From here, the whole of Wensleydale from  Leyburn to Aysgarth lay spread before us.
There's nothing finer than standing on the edge of a Dales hill like this looking down at the landscape strung out below.
We walked on round the summit edge to Penhill Beacon itself, where the beacon mound marks the possible site of the last resting place of an Iron Age chieftain.
The similarities between this mound and that on Wild Boar Fell in terms of placement and structure are remarkable.
Both are basically shaped like upturned saucers set on rocky promontories above crags, and both look across dale in a basically northerly direction.
The Penhill site may be the source of a story that goes back to Celtic mythology, "The Legend of the Giant of Penhill" .
The story, for which I'm indebted to Dr Arthur Raistrick, goes as follows:
There was once in the olden days a giant who lived on Penhill who had all below him in the dale in his thrall.
He owned a savage wolfhound called Wolfhead and a herd of swine who roamed the forest and fields below Penhill.
He was cruel and vicious and cared about nothing but his flock of swine.
One day, as the giant and Wolf head were hunting in the dale, they came upon a shepherdess called Gunda who was minding her flocks.
The giant, for sport, set Wolfhead to worrying the sheep and when Gunda pleaded with him to call the dog off, the giant turned upon her and, struck by her beauty, tried to ravish her there and then.
However, Gunda struggled free and ran for her life; but the giant set Wolfhead on her and the dog pulled her down and began mauling her.
Being a true Yorkshire lass, Gunda reached out and with a lump of stone that was to hand beat the dog off.
The giant, who by now had reached her, was maddened with what he saw and battered her to death with his club.
Afterwards, he washed Wolfhead in the blood, but when the dog growled at him while he was doing this, he took his spear and killed it.
Later that year, when the giant's favourite boar was killed by an arrow fired from an unknown bow, he was so enraged by this that he took the first-born of all his tenants and threatened to kill them unless the guilty one came forward or some other person informed on them.
The wise hermit of the dale, the Seer of Carbaby, warned the giant that if he carried out his threat he would never see his castle again alive or dead.
The giant ignored this and killed all the children, at which moment there appeared to him the ghosts of Gunda and Wolfhead.
Terrified, the giant backed away from them as they came towards him and fell head first over the crag, never to be seen again.
Thus perish all giants, slayers of dogs and children and ravishers of Yorkshire lasses.
From Penhill Crags, where the only bones I saw were those of a less than gigantic sheep, we walked by the disused quarry to Stony Gate and the old drove road of Morpeth Gate, now a peaceful broad green lane and very pleasant walking.
Through the haze, Bolton Castle was just beginning to show itself across the dale, square and massive.
In its former glory it must have  dominated the whole dale below from Richmond to Hawes.
The castle was built by the first Lord Scrope who fought at Crecy and was knighted for his efforts.
It took eighteen years to build, every piece of stone used in its construction coming from the quarries in Apedale (the valley of the Norseman Appi).
Bolton housed poor Mary Queen of Scots from July 1568 to January 1569.
It was besieged by Cromwell's merry men in 1645, and when it surrendered Cromwell ordered it to be dismantled (if that's what you do to castles).
It now belongs to Lord Bolton and has a grand little tearoom where I have slaked the dust absorbed on summer cycling trips on many an occasion.
From Morpeth Gate we turned right following the path towards Swinithwaite, striking off at a kink in the lane to the field gate that led to the ruined Chapel of the Knights Templars.
I must admit that I was disappointed to find there was so little of the wall of the chapel left standing and that what remained was surrounded by a wooden fence.
A little bit of imaginative nettle-clearing and further excavation of domestic buildings which, though they are known to exist in the proximity, have never been uncovered, could make all the difference to the site.
The most impressive of the remains are the tiny stone coffins on the ruined floor of the chapel which indicate that either the Knights Templars were very small men or that their bones were broken after death and they were buried with their limbs beneath them.
A hole in one of the largest stone coffins was there, so Dr Raistrick told me, "to let the juices drain away" .
Billy was not at all impressed by the chapel and was trying to out-stare some heifers in the next field.
We walked on above Long Bank Wood and Spring Bank where wild deer are said to roam and where Bill was made a fool of by several rabbits.
It was late in the afternoon now, later than I thought it would be, and shadows were long on the grass before us, so that by the time we'd travelled the leafy lane to Flanders Hall and had followed the road past the Grange to West Burton village green, it was early evening.
Children were playing on the green, a wet labrador that had been swimming in the beck was drying out by the village cross, and there was just room amongst the people sat at the table outside the pub for one man and his dog.
Shunner Fell and Lovely Seat
AYSGARTH Falls, Ingleton Falls and Hardraw Force are probably the most visited waterfalls in Yorkshire, for like Malham Cove, Bolton Abbey and the show caves of White Scar and Ingleborough, they are amongst the "honeypots" that attract coachloads of trippers to the Dales.
But besides the falls I've just mentioned there are many more falls and forces like Cotter Force, Catrigg Force and Scaleber Force which, perhaps because they are a little less accessible, are visited by far fewer people, although they are also arguably less impressive because they don't fall as far or there aren't as many of them.
The writers of the nineteenth century who first created the cult of the picturesque and peopled the Dales with "awful caverns and frightful ravines" were only impressed by waterfalls that had height or were "raging spouts" in flood.
So strong was this hankering for the Gothic and everything that went with it that many of them refused even to look at nature first-hand, but looked at it through a special lens called a Claude-glass, Claude being a French painter of the Gothic who designed his glass especially for looking at ancient ruins and alpine chasms.
For a confirmation of this, you only have to look at some of Turner's paintings of the Dales and compare them with the reality to see how much poetic licence has been taken for the sake of the "phantasmagoric" .
Turner's painting of Hardraw Scar shows a vast rocky amphitheatre with a torrent gushing over the lip of the furthest wall, while leading us into the scene there is a wide, almost treeless valley, with cows grazing on its slopes and a milkmaid perched on a dry-stone wall ill the foreground.
Turner is one of my favourite painters, but for a long time I have had a theory that he had "wide-angle eyes" that filled the camera with distorted shapes.
He also had a graduated filter in front of his eyes that turned every sky into a backcloth for "Maria Martin or the Murder in the Red Barn" .
I know that artists aren't expected to paint exactly what they see, and that interpretation and expression are all part of the game.
However, I can't help wondering how many people after seeing the engraving based on Turner's painting by Middiman and Pye of Hardraw Force got off their wagonettes and hurried through the door of the Green Dragon Inn — only to be underwhelmed by a narrow, peaceful, tree-clad valley that leads serenely to a rocky bow with a high fall dropping from its lip to the valley floor which, impressive though it certainly is (particularly after heavy rains), is nothing like the falls depicted by Turner.
Hardraw is a friendly little place, particularly on the day of the annual brass-band contest when bands from all over Yorkshire and beyond come to compete against each other and the treeless side of the little valley is carpeted with supporters and spectators picnicking oil the grass and the ringing of the sounding brass echoes from the steep gillsides.
One year I walked from Newby Head by Cam High Road to Hawes on a wonderful late spring day and carried on to Hardraw to watch my local band, Settle and Giggleswick Brass Band, take first prize from amongst a great deal of strong opposition.
It was a smashing walk on a beautiful day and sitting listening to the bands playing in the sunshine was as near to heaven as I'll probably ever get.
Not many people who come to Hardraw realise that the lip of the waterfall is totally artificial.
After the disastrous storms and floods of 1890 in which vast sections of Grisedale and Garsdale were washed away, bridges destroyed and people made homeless, the stone lip of the waterfall was found to have been destroyed completely by the force of the water, so much so that instead of falling from an overhanging shelf a majestic hundred feet on to the rocks below, the waterfall now raced down in a series of cascades.
The landowner, Lord Wharncliffe, conscious of the loss of one of Britain's greatest natural assets, immediately  instructed his workmen to reconstruct the lip exactly as it was before, and it is to him that we now owe the sight of Hardraw Force in all its almost-original splendour.
Hardraw is a good starting point for Shunner Fell and Lovely Seat, the two hills that flank the famous Butter Tubs Pass, and is known to many who have walked the Pennine Way as either the end or the beginning of the day that takes you from Tan Hill to Hawes or vice versa, depending on which direction you are walking.
I used Hardraw as a starting and finishing point of a walk that goes first to Cotter Force, then passes along Cotterdale up on to Shunner Fell, crosses the Butter Tubs to Lovely Seat and  returns by the upper falls above Hardraw Falls to the village itself.
It was a warm but cloudy day in June with high shifting cloud leaving only the occasional gap of blue to send fleeting shafts of sunlight across the fells.
I left the road halfway between the Cotterdale Road end and Hardraw and walked with Bill the dog and Eddie the landlord from the Sun in Dent along to the signpost that pointed the way to Cotter Force.
The fields were spread thick with buttercups and the may blossom which had been particularly plentiful this year was beginning to turn and fall.
Bill the dog, happy as ever to be out and about, was sniffing everything in sight, his tail whirling round in a completely circular motion like a helicopter rotor; Eddie, however, having no tail to wag, was simply smiling, something he's very good at.
Ahead of us I could hear the noise of the waterfall — there had been plenty of rain and when we arrived at the foss, the beck that eventually joins the Ure to travel down Wensleydale was hammering over the lip of the force.
We sat for a while just watching and listening to the water and turned back to follow the path out of the steep-sided gill towards Cotterdale.
At a bridge above the fall a friendly sign said "Keep out, private property" , while another sign told me that a bull was loose with cattle in the field I had to cross.
I crossed the field, keeping extremely close to the top wall ready to jump over it if two tons of Fray Bentos came visiting, but there was no sign of either bull or cattle.
Above the collection of stone-built houses that comprise Cotterdale, the fields were giddy with colour.
Buttercups, daisies, cranesbill, the red purple of clover, all were pushing through the new grass of the meadows.
Below the wood, a curlew started from the grass and winged beneath us, its mate calling from across the dale.
They circled in the wind, their cries filling the morning air as we crossed the bottom meadows into the hamlet.
The half-dozen or so houses were neat and well cared for, yet there was no sign of life at all, not even the yapping of a dog or the cluck of a hen, just the wind stirring the flowers at the road end.
Beyond the houses the lane became a rough track crossing a bridge towards the forestry development, climbing up through the young trees of the forestry and out on to open country towards the summit of Shunner Fell, where, after much bog-trotting and splashing about, we hit the line of ash palings that had been laid down here to stop further erosion of the Pennine Way but which had very largely sunk into the bog.
At the summit cairn on Shunner Fell, we paused only for a few seconds to look towards Swaledale and back towards Mallerstang before moving on.
The wind was chilling and we wanted to find somewhere sheltered to have our sandwiches.
It was just enough time, however, for Bill to perform in a way that he usually (being then only a puppy) performed on the kitchen floor.
 "That's a good dog," I said, patting his head in a friendly way.
 "Now that's where you should do it, not on the kitchen floor." 
"It's a long way for him to come every time he wants a crap, said Eddie, running off before I could hit him.
The last time I had been on Shunner Fell two years previously I had been walking the Pennine Way and had left Tan Hill on a rainy June day, with heavy clouds following me south as I travelled.
Leaving the pretty village of Thwaite I climbed the green lane to Shunner and below the summit had overtaken "the Dog Man" .
I had heard about the Dog Man before on my week-long journey from Kirk Yetholm towards Edale — travellers going north had told me as I journeyed south at first that the Dog Man was only three days ahead of me, then two days ahead of me, and then the final group of walkers had told me that it wouldn't be long before I caught him up.
I asked them who this mythical creature was, but each time they just said, "You'll see when you meet him." 
The Dog Man was a walker like myself doing the Pennine Way.
He had been out of work for a year and some mates had clubbed up to give him enough money to take a three-week walking holiday on the Pennine Way.
He hadn't done much walking before, and had made what I think was a mistake in deciding to carry all his food with him from day one.
He started off carrying something like a seventy- to eighty-pound pack of tinned foods and dried foods, his only companion a lurcher dog walking beside him on a length of clothesline.
The idea was that he would eat the food in the pack while the lurcher dog would provide itself with rabbits and hares along the journey.
The only problem was that every time he let the dog off the lead it tried to provide itself with a sheep supper, so consequently he had to keep it on the lead and feed it on tins of beans, sausages, bacon and egg, which had so exhausted his stock of food that now he was living on porridge and giving the dog the rest of his sausages.
He had also walked the whole way in a pair of ex-NATO boots, high-laced stiff things that could reduce an SAS regular into a hobbling wreck in five minutes.
His blisters had blisters on them.
He was limping dejectedly towards the summit of Shunner when I overtook him and garnered his story.
We sat down and talked for a while before setting off towards Hawes, as the sun broke through the clouds and the dog pulled him downhill towards the cairns.
 "The only fun I get," he muttered in the voice of a man with nothing left to live for, "is at the end of every day when I have fed the dog and I climb in the tent and change the bandages on my blisters." 
As we made our way down towards Butter Tubs Pass following the boundary fence, Bill found the head of a freshly killed grouse, possibly the work of a fox, and refused to put it down again but walked along with it head first in his mouth, the neck feathers sticking out like a shuttlecock.
When we sat down for our sandwiches, I made him go away with the grisly thing, but we could still hear him crunching away behind a rock — first a crunch then a cough as he swallowed a feather, then another crunch then more coughs until he realised there was no future in it and came round for a sandwich.
They were cheese and onion.
Bill hates cheese and onion sandwiches.
It wasn't his day.
The light changed for a few minutes and a watery sun hit the flanks of Lovely Seat.
Lovely Seat (from the Norse words meaning Lorn's summer pasture) is a broad expansive hill with wonderful views down Wensleydale from its southernmost and Swaledale from its northernmost flanks.
We crossed the Butter Tubs Pass, keeping to the contour at the head of the pass so as not to lose height, and began to ascend the flanks of Lovely Seat.
The Butter Tubs Pass links Swaledale and Wensleydale, snaking airily up from Hardraw, crossing the saddle between Lovely Seat and Shunner Fell at 1100 feet before dropping down to Thwaite.
The pass gets its name from two groups of deep limestone potholes set either side of the road.
They are fenced now and those on one side have steps leading down to them.
There are signs too, telling you that these are the Butter Tubs, in case you didn't know.
The name is supposed to come from their usage as cool stores for butter that farmers travelling the pass had failed to sell at market.
The butter was lowered down on ropes into the cool depths to keep until next market day.
It was a gentle pull up Lovely Seat to the cairn, but again the June winds of our English summer were too cold for anything but a brief look over to Shunner and south to Dodd Fell and the distinct hump of Ingleborough before taking a compass bearing and walking off towards Hardraw.
The clouds broke a little and the sun that had previously looked like a tarnished shilling in a bowl of porridge came out and lit the sweep of Wensleydale below the cairn.
We cut off down through a sloping jumble of gritstone boulders, rabbits everywhere starting for cover, all thankfully too fast for Bill or Eddy.
Below the crags a well-built tunnelmouth and a lined tunnel leading into the hill marked the site of one of the old stone-mines on Stags Fell.
The Stags Fell stone-mines are typical of a phenomenon found only in this area.
Good-quality gritstone that could be  dressed for architectural purposes was found deep beneath the fell.
The alternatives were either to make a massive quarry or to mine into the fell.
It was easier to mine in for two reasons: firstly, if you mined the stone, massive amounts of earth did not have to be shifted before the stone could be got at, and secondly, the men of Swaledale and Wensleydale, many of them experienced lead-miners, had all the knowledge and expertise necessary to dig stone from the mine, and furthermore labour was plentiful because of the decline of the lead industry.
Most of the stone for Victoria Station, Manchester, for example, came from these stone-mines above Hawes.
Heaps of spoil lay between Stags Fell and the road, so we picked our way through them and down by a wall to the road, following a pleasant series of falls through Shaw Gill Wood above Hardraw Force for a while before hitting the road again where a footpath took us down through flower-spattered meadows to Hardraw.
There we walked through the Green Dragon to the force, at a hundred feet the longest unbroken waterfall in England, and known to freeze into a massive ice tube in winter — Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy visited the spot and were impressed by its grandeur, so much so that William, ever the florid poet, wrote ebulliently to Coleridge, describing the visit:
We soon reached an Inn at a place called Hardraw, and descending from our vehicles, after warming ourselves by the cottage fire we walked up the brook side to take a view of a third waterfall…
We walked up to the fall and what would I not give if I could convey to you the images and feelings which were then communicated to me.
After cautiously sounding our way over stones of all colours and sizes encased in the clearest ice formed by the spray of the waterfall, we found the rock…from the summit of which the water shot directly over our heads into a bason and among fragments of rock wrinkled over with masses of ice, white as snow, or rather as D. says like congealed froth…
I cannot express to you the enchanted effect produced by this Arabian scene of colour as the wind blew aside the great waterfall behind which we stood and hid.
We less poetic mortals sat for a while in the afternoon sunlight and shadow, then we turned down the path again for a pot of tea and a scone for myself and Eddy and a biscuit for Bill before we began the road walk back to the car.
While we were drinking our tea, the lady at the shop told us that the water that flows over Hardraw Force is in York within an hour.
When I told Tom Stephenson this, he said nonsense, so I'll leave them to fight it out.
4.
Dentdale
IN my opinion the loveliest of all the dales, Dentdale is also the most secluded, cut off both by the hills which hem its stern and western ends and by the narrowness of the roads that lead in and out of it.
At Dentdale's eastern end, Dent Head and the viaduct lead into the dale, the road winding on to Lea Yeat and Cowgill where the narrow winding Coal Road climbs by Monkeybeck Grains and below Shaking Moss over into Garsdale, its highest points often being blocked by snow in the winter months.
The Dentdale road carries on from Cowgill by the chapel past Scotchergill and on by Church Bridge to Dent "Town" , as the village is called.
West of Dent the road passes by Helmside and climbs the foot of Frostrow by Millthrop into the "big city" of Sedbergh behind which loom the great Howgill Fells.
It may be the fact that this end of the dale is shielded by the Howgills and the other by Wold Fell and Blea Moor, which, combined with its narrowness, makes Dentdale so lush and green — I don't know.
But it does seem (and locals swear) that the climate is milder in Dentdale than the rest of the Dales.
It gets less rain, they say, and the snow if it does fall never lies long.
It's a woody dale with more trees than many of the other dales, and hedges replace the stone walls of limestone country.
Be that as it may Dentdale certainly is, as I have said, the bonniest of all the Dales and Dent village, with its cobbled streets and whitewashed houses, the bonniest of all the Dale villages.
Dent has been called a "chocolate-box village" by some writers who have assumed that the preservation of the village is due to the action of the green welly and Barbour jacket brigade (2.4 children called Timon and Amarintha, Range Rover with macramé or  tie-dye seatcovers and this year's Booker Prize winner on the back seat), but the fight to prevent the cobbles being ripped up and the narrow bridges widened was led, not by middle-class "off-comed-uns" , but by the Dalesfolk, the farmers, joiners and builders, the ordinary people who cared about their dale.
Dentdale is superb walking country: the high ridge walks along Rise Hill and Barbon Fell are amongst the best in the  Dales, while lower down, the Dales Way long-distance path follows the river for much of its length into Sedbergh, and some of the wooded gills like Flinter Gill, which arc a typical feature of Dentdale, have footpaths along them leading on to the fells or on to the old packhorse routes.
The dale is dominated at its lower end by two scars, Great Coum and Combe Scar, both carved out by the passing glaciers, while the sweeping fells of Barbondale mark the point at which the Dent fault has thrust the older Silurian gritstones thousands of feet above their original bed.
Dent is a popular walking centre with a Post Office, stores, a knitting shop, an outdoor clothing shop, a"raft centre, two good pubs, plenty of bed and breakfast and camping accommodation; it also has Stone Close Cafe, the best little tearoom in the Dales.
The village itself is rich in local history and lore.
Dent had its "coiners" , men who clipped the edges of gold coins and melted the clippings down.
It had some connection with the Bronte sisters, and two of the houses in the dale, High Hall and Whernside Manor, may have been the models for Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange.
But Dent is famous for many other things: its "Terrible Knitters" ; Dent marble; Adam Sedgwick; and, of course, its vampire.
Until the end of the last century, knitting was not a pastime in Dent but a livelihood.
Everybody knitted, children on their way to school, shepherds minding their flocks, men on their way to market, all would knit, and women would gather and sit by the fires at night knitting and singing and reading aloud.
The stockings they knitted went on to the feet of the British Army, and so great was the demand and so determinedly was it met that  the Romantic writer Southey called them the "Terrible Knitters of Dent" , terrible meaning not bad but fierce, terribly good.
Dent marble is not a true marble but a fossil limestone containing a variety of crinoids.
It comes in two forms, black and grey.
The black "marble" was considered the finest and was quarried at Arten Gill and at Binks Quarry below Great Coum.
Until the introduction of cheap Italian marble killed the industry in the late nineteenth century, Dent marble was cut and polished at Stonehouse.
Fireplaces of Dent marble can be found all over the Dales, while the columns of Ingleborough Hall and the staircases of the Inns of Court, London, Owens College, Manchester, and the Cartwright Memorial Hall, Bradford, were all made of the crinoid limestone of Dentdale.
Adam Sedgwick, whose life is commemorated in a fine book by Colin Speakman and in a memorial fountain of Shap granite that stands in the main street, is Dent's most famous son.
He was the son of the Vicar of Dent, went to Sedbergh School and later on to Cambridge, where he became one of the most important founders of the present science of geology.
He never forgot Dentdale and credits much of his earlier love of learning and his interest in rocks and their formation to the days he spent as a boy rambling the fells around Dent.
The legend of the Dent vampire is in all probability nothing more than an elaborate leg-pull, but it's worth relating in case you haven't heard it before.
George Hodgson was an old man of ninety-four when he died in 1715.
For years before his death rumours had spread all over the Dales that put his rude good health and longevity to dealings with the Devil and pointed to his long canine teeth as evidence of vampirism.
After his death and burial in a far corner of the churchyard, several Dalespeople swore that they had seen George Hodgson walking by moonlight and after the mysterious deaths of a number of them, his body was exhumed and buried by the church porch with a stake through its heart.
When the coffin was opened, so it is said, the hair and nails had grown and the flesh was glowing pink as though the corpse were alive.
Well, the gravestone certainly stands by the porch and it does have a hole drilled through it, said to have been where the iron stake was hammered through the stone into the coffin, but I'm afraid that I agree with the general consensus voiced around the bar of the Sun Inn and the George and Dragon that George Hodgson was guilty of nothing but old age, that the only thing he sucked were his gums, and that the hole in the stone was made for a railing or gatepost.
It's certainly difficult to imagine anything dark or dastardly happening in Dentdale — it seems such a friendly, cheerful, always happy place, with its rounded fells, its lush fields and the river appearing and disappearing below its limestone bed.
See Dentdale in summer when the hay meadows are on fire with wild flowers and the roadsides are crowded with the pale lilac of the bell flowers and you will find it hard to disagree with one early writer's description of Dentdale as "an earthly paradise" , even if it does have a vampire buried in its churchyard.
The Occupation Road to Whernside tarns
FROM Barbondale, a walled track leads along the flanks of Great Coum above Dentdale and Deepdale over the watershed to Kingsdale.
It is one of the many old drove and packhorse roads that, before the coming of the railway and the motorcar, were the main links in the chain of communication that ran throughout the Dales.
When the rough land above Dentdale was enclosed or "occupied" , the road was walled for most of its length (which shows how important it was in the life of the Dales) and became known as the Occupation Road.
The track from Dent Town up Flinter Gill on to the "Ocky" , as locals call it, is an old green lane, with rough boulders and stones paving the steep way out of the dale used in former days  by packhorse trains and coal-carts coming over from Ingleton and Barbondale.
A series of falls hidden from immediate view follows the gill on the left-hand side and one May morning as I walked up the gill the falls were roaring after the heavy rains of the week before.
It had been a wet May with a few scarce hours of sunshine at the beginning of the month and little since, but today the grey skies that had hung over the land like a shroud had broken, and high white clumps of cloud were bowling swiftly across the blue sky betokening a day of good weather.
From the top of Flinter Gill I looked out to the Howgills and across to where cloud shadows were moving across Dentdale and over Rise Hill.
The fields shone a new green in the sun, and the air which for days had been hazy had been cleaned by the rain so that I could make out the shapes of sheep  grazing near the old Coal Road above Cowgill as I walked down the lane.
I cut off from the lane up towards Great Coum and the Megger Stones.
The Megger Stones, like Nine Standards Rigg and the Three Men of Gragareth, are a group of cairns standing sentinel below Crag Hill.
I have heard it said that they were built by Iron Age men in honour of Megan, a Celtic goddess.
Another suggestion is that they were put there by shepherds so that they could find their way off the fell in bad weather, the idea being that by the number of cairns the shepherds would be able to tell where they were and by the pattern they could know which direction to follow.
Both are possibilities but some of the smaller cairns look as though they were thrown together by walkers while they were having their tea break.
I climbed through the Megger Stones and on to Great Coum looking down Dentdale and Deepdale.
Below the coum near the County Stone are the strewn remains of a Second World War plane that crashed killing all the poor lads that were in her.
Miley Taylor of Deepdale, who was in the Home Guard at the time, went out with a horse-drawn sledge to bring the bodies of the crew, all French-Canadians, down into Dent.
It's just one more indication of the madness of war that four lads from Montreal or Quebec should lose their lives on a Dales hill.
It proves to me once again that war is not just immoral, it's stupid.
As somebody once said, "Military intelligence is a contradiction in terms." 
It's easy to see how important the Occupation Road used to be, because every so often the little becks that rundown from the fell to cross the track are culverted underneath the lane through well-made stone-lined tunnels.
Some of the culverts have been smashed by the passage of heavy-wheeled vehicles such as tractors and Land-rovers over the years, so that in places beyond Nun House Outrake after heavy rains the Ocky is a lagoon of peaty mud and you need the agility of a ballerina and the balance of a goat to skirt round it.
I had neither, so I plodded stoically through the mire turning a corner eventually to see the summit of Ingleborough framed by the walls of the lane.
At Kingsdale I stopped by the road and had a bite to eat before striking off up the fell to Whernside, following the wall that leads upwards towards the summit.
The view down Deepdale as I climbed was beautiful.
Farms and outbuildings stood out grey-white against the green of the fields and the darker green of the hedges that parcelled and patched the land.
I could see the line of Gastack Beck above Lockin Garth Force and traced the curve of the Ocky below Great Coum.
Another pull for ten minutes or so brought me up on to the summit, where I sat down to have my lunch.
Below me were Ribblehead and the viaduct, while to my right was Ingleborough which for the first time in days looked fresh and green instead of glowering and grey.
A number of people close by on the summit were busy like me holding the wall up with their backs and their morale up with cheese and onion doorsteps.
I remember when I was working on the building sites in Manchester, the Irish lads called onions "navvies' apples" and some of them would peel them and  eat them whole like fruit.
As one of them said,"Your onion is your better class of vegetable.
It clears the blood and be God it'll drive the colds out of you faster than any medicine you could care to name.
Doctors have recently come to the opinion that garlic and onions do in fact lessen the risk of heart disease, but as somebody pointed out, they also lose you friends.
I packed my rucksack again and walked off the summit towards the tarns.
After the heavy rains of the past days I expected them to be full, and they were, a lot fuller than when I had seen them the year before.
Then, after a long hot summer, they had dried up until they were small circles of stagnant water surrounded by mud and silt.
Now they were once more full and shining under a blue sky and a breeze that shook the surface into tiny waves.
From the tarn, I followed my nose down to a cairn that stands on the shoulder above Deepdale Side where the view down Deepdale into Dentdale was so good that I sat and looked at it for a good half-hour until the thought that I needed to be home by late afternoon pushed me on down to the green lane of the old Craven Way.
The old Craven Way is a wonderful way of coming into Dentdale from Ribblesdale.
Like the Occupation Road, it's an old packhorse lane rising out of Ribblesdale by Blea Moor and Force Gill.
Follow the old Craven Way on a frosty October morning when skies are clear and the whole of Dentdale opens below you tinged with autumn and you can keep your Grand Canyon and your Taj Mahal.
From the old way I took the track down to Whernside Manor and Deepdale Methodist Chapel, crossing the road there and taking the path through the woods where a millstone propped against a tree is all that remains of the old mill that once stood here.
By the riverbank in the warm afternoon sunlight I meandered back to Church Bridge and Dent.
The fields were full of early summer flowers, and on the banks butterbur spread its thick green leaves.
At Church Bridge people were paddling in the still pools beside the running water and throwing sticks out into the mainstream which reluctant dogs stared at and barked as though to say, "I may be daft but I'm not daft enough to go splashing through that lot." 
I walked slowly back into Dent for a pot of tea and a slice of buttered spiced loaf at Stone Close Cafe.
As my grandad used to say at the end of a grand day like that, "That's another one they can't take away from you." 
Dent to Brigflatts and back by the Dales Way
THE hamlet of Gawthrop (the village of the crows in Old Norse) clusters round the road that makes up from Dentdale to course down Barbondale below the impressive sweep of Barkin Fell.
At Bridge Cottage Cafe, where the road crosses the beck, there is a bridge called locally Oliver Bridge.
Legend has it that Oliver Cromwell on his way to lay siege to Middleton Hall during the Civil War found the old packhorse bridge too narrow for his cannons and wagons and so had the bridge widened.
A footpath leads from Dent across the fields to Gawthrop and from Bower Bank a little way down the back road to Sedbergh, a footpath leads up to Combe Scar via Tofts.
I often go this way to walk to Brigflatts, a very special building that lies a field back from the river Rawthey near the Sedbergh to Kendal road.
Brigflatts is the very first Quaker meeting house established in England.
It is a peaceful house in a peaceful place, an air of stillness and quiet lies all around it, and everybody I have taken to see the house has said that it has a very special atmosphere.
Though I am not superstitious or religious in any formal sense, I do feel that certain places that have had working within them strong forces for either good or evil absorb something and retain some of that force.
In the early seventies I worked in Bergen in Germany, which had been the site of the Belsen concentration camp, and the whole place was heavy with an air of misery, fear and evil.
It was said that birds had not been seen nesting or singing in the area of Belsen since the war.
You can feel the same oppressive sense of place at Culloden, where great numbers of Scots were massacred, and I felt a similar sense of sadness and grief as I walked through Glencoe where the Macdonalds were treacherously murdered by the Campbells.
I also think you can feel such sensations in places where great acts of religious worship have taken place.
Stonehenge still has a very special air in spite of the official attempts to destroy the place; York Minster has it, and Chartres has it to an incredible extent.
I remember when I was cycling through Normandy and along the Loire valley a couple of years back, I stopped at Chartres and went into the cathedral.
Great pillars of stone swept up to a roof that seemed an infinity away, sunlight was pouring through the stained glass and falling through space to the floor below, and in one of the side chapels a group of French nuns were singing the Angelus by candlelight, their voices weaving round the stone pillars and the shafts of dark and light.
It was a very emotional experience.
If we accept calmly and scientifically that stone in the form of silicone chips can accept messages and retain them, then it doesn't seem too impossible to me that the stones of buildings can absorb strong emotions such as fear and terror or the positive feelings of worship and devotion.
If Chartres has an atmosphere of almost hysterical ecstasy, then Brigflatts has an air of honest calm and loving peace.
Somebody once said, "I have never met a bad Quaker yet." 
There may well be some truth in that — certainly the Quakers I've met have given me the impression of being caring and loving people.
They are peaceful people, too, and many of them have been persecuted for that love of peace: Arthur Raistrick, Yorkshire Dalesman and the greatest living Dales historian, was imprisoned as a pacifist during the First World War, while in earlier times, the Quakers led by William Penn fled to America where they founded Pennsylvania, the capital city of which is Philadelphia, the city of brotherly love.
Quakerism must be one of the most sensible religions of all, since it has no ministers and no hierarchy but involves all its members in its organisation and its acts of worship.
The movement was founded by George Fox, who was walking one day on Pendle Hill when, as he said, the sky opened and the Lord showed him a great multitude of people waiting to be saved.
He travelled the country round, like Wesley after him, preaching
and converting, often being persecuted and physically assaulted for his beliefs.
At Firbank, where the chapel proved too small, he went out on to the fell to preach to the people, saying that God's church was not made of stone but of the air and the countryside around.
That afternoon he preached to three thousand people, so it is claimed, and the place where he preached that sermon is known as Fox's Pulpit.
If you walk up the hill above the Pulpit, you will be rewarded with one of the finest views of the beautiful Howgills Fells.
Brigflatts can be walked to from Sedbergh following the Rawthey Way, coming back via Birks and the wonderfully named Elysian Fields, but my favourite walk to Brigflatts begins from Gawthrop and follows the edge of Middleton Fell to Holme Knott and Brigflatts Moss.
It continues on to Jordon Lane, crossing the Rawthey at Middleton Bridge and following the road and the Rawthey Way to Brigflatts meeting house.
The return route follows the Dales Way and involves a bit of road walking, but since the road is a backroad and sees at the most two or three cars a day, it is a pleasant way of returning.
I did this walk once on a bright June day with Pat and Bill the dog.
There were a few light clouds about and a cooling breeze, and everywhere the hawthorns were heavy with may and the hedgerows thick with wild garlic, campion, bluebells and the little star-flowers of chickweed.
I know next to nothing about wild flowers, and what little I do know I learnt largely when I was a pink-kneed "Boy Sprout" in Manchester and in order to pass some badge or other I had to be able to burn some dough on a stick over an open fire, make smoky porridge and recognise six kinds of trees and flowers from their leaves and blossoms.
I can show you hawthorn, beech, oak, ash, elderberry and sycamore; after that I have to take a leaf home and look it up in a book.
The flowers I know at sight are bluebell, foxglove, dandelion, buttercup, campion and wild garlic.
(Well, you don't get many soldier orchids growing between the paving stones in Manchester.
The only flower that did grow in abundance was fireweed (rosebay willowherb), which grew rapidly in the years  after the war to cover the bomb sites with its purple flowers and to fill the air with its cottony wisps of seeds.)
Pat is very good at recognising wild flowers and I am quite good at map reading, so between us we manage well enough.
We walked up past Tofts, a beautiful old Dales house now sadly uninhabited, towards Combe Scat.
To our right stood the shell of Combe House, yet another Dales house crumbling into ruin.
The Combe, sometimes called Dent Scar, stands on the edge of the Dent Fault and its massive bowed wall of Silurian stone is dotted with thorns and cut by gullies.
Local folklore has it that in prehistoric times men drove wild cattle to their deaths over Combe Scar and ate them where they fell at the foot of the crag (cattle bones are reputed to have been found there).
A well-worn path not marked on the map that may have been an old link between Gawthrop and the track called Long Bank that crosses Middleton Fell, leads to the right of the crags into a slight outcrop of rock marked by a lone hawthorn.
From this point you get one of the best views in the Dales: to your right, Dentdale, Whernside, the foot of Deepdale and Dent town itself; to your left, northern Dentdale, Frostrow and the Howgills; while below you are spread the patched and parcelled fields of the dale which, on this June day, were coloured a green the like of which I had seen before only in Ireland.
We carried on walking northwards following sheep tracks through the heather and rock outcrops.
Billy's short legs kept getting tangled in the heather, so he bounced along like a kangaroo through the springy tufts.
On the fell edge near Brackensgill we looked down to where the river Dee meanders through the valley like a slow-worm.
It used to be said that any salmon running up the Dee made a one-way journey.
I swear I don't know why, though there ate one or two young boys with bamboo poles and coathangers who do.
A little further on we came to a cairn, a perfect match for the cairn on Rise Hill above Garsdale, and another carefully crafted stone man staring out over Dentdale towards Lonsdale and the Howgills.
Strictly speaking, much of this walk is trespassing since it doesn't follow recognised footpaths, but the land is rough grazing and won't suffer from the passage of a few feet.
Though walls have to be scrambled over, if you do it with care and replace any stones you dislodge, I find that most farmers don't object to walkers on their land.
The ones who do object, and with reason, are those whose land has been trampled over without care, whose stock have got loose because gates have been left open or walls broken down, or whose sheep have cut themselves or choked to death on the bottles and plastic bags thrown away by the Wandering Wallies of this world that have as much common sense and appreciation of the countryside as a toad has feathers.
A farmer has every right to rant and rave about such clowns.
We sat for a while by the cairn in the hot sun looking out before us, the only noise being the sound of the beck behind us  falling over boulders and down towards Brackens Gill and the Dee.
From Middleton Bridge we followed the Rawthey to Brigflatts and sat in the garden in the sun, a black tulip growing solitary amongst the mass of wild flowers below one of the windows.
Basil Bunting the poet wrote a poem called Briggflatts which, although it is not an easy piece to read, has a cragged beauty which fits these dales and fells.
It is an autobiographical poem and though it ranges far from Brigflatts in its subject matter, it is Northern in its very essence and its tongue is the tongue of the Dales.
Here is a short excerpt from the poem.
Two lovers are lying hidden under sacks 011 a travelling cart.
Beneath them is a freshly lettered gravestone being carried from Sedbergh to Hawes:
Stocking to stocking, jersey to jersey,
Head to hard arm,
they kiss under the rain,
bruised by their marble bed.
In Garsdale, dawn;
at Hawes, tea from the can.
Rain stops, sacks
steam in the sun, they sit up.
Copper-wire moustache,
sea reflecting eyes
and Baltic plainsong speech
declare: By such rocks
men killed Bloodaxe.
Coming from Brigflatts over Birks we passed through woods below Sedbergh School where a quiet lane took us towards Millthrop.
It was mid-afternoon now and the sunlight fell in shafts on the bluebells clustered round the boles of the trees deep in the woods.
For a few minutes we watched a tree-creeper working his way up the trunk of a tree looking for grubs until Bill the dog, crashing through the undergrowth sniffing for smells, frightened him off.
From Millthrop, the Dales Way crosses one of the craziest golf courses in the world, which has what must be an average gradient of one in four.
It then passes near Gate Manor, a fine Victorian mock-Jacobean hall, before crossing the Dee by way of Rash Bridge, a quiet spot with a tiny Methodist chapel and an old mill (one of three corn mills that at one time ground in Dentdale) that still has a working waterwheel.
By Brackensgill the Dales Way passes below Brackensgill  Wood where there are some magnificent waterfalls hidden amongst the trees.
After wet weather their thunder can be heard from across the dale and once, and only once, in winter when many of the trees had lost their leaves, I caught a glimpse of them from Frostrow: shimmering skeins of white foam through the wooded gill.
At Ellers we stood on the bridge watching swallows skimming and bumping the water after a hatch of flies that the late afternoon warmth had brought out.
As we walked the river path towards Dent a pair of curlews rose in alarm close by a pool where one autumn morning I had watched a heron fishing.
Seeing me, it had taken to the air, clumsily at first, then with Increasing speed as its great wings beat it downriver to Rash.
We crossed the fields below Underwood and made our way back home as cows were brought in to milk and children were brought in from play for their tea.
A beautiful day.
Ease Gill, Great Coum and the Megger Stones
ON the edge of limestone country, Ease Gill is classic limestone: at its lower end it is a dry "alley with an impressive cavernous" kirk", and further upstream it has the waterfall at Cow Dub where the beck leaves a pure white flowstone bed to drop twenty feet through a collapsed cavern into a deep pool where it is again cupped in limestone.
The gill is easy walking and leads up on to Crag Hill, which is near my home in the Dales, so one day, throwing work to one side, I cadged a lift down Barbondale to Blind Beck Bridge and set off in bright sunshine up the track to Bullpot Farm and Bull pot of the Witches.
It was midwinter but one of those strange warm days that seemed to come from nowhere to tell you that spring isn't really far away.
The bracken on Barkin Fell was the colour of new rust and the sky over Barbon Manor a deep blue.
The manor always looks out of place to me, a Victorian shooting lodge built in the style of a German castle for the wealthy Kay Shuttleworth family.
Sir James Kay Shuttleworth was a successful physician in Manchester during the great cholera epidemic of 1832.
He was shocked at the condition of the working class employed in the cotton manufacturing industry in Manchester and became a leading reformer and campaigner for better working and living  conditions.
He built Barbon Manor, which now lords it over the pines perched halfway up Barkin Fell like a Bavarian schloss.
It must be a nice spot to live, though I wouldn't like to have to pay the window-cleaner's bill.
Bullpot Farm is a caving club now, owned by the Northern Association of Caving Clubs.
A lot of people say that cavers are mad, that they cause a lot of trouble getting themselves stuck, and that they wouldn't do it themselves for a gold onion.
Most of the cavers I have met, and I have met hundreds, have been careful and courageous people who cave for the adventure, challenge and hard physical exercise, and most of whom have a deep appreciation of the beauties of underground limestone.
Like climbers and fell-walkers, they frequently attract animosity, oftentimes from locals in the areas they use for their sport.
I think this is unjustified — some people don't like anybody coming into their area.
They resent the "off-comed-un" , the "bloody potoiler" , the "bloody hiker" , forgetting that no matter how far back their own roots go, they or their ancestors were at one time "foreigners" too.
It's unfair for another reason: most of the walkers, climbers and cavers that come to the Dales, the Lakes and the mountains come because they love them, because they respect them and care for them and want to keep them the way they are so that the people of the future can enjoy the wildness and the greatness of the earth.
There are cowboys, admittedly, idiots who leave smashed bottles in grass, throw lit cigarettes away carelessly, leave gates open or even vandalise them.
You get that in any society, but I would say that these loonies are in the minority and certainly would get the "clog pie" from any walking or caving club.
At the other end of the argument, there are farmers who block footpaths, set dogs on walkers, block cave entrances with rubbish, run dangerous bulls in fields with rights of way through them, rip footpath signs down and who have, in some cases, threatened people or actually hit them.
Quarrying companies blast away the sides of beautiful valleys, destroy footpaths, old woodlands, Iron Age settlements and other antiquities and leave areas of the Dales looking like the surface of the moon.
Water boards flood valleys, culvert streams, run concrete open drains across hillsides and fence off millions of acres of wild and open land.
The M O D have again taken millions of acres of beautiful wild land and made it, if not unwalkable, at least dangerous to walkers.
 "Do not stray from the path" , said a notice I saw in the Cheviots when I was walking the Pennine Way.
"Do not pick anything up.
It may maim or kill you."
Strange sort of welcome?
If you are looking for vandals then I think some people should look closer to home.
Walking past Bull Pot of the Witches was a sad occasion for me, as a couple of years ago a very fine caver friend of mine died while diving Bull Pot.
 "In memory of Ian David Plant" , a plaque reads above the pothole, "a fine caver who died while diving Bull Pot of the Witches, 14 October 1985" .
Ian was the youngest editor ever of the Craven Herald, one of the most important papers in the Dales.
I first met him when he came to interview me as a young reporter.
He was intelligent, cared about people, loved the Dales and was a good newspaper man.
He was a caver  too, probably one of the top ten cavers in Britain, and known well in potholing circles far and wide for his work with Oliver Monks in diving the Kingsdale master system.
His death was accidental, a million to one mishap.
His tragic loss was shared with his wife Sally and daughter Katie by everyone who knew him.
Beyond the tree-fringed mouth of Bull Pot of the Witches, the path to Ease Gill cuts left on to the fell's edge and passes close by a trap door covering a shaft that leads into Lancaster Hole, the first route into the main cave system of Leck Fell.
Lancaster Hole was found in 1949 when a caver sitting having his lunch on a still sunny day noticed the grass nearby waving and stirring as though a wind were moving it.
Being a bright lad, he worked out that it was an updraught from underground and a few removed boulders later the entrance to Lancaster Hole was revealed.
Bull Pot of the Witches, by the way, may mean just that, that it was named after a witch or witches that lived in the area.
Over the fell, near where Deepdale meets Dentdale, is a farm called Coventree, which, Miley Taylor told me one night in the Sun Inn, is named after a tree beneath which the hairy crones of Dentdale would hold their covens and throw eye of newt and armpit of toad into the stew while waiting for the Dales equivalent of Macbeth and Banquo to come riding out of the night.
The ruins of Hellot Scales Barn mark the beginning of Ease Gill and the rise of Leck Beck, where all the waters that drain beneath  Leck Fell resurge.
The first hundred yards' walking up the gill leads you into the rocky vault of Lower Ease Gill Kirk.
Sheer walls thirty feet high enclose you, the way upstream being a clamber up the smooth lip of a nine-foot dry waterfall that takes you into Upper Ease Gill Kirk.
Although it was dry when I visited it, Kirk Pot in the Upper Kirk is a deep pool in flood conditions.
There is no way out of the Upper Kirk other than scrambling to the left or right on to the higher ground.
As I started to make my way up through some bushes on the left of the kirk, something caught my eye and I stopped.
Staring at me through the branches of a twisted thorn was a tawny owl perched on a rock ledge.
He blinked; I held my  breath.
He had obviously been sleeping out the daylight in the gloom of the kirk, never expecting that some idiot with a camera, rucksack and heavy boots would come crashing into his bedroom.
With what I swear was a scathing look that said something like "Wally" , he launched himself gracefully on to the air and noiselessly flew down the gill out of sight.
I scrambled noisily and gracelessly out and up into the sunlight.
Another half-hour's walking brought me to Cow Dub where a stream thunders down from a lip of flowstone, crashing through a narrow tubular cavern to scour out a perfectly formed round pool below.
Climbing up to the right and beyond Cow Dub, I followed the beck, dry where it had drained away through the limestone but flowing where the bands of sandstone outcropped, until on the open fell the limestone gave way to glacial moraine and the beck gurgled noisily back down towards Cow Dub.
As I struck northwards, climbing heavily towards Barbondale, I looked back and saw the river Lune cut like a golden scratch on the face of the earth leading towards Morecambe Bay, the far fells of the Lake District just visible through the afternoon light.
On Crag Hill I stopped at the cairn to look down on Dentdale spread below me, Helms Knott, the Howgills and the distant forms of Cross Fell, Dun Fell and, facing me, the long ridge of Barbondale.
Cutting round to the right and following the track northeastwards, I came down a path that led towards the Occupation Road via the Megger Stones.
At the Megger Stones, the views across Dentdale and over the fells to the Howgills were superb.
I sat down to watch the late afternoon shadows climb Rise Hill before striking out for the Occupation Road.
This took me in a gentle curve round the flanks of Great Coum towards the Barbondale road, Combe House, the track past Tofts, and back to my home for tea and crumpets.
When I eventually got home the crumpet packet was lying empty on the kitchen floor while Bilbo Baggins, the new puppy my daughters had brought home from the dogs' home, was lying full beside it.
I didn't fancy his biscuits, so I made do with some toast.
5.
Malhamdale
MALHAMDALE stretches in a vaguely northwards direction from the gentle swelling lush lands of Craven to the wilderness of Fountains Fell and Malham Moor.
At its southernmost end is the village of Gargrave where the river Aire, the Skipton — Kendal road, the Settle-Carlisle Railway and the Leeds-Liverpool canal all meet to travel among the low-lying valleys of the Aire and the Ribble.
Gargrave is the home of Johnson & Johnson of babies' bottoms fame and is also a good stopping point for a traveller on  the Pennine Way, for there is a wonderful cafe here known to generations of walkers and cyclists at the very spot where the Way crosses the busy turnpike.
Walking north from Gargrave the Pennine Wayfarer follows a meandering path over a series of drumlins to Airton, where an old cotton mill was once used for the manufacture of Dettol.
On the last Saturday in August the Malhamdale Agricultural Show takes place here, one of the most important shows in the dale.
From Airton the Way follows a peaceful riverside path to pass below Kirkby Malham and come close by Aire Head to Malham itself, dominated by the great scar of the Cove, which for generations of Yorkshire folk has been a place of pilgrimage and picnic.
Northward of Malham is the Tarn, while to the east lies the gorge of Gordale Scar.
Fountains Fell dominates the northern end of the dale and from its flanks looking southward you can see the Tarn and the head of the dale spread before you.
If you come into the dale from Stainforth, then the road into Malham winds down by Ewe Moor giving you a good view of the Cove and the lynchets under Shorkley Hill.
Lynchets are strips of land one oxen-width wide that were ploughed into the hillside by Anglo-Saxon farmers.
A little like the paddy fields of China, they were a sensible way for unmechanised farmers to grow crops on steep land without causing erosion.
Within its narrow boundaries, Malhamdale contains probably more of interest to the historian, geologist, naturalist and the casual tripper than any of the other dales.
It has the natural beauties of the Cove Scar and Tarn, prehistoric circles and burial mounds, monastic highways and dwelling houses and, at Kirkby Malham, one of the most beautiful churches of the Dales.
It's fine walking country in any weather, though it's probably best avoided on Bank Holidays and summer Sundays.
Malham, the Cove, Gordale Scar and back by the Tarn
MALHAM village is one of the "honeypots" of the Dales and, to some extent because of this, it has suffered badly from the effects of visitor pressure.
I'm thinking particularly of the footpaths leading to and climbing up the side of Malham Cove, where artificial ways have had to be created to cope with erosion caused by millions of feet.
The area is popular because it contains, within a short walking distance of the village centre, the great crag of the Cove, the chasm of Gordale Scar and the glacial lake of the Tarn.
Visit Malham at mid-day on a sunny Bank Holiday and it will be "fair thranged wi' folk" , yet wait until evening when the charabancs have gone and the cars have motored their way back downdale, and Malham becomes again a quiet little place, the only noise coming from the Hikers' Bar of the Buck Inn where legions of Pennine Way pilgrims have slaked their thirst; or from the bar of the Listers Arms where Dalesfolk have been coming for years to taste the best steaks in the Dales.
I like Malham because, in spite of the hammering it takes from visitors, it has still managed to keep its character.
The Post Office sells a few souvenirs and the cafe sells sandwiches "to go" , and there is a converted barn selling walking gear and souvenirs with a smashing little tea shop.
There is also, of course, Beck Hall across the Clapper Bridge, which does afternoon teas and is a grand spot to sit with your scones and jam and good strong tea in the sun watching the ducks do ducky things in the water.
But beyond all this, Malham goes about its business of being a living Dales village, with its farms and farmers, its village hall and little shops, very much in the way it has always done.
Malham has been a favourite stopping-off point of mine for years now.
While walking the Pennine Way I cooled my feet in the beck before continuing south to Airton and Gargrave.
Another time when I was walking with Tony we paused for an hour at Malham to break a long day's walk from Langcliffe to Arncliffe by Malham and Yew Cogar Scar by the old monks' road.
I remember two summers ago crossing the Dales with a backpack and camping at Malham after a glorious hot day's walking from Horton over Pen-y-ghent and Fountains Fell.
The evening was cloudless and warm and after pitching the tent and cooking something called "Hunter's Goulash" (a freeze-dried meal that I'd brought home from a trip along the Appalachian Trail — it tasted like fried sofa stuffing doused with monosodium glutamate), I walked up the narrow lane above the youth hostel to watch the sun going down behind Pikedaw Hill tingeing the sky a dusky orange — a wonderful sight.
The next day I walked through a hazy, warm day up Gordale Scar to Seaty Hill and then followed the old monastic road of Mastiles Lane to Kilnsey in Wharfedale.
The few days I spent on that trip will stay in my mind as some of the most pleasant times I have ever spent.
I love camping and don't feel that anything can compare with waking up in the morning with the day just a few hours on from dawn, dew still on the grass, so that when you open the tent flap the smell of a new day comes to  you with the early morning sun.
Nothing in the world tastes better than bacon and eggs cooked on a wood fire as the sun dries the tent ready for packing away again.
Having said that, there have been times, one particular occasion in the west of Ireland I remember only too well, when after four days of heavy rain, I would have swapped tent, pack, pots and all for a warm bed and a hot bath.
Malham, though, has also been a favourite spot of mine for little walks, the sort of walks that only take an afternoon.
Or, if it's a terrifically hot day and you don't feel like burning out a gasket on the tops, Malham is just the place for an easy stroll, going "just steady on" , as they say in the Dales.
I suppose the most regular walk I do around Malham begins and ends at the village itself, going first by Janet's Foss to Gordale Scar then on to the Tarn and back by the Cove.
It means that you don't get the good views of the Cove until you've reached Malham Beck, but I think that it's better doing the walk this way round than going at it clockwise and having to clamber down the scar.
This walk, by the way, although it's only short, does involve a bit of scrambling which, though hardly dangerous, does need a fair amount of agility — fit grannies and grandads would make it, overweight VAT inspectors with beer bellies wouldn't.
I did the walk last summer on a fine sunny afternoon, leaving Malham by the beck that runs from the village to the pretty little waterfall at Janet's Foss.
Janet's Foss (foss = force = waterfall) is said to have been the haunt of a witch or water sprite called Jennet.
Her cave lies just to the right of the waterfall.
But when I reached the foss I encountered not a fairy, but my first school party of the day.
Like Alum Pot and Gaping Gill, Malham is known to generations of "O" level, "A" level and C 5 E geography students as a superb example of limestone scenery.
During the spring and summer, thousands of minibuses bearing such legends as "St Mungo's School, Larking in the Marsh" crawl down Malhamdale, eager noses pressed to the windows and hands clutching clipboards full of papers scrawled with questions, measurements and such amatory statements as "Ruth loves Simon Carr — true" .
So there at Janet's Foss was my first school trip of the season.
It was a party of sixth-formers with an instructor teaching them about the effects of weathering, the differing levels of hardness of limestone and how the two combine to produce waterfalls.
One of the boys, wearing shorts and a T-shirt and little else, climbed round the pool and up below the fairy cave.
He was showing off, as is the way with adolescent boys in the first flush of manhood (let he who has not sinned throw the first stone), and, as is the way with adolescent boys in the first flush of manhood, he slipped and fell in the pool — collapse of stout party etc.
From Janet's Foss my way led across the road and through a gate where the Dales Park have placed a plaque telling me that this is Gordale Scar and to keep to the path.
I did as I was told, although I did go off it once, I confess, to watch a lad from Leeds ferreting for rabbits.
Back on the path I came to the "chasm" said by many geologists to be a collapsed cave system and suggested by others more recently to have been carved out of a weakness in the limestone by the raging melting ice waters of a glacier.
This morning the school party, including the wet member, having gone on well ahead, I crossed the beck and sat in the warm sun outside the gorge, simply looking.
It has always inspired awe and wonderment.
Even Wordsworth, who had never been there, took it on himself to describe it as "terrific as the lair where the young lions couch" , then went on to say that if the "pensive votary enters Gordale at" shadowy eve when the air glimmers with fading light ", he or she will meet" a local deity with oozey hair and mineral crown".
Local writer Thomas Hurtley (who also, by the way, thought the Dales peaks at least as high as those in the Alps) called Gordale a "Stupendous Pavilion of Sable Rock apparently rent asunder by some dreadful although inscrutable elementary convulsion" .
The scar itself is part of the Mid-Craven Fault, one of the same set of faults which produced Giggleswick and Attermire Sears.
The gorge which cuts through Gordale Sear, whether a collapsed cave or simply a water-eroded cleft, is impressive in its grandeur.
Although the literary effusions of Hurtley and  Wordsworth and the exaggerated landscapes of James Ward and J. M.W. Turner seem a little over the top to us dwellers in the twentieth century (who, since the advent of the camera and the picture postcard, like our landscape more real and our prose less flowery), the scar nevertheless overhangs and dominates the scene as an example of the incredible forces at work when the landscape we now see was formed.
The Mid-Craven Fault is so deep that if you were to look south of Malham for the limestone that you see on Gordale Scar you would have to drill many thousands of feet below the earth's surface before you came to it.
I walked out of the sunlight into the cool dark shadow of the gorge, meeting no deity with oozy hair hot a couple eating sandwiches and two crag rats.
The crag rat, or Rattus lithographus, is a strange specimen rarely seen in limestone hitherto because of the friable nature of the rocks, until now usually preferring Lakeland granite or Pennine gritstone.
The creature is often seen on the Idwal Slabs in North Wales and Stanage and Laddow Rocks in the South Pennines but has of recent years migrated on to the Craven limestone.
When they first made their appearance in this country, crag rats sported nailed boots and tweed plus-fours.
Now they wear little except shorts and light rubber-soled pumps and hold on to vertical cliff walls like flies with a combination of sticky powder on their fingers, the faith of an Indian fakir, and tons of hardware in the shape of bolts, runners and slings hammered into the rocks.
For all that, as somebody who gets jelly knees on anything as simple as Jack's Rake in the Langdales, I admire their bottle.
Passing the crag rats who were climbing Cave Route Right Hand, I climbed my own bit of grade E6 over the tufa and out past the block of stone with a hole eroded through that is said by some to have been the lip of a water chute when the chasm was a cave.
Then I climbed up into the warm sunshine and the dry valley of Gordale Beck.
Access to the dry valley is forbidden, which is a shame since it is in fact one of the best examples of a dry valley in the area.
Steep cliffs of limestone line its sides, while higher up in the bed of the beck which flows through it you can find, according to Dr Raistrick, "Cave Pearls" , small, rounded calcite pebbles formed by the deposition of layer upon layer of calcium in solution.
Visitor pressure and the often mindless or downright destructive behaviour of some of the people who come to this area have annoyed some farmers so much that they look on walkers as just another kind of vermin — and there are many times when I can sympathise with this attitude completely.
The unfortunate result is that farmers, angered by the attitude of the careless few, block footpaths or refuse access to such places as the dry valley of Gordale Beck to the many considerate walkers who respect not only the countryside but also the problems of the working community who for centuries have fought to make a living from the land.
It's long been a custom to knock farmers and the high subsidies that many of them receive.
I might agree in terms of lowland farming where farms are more often controlled by investment groups than by single families, but hill farming has always been, and still is, a hard and often heart-breaking as well as back-breaking job.
To work all year and then watch your entire flock of sheep be killed by a long savage winter, as happened in Malham in 1940 when drifts ten and twenty feet deep covered the moor of Spiggot Hill and Tarn Moss, must be cruelty itself.
The sheep  had huddled together to keep warm and as the drifts covered them the weaker animals were trampled and crushed beneath the stronger sheep that were struggling for air.
Then they too died as, too exhausted to fight any further, they were covered by a crust of snow which froze on in the bitter winds.
In 1947 again the winter closed in after Christmas, as often happens in the Dales, only this time haytime had been ruined by a terrible summer and, in spite of the RAF airlift of fodder, many thousands of animals died of starvation.
From the forbidden dry valley I followed the path to Seaty Hill, a Bronze Age tumulus standing close to the point at which Mastiles Lane joins the main tarmac road and an indication of the deep roots of man's existence in the Dales.
The day was moving on faster than I was now and a heat haze shimmered over the Tarn as I came to its banks to sit and eat my lunch.
Malham Tarn was first formed when glacial meltwaters gathered on a thick bed of boulder clay at the end of the last Ice Age.
In a landscape renowned for its water sinks and disappearing streams, it's unusual to find lakes of the size of Semer Water and Malham Tarn.
 "Tarn" , by the way, is an interesting word coming from the Old Norse word for tear.
I suppose for the early settlers the smaller tarns such as those on Widdale, Baugh Fell and Whernside looked like tears on the face of the fell.
Malham Tarn is a fascinating place.
The monks of Fountains Abbey fished here for trout in the Middle Ages after William de Percy granted the Tarn to the Abbey "for the good of the souls of his father and mother and all his ancestors" .
The Tarn is still famous for its trout, and boats can be hired from Tarn House.
On the day I fished the Tarn, however, a long summer heatwave and a freak wind had brought algae up from the lake bottom so that they hung ill suspension, turning the lake the colour of pea soup.
I caught precisely nothing, not even a pea.
The Tarn House, now a centre for nature study, was largely rebuilt on the site of the hunting lodge of the Lords Ribblesdale by Walter Morrison around 1851.
Morrison was host to such Victorian worthies as Ruskin, the great art critic, and Charles Kingsley, who is said to have been inspired to write his book The Water Babies by his visits to the Dales (Vendale being based on Littondale) and who once told somebody that the black marks on the face of Malham Cove were made by "the fingers of little chimney boys" .
The Tarn is home to many varieties of water fowl including the curlew, the greater crested grebe and the lesser spotted sandwich-pinching duck, one specimen of which had my last tuna-fish butty while I wasn't looking.
I could see the beginning of cloud formations in the far west that looked as though they might thicken up and, since I wanted to get some shots of the Cove while the light was still good, I set off by Water Sinks, where the water from the Tarn sinks and doesn't reappear again until some miles down the valley at Aire Head, and followed the footpath that would take me west of Watlowes dry valley and bring me down to the Cove by the pasture land above the Pennine Way.
It was as fine an afternoon as you could wish for as I slowly descended to Malham Beck, the Cove coming into view on my left as I walked down.
Children were splashing in the beck, their cries echoing from the cove face, a courting couple were doing what courting couples have done since time immemorial, oblivious to the world and its wife passing by, and old ladies on a coach trip from Bradford were walking gently through the sunny afternoon, all grey hair, handbags and giggles.
I stayed at the Cove watching cloud shadows racing across the great limestone cliffs until the sun moved round to the west when it was time to race the old ladies back to the village for the tea and scones of Beck Hall.
I beat them, but only just — those handbags are lethal.
Malham to Settle, back by Victoria Cave
I'VE always been fascinated by prehistory, particularly the time of man's first settlement in the northern Dales.
The area between Langcliffe and Malham is probably the most interesting area in the North for anybody interested in prehistoric man, for in the limestone cliffs of Attermire and Langcliffe lie some of the earliest traces of man's habitation in Western Europe.
A couple of years ago I was staying in Malham for a few days and decided to set out one morning for Attermire by the old pack lane from Settle to Malham.
It was a sunny morning in late autumn and the frost was melting on the stiff blades of grass as I climbed the lane out of Malham and crossed the meadows climbing steeply upwards to Pikedaw Hill.
On Pikedaw Hill is the now covered shaft of a calamine mine where men descended deep into the earth to dig out zinc bearings, a memorial to the fact that Malhamdale was once a very industrialised valley.
Cotton mills were built and worked at Airton and Kirkby Malham: by the side of the path up Pikedaw Hill is the entrance to a disused lead-mine, while further up the dale is the old smelt mill chimney on Malham Moor.
Beyond Pikedaw Hill I followed the track over the saddle of Kirkby Fell and below Rye Loaf Hill to Stockdale Farm.
It's smashing walking along this track because it's firm underfoot and the views back to Malham and over to Great Scar and Attermire are worth nine out of ten in anybody's book.
From Stockdale Lane End, I climbed a stile and followed the footpath under Attermire Scar.
High above me was the narrow gash of Attermire Cave and the craggy outcrop of the scar hanging over the valley like a wave of stone about to break.
Some more crag rats were further proving the delights of Yorkshire limestone, holding on to ledges with their eyelashes and hanging on to spars of rock by their nostrils, swarming in a team of a dozen or so all over the face of the scar like a plague of dayglo flies.
I turned away from the scars near Warrendale Knots and dropped down by Middle High Hill to Settle and lunch at the Naked Man where the nicest ladies you could ever wish to meet serve real Yorkshire food, and plenty of it.
They do, however, insist that you keep your clothes on.
After lunch, full of roast beef, Yorkshire pudding, apple pie and custard, I took the back lane from Settle to Langcliffe and began the long climb out of the village by road.
I had to sit down twice because of the roast beef and everything, which had gone straight to my legs.
It isn't a good idea to climb hills after eating at the Naked Man — ideally you should find a quiet corner and sleep it off like a boa constrictor does after it has swallowed a goat or two too many.
Eventually, having decided that calling out the Cave Rescue for a simple case of overeating wouldn't look good in the newspapers, I recovered and got to the lane by Clay Pits Plantation that leads to Victoria Cave.
Clouds were moving across the far north-west of the landscape as I got to the cave, and I'd just reached the mouth when the first drops of rain spattered on the stones at my feet.
In minutes the sky had darkened and a heavy rainstorm was lacing the fields before me.
As I sat in the mouth of the cave looking out at the change in the weather, I wondered how a man in the Old Stone Age must have felt, staring out at the rain, knowing that if it didn't let up soon he'd have to go out in it and knock a mammoth on the head for tea.
Amusing myself with such trivial thoughts, I waited for the rain to give up.
It didn't, I did and clad in my cagoule, glasses steamed up, and mouthing curses at the weather, I walked through the grey rain to Attermire and back to Malham.
I'd like to say that I remember something about the rest of that walk but I don't, only that it rained, then it rained some more, and when it got fed up with that, it rained again.
I reached the Buck Inn just at opening time and stood by the fire steaming so much that two Swedish students got lost in the fog going to the gents.