

After the Fair
MELVYN BRAGG
In Norman Nicholson's Lake District anthology, he is sensibly clear-headed about including his own work where he thinks it is useful.
Following that excellent precedent, I include a passage from The Hired Man, a novel set in Cumbria from 1898–1923.
Here the young hired man, John, eighteen, having walked thirty miles to get employment, has been landed with a poor place and low wages.
He has met his brothers at the fair which accompanies the hiring but otherwise there has been no joy; certainly nothing to bring to his wife, Emily, who has been driven up to the town and found refuge in the house of a local schoolmaster, Mr Stephens.
When Mr Stephens went out to buy more provisions for tea — though his excuse offered was that he needed some tobacco — John sat in chair on one side of the kitchen, Emily stood by the window on the other side, both on their best behaviour.
But while he was most conscious of himself, clumsy in uneasy gratitude, Emily was delighted with it all.
After seeing Mr Stephens disappear around the corner, she examined the small room minutely, the books on the shelf — reading out all their titles aloud — the three prints on the wall, "The Education of the Young Raleigh" , "Derwentwater at Dawn" and "The Drunkard's Children" — drew her boots appreciatively over the mat, picked up the jug of pencils and finally came to the oven which was next to the sink.
Above the sink was a large cupboard which she opened despite the disapproving suck of John's tongue.
 "I could make some biscuits," she said.
 "Do you think I should?" 
 "Leave things be, Emily," John replied, speaking softly in the new place.
 "Thou can't go using other people's stuff like that." 
 "He would like some biscuits." 
 "How dis' thou know?" 
 "He would." 
She shut one of the cupboard doors only, not to be defeated that easily, and then thought of a conclusive argument.
 "I bet he can't make them himself!" 
 "Well, that's that got to do with it?" 
 "A lot." 
But she swung the second door in her hand uncertainly.
 "Don't you think he would like some?" 
 "How do I know?" 
 "There you are!" 
She smiled.
"You can't be certain.
It'll be done in a minute."
"He won't want his kitchen mired up wid baking stuffs.
That I do know."
 "And who'll mire a kitchen up?" 
 "Thou's bound to." 
"I am not, John Tallentire!
And anyway, it's clean dirt.
It's easily mopped up."
She paused.
 "He would like some," she reiterated.
"I could make ginger snaps.
He has some ginger."
 "Do as you please." 
 "Wouldn't you like a ginger snap?" 
 "O, for pity's sake Emily, stop keeping on!" 
She slammed the door shut and went back to the window.
She glanced at John quickly and then leaned forward, slipped the latch, and pushed it open.
Through the rain came the sound of the fair, organ music squeezing enticingly away, unseen.
 "So I won't get to the fair," said Emily — and then, the second she had said it, she covered her mouth with her hand, afraid that her thoughtlessness might upset John.
And so before he could say a word, she rushed on.
"Still!
I've been to Cockermouth in a pony and trap!"
John got up and went across to her.
She heard him but kept her back turned so that she would have his arms around her and then she could wriggle inside them to face him.
As he held her she seemed to swell, as if another skin, another body, more calm and perfect than the one she had, grew  out of her as token for that love of him which could in looks and words show itself so inadequately.
He kissed her on the cheek and her eyes closed to feel his lips breathing so tenderly.
 "I'm sorry about the fair," he said.
 "Don't be sorry." 
 "We'll come next year." 
 "Yes." 
He released her, held her on the shoulders for a moment and quickly turned away.
 "There were some logs in his backyard," he said.
 "I'll chop them up for kindling." 
Use the axe to cut out the feeling of obligation.
"O!
That's good!"
 "Emily," he asked as he reached the door.
 "Twelve shillin's will be enough, won't it?" 
 "Plenty!" she answered.
 "And if you can chop wood, I can make biscuits." 
By the time Mr Stephens came back, the snaps were almost done, the table was laid, crockery out, a split log burned on the fire, there was a neat pile of sticks drying in the grate, and tea went well.
They talked of the market and the fair, and then, Emily having noticed and praised his drawings of the swans, Mr Stephens held forth about his hobby.
 "What d'you call a missel thrush down your way?" he asked John.
 "Is it a shalary?" 
"Yes.
That's right.
There is a shalary."
 "I thought so," said Mr Stephens, happily.
"Even in our country it changes its name all over the place.
There's stormcock and chur-cock and shell-cock, shalary and mountain throssel — all the missel thrush!"
 "There's something my grandfather calls a shrike," said John, "would that be another?" 
"It might be.
It might be!
I'll ask Mr Carrick tomorrow.
Shrike!
I'll make a note of that."
 "There's something I call a blue-wing," said Emily, boldly, pleased to be joining in a conversation in which she was proud to see John taking such an active part, "and my uncle Tom calls it a blue-back." 
 "That's the" field-fare "," said Mr Stephens.
 "Turdus pilaris." 
And the Latin appellation — memorized so  painstakingly — crunched between his teeth like barley sugar.
 "Your grandfather might have heard it called the felty, or the pigeon felty or even the blue felty — and I think some call it fell fo!" 
 "Goodness!" said Emily, mouth half-open.
 "Oh, that's just the beginning!" 
Mr Stephens responded.
"Now take the whitethroat — sylvia cinera…
"
But after the tea had been cleared, the cups put away, everything tidied, then the three of them sat around in broken sentences.
Because of the regular placement of the chairs around the fire, they were quite close together — and yet the small spaces between them quickly became boundaries.
John wanted to be in bed so that the night would be over quickly and he could move off the next morning; Mr Stephens had a neighbour who would lend them a handcart and John wanted to be able to push the furniture the eight miles uphill to Crossbridge, settle it, and return the handcart the same day.
Already he was worried about their stores lasting until the Saturday when he might reasonably claim a few shillings to tide him over; Emily's mother had given them a box of stuff, sausages, bread, some tea, butter, bacon — but it would have to be spun out.
He was burrowing into responsibilities, looking for them almost, for they gave substance to that which bound Emily to him — and still the shock of jealousy pulsed occasionally making him shudder so that he blushed to seem to be shivering.
The schoolteacher realized that his guests were tongue-tied in this strange place and, after a few openings had brought no more than murmurs of self-conscious or self-absorbed politeness, he did what he had found best to do on such occasions.
For he was not a man who could slither into any shape required of him.
His interests and habits had been too strictly and personally framed for him to be anything less than completely reliant on them.
So he did what he was going to do anyway, what would most engage his own attention, and invited the others to share the preoccupation — which was as much as any man could do, he thought.
He took down a copy of Wordsworth's collected poems.
John and Emily sat themselves up to listen, and felt most solemn: but the schoolmaster's plain reading gave them confidence and Emily's hand reached out to touch John's arm.
Mr Stephens was careful to read the short poems and finished up with one set not far from the place at which John was hired.
Beginning:
 "There is a yew-tree, pride of Lorton Vale, Which to this day stands single, in the midst Of its own darkness, as it stood of yore." 
And John felt Emily's hand tighten on his own as the last lines rolled out:
 "…beneath whose sable roof Of boughs, as if for festal purpose decked With unrejoicing berries — ghostly shapes May meet at noon-tide; Fear and trembling Hope, Silence and Foresight; Death the skeleton And Time the Shadow:— there to celebrate, As in a natural temple scattered o'er With altars undisturbed of mossy stone United Worship; or in mute repose To lie, and listen to the mountain flood Murmuring from Glaramara's inmost caves." 
That final line itself murmured through the kitchen and they sat silently, the organ music from the streets like the sound from the caves.
John looked at Emily and saw a face on which such a keen reverence was trying to settle itself to gaze of understanding that yet again he stirred against the schoolmaster.
He had no such means of casting spells over her.
They came from a world out of reach.
And he did not want to hear of what was impossible.
When the couple had gone upstairs to bed, Mr Stephens packed his bag for the next day's outing, bolted the doors firmly — for many of the men stayed in Cockermouth drinking for three or four days and would roam the streets at night looking for somewhere to sleep — and then, as if to atone for those first designs he had on Emily, he picked out Silas Marner from his bookshelf and wrapped it up as a present for her.
He pushed back the chairs and laid his blankets on the floor to fall asleep, as always, the moment he closed his eyes.
John could not sleep.
He had stayed in bed until Emily was settled and then, very quietly, got up.
The window in the bedroom was very small and all he could see through it were the roof-tops lit, as the previous night, by a full moon.
He could not recapture the certainty he had felt that morning.
And it was not only that he had not got what he had hoped for, nor was it the jealousy which made him feel unsure.
In The Ring his pride in being on his own had met with confusion and Isaac and Seth, too, seemed to challenge what he wanted, what he believed in, how he lived — though understandingly enough, he knew.
It was as if he has caught an infection which was moving around all men but as yet lighting on few, something which would grow to cause fever where there had been force.
He shook his head, abruptly.
No wonder you get like that, standing in your bare feet in the middle of the night, his mother would have said.
And he remembered Isaac's story about the man who thought too much and smiled once more.
Not until dawn, however, could he fall asleep.
He lay in the bed, touching Emily with fingers too rough for her skin, wondering what he could give her that would even approach what he thought of her; waiting to be gone to his own place.