

MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION — IDENTIFYING THE ISSUES
Professor D de Bono
Department of Cardiology Glenfield General Hospital, Leicester
INTRODUCTION
Shortly after the Second World War the typical advice given concerning this condition was: "Acute coronary thrombosis must be regarded more seriously than most cardiac conditions, a rest in bed for weeks or months, with a minimum of 4 weeks, should be prescribed in order to assure as sound a healing of the myocardial infarct as possible." 
It is interesting to note that there is still a wide variation in the time that people stay in hospital.
The average time spent in Britain after a myocardial infarct is 7 days, while in Germany it is 3 weeks.
Much has been learnt about the natural history of coronary disease since 1945.
This is the right coronary arteriogram of a man who presented with a history of indigestion (Figure I).
The right coronary artery is a little irregular and not quite  normal, but it is certainly patent and no surgeon would operate if shown that picture.
No cardiologist would insert a balloon.
Three months later he was seized with chest pain, but because he had been told that his coronary artery was normal he developed an irresistible desire to chop wood.
The pain worsened and on admission it was found that the right coronary artery was blocked (Figure 2).
It is important then to realise that ischaemic heart disease has different natural histories with different manifestations.
There is not a linear progression of coronary disease, with a little narrowing in a coronary artery becoming severe and then blocking eventually.
Such a course is by no means inevitable nor invariable.
We studied patients who had coronary arteriography and then later an infarct.
To our surprise it was only possible to predict in half the patients the point at which they would block their coronary artery.
It appears entirely possible for a coronary artery to progress from one with   hardly any narrowing to one which is completely blocked over a relatively short period of time; and conversely, it is possible for a severe coronary stenosis to stay as a severe coronary stenosis without progressing for several years.
Patients who suffer a myocardial infarction may not have widely distributed coronary disease.
An analysis of cases in a trial of thrombolytic therapy in 1984–5 demonstrated that two thirds of the patients had coronary disease affecting only one of the three coronary vessels.
Some had no stenosis greater than 50% in any vessel.
Another study conducted in 1989 is starting to show the same phenomenon: the majority of patients with their first myocardial infarct do not have severe, diffuse coronary disease; they may have a single lesion affecting only a single vessel.
That is very important for their follow-up.
We have analysed coronary arteries, segment by segment, and recorded grades of stenosis.
Two groups of patients were studied: one who had had coronary angiography because they had been given thrombolytic therapy for coronary disease, and another who had had coronary angiography due to chronic stable angina (Figure 3).
The patterns are asymmetrical — which means that the distribution of coronary stenosis and their severity in the group who   presented with infarction is markedly different from the group who presented with chronic angina.
In general patients with chronic angina have diffuse coronary disease, with few blocked vessels, whereas the myocardial infarction group tend to present with at least one blocked vessel, but once that thrombus is cleared their resultant coronary disease is less severe than the chronic stable angina sufferer.
ACUTE CORONARY CARE
People die from myocardial infarction for two reasons: either a sudden electrical event or pump failure due to a severely damaged myocardium.
The time scale and the associations of these two modes of death are different.
Sudden electrical death may occur early after blocking a coronary artery.
The majority of these deaths occur in the first hour and it is important to realise that if early ventricular fibrillation is survived the ultimate outcome is unaffected.
It does not correlate with the risk of a big infarct.
Interestingly sudden electrical death is more likely following right coronary artery occlusion.
I usually say to patients who have had an inferior infarct that once in hospital the worst is over; the main cause of mortality then is pump failure and one of the striking contributions of thrombolytic therapy, to be dealt with later, is its ability to open up coronary arteries and prevent myocardial damage, pump failure and all the complications.
I want to emphasise that if the acute care of myocardial infarction is to be effective, it has to be very acute care.
Adequate resuscitation facilities must be provided and taken to the patient; in particular this applies to defibrillation.
Many people worry about the imagined complexity of defibrillators.
There has been a fascinating increase of interest over the last year by general practitioners in the use of defibrillators.
There is no new data to encourage this, but it is due to the concern about the acute care of myocardial infarction being heightened by thrombolytic therapy.
People are realising what particularly the Belfast group has been preaching for years, that early availability of resuscitation is tremendously important.
Pain relief is important in myocardial infarction, but let that not be an excuse for filling a patient with opiates and then forgetting about him for the next 2 hours as he quietly rots his myocardium in some corner of the accident and emergency department.
Pain relief is essential, but I would like my thrombolytic therapy as well.
Nitrates are underestimated and do have an important and increasing role in the management of acute infarction.
The impact of the ISIS2 study on convincing us that aspirin has an important, life-saving role in acute myocardial infarction should be emphasised.
Intravenous beta blockade also has a place in acute care in selected patients.
Certainly there is good evidence that long-term beta blockade improves survival at one year.
LATE CORONARY CARE AND REHABILITATION
The progression of coronary disease must be considered.
When I was first taught cardiology there was little evidence for the efficacy of secondary prevention after myocardial infarction.
That was wrong.
It is now incumbent on everybody looking  after patients following a myocardial infarct to try to reason out what caused the condition and to try to do something about stopping it.
The most important feature is to stop the patient smoking.
Some patients who have had a myocardial infarct, and particularly those who have had thrombolytic therapy, are going to be left with residual stenosis.
Dr Fox will be talking later about the potential role of coronary angioplasty.
POST INFARCT ANGINA
About a third of patients suffer from post-infarct angina.
The prevalence of this diminishes with time after the event, which you might think peculiar, but there are fewer patients who have been followed up for five years.
For such patients we have adopted a policy of exercise testing on the one hand to convince them that they can often do a lot more than they feel like doing, and on the other hand to pick up the occasional patient who has severe residual ischaemia but is not declaring it.
REINFARCTION AND PROGNOSIS
The problem of reinfarction after thrombolytic therapy is less than was anticipated.
Approximately half of all reinfarcts occur within the first month and the rest tail out to one year.
After one year it has been our experience that a further infarction is a separate event involving often a different coronary artery territory to the original.
The pattern of angina and reinfarction is mimicked by the pattern of intervention, and our experience is that half of all interventions take place in the first 3 months and the rest are spread out over the next 2 years.
In our unit this treatment has spread evenly between angioplasties and coronary artery grafting.
The end result of interaction appears to be that the longer one survives after myocardial infarct the closer one's life expectancy comes to match the normal population.
That is something we emphasise very strongly to patients after they have had a myocardial infarct; that they are working their way back to becoming just like everybody else.
Whether the patients enjoy life after a myocardial infarct is very much up to the people who look after them at home or in hospital.
That is the very important issue of rehabilitation and will be dealt with later.
DISCUSSION
Audience
You stated the importance of VF as a cause of sudden death and you listed the acute treatment as including pain relief, nitrates, aspirin and thrombolytics.
Do you not think we should have an anti-arrhythmic agent rather than £600 worth of thrombolysis in our medical bag?
Professor de Bono
I would not give space to anti-arrhythmics in my bag as a GP.
I might if I was running a coronary ambulance.
Thrombolysis and beta blockade prevent more arrhythmias than lignocaine, for example, ever did.
Interestingly, follow-up anti-arrhythmic treatment is rarely required after defibrillation from primary VF.
Professor Goodwin
ACE inhibitors are said to be useful in acute myocardial infarction.
Is this because of their anti-arrhythmic effect, or due to them combating heart failure?
Professor de Bono
After an anterior myocardial infarct there is a tendency for the heart to bulge at the site of the damaged muscle.
The larger this becomes the harder it is for the rest of the heart to function.
There is good evidence that ACE inhibitors will help to prevent this and reduce the chance of long-term heart failure and arrhythmias.
Audience
There is concern about arrhythmias after an infarct, and reperfusion arrhythmias following thrombolytic therapies.
I believe general practitioners should carry a solution of intravenous diazepam.
This could remove the fear, the pain, the anxiety and other factors which are arrhythmogenic and could cover the patient after thrombolytic therapy.
Also, I was not sure of the significance of your information regarding prolonged rest post-infarction.
In my experience most people who suffer a myocardial infarct have been under pressure with associated exhaustion and fatigue for a prolonged period.
Four to six weeks spent post-infarction recuperating from that would appear to be money and time well spent, when considering someone's life with 20 or 30 years remaining.
Professor de Bono
With regard to diazepam, I would agree absolutely.
The only point that I would make is that if you are giving an opiate it will have many of the same effects and if I had to choose, I would probably prefer the opiate to diazepam.
I do reinforce the need for a period of recuperation.
Whether that period should be spent in bed followed by a prolonged holiday or whether it should be spent returning to a degree of post-infarct fitness will be discussed later.
EARLY THROMBOLYSIS
Dr A A Jennifer Adgey
Consultant Cardiologist Regional Medical Cardiology Centre Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast
INTRODUCTION
In the United Kingdom more than 250,000 patients have an acute myocardial infarction annually.
The community mortality from this disorder is approximately 40%.
Thus at least 100,000 deaths occur annually and 55,000 of these deaths are in patients aged less than 70 years.
Over the past two decades the management of myocardial infarction has been revolutionised in two ways: the first was the development of DC defibrillation for ventricular fibrillation with the possibility of correcting this condition outside hospital, where the highest incidence exists, and the second major advance has been thrombolytic therapy.
THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY
The Italian (GlSSI) study was one of the first where treatment was administered soon after the onset of symptoms to patients suspected of having an acute myocardial infarction."
Of the patients treated within the first hour, the 21 day mortality for those who had received streptokinase was 8.2%, compared to 15.4% for those who had received placebo.
There was no significant benefit seen if the patients were treated after 6 hours from the onset of symptoms.
The second generation thrombolytic agents are recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) and APSAC (anistreplase).
These are more clot specific than streptokinase.
We have compared the thrombolytic efficacy, left ventricular function, mortality and complications of therapy using rt-PA and anistreplase.
All patients had chest pain and ECG changes of acute myocardial infarction (initially at least 1 mm ST segment elevation in either the precordial or limb leads).
They were aged 75 years and were seen and treated within the first 4 hours of the onset of symptoms.
There were no contraindications to thrombolytic therapy, e.g. severe hypertension, previous cerebro-vascular accidents, transient cerebral ischaemic attacks, recent trauma or bleeding tendencies.
THROMBOLYTIC EFFICACY
We first carried out a dose ranging study of rt-PA among 50 patients with myocardial infarction seen 4 hours after the onset of symptoms.
Twenty, 50 or 100 mg were infused intravenously over a period of 90 minutes.
This was followed by  immediate coronary angiography, further revascularisation as necessary, and assessment of left ventricular function and in-hospital complications.
The thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) reperfusion grades of the infarct related vessel were assessed, i.e. Grade 0, no flow in the obstructed coronary vessel; Grade I, a trickle of flow is seen distally, Grade 2, usually a high grade stenosis remains, but there is significant improvement in the distal flow; and Grade 3, where the flow rate distally is the same as in the normal vasculature.
Grades 2 and 3 indicate patency of the infarct related vessel and were found mostly in these 50 patients seen and treated within the first 4 hours after the onset of symptoms who received the 100 mg rt-PA.
Additionally, those treated within the first 2 hours had a significantly higher patency rate than those treated within the third and fourth hours.
Approximately a third of these patients had had a previous myocardial infarction.
LEFT VENTRICULAR FUNCTION
The left ventricular ejection fraction correlates only roughly with infarct size, but is a powerful predictor of the long-term survival of the patient following myocardial infarction.
Nevertheless, during the early hours of an acute infarction the ejection fraction is an insensitive measure of the severity of hypokinesis in the infarct region because of compensatory hyperkinesis or other wall motion abnormalities in the non-infarct region.
Thus, of these 50 patients where left ventricular ejection fraction was studied using radionuclide ventriculography at a mean of 46 hours post infarction, no difference in the ejection fraction could be found for those with Grade 2 and 3 reperfusion when compared with those who had Grade 0 or I, but when the infarct related regional third ejection fraction was assessed those who had open vessels had a significantly better regional third ejection fraction than those who had closed vessels (p{0.05).
COMPLICATIONS
There was a very low incidence of bleeding complications in this series of patients.
The earlier the administration of thrombolytic therapy the greater the frequency of early reperfusion and the greatest potential for the salvage of myocardium.
There is increased resistance to lysis as the thrombus ages not only in vivo, but also in vitro .
A possible explanation of this is the continuing polymerisation and cross linking of the fibrin.
So the earlier the thrombolytic therapy is administered the greater the chance the patient has of maintaining reasonable left ventricular function after the vessel is opened.
This led to a further study where rt-PA or placebo were given first either outside the hospital or in the accident and emergency department of the hospital.
After the patient was admitted to the coronary care unit the placebo was added to those who continued to receive active therapy, and rt-PA to those who had received placebo.
All were given intravenous heparin and cardiac catheterisation was carried out at I 014 days.
The infarct related regional third ejection fraction"was compared between the 2 groups.
In group A, the group who received the active  therapy early, there were 27 patients and in Group B, those who received the placebo early, there were 30.
The distribution of anterior infarcts was similar.
Interestingly, the rt-PA started at a mean of I 19 minutes in Group A as opposed to 187 minutes in Group B. Surprisingly, even with that short time difference, the infarct related regional third ejection fraction in those who received earlier thrombolytic therapy (Group A) was 41% whilst in Group B it was 28%.
Approximately one third of patients in both groups had had a previous myocardial infarction.
When these two studies using rt-PA were combined it was found that the earlier the attempted thrombolysis the higher the patency rate of the infarct related vessel.
The global left ventricular ejection fraction and rapid ST segment resolution did not differ significantly between those treated in the first 2 hours and those treated later.
Using the scoring method of Palmeri, good myocardial function was preserved until therapy was delayed beyond 180 minutes.
Ventricular Fibrillation
The incidence of early ventricular fibrillation following successful thrombolysis is low and late ventricular fibrillation following successful thrombolysis is virtually reserved for patients who reinfarct.
Deaths
In hospital, mortality for this series of patients was 7.6%.
Follow-up
The first-year mortality following discharge from hospital was 3.7%.
Ninety-three survivors were reviewed at a mean of 53 weeks after infarction.
Coronary angiography indicated that 45% of these 93 patients had significant single vessel disease, 31% double vessel disease and 24% triple vessel disease.
Twenty-two patients complained of angina (16 with Grade 1/2 using the New York Heart Association classification), 5 had cardiac dyspnoea (all Grade 2), and 2 had suffered a reinfarction within the first year period.
Thus the incidence of angina and reinfarction was low.
However, coronary artery bypass grafting or PTCA after rt-PA was carried out in 31% of patients probably contributing to the low 1 year morbidity and mortality.
ANISTREPLASE OR APSAC
Anistreplase is given intravenously as a bolus (30 units) and is therefore more easily administered outside hospital than an infusion.
The patients studied were seen and treated up to 3 hours from the onset of symptoms.
Very high patency rates (similar to rt-PA) were recorded.
Particular rapid ST segment resolution occurred among those treated within the first hour of the onset of symptoms.
The incidence of ventricular fibrillation was low and the in-hospital mortality was 5%.
Although there were no significant differences in the global left ventricular ejection fractions whether patients were treated early or in the third hour, when the global left  ventricular ejection fraction measured in these patients was plotted against time and a regression analysis performed, the delay in treatment was significantly related to the global ejection fraction, i.e. the longer the delay to treatment the lower the global ejection fraction.
When a multiple regression analysis of the global ejection fraction was carried out, the two most important variables were patency and the delay to the administration of anistreplase (APSAC).
The incidence of ventricular fibrillation, pericarditis and cardiogenic shock in those patients who have undergone successful thrombolysis is low.
The low incidence of early ventricular fibrillation is probably due to a more gradual opening of the vessel than was once thought.
The incidence of pericarditis and cardiogenic shock is low with increasing salvage of myocardium contingent upon the opening of the vessel.
The incidence of heart failure among patients who are treated effectively with thrombolytic agents is probably lower than among those patients who are not treated.
REOCCLUSION AND rt-PA
Those patients who fail to achieve reperfusion or who experience reocclusion of the infarct-related artery show no improvement in regional or global ventricular function.
The reocclusion rate following successful thrombolysis has been found to vary from 10 to 45%.
Recurrent MIs were studied in 26 of our patients; 11 with an anterior and 15 with an inferior infarction.
The median time from the first thrombolytic agent to the administration of rt-PA (as second dose thrombolytic agent) was 6.5 days (range 10 hours to 218 days).
The dose of rt-PA infused varied.
The majority received 100 mg over a period of 3 hours.
After the rt-PA, coronary angiography was performed in I 9 of the 26 patients; the coronary artery was patent in 13 (68%).
Of the remaining 7 who did not have repeat coronary arteriography there was acute resolution of the ST segment elevation in 4.
The mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 46%.
Ventricular fibrillation following the first thrombolytic agent did not occur in any of the 26 patients, but occurred in 2 after the rt-PA while in hospital.
Subsequent PTCA was carried out in 11 of these patients because of the recurrence of their pain and I patient went on to bypass grafting.
There was a further clinical reocclusion during hospitalisation in 5.
There were no significant bleeding complications.
Four patients died in hospital from cardiogenic shock.
Thus rt-PA used as a second dose thrombolytic agent, allows coronary artery reperfusion with preservation of left ventricular function and without serious side-effects.
With rt-PA there is no risk when giving a second dose within 6 months of the initial myocardial infarction because antibody formation does not occur.
COMPLETE HEART BLOCK AND THROMBOLYTIC AGENTS
A section of our patients had complete heart block and our results indicate that in these patients with acute myocardial infarction thrombolytic therapy is effective and safe.
Of 11 patients with complete heart block in association with acute  myocardial infarction, 10 patients had an inferior and one an anterior myocardial infarction.
The majority were treated outside hospital.
The average time from onset of symptoms to first being seen was 112 minutes and to attempted thrombolysis 172 minutes as in the early part of the study atropine was used in an attempt to convert the patient's rhythm to sinus before the thrombolytic agent was given.
rt-PA was given to 8 and anistreplase or APSAC was given to 3 patients.
Coronary arteriography was carried out in 10 of these patients and in 8 there was an open vessel.
The left ventricular ejection fraction varied from 39 to 64% (mean 57%).
Three patients developed ventricular fibrillation and pacing was required in 3 patients (1 patient prophylactic).
One patient died during hospitalisation.
RESIDUAL CORONARY ANATOMY AFTER THROMBOLYTIC AGENTS
After any effective thrombolytic agent the patient is usually left with a patent vessel.
Critical or significant lesions do occur however in a high percentage of patients.
The question then is should angioplasty be attempted in these patients or is bypass grafting indicated?
Recent work would suggest that early PTCA is not indicated but can be carried out safely later in the recovery phase.
The infarct-related vessel remains occluded in 2030% of cases.
There is much debate still as to which treatment would most benefit this group.
Of the 10% with a patent vessel but coexisting left main disease, or severe three vessel disease, CABG is indicated.
ST SEGMENT DEPRESSION IN SUSPECTED ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Finally, there remains a question about the patients who present with significant ST segment depression, probably indicative of a subendocardial myocardial infarction, but which might be unstable angina.
In the Italian (GISSI)"study the hospital mortality at 21 days for those who received streptokinase was not significantly different from the control group, who did not receive streptokinase.
The ISIS-2 study gave similar results at 35 days.
What does this mean and should we be treating these patients?
Does it indicate that these patients have got such severe coronary artery disease in other vessels that opening of the occluded vessel will not affect overall survival?
CONCLUSIONS
Earlier institution of thrombolytic therapy allows greater patency rates with improvement in left ventricular function and reduction in mortality.
Pre-hospital administration of thrombolytic therapy in the proper hands is feasible and safe.
We feel that all doctors or other qualified individuals seeing a myocardial infarction for the first time should consider thrombolytic therapy as early as possible so that the maximum amount of myocardium can be salvaged.
DISCUSSION
Professor Goodwin
Early thrombolysis will place a very heavy burden of responsibility of correct diagnosis on the first general practitioner or physician to attend the patient.
There are circumstances in which the incorrect diagnosis and inappropriate administration of a thrombolytic would be disastrous; for example, acute pericarditis.
Dr Adgey
All who are going to attempt thrombolysis will need a check list.
The individual must look down that list and check that there are no other complicating features that the patient might have before administration of the drug.
It will include prior cerebrovascular events, major diabetic complications, recent trauma or surgery, severe hypertension or any problem that might lead to major bleeding complications.
The patient should have had central chest pain in the classic distribution for at least 15 minutes.
An electrocardiogram may show evidence of minimal ST segment elevation; the earlier the patient is seen the more normal the ECG is likely to be.
The patient should be treated within the first 6 hours of the onset of symptoms; the longer you delay therapy the greater the risk of haemorrhage into the area of myocardial infarction following thrombolysis.
An upper age limit may be appropriate although the Americans dispute this.
Over the age of 80 the cerebrovascular system, even in the absence of a previous CVA or TIA, is at risk of bleeding.
Professor Goodwin
Those patients with ST segment depression would be people now regarded as having non-Q wave infarction.
A recent study from Boston suggests that these patients have a better immediate prognosis than people with Q wave infarction, but a worse prognosis later.
Would you comment on this?
Dr Adgey
I understand that viewpoint.
The difficulty with these two studies, unfortunately, is that we do not know how many patients ended up with a definite myocardial infarction; an initial electrocardiogram only was used.
The mortality rate in these patients with ST segment depression, both in the control and in the treated groups, is considered high at approximately 18%.
It is difficult to relate these mortality figures to the good initial prognosis that patients with sub-endocardial infarctions enjoy.
Your point is well taken that a percentage of those will go on to a transmural infarct, but I have difficulty in understanding these figures in relation to an expected mortality for sub-endocardial infarction of around 5–6%.
Audience
What is your policy concerning pacing and complete heart block?
Would you first pace before starting thrombolysis and what route would you choose?
Dr Adgey
The highest incidence of complete heart block occurs outside the hospital following acute diaphragmatic infarction.
Thrombolytic therapy is started provided there arc none of the exclusion criteria that I mentioned, along with atropine.
In the majority of cases, as in this very small study, the patient's rhythm will revert to 2:1 AV block or 1:1 conduction (sinus rhythm).
The patient is then brought into the hospital and monitored closely.
Pacemakers are not used in those with either first or second degree heart block, or in those with 1:1 conduction rhythm with a normal PR interval.
For those with an anterior infarction outside hospital, atropine is clearly not indicated and is totally ineffective as the damage to the septum is usually very significant.
If they remain in complete heart block after attempted thrombolysis and admission to the coronary care unit, a temporary pacing catheter is inserted, being aware that there is a much higher incidence of ventricular fibrillation as the tricuspid valve is crossed in patients in this very early phase.
The patients who develop late complete heart block, perhaps in the coronary care unit, usually associated with a diaphragmatic infarction, do not respond to atropine.
Thrombolysis is not indicated, and these people need a temporary pacing catheter.
The patients with anterior infarction may collapse later, usually preceded by bundle branch block, and then into complete heart block-these patients also require a temporary pacemaker.
Audience
As a general practitioner from Northern Ireland, do you recommend that when I go back home tonight I put Eminase in my bag?
Dr Adgey
I would recommend that you use a thrombolytic agent of choice.
The two with which I have experience which have very high patency rates are either rt-PA or anistreplase.
I would say to you that you must have a defibrillator available should your patient reperfuse on the way to hospital and develop ventricular fibrillation, because having salvaged the myocardium, it is a shame to lose the patient and we cannot yet tell which patient will develop ventricular fibrillation and which will not.
Professor Goodwin
Would you like him to have aspirin in his bag too?
Dr Adgey
Yes.
The earlier aspirin is administered the better.
Oral aspirin is difficult if the patient is nauseated and vomiting and the opiate given to relieve pain may delay gastric motility.
ANGIOGRAPHY AND ANGIOPLASTY
Dr K A A Fox
Senior Lecturer in Cardiology and Consultant Cardiologist University of Wales College of Medicine (Current appointment: Professor of Cardiology, University of Edinburgh)
INTRODUCTION
The role of diagnostic and therapeutic cardiac angiography has evolved rapidly over the past decade, particularly in the context of acute coronary occlusion.
Angiographic studies provided evidence of the high frequency of total coronary artery occlusion early after myocardial infarction, despite the previous reports from autopsy studies which suggested that thrombosis was a secondary event.
Although the role of diagnostic angiography has been defined in the investigation of angina, there remain areas of controversy in unstable angina and early evolving infarction.
For certain mechanical defects where surgery is contemplated, for example, ventricular septal defects, or papillary muscle rupture, invasive investigation and/or echocardiography are required, and the relative merits of these approaches are beyond the scope of this review.
The roles of angiography and angioplasty in unstable angina after thrombolysis and the possible role for angioplasty as a primary procedure in acute myocardial infarction are controversial and will constitute the main topics for discussion.
UNSTABLE ANGINA
The following case history illustrates the therapeutic options in unstable angina.
A lady of 74 presented with unstable angina and intractable pain, despite intravenous nitrates and maximal anti-anginal therapy, but without ECG or enzyme evidence of infarction.
At cardiac  catheterisation there was a sub-total occlusion in the right coronary artery (TIMI grade I) with no significant flow past the occlusion.
This real clinical problem presents a therapeutic dilemma.
Without objective evidence of infarction but with very poor flow, should the decision be:(a) treat this patient medically (b) give thrombolytic therapy in the context of unstable angina (c) open the vessel with a balloon (d) a combination of b and c?
In this particular example, the vessel was opened by means of angioplasty, with an excel lent angiographic result.
Thus, it is technically feasible, but we must define the risks and potential complications.
A second example illustrates the thrombolytic approach.
A diabetic lady weighing 100 kg and measuring 147 cms in height (4 ft 10in) presented with similar features of unstable angina.
She too was unresponsive to maximal medical therapy.
Although the majority of individuals have a high-grade stenosis, this lady had marked irregularity of the first part of her left anterior descending vessel, with a narrowed perforator branch, angiographic features of thrombus but without vessel occlusion.
Thrombus has been recognised by angiography and angioscopy in the clinical syndrome of severe unstable angina, even in individuals without critical stenosis.
In this particular case thrombolytic therapy proved useful in dissolving the clot and maintaining vessel patency.
What evidence is there to decide among the approaches?
Table 1 illustrates a comparison of the results and complications of angioplasty for unstable angina and chronic stable angina."
The technical achievement of opening a vessel measured angiographically was similarly successful for both groups of patients.
However, it must be noted that the incidence of acute myocardial infarction in unstable angina is about 9%, but much lower in chronic stable angina (Table 1).
Many North American studies record lower rates of infarction than the currently illustrated British experience.
However, we must distinguish early angioplasty, with the higher incidence of acute MI versus those for whom the angioplasty can be delayed, where the incidence of acute MI is much lower.
Thus, we may conclude that, "Yes, it is possible to get the vessel open," but note the inherent risk, particularly early on, of acute myocardial infarction and death.
This mortality risk is much lower for chronic stable angina but a similar number of patients in both groups will go on to coronary artery bypass surgery.
In North America the practice among many centres is to undertake angioplasty with an intracoronary thrombolytic agent, usually urokinase, but the impact of this approach remains to be tested.
RESIDUAL STENOSIS FOLLOWING THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY FOR ACUTE MI
Although thrombolytic therapy dissolves the clot, angiographic studies have revealed a high incidence of residual atheromatous narrowing in the coronary artery.
Harrison and colleagues found that for vessels with a residual lumen of less than 0.4 square mm in cross-sectional area, there was a high incidence of  re-thrombosis."
A much higher proportion of the large-calibre stenosis remained patent.
This type of study provided the impetus to investigation of the role of angioplasty for residual thrombosis following thrombolytic therapy.
In the TAMI study the aim was to determine whether immediate angioplasty conferred benefit, compared with elective angioplasty, following thrombolysis.3 The underlying premise was that in view of the high frequency of residual stenosis following thrombolysis, angioplasty would be needed, but the timing was uncertain.
In those for whom thrombolysis failed to open the vessel there was a 10.4% incidence of hospital mortality, despite successful angioplasty to restore vessel patency.
This mortality rate is very similar to that seen in the mortality studies for conventional management of acute myocardial infarction without thrombolytic treatment.
Therefore, before embarking on a policy of immediate angioplasty for patients with failed thrombolysis, we must recognise that even in centres with extensive experience involving angioplasty, there is still a substantial risk of mortality and that opening the vessel may not improve short-term mortality.
When considering the principal aim of the TAMI study, there was a slightly higher mortality for patients randomised to immediate angioplasty, and no discernible benefit (Table 2).
The incidence of reocclusion was equivalent.
More patients in the elective group need angioplasty at a later stage.
Thus, this study revealed that there is no advantage in immediate angioplasty after thrombolysis compared with elective angioplasty.
The European study asked a slightly different question: whether or not a policy of immediate angioplasty was preferable to a non-invasive strategy?"367 patients with acute MI were treated with rt-PA thrombolytic therapy (Table 3).
Primary end points of the study were infarct size and ejection fraction, and the results revealed no differences between the groups.
There were more deaths and more frequent ischaemic episodes among the immediate angioplasty group, but the incidence of transient and sustained reocclusion was similar.
The  salutary lesson, therefore, is that although there is a high frequency of residual stenosis following thrombolytic treatment for acute myocardial infarction immediate angioplasty is not indicated.
Recently, the TIMI 2B study compared an invasive with a conservative strategy following thrombolytic therapy after acute myocardial infarction.5 All the patients received t-PA thrombolysis at a relatively early time of 2.6 ±0.2 hours (Table 4a and 4b).
They were then randomised and the majority of the invasive group was  catheterised between 18 and 24 hours.
It is important to note that the conservative strategy included angioplasty for those with clinical or ECG evidence of continuing or recurrent ischaemia.
In the TIMI 2B study about a quarter of the patients assigned to conservative strategy required angiography and further intervention.
As expected, among the invasive treatment group angioplasty was performed in a high proportion of cases.
Serious, complications of reocclusion, myocardial infarction and death occurred in 13% of patients.
In the conservative group angioplasty was performed only in those with further pain, or ECG evidence of ischaemia, and 22% sustained complications.
At 42 days the incidence of reinfarction or death was similar for the   two groups; hence, there was no benefit in terms of major cardiovascular complications for the invasive strategy (Table 4c).
The only benefit of the invasive strategy was revealed by exercise tolerance tests performed at 42 days and these suggest that there may be fewer patients with positive exercise tests in the invasive group.
Thus far we have answered two questions:(1) immediate intervention with angioplasty is not appropriate, and (2) early invasive strategy does not appear to confer benefit versus a conservative strategy, which includes intervention for those with evidence of further ischaemia.
A number of additional points may be extrapolated from the TIMI 2B study.
Eighteen to 48 hours after thrombolytic therapy about 85% of vessels are open, with the minority remaining occluded, This patency rate is rather higher than that seen at 90 minutes following similar thrombolytic treatment (65–70%).
Only about 12.5% of vessels have lesions with less that 60% stenosis.
In the conservative group the overall incidence of stenosis will be very similar to that of the invasive group.
Thus, excluding those with intervention, about 1000 out of 1600 patients would be expected to have a stenosis of more than 60%, despite an absence of clinical evidence of ischaemia and the negative exercise test.
This group has a six-week mortality of only about 2.5%.
It appears, therefore, that despite the high incidence of stenosis, the majority of patients have a relatively benign prognosis, at least in the short-term.
This may relate to collateral development and/or remodelling of the lesion during the period following thrombolysis.
ANGIOPLASTY AS THE PRIMARY PROCEDURE IN ACUTE MI
From the Mid American Heart Institute a strategy has been reported and this entails angioplasty as the primary coronary procedure for acute myocardial infarction.
No controlled trials yet exist, but the experience of this group is clearly relevant.
In a collection of 446 patients angioplasty was used as the only therapy to open the vessel.
The overall in-hospital mortality was 8.5% but with triple vessel disease it was 25%.
This high mortality risk occurred in patients opened, for the most part within six hours of infarction, and all were opened within 24 hours.
There was a 15% incidence of serious complications; death, bypass surgery and occlusion.
Patency at 48 hours is about 85% and, interestingly, this is similar to the patency rate 48 hours after thrombolytic treatment, but the latter has a higher frequency of residual stenosis.
In summary, I would argue that there is no clear indication for angioplasty as the primary procedure for acute myocardial infarction, particularly in the light of the mortality results following thrombolytic treatment.
The proposal has been put forward that angioplasty may be helpful in patients with coronary occlusion and cardiogenic shock or for those with marked impairment of ventricular function.
There are only anecdotal reports of the treatment for these groups and so we must await larger studies in order to define a treatment strategy.
CONCLUSION
It is now possible to draw up a set of guidelines (Table 5).
Angioplasty as a primary procedure has very limited application, and it may only be appropriate where the patient sustains an acute coronary occlusion when in close proximity to a centre with highly experienced and immediately available angioplasty expertise.
Immediate   angioplasty following thrombolysis is not indicated.
For acute reocclusion, repeat thrombolysis is suggested, and the place for angioplasty remains unresolved.
TIMI 2B clearly shows that elective and semi-elective angioplasty after thrombolysis can be performed in the conservative strategy patients, in other words those with recurrent ischaemia or a positive exercise test, and this results in a good prognosis, both at six weeks and at one year.
We do not know whether angioplasty has an impact on the asymptomatic high-grade stenosis in the infarct territory.
The evidence to date does not suggest that there is a substantial benefit but further studies are awaited.
DISABILITY AND REHABILITATION AFTER MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Dr R E Nagle
Consultant Cardiologist Selly Oak Hospital, Birmingham
INTRODUCTION
Cardiac rehabilitation is an attempt to counter all the various kinds of disablement which patients meet after myocardial infarction.
It therefore lacks the precise single end point of studies of survival after infarction but for the patient who survives an acute coronary attack questions such as whether he will be able to return to work and earn his living, to lead an active family life and to enjoy his leisure pursuits are of the greatest importance.
Such survivors, after all, form by far the greatest proportion of patients with coronary disease.
Because there are so many desirable objectives to achieve for the convalescent patient the outcome of rehabilitative measures is difficult to quantify.
It is for this reason that so many studies of disability and rehabilitation use "return to work" as the end point since it is definite and usually unequivocal.
It must not be taken that other potential measures of success are of less importance, merely that they are more difficult to quantify.
FAILURE OF RECOVERY
Cardiac symptoms after infarction consist mainly of heart failure, which is a consequence of muscle damage and angina mainly related to the degree of residual   coronary disease.
These two physical symptoms are the most important causes of disability and failure to convalesce.
However, by themselves they are a relatively insensitive guide to the degree of success which may be expected since so many other factors (See Table) contribute to the eventual outcome.
Social factors include the general level of unemployment in the neighbourhood and whether there is a local trend for firms to shed their work force.
Under such circumstances it is frequently the sick who are the first to leave.
The system of social security which varies widely from country to country is another important influence when international comparisons are made.
Legal requirements may prevent a significant proportion of men returning to their original job, particularly if it involves driving motor vehicles.
At the present time patients who lose their job in middle age experience great difficulty in finding another.
Those who are without the support of a spouse and family or whose family relationships are inharmonious are frequently at a disadvantage.
While serious psychiatric illness is relatively uncommon after a myocardial infarct, lesser degrees of mild depression and anxiety are common, affecting about a third of all survivors.
These feelings tend to be transitory but some patients remain psychologically disturbed for many years and, in a few psychological difficulties develop in the convalescent period which were not apparent during the acute episode.While these problems can sometimes be anticipated in hospital on the basis of the patient's reaction to his illness, and any premorbid difficulties which he has encountered in the past, a better idea of his potential can be gained by following him during the convalescent period to observe how he copes with the various stresses and strains which he encounters during this time.
PHYSICAL TRAINING
Physical training occupies the central place in most formal schemes of rehabilitation.
Physical training can undoubtedly produce significant enhancement of exercise capacity which can be of particular benefit to patients with angina but can also help those with mild or moderate heart failure.
In certain cases such improvement can make all the difference between a patient being able to lead a productive life and being able to enjoy his hobbies and pastimes, or lapsing into inactivity and unhappiness.
However, by itself, exercise training is no guarantee either of successful vocational rehabilitation or of psychological well being.
Although it is often claimed that exercise has a beneficial psychological effect in its own right, the evidence for this is scanty and it is always difficult to separate the specific effect of exercise from the moral support and social contact which usually goes with it.
Nevertheless an exercise programme is useful both in its own right and as a focus and forum for observation of the patient's physical progress and of his psychological process at the same time.
It is also a useful place for education in secondary preventive measures to reduce the risk of further infarction.
Careful follow-up, and readily available expert advice and support form the basis of a successful rehabilitation programme and should be made available to all patients.
An exercise programme is a useful addition for the majority and for certain  patients can produce a significant improvement in their physical capacity.
Simple psychological support is required by many and can be easily provided in this framework.
More intensive psychological care and psychiatric treatment may be required for a few.
Such a rehabilitation programme can and should be combined with the general medical care of convalescing patients including exercise testing for risk stratification and consideration for further investigation with a view to possible coronary surgery or angioplasty.
In my view these different aspects should be coordinated by a cardiologist who is in charge of the patients and it is certainly a mistake to regard rehabilitation as something separate and only suitable for good risk patients who do not require proper medical follow-up.
DISCUSSION
Audience
I was a little concerned that you put so much emphasis on return to work.
A large proportion of patients are too old to return to work and a large number are not in economic circumstances of their own choosing.
What other measures of rehabilitation are there?
Dr Nagle
My experience is almost entirely confined to patients of 65 years and under for practical reasons.
The time is not available to deal with those who are older.
The end point of return to work is something that can be measured, but it has many difficulties, particularly where there is significant unemployment.
There is also a particular difficulty with care for the unemployed; not only is the research team unable to use return to work as an end point, but the patient also does not have it as an objective and he has therefore nothing to aim at.
It can become difficult to get such a patient to accept that he is back to normal as he has no milepost to reach.
This is a big problem.
DISCUSSION
Professor Goodwin
Do you use heparin as well as thrombolytics?
Dr Adgey
Yes, particularly within the first 24–48 hours after the thrombolytic therapy.
Unfortunately we do not know how efficacious it is as no trials have shown its benefit in preventing reocclusion.
Professor Goodwin
You are working in an intensive research and treatment area.
Would you advise heparin to be given in all the district general hospitals where thrombolysis is being used?
Dr Adgey
Yes, provided the APTT is monitored; although a crude test, it is the only one.
There is no reason why an average sized adult should not receive 24 to 30 thousand units intravenously in 24 hours.
Professor de Bono
It is sad that heparin and aspirin were not invented in the late 1970s; if they had been, good trials might have been concluded by now!
There are two studies in progress which study heparin formally in the context of acute thrombolytic therapy; in the European co-operative study group trial every patient receives TPA and is then randomised into an intravenous heparin or placebo group.
Three hundred patients have been recruited.
There is also the ISIS 3 study.
Professor Sleight
In the aspirin era this is a difficult question to answer.
There is insufficient evidence at the moment.
My personal feeling is that anticoagulation (heparin or heparin plus oral anticoagulants) should be used whenever indicated: with arrhythmias, large anterior MIs with the possibility of mural thrombus, or heart failure.
In ISIS 3 all will get aspirin and we will then randomise 12,500 units of subcutaneous heparin for 7 days (instead of intravenous heparin) versus no heparin.
It is easier than intravenous heparin to give and it has been shown in randomised studies from McMaster University in Canada that it is as effective.
Dr Fox
I have a slightly different interpretation of the present policy.
Whilst we do not have clear evidence that heparin confers benefit we do know that where one is administering TPA and aspirin and heparin there is some evidence of an increase in side effects.
I would therefore add a word of caution and agree with Professor Sleight that we must have that data before we develop a general policy.
We do have sufficient data that a straightforward regime of thrombolysis and aspirin works, but I would advise holding off on the heparin until more data is available.
Professor Sleight
I agree.
In ISIS 2 a lot of people received heparin, although not randomised, in addition to aspirin and thrombolysis and they appeared to have a lower mortality than those who did not get heparin.
That is not good evidence, only a suggestion.
A fact that becomes clear, however, was that the addition of heparin undoubtedly raised the incidence of bleeding; those on no heparin had no severe  bleeding, those who had subcutaneous heparin bled in about 0.5% of cases and those who received full heparin therapy bled in about 1% of cases.
It should at present, therefore, be reserved for those cases I outlined, where long-term anticoagulation is indicated.
Dr Nagle
Dr Adgey, how long do you think heparin should be continued?
Dr Adgey
We continue to 24–48 hours based on our previous experience with streptokinase where it was found that this was the critical period for reocclusion.
We start aspirin early on and continue it throughout the hospitalisation.
Professor Goodwin
Dr Nagle, does the way the patient was treated influence your success in rehabilitation?
Dr Nagle
There is no problem due to thrombolysis.
I am very aware, however, of the impact of this whole stressful experience and sometimes patients have prolonged and severe psychological problems, for example, those with unstable angina requiring emergency angioplasties.
Audience
What is the stressful experience?
Dr Nagle
It is the combination of being told for the first time that you have coronary disease with the need for an emergency procedure, for example, an angiogram.
Although it may well be the right treatment, they take a long time to get over it.
We have seen serious psychological problems develop from this sequence.
Dr Fox
I would support that.
We are in a changing era; more and more we have people who are unaware of these therapies, but equally want to know what is going on.
Increasingly we are subject to medical audit.
There is pressure to minimise the time in hospital.
This afternoon we will discuss risk-stratification to identify the so-called lower risk group who in some American studies are leaving hospital at 3 days.
What will the impact be of this on subsequent rehabilitation, having had the same stress of acute infarct?
Professor Sleight
Yes, similarly there has been an enormous change in the treatment in myocardial infarction in the last few years, not only with angioplasty, but also with thrombolysis: 70%-80% of general physicians now use thrombolysis routinely.
This has resulted in a pressure on general practitioners to admit more patients, an increased pressure on CCUs, and patients being discharged from hospital earlier, both because they are healthier sooner due to thrombolysis, and also because their beds are needed by new arrivals.
This means that there is now less time to influence people's life styles, to give information about smoking, diet and exercise.
Rehabilitation is therefore more important than it ever was.
Dr Fox
There are two things that could be done relatively easily to ameliorate this situation.
The first is that when people are discharged from hospital early they should be seen soon in out-patients.
Secondly, the possible role of the primary care team should be explored, for example, a health visitor might visit the patient at home and discuss these issues normally discussed in hospital.
Audience
Dr Nagle, you mentioned the need for the continuity of medical care.
We are part way through a randomised multi-centre control trial of rehabilitation and the majority of physicians collaborating say they have insufficient time to review all their patients after discharge, after this aggressive therapy of 3 or 4 days in hospital.
Do you think that there is a place for referrals from the physician to a suitably trained rehabilitation team?
Dr Nagle
Briefly, they ought to make time to follow up their patients.
There is a general agreement amongst cardiologists about the value of risk stratification and exercise testing, and if the patients are seen under medical control, more general points can also be tackled.
Professor de Bono
We are all agreed as to what ought to happen, but we have to be realistic and question how it can be made to happen.
There are many factors which indicate that rehabilitation should become a community-based process into which the hospital facilities can feed, but which ought to be based closer to the patient's home.
Audience
Could the panel please discuss the use of sedatives.
Many general practitioners will use narcotics such as diamorphine initially, but is that a contraindication to adding a hypnotic?
Professor Goodwin
Opiates, particularly diamorphine, are better at relieving anxiety, but diamorphine has an additional advantage in that it is a vasodilator, it unloads the left ventricle and may help heart failure.
Problems with diamorphine include vomiting, bradycardia, and hypotension, but in small doses diamorphine is better than any sedative.
Dr Adgey
The patient seen outside the hospital is a different type to the one seen in an accident and emergency department or in a coronary care unit.
Patients seen in the first half hour after the onset of symptoms are experiencing most severe pain.
In my experience they require an opiate as rapidly as possible as many of the arrhythmias can be suppressed simply by relieving the pain.
Sedation in the form of diazamuls will not usually relieve the pain until cortical activity is suppressed sufficiently to induce semi-consciousness, and it is unwise to demand a semi-conscious patient outside hospital.
You need a fully conscious patient with total pain relief and the slight euphoria generated by the use of opiates can also be very useful in relieving anxiety.
You should use the opiate with an anti-emetic because many of these patients are nauseated at presentation.
We use metoclopramide as it causes no increase in sympathetic drive.
Once the patient has passed through casualty and becomes a coronary care admission the pain has usually eased significantly.
The type of sedation can be debated then, particularly if it is a high powered executive very worried about his business.
Professor Sleight
I do not use sedatives much after infarction.
Most people are reassured in the coronary care unit.
It is afterwards that they get stressed, particularly when they get home.
I am not certain that time and rehabilitation is not the best for this rather than sedating them.
Professor de Bono
There are specific indications for sedation.
One of the major properties of the benzodiazapines is amnesia.
At acute angioplasty or similar, they have a definite role and are important in avoiding the situation Dr Nagle referred to earlier.
Dr Fox
The amnesia associated with this period may render some difficulty in coming to terms with what they have been through.
Some people feel they have lost a space of time and, like other members of the panel, I would be cautious in the use of sedatives in this situation.
Professor Goodwin
May I ask each member of the panel to give a brief message for the general practitioner.
Professor Sleight
Organise your affairs so as to get to the patient quickly, or decide not to go to the patient and use routinely the 999 service, but do have a practice policy.
Be aware of the proper treatment as it is now possible to halve the mortality so that it is often inappropriate to leave people at home.
That is not universal.
I heard recently that if the patient is in North Wales he may be 2 hours from the nearest hospital.
There may then be cause for general practitioners to use thrombolysis if they are confident of their ECG diagnosis and management.
Any patient who has vascular disease should be on long-term aspirin.
The hospitals may discharge them on it, but make sure it is continued.
Beta blockade should also be considered in the high-risk patients.
Do not be afraid of trying it in patients who you think might have mild heart failure.
They are the people who will benefit the most, if they will tolerate it; so give a diuretic and add a beta blocker if you feel it is indicated.
If the patient develops early overt congestive heart failure it is contraindicated, but do seriously consider it later.
Dr Adgey
The essentials for the general practitioner are:
* An opiate to relieve the chest pain, with an anti-emetic.
Thrombolytic therapy alone will not work sufficiently rapidly to relieve the pain, nor will intravenous beta blockade.
* A defibrillator.
* A thrombolytic agent.
The earlier this is given the more likely is the chance of an open vessel and the greater the salvage of myocardium and of the patient leaving hospital earlier.
I do not share the view of Professor Sleight that it is essential to give a beta blocker early on.
There are some complications with this treatment, so I feel it is important to use it for specific indications.
Professor de Bono
Decide on a policy with your local cardiologist and work together.
Dr Nagle
I echo that.
The GP needs to have information if he is going to look after the patient properly: he needs to know what has happened during the infarct, how severe it was, what evidence there was of heart failure, and whether the angina recurred.
He should be told quickly in discharge letters (often he is not), in which case he must ask.
Alternatively, if he has information which the hospital may need, he should send it to them.
Professor Goodwin
I have one message for the whole primary health care team and it is: take chest pain or chest discomfort seriously; if you make a mistake when the diagnosis is hiatus hernia nobody will mind very much; the other way round you risk lives.
One final question, "Is the panel advocating thrombolysis by general practitioners?" 
Dr Fox
My view is that thrombolysis should only be administered by personnel who are capable and competent at recognising the risks and complications, and also managing the patient thereafter.
We should not generalise, it will be different from area to area and practice to practice.
Professor Sleight
I do not see it "selling" terribly well in general practice.
Myocardial infarction is a dangerous disease and people die frequently despite thrombolysis.
If as a GP you are in somebody's home and give a thrombolytic and the patient dies, you will be blamed.
They will not so easily recognise the lives that you have saved.
Dr Adgey
That argument was used for not giving heroin or an opiate intravenously because the patient might die at the end of the needle and the GP would be blamed.
I no longer accept it.
It is too cautious a view, and the evidence is clear from many studies that the earlier the individual is seen the more likely he is to end up with a patent vessel following thrombolysis.
The GP is the one who is very likely to know his patient well and if he finds him with chest pain of at least 15 or 30 minutes duration in the classic distribution, with no previous complaints, and obviously not a malingerer, that individual should have thrombolysis as rapidly as possible.
I think the GP is the best individual to give it, even with the risk of developing ventricular fibrillation.
The GP should have his defibrillator with him.
I am not advocating thrombolysis in the absence of that, but provided that is available and he keeps his head and the family respect the GP, then he should be giving thrombolysis.
Professor de Bono
In Leicestershire we are trying to produce an agreed policy between each practice and cardiologist, and I would entirely agree that you cannot give a blanket yes or no.
There are some practices who could and should be giving thrombolytic therapy, there are others that cannot and should not.
That has to be an individual decision.
THE REHABILITATION OF PATIENTS AFTER MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Dr H Bethell
General Practitioner Alton Health Centre, Hampshire
Every District General Hospital should provide rehabilitation facilities for its coronary patients, be it those recovering from acute infarction or those who have had coronary artery surgery or angioplasty.
At present about 30% of District General Hospitals in the United Kingdom provide such programmes, but the extent and quality of these programmes is still very variable; probably less than 10% of eligible patients overall are offered their facilities.
The correct person to initiate and oversee coronary rehabilitation is the district cardiologist or physician with an interest in cardiology.
He is able to decide what sort of programme is suitable for his patients and make sure that it is run to a suitable standard.
He need not devote much time to the programme once it is up and running, since most of the work performed by a rehabilitation programme can safely be delegated to nurses, clinical assistants, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, psychologists, dietitians and others.
There are four stages of rehabilitation follow-up after myocardial infarction:
1 In the Coronary Care Unit:
Rehabilitation should start in the Coronary Care Unit with a positive attitude towards future activities and the start of education.
Patients should be disabused of any notion they may have developed of the possibility of becoming invalids as a result of the heart attack.
They must be encouraged to think of their future activities as being as full as, or fuller than, before the attack.
Individual chats by the coronary nurse and by the physiotherapists in the coronary unit can be supplemented by educational videos, so that the patients can begin to understand more about the nature of the condition.
This will include information about risk factors and how they can be changed for the long-term good.
The importance of stopping smoking needs to be very strongly emphasised, as well as the advisability of sticking to a low animal fat diet for the future, of getting the weight down to normal and of taking those measures necessary to reduce blood pressure to an ideal level, i.e. reducing salt and alcohol intake, keeping the weight normal, taking regular exercise and avoiding anger.
2 At home:
Immediately after discharge from hospital most patients have a recurrence of the anxiety which is a prominent feature of the early days after the attack and which tends to lessen towards the end of the hospital stay.
This anxiety is aggravated by the common, but non-serious, symptoms which are so common after the attack, i.e. left-sided chest pains, ectopic beats causing palpitations, light-headedness and weariness.
A visit from the coronary nurse at this stage, or from the general practitioner, is extremely useful to reassure the patient about the benign nature of most of these symptoms, but it is also an opportunity to screen for more serious problems which can be developing at this stage, now that activities are  increasing, i.e. increasing angina, serious arrhythmias and left ventricular failure.
It is common for patients to appear for their first out-patient appointment with one or other of these problems, which has been going on for the previous few weeks.
The visiting nurse or GP can also advise the patient about when it is safe to resume sexual intercourse (usually by about four weeks after the attack) and how much exercise they can safely be taking.
They should be encouraged to be out for short walks from the second week after they arrive home.
3 Outpatient exercise programme:
When an outpatient exercise programme exists, patients can begin by about 5–6 weeks after the infarct.
The principles of exercise for coronary patients is no different from that applied to normal individuals trying to get fit.
The exercise should be "aerobic" , that is to say using much movement but little strength, as opposed to isometric which uses much strength and little movement.
An ideal programme includes exercise sessions which last about 30 minutes three to four times per week.
Longer, or more frequent, exercise sessions produce little further improvement in fitness level, but do produce an increase in risk of musculoskeletal abnormalities.
The intensity of the exercise should be sufficient to push the patient to between 70–85% of the predicted maximum heart rate (170 minus age-195 minus age).
This is not possible for patients on rate-slowing drugs such as beta blockers, ACE inhibitors and calcium blockers.
They will need to have their exercise heart rates determined from their perception of exercise intensity as indicated by the Borg Score (see Table).
In some cases an exercise test performed by the hospital will provide additional information, but this is often not possible because the hospital's exercise test is usually performed off their rate-slowing drug so that the coronary arteries can be more fully assessed.
An ideal outpatient exercise programme will therefore include an exercise testing facility.
For those exercise programmes which do not have an exercise testing facility the following information needs to be gleaned from the hospital exercise test.
(i) The presence or absence of residual ischaemia (ii) The safe heart rate to which the patient can exercise (iii) The likelihood of arrhythmias developing during exercise (iv) The blood pressure response to exercise (some patients show a paradoxical fall in blood pressure with exercise, and this is an adverse prognostic feature and may result in the patient developing quite severe orthostatic hypotension after an exercise session)(v) Current fitness level from which the patient's exercise tolerance can be derived Most hospital-based or community-based exercise programmes for coronary patients are based on circuit training.
This is because this form of exercise provides excellent aerobic training and is also easily supervised with a large number of people in a relatively small area.
An added benefit is that many different muscle groups can be trained, so that individuals with a wide variety of jobs and leisure-time activities can benefit from them.
A suitable mix of exercise includes cycling on an ergometer, stepping up and down a two-step climb, a variety of arm and leg exercises using dumb-bells or fixed-weight training equipment and jogging on a mini-trampoline.
This circuit can be performed once or twice per week under supervision, and once or twice per week at home with recordings of the results.
It is a good idea to   supplement the exercise circuits with a measured, timed two-mile walk on those days without circuit training; the walk can be increased in speed gradually to reach the target heart rates mentioned above.
Some younger patients will need to develop this into a walk/jog sequence to get the heart rate up to the necessary level, and will ultimately take up jogging the whole distance.
A well-organised exercise programme has both physical and psychological benefits for the patient.
The main physical benefit is improving the fitness level as measured by the maximum oxygen uptake.
This is the best measure of fitness, since it expresses the greatest rate at which an individual can exert himself.
In coronary patients the effect is all on the peripheral utilisation of oxygen by improving the uptake of oxygen by the working muscles and increasing the efficiency of distribution of blood in the periphery.
Only if exercise training is continued for a year or more is there likely to be any cardiac training effect with improvement in ejection fraction and stroke volume.
Nevertheless, the peripheral effects bring a marked benefit for the heart, since any given level of exercise requires less oxygen, and therefore a lower heart rate and blood pressure after exercise training than it did before.
Other physical effects of training include a reduction in blood fat levels and almost certainly a reduction of about 20% in recurrence rate of myocardial infarction and, in the long-term, mortality.
The main psychological effect is improved well-being with a reduced anxiety level and less depression than in the patient who has not  undergone exercise training.
The benefits are supplemented by the group therapy effect of training with a number of other similarly placed patients, and is also helped by encouraging spouses to join in.
The exercise programme should not, however, be the full extent of coronary rehabilitation.
It does, however, provide an excellent centrepiece for performing all those other activities which are so useful for coronary patients.
These include:
(a) Education.: A clear idea of exactly what coronary artery disease means is most important for the coronary patient if he is to comply in the long term with the advice that he is given, and understand what has happened to him.
(b) Relaxation therapy and stress management: These are both very helpful for patients in the phase of recovery from the infarction.
Many are extremely tense, not only since the infarct, but have been for many years, and it is possible that the inward tension that they suffer has been a contributory factor to their disease.
(c) Job counselling: This is of particular importance to manual labourers with heavy jobs who have suffered relatively large infarcts, and is also necessary for people whose infarct precludes them rejoining their old job, i.e. HGV and PSV drivers.
(d) Risk factor management: As mentioned above, the importance of stopping smoking after an infarct cannot be over emphasised.
A prudent diet with long-term follow-up of cholesterol levels, follow-up of blood pressure levels and appropriate treatment of hypertension all contribute to longevity.
(e) Self-help groups: The rehabilitation programme can be the setting off point for a self-help group, so that patients who have been through the exercise programme, which may well last anything from 4–12 weeks, can continue to meet and exercise together with friends they have made.
A self-help group can also provide back-up support for new coronary patients by visiting them in hospital and after discharge.
4 Long-Term follow-up: The initial effect of the heart attack is extremely effective in altering life-style in encouraging the patient to give up smoking and to change his eating habits and work patterns.
However, this effect may not last, and long-term follow-up is useful to ensure that the patient does not lapse into those unhealthy ways which made him unwell in the first place.
In addition, an exercise test performed periodically should be able to detect the development of new coronary lesions, so that these can be acted upon at an early stage, either by angioplasty or by coronary artery bypass grafting if this is appropriate.
DISCUSSION
Professor de Bono
While I agree with everything that you have said, as a devil's advocate in a health service that has a 2-year waiting list for hip replacements, how can you justify the expense of a rehabilitation programme by any quantitative measure?
Dr Bethell
Cardiac rehabilitation is very cheap.
The cost of rehabilitating a patient after a heart attack is somewhat less than being in a hospital bed for a third of a day, so I do not think that we are denting the NHS's resources by providing this for everybody.
Audience
Professor de Bono, there are well-established scales, particularly in the States, measuring long term stress and anxiety that we can use in rehabilitated patients to demonstrate that not only have the cardiologists given them years, but Doctor Bethell and his team have given them quality.
Professor de Bono
It is important when people are talking about quality adjusted life years to realise that the Q.A.L.Y.
scale is not linear and it puts enormous weight on being alive and not much on whether you are active or working.
This causes enormous problems, as the Q.A.L.Y.
is so widely accepted, in trying to show that rehabilitation is a benefit.
Audience
I am involved in running a rehabilitation group as an occupational therapist along with physiotherapists.
I am concerned that you did not mention occupational therapists in your project.
Are they involved?
Dr Bethel
They are not.
We do have a job counsellor who is an employment advisory officer but no occupational therapists.
Perhaps we have not got an enthusiastic occupational therapist in our district.
The exact people involved in rehabilitation are not important as long as they are enthusiastic.
RISK STRATIFICATION IN POST INFARCTION PATIENTS
A I Camm
Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine St George's Hospital Medical School, London
INTRODUCTION
A number of strategies have been devised for risk stratification in post infarction patients, attempting to predict future cardiac events, particularly sudden death and reinfarction.
While it is possible to identify accurately those patients in low-risk groups the positive predictive value of many tests remains poor.
Beneficial aspects of risk stratification include the cost effective investigation of post infarction patients, in particular the identification and early rehabilitation of low-risk groups and the development of new therapeutic strategies through interventional trials in high-risk patients.
To date most stratification schemes have been based on exercise testing, Hotter recordings and coronary arteriography though a number of newer variables have been recently investigated.
The single most important determinant of future prognosis remains left ventricular function.
INFARCT SIZE, LEFT VENTRICULAR FUNCTION AND PROGNOSIS
Obviously infarct size and subsequent left ventricular function are closely related to prognosis.
The early assessment of infarct size through the collection of clinical, radiological and biochemical data at the time of admission such as in the Killip, Norris or Peel indices or by direct haemodynamic monitoring allows an accurate assessment of prognosis and implies that extensive myocardial infarction remains a persistent liability (Figure 1).
Data from the Multi-Centre Post-Infarction Study (MPIS) showed that the mortality in the first year was strongly associated with ejection fraction at rest as assessed by radioisotope scan (Figure 2).
A progressive rise in mortality was noted as resting ejection fraction fell below 40% and multivariate analysis showed an ejection fraction below 40% to be the most significant independent predictor of mortality.
Studies using other measures of left ventricular function, including QRS mapping and echocardiography, have confirmed these findings.
As a significant number of people with a normal resting ejection fraction die within the first year following infarction, it has been suggested that a fall in ejection fraction on exercise may identify this group.
However, there are conflicting results; Corbett et al found a significant fall in ejection fraction in patients who later suffered cardiac events but these findings were not confirmed by Borer or Abraham.
In 1975 a small pilot study of 81 patients by Schultz noted a relationship between left ventricular dysfunction and ventricular arrhythmias.
All eight patients who died during follow-up were noted to have not only a reduced ejection fraction   ({40%) but also "high grade ventricular activity" .
There was some initial debate as to whether the two were related but two large multi-centre trials MPIS and Multi-Centre Investigation of the Limitation of Infarct Size (MILIS) have shown that repetitive ventricular beats and arrhythmias are independently related to mortality.
When other markers of electrical instability are used such as late potentials or programmed ventricular stimulation this relationship still holds.
Recent attention has been focused on the stunned myocardium and while established methods of assessing ventricular function are unable to detect such jeopardised myocardium, newer imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography, nuclear magnetic resonance or contrast echocardiography may further improve risk stratification in the future.
EXERCISE TESTING IN POST INFARCTION PATIENTS
Considerable variability exists in the practice of post infarction testing; predischarge or late, Bruce or modified, symptom or rate limited and the criteria judged as positive.
If ST depression alone is used then very limited information regarding future mortality is gained and there is a striking variation in the results published (Table 1).
The likelihood of dying in the first year is increased by no more than twofold.
If other variables, such as blood pressure response, exercise duration and  induced ventricular ectopics or arrhythmias, are included then the value of the test as a prognostic indicator increases markedly.
Weld et al combined exercise testing and variables from the Norris index and found exercise duration, the frequency of exercise induced ventricular ectopics and an abnormal chest X-ray to be significant independent predictors of 1-year mortality.
Angina and ST depression were of no predictive value.
Krone et at found increased mortality in those patients with one or more of the following: failure to raise systolic BP above 110 mmHg, inability to complete the exercise schedule and paired ventricular complexes.
If these data were combined with clinical data then large subgroups with low mortality could be identified.
For instance those patients with a normal haemodynamic response and a clear admission CXR (70% of the group) had a 1-year mortality of 1% compared to 30% in the remainder.
Hall et al have also drawn attention to the role of exercise testing in young patients (less than 55 years).
These young patients appear to have a good prognosis following infarction and intervention policies based on exercise testing in an older age group may not be appropriate.
Indeed in this group ST depression and poor haemodynamic response were not associated with increased mortality.
The sensitivity of exercise tests after anterior infarction is poor and combination with thallium and radionuclide scanning has not improved this.
Several newer techniques may help improve this situation such as the combination of exercise testing with doppler echocardiography and the measurement of ascending aortic blood flow acceleration.
Gilmour et al measured maximum aortic acceleration using a suprasternal doppler probe in patients admitted with an acute infarction and at the time of predischarge exercise testing.
On both occasions they identified an identical group with a low maximum acceleration in which there appeared to be a much increased risk of early cardiac death.
This information was independent of a positive exercise test.
It should also be noted that patients physically unable to exercise test have a high 1-year mortality and should be considered as having a positive test.
In the study by Fioretti et al the mortality of such a group was 56%
CORONARY ARTERIOGRAPHY
While it is now accepted that coronary arteriography can be safely performed following myocardial infarction, there is considerable variation between centres about the perceived indications for the test.
Excepted indications include early post infarction angina with or without ST changes, non Q wave infarcts and patients with a positive predischarge stress test.
As the sensitivity of stress testing is poor in patients with anterior infarction some authors have suggested that all patients with an anterior infarct and reduced left ventricular function should be catheterised as it is patients such as these with triple vessel disease that benefit most from revascularisation.
VENTRICULAR ARRHYTHMIAS AND MARKERS OF ARRHYTHMIC PROPENSITY
Persistence of high-grade ventricular arrhythmias following myocardial infarction are associated with an increased risk of sudden death.
As has been discussed above this appears to be related to left ventricular dysfunction.
Between 3 and 11% of patients will develop sustained ventricular arrhythmias following MI and 50% of these occur within the first 48 hours, and if not associated with further ischaemia, pump failure or multivessel disease they carry a good prognosis.
Arrhythmias occurring more than 48 hours after MI are associated with a very high risk, 50–80% mortality in the first year.
A recent study of ventricular arrhythmias following infarction has also suggested that ventricular fibrillation complicating an anterior infarct during the first 24 hours does not carry such a benign prognosis as previously thought.
It has also been suggested that complex ventricular arrhythmias carry a worse prognosis in patients with non Q wave infarcts.
HOLTER STUDIES
The mechanism of sudden arrhythmic death has been clarified by Milner et al who analysed Holter tapes of 13 patients who suffered cardiac arrests.
In 12 patients the recordings showed ventricular tachycardia rapidly degenerated into ventricular fibrillation.
Three large studies have analysed Holter recordings at 10 days following myocardial infarction.
All have shown that the frequency of ventricular ectopic at this time is low.
Between 50 and 60% have a frequency of ventricular ectopics beats of less than I per hour and the 2-year mortality for this group is less than 5%.
There are two important cut-off points; at a rate of above 10 ventricular ectopic beats per hour the mortality increases steeply to above 20% and plateaus out at a rate of 30 per hour associated with a 1-year mortality of 30%.
Increasing repetitiveness of ventricular ectopic beats is associated with an increased mortality (Figure 3).
Against this evidence certain points must be made; no trial of antiarrhythmic agents in patients with increased ventricular ectopic counts has been shown to be  beneficial; in the case of the Cardiac Arrhythmia (CAST) trial it has proven detrimental.
Analysis of the Beta Blockers in Heart Attack Trial (BHAT) has shown that the beneficial effects of beta blockers is not mediated through the reduction of ectopic frequency.
Exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias have important prognostic value.
Many studies have shown that exercise-induced arrhythmias and complex ventricular activity are strongly associated with cardiovascular death in the first year.
This relationship stands after adjustment for a number of factors including age, left ventricular function, radiological findings and exercise-induced ST changes and duration.
SIGNAL AVERAGED EGG AND LATE POTENTIALS
Signal averaging is a technique used to decrease random noise in the amplified ECG in order to enhance the detection of signals only a few microvolts in amplitude.
Using this technique in combination with high-gain amplification it is possible to detect "" late potentials"which are thought to represent slow and inhomogeneous conduction through surviving Purkinje muscle elements and to provide a substrate for re-entrant ventricular tachycardias.
There have been several large studies of late potentials in post infarction patients (Table 2).
All have shown a high incidence of arrhythmic events or sudden death in patients with late potentials (17–29%) compared to those with a normal signal averaged ECG.
Both Cripps and Denniss have found a strong correlation between late potentials and the inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias at programmed ventricular stimulation.
All three studies have found that the presence of late potentials provides prognostic information and is complementary to left ventricular function, wall motion abnormalities, Holter recordings and exercise data.
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES IN POST INFARCTION PATIENTS
Since 1981 there have been at least ten studies of programmed ventricular stimulation (PVS) in post infarction patients.
Only three studies have included more than 100 patients and to some degree all are biased in their selection of patients.
In most cases this has meant the use of such low-risk patients that the number of arrhythmic events has been too low to allow any valid conclusions.
Where high-risk patients (congestive heart failure, poor ventricular function, post infarction angina and late ventricular arrhythmias) have been studied such as in the studies of Waspe or Hammer then PVS seems of definite value in the prediction of sudden death.
Marked variations have also occurred in the timing of the studies following infarction, the site of stimulation and protocol used especially as the more aggressive protocols using increased current strength and extra stimuli number are known to have an increased sensitivity for the detection of clinical ventricular arrhythmias.
The studies of Cripps, Richards and Waspe all used aggressive protocols and proved to be very sensitive tests for the detection of future arrhythmic events although lacking in specificity (Table 3).
Of these three studies those of Richards and Cripps are the best devised to date.
In both cases it was the development of sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia rather than fibrillation which was prognostic and it would seem that ventricular fibrillation is a non-specific response to PVS dependent on the "" vigour "" of the protocol.
While the test may lack specificity Richards and his co-workers make the point that a negative stimulation, especially if coupled with an exercise test, implies an extremely favourable prognosis.
The induction of ventricular arrhythmias was associated with a 21% mortality against 4% in the negative group.
Furthermore 80%  of all deaths in the inducible group were instantaneous and in 63% ventricular tachycardia was documented.
Cripps et al found PVS to be superior to any other prognostic indicator.
Again as with Holter data while prognostic information can be gained no trial to date has shown any benefit from antiarrhythmic therapy.
AUTONOMIC FUNCTION
Recent attention has been drawn to the role of autonomic function in risk stratification.
The loss of protective parasympathetic mechanisms may be associated with an increased incidence of arrhythmic events and sudden deaths in post infarction patients.
Both heart rate variability (the beat to beat variation in heart rate) and baroreflex sensitivity are accepted measures of parasympathetic activity.
Reductions in both of these measures have been reported in patients following infarction and subgroups at increased risk of sudden death have been reported by both Kleiger and Schwartz.
Kleiger et al showed that in patients with reduced heart rate variability (standard deviation of successive RR intervals of less than 50 ms compared to patients with a heart rate variability of more than 100 ms) that the relative risk of mortality was 5.3 times higher.
It remained a significant predictor when adjusted for clinical, demographic, Holter data and ejection fraction.
Schwartz has found similar findings when BRS is assessed at one month post infarction.
There also appears to be a strong correlation between depressed BRS and the inducibility of sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia at programmed ventricular stimulation.
While both are predictive of arrhythmic events the use of reduced BRS (less than 3.0 msec/Hg) to select patients for PVS allows a simple and efficient screening of the infarct population.
HAEMOSTATIC FUNCTION
Hamsten in a prospective trial of 109 patients under the age of 45 years who suffered a first myocardial infarction found a reduced plasminogen activator capacity and increased levels of plasminogen activator inhibitors in those patients suffering reinfarction.
Meade and his workers had earlier reported increased fibrinogen and  reduced factor VII activity.
As yet there is little agreement on haemostatic and platelet factors in such patients but it may offer a further method of risk stratification in the future.
FUTURE THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS
In those patients who are identified as having been at risk of sudden death a number of therapeutic options should be considered.
In many cases this will be as part of a controlled trial and will include the use of automatic implantable cardiac defibrillators, catheter and surgical ablation of ventricular arrhythmias and antiarrhythmic/ antifibrillatory drugs (Figure 4).
CONCLUSIONS
Established methods of risk  stratification have concentrated on the identification of patients with multivessel disease.
Risk stratification based on left ventricular function or Holter data have proven ineffective.
The effective identification of patients at risk of sudden death must allow possible therapeutic intervention.
This will require a change in our present practice including the use of newer investigations including heart rate variability, baroreflex sensitivity and late potentials to identify a high risk group.
Aggressive investigation of such patients is necessary including programmed ventricular stimulation and cardiac catheterisation.
THE PATIENT'S VIEWPOINT: PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS
Mr B Falk
Journalist and Broadcaster BBC
INTRODUCTION
I am not a doctor but a journalist and broadcaster with the BBC, so why was I invited?
When I pondered this I decided my role was to be a walking example, an end product, a result, a victim.
You might call me a patient.
I suffered my myocardial infarction on 30th May 1986, at approximately 3 o'clock — it is the sort of date you do not forget.
I blame myself, the medical profession, and the government, that it happened to someone aged 43, who considered himself fit.
THE PROLOGUE
My personal tragedy started with my mother, now a robust 85-year-old.
She believed in fat babies and at the time I was born, during the war, little was known about nutrition or cholesterol, nor that heart attacks were preventable.
A bonny, bouncing baby Falk was her heart's desire and joy.
I left school a stone overweight while my father was already dead due to a heart attack at the age of 59.
Having no qualifications I launched into a career as a journalist and for my health it became downhill all the way.
By the time I had joined the BBC in 1969 I was three stone overweight, I drank a bottle of scotch a day and thought muesli and high fibre were feed for cattle.
Sausages, bacon, eggs, chips, baked beans and fried bread was a man's diet.
The mystic person who singularly failed to appear during a 20-year span of abuse was my doctor.
Doctors of the 1940s and early 1950s failed to realise that heart attacks were going to become Britain's Number 1 killer disease.
I can excuse them for not knowing all the facts that have now come to light but I cannot forgive them or the government for failing to steer the health of the nation.
People only wish to see doctors when they are sick, but the National Health Service has not encouraged people like me to seek preventative health advice.
Heart attacks are caused by ignorance and indifference.
I was not ill, but nearly died of my own neglect, I believe the medical profession and the National Health Service share some of the blame.
As a male Caucasian with a father who had died of a coronary thrombosis at the age of 59, I was brought up in the smoky atmosphere of a northern industrial town.
I was one of a "lost generation" who remained blissfully ignorant of the major advances in preventative health care.
That generation now dies at the rate of 150,000 people a year which makes coronary artery disease Britain's number 1 illness; a generation that has died of ignorance, indifference and arrogance.
At the time of my infarct I was three stone overweight, smoked 60 cigarettes a day, hated health food; my idea of a perfect dinner was a plateful of greasy cholesterol.
Exercise consisted of getting up in the morning, reaching for a cigarette and climbing into the car.
I had never seen a happy jogger and I was not ill.
In fact, I had been heading resolutely towards a myocardial infarct for at least 15 years.
A regular checkup once or twice a year with a GP who had the time, the energy, and the resources to advise on preventative medicine as an integral part of the National Health Service, may have protected me from a heart attack.
It could have done so much to persuade this wayward son that he was actually killing himself.
It did not occur to me.
The most intelligent of people have heart attacks as well as the stupid ones.
I was kidding myself for such a long time I began to ignore the risks.
Quite a few people do that.
It is not just ignorance, but arrogance; you do not think it is going to happen to you.
MY HEART ATTACK
It may be poetic irony, but I was attending a convention in Hong Kong and working resolutely for the cigarette manufacturers at the time of my infarct.
I was giving them advice on how to handle the media.
On my return I developed a pain in my chest and rang my GP.
He said, "You've got indigestion." 
The pain got worse, the GP called and declared "There is no sign of anything wrong with your heart." 
The strange thing is illness plays tricks with you.
The pain never came on during exercise, only after a meal.
The doctors were diverted into believing that it was related to my stomach.
They did not refer me, and strangely I did not insist; as patients do not want to hear bad news.
 "Thank goodness, I'm not having a heart attack" was my reaction.
A barium meal confirmed a hiatus hernia but the chest pain continued to infiltrate my left arm.
I was so overjoyed with the diagnosis that I celebrated with a huge meal, a bottle of champagne and a large cigar.
Afterwards I had my myocardial infarction in my office, feeling a complete idiot.
But, I must claim, as a patient, that when a doctor tells you there is nothing wrong with your heart, and it is backed up by four colleagues who diagnose a hiatus hernia, the feeling of relief is enormous.
THE MORNING AFTER
While still in hospital I decided to pass my knowledge gleaned through stupidity to other people.
I embarked upon a thorough investigation of what causes heart attacks, and I wrote a book called "Why Kill Yourself" ? with Dr Roger Blackwood, Consultant Cardiologist at the Wexham Park Hospital, Slough, who treated me, particularly during the rehabilitation.
I observed the rehabilitation process for people after myocardial infarction and discovered the importance of boosting personal confidence.
Unlike my father who was told to sit on a bean bag my cardiologist said, "Exercise, build up your strength," and so I started jogging and disliked it intensely and stopped jogging.
I now walk when I could drive and take exercise regularly.
I  stopped smoking and campaign openly to prevent others.
I challenge the cigarette manufacturers rather than support them.
I have gradually changed my life style and I cannot stress enough the relief of being able to walk, run and do exercise without pain.
COMMUNITY ACTION
The next question was how to tackle the problem of lack of self-confidence.
We toyed with the idea of forming a group; getting 20 patients together to build each other 's confidence.
We searched for examples around the country but found there were few operating in the National Health Service.
We established our own club in the Sports Council headquarters at Marlow.
Patients now attend on a regular basis.
The service is well equipped and we have physiotherapists with experience in treating cardiac patients.
The effect upon the patients' morale is absolutely tremendous.
I believe, however, that the National Health Service should be providing this service.
I was horrified to learn, for example, that the government at one stage was spending more money on AIDS than preventing heart disease.
I was amazed that excellent organisations like the National Heart Foundation have to arrange charity runs in order to raise money.
I would have thought it should have been a national effort.
Can you imagine the outcry if this number of people died in one year due to plane or rail crashes?
If it is the Number 1 killer disease, why does it not receive the Number 1 national effort with the entire nation behind it, with colossal educational programmes, enormous amounts of publicity, and the full support of the medical profession?
As a patient, I do believe that if the government, the media, and the medical profession combined to produce a national effort then the ignorance, the indifference and the arrogance could be wiped out.
Preventative medicine should be practised in every general practice surgery in the country.
Huge amounts of government money should be invested to turn it into the national effort.
School children should be taught about health care.
In a deprived area of Slough there is a school where we have explained to children the importance of blood pressure monitoring at an early age.
Interestingly, amongst the 8- to 12-year-olds 30% were hypertensive, particularly those coming from single-parent families.
The children are taught to go home and tell their parents to put out their cigarettes.
Through programmes like the "Slough Health Habit" we have established health food bars in major factories and raised the awareness of their workforces.
We are monitoring the entire town to find out how preventative measures can influence the way people live.
If that was done on a national scale we would wipe out this disease.
DISCUSSION
Audience
GPs have tried encouraging preventative medicine but it is rarely successful.
It often takes something like a heart attack, as in your case, to bring it home to people to stop smoking.
I believe that the government must increase the tax.
Mr Falk
The government is doing a lot about the smoking issue.
Passive smoking has come to the fore.
For many years cigarette manufacturers survived the accusation that cigarettes killed you.
The anti-smoking lobby then switched to point out that cigarette smoking was anti-social and could harm friends and family.
That damaged the cigarette manufacturers more than you might imagine.
They are now fighting a rearguard battle and losing.
I do not believe frankly that doctors ever worked together to produce one solid coherent agreement that could have convinced the public.
Dr Minshull-Beech
Mr Falk seems to be putting a large proportion of the blame onto doctors for failing to give him proper preventative medical care.
I would expect that the day he was diagnosed as having a hiatus hernia he was not advised to have a large meal followed by a cigar and a large amount of alcohol.
Surely, having gone completely against what is standard medical advice for a hiatus hernia, he would have done exactly the same had his heart been suspect.
Mr Falk
That is a fair comment, but I was being a little frivolous.
I can promise you, however, that if you walk around for three weeks with a chest pain, fearing a heart attack at the age of 43, and you are told you have a hiatus hernia you feel a great relief.
It was then natural for me to celebrate.
I did say in fairness that most of the fault was my own.
Dr Carne
Many of your colleagues in the broadcasting field are well-known to me, how can I persuade them, when they go to the bar that a Perrier or a tonic water might be just as efficacious as alcoholic liquor; and how can I persuade them to stop smoking before they have a heart attack?
Mr Falk
I wish I knew because then we might be able to prevent about 50% of all heart attacks.
From the patient's point of view the medical profession still appears divided about the main causes of heart attacks; there is the stress lobby, the cigarette lobby and the exercise lobby.
Different opinions are given all the time.
My own cardiologist likes his Scotch, as I do, and says that a glass of whisky in moderation does you no harm at all.
Dr Bethell
The government has not done anything about smoking.
It actually failed to put the price of cigarettes up in the budget last year and most people agree that a high price would be a major disincentive, second only to a heart attack.
You will be glad to hear that the new GP contract includes a provision for every patient to be seen by his GP every three years.
On the subject of rehabilitation, this is growing rapidly throughout the country and the British Cardiac Society has a working party on this subject at the moment trying to promote it.
Mr Falk
That is good news.
Is three years too long a time, particularly for males in their 40s?
I see people every day of my life who you can bet are going to have a heart attack.
DISCUSSION
Professor de Bono
Professor Camm, I am fascinated by the data on the prediction of arrhythmic deaths.
Many physicians prescribe beta blockers to as many patients as will tolerate it before they leave the CCU or before they go home.
Do you think that it is a good policy?
Do you think it reduces the incidence of deaths at one year by affecting ischaemic or arrhythmic death?
Professor Camm
I suspect that beta blockade reduces arrhythmic death.
As far as beta blockade is concerned there are two approaches: one is the pragmatic approach, to prescribe it for everybody who can tolerate it, and not to investigate because of cost (beta blockade is relatively cheap); the other approach is to investigate all patients in the hope of giving focused therapy.
I support an intermediate position, in which one performs appropriate investigations in the right order for a few patients.
In these instances you might then be able to offer more successful therapy than pure beta blockers.
For example, you might suggest surgery for some to prevent occasional arrhythmic death and in others, implantable defibrillators might be indicated.
Audience
Dr Bethell, is beta blockade a hindrance to your training programme and do you try to wean patients off them?
Secondly, is there a competitive element in the gym?
Dr Bethell
No, beta blockade is not a large problem.
The only slight snag is that you have to perform two exercise tests, once on blockade and later off treatment, to detect any residual risk coronary narrowing.
Our policy is not to give beta blockers to everybody, only those in high-risk groups.
We strongly discourage competitive behaviour.
Dr Nagle Professor
Camm, I found a little surprising your comments about the shortcomings of the exercise tests in prognostication.
Were you talking about it in relation to death or arrhythmic events?
Professor Camm
I based this on two sets of data.
Considering "all-cause cardiovascular mortality," the exercise test was found to be moderately sensitive and moderately specific.
I then dissected out a group called "all-arrhythmic events" , including sudden, unexpected cardiac deaths and presentations with a sustained ventricular arrhythmia.
It includes, therefore, some patients not included in the "all-cause mortality" .
That second group is not at all well predicted using the exercise test.
One can go on to a third group that I did not discuss, "all-ischaemic events" , including non-fatal and fatal reinfarction; it includes the development of unstable angina, and revascularisation procedures.
With that group exercise testing is more predictive than with "all-cause cardiovascular mortality" .
Professor de Bono
Approximately a third of all exercise tests yield little information because the patients fail to complete them; they are therefore neither  positive nor negative.
Patients with a normal exercise test often do well while those who have a dramatically positive test do not.
It is those in the large middle group that prove difficult.
We used to go through the ritual of taking people off beta blockers, performing exercise tests, returning them to beta blockade and repeating the test.
We have given it up, partly because we cannot afford all the exercise tests and partly because we believe that once you know the patient has got ischaemic heart disease, which he has by definition if he has had an infarct, that the exercise test on a beta blocker is as useful prognostically.
Dr Harten-Ash
Mr Falk suggested that we as a profession are not getting the message about risk factors across to the population.
He said that we should be taking 100,000 deaths per year seriously.
Does the panel agree that we are not communicating effectively?
Dr Nagle
I agree with the statement but I am not sure that it is our particular job to convey this message.
It is our job to state the message and I believe that has been done.
It was implied, for instance, that the medical profession had not said that smoking is bad for you.
I do not believe that is true.
If you suggest that we have produced ineffective propaganda, that may well be true, but doctors are not trained to do that.
People like Mr Falk are trained and I would have thought that it is people like him who should be involved in such programmes.
There are political aspects of course, and the question of will.
Professor de Bono
When Mrs Currie said her famous one-liner about eggs and salmonella, the egg consumption in this country plummeted by an incredible 30%, more or less overnight, and she achieved far more by that sentence than the entire medical profession had achieved in 20 years.
I do not think that that was because she was a more effective communicator.
It is that everybody understands the idea of having diarrhoea and it is not pleasant, but you do not die from it.
Conversely, people think that myocardial infarction is something that you die from, quite rightly, and therefore most believe that "it is not going to happen to me" .
There is an immense, built-in denial mechanism about myocardial infarction and cancer, and this is a major drawback in educating the public to do something about it.
It is interesting that if you ask where it is that the British Heart Foundation and the Imperial Cancer Relief Fund get most of their money from, it is not like other charities from donations, but it is from legacies.
By and large people who are healthy and alive do not wish to think of the possibility that they are going to die cardiac or cancer deaths.
Dr Bethell
There is actually only one organisation in this country solely concerned with prevention of coronary disease and that is the Coronary Prevention Group.
It receives very little public funding and raises nearly all its money by public donation and subscription, and runs in consequence on a shoestring.
I am pleased to tell you, however, that the Sunday Times Fun Run this year, and all years to come, will be run on behalf of, and to raise money for, the Coronary Prevention Group.
Professor Camm
For centuries the British physician has told the patient not to bother about his health.
He has been discouraging enquiry and I think we live with that legacy which produces apathy in our general population about health care issues.
In that setting it is very difficult for our "propaganda" to be as effective as it might otherwise be.