

5
Keynes and the labour market
We saw in Chapter 2 how the classical economists rested their belief in the inherent tendency towards a state of full employment upon an analysis of the functioning of the labour market which has proved to be both durable and compelling.
The new classical macroeconomics, which we shall examine in greater detail in Chapter 7, can, to a considerable extent, be viewed as a return to pre-Keynesian methods of analysis, particularly in their treatment of the operation of the labour market.
Pigou's Unemployment (1913) and The Theory of Unemployment (1933) have made a striking, if largely unacknowledged, comeback in the writings of Lucas, Sargent and Wallace.
An understanding of Keynes's critique of the classical theory of labour market adjustment is therefore an essential prerequisite for a fuller evaluation of the contribution of the new classical macroeconomics to our understanding of the workings of a market economy.
It will be seen that many of the disputes between Keynesians and monetarists/new classicals find their origins in quite fundamental prognostic disagreements concerning the response of the labour market to a state of general excess supply.
The classical view restated
The sanguine view of the classical writers that deviations from the normal state of full employment could be regarded as temporary ‘lapses from full employment’(Pigou's phrase) was based upon a very simple disequilibrium adjustment mechanism derived from Marshallian partial equilibrium analysis.
According to Marshall, when supply exceeded demand in any market, the forces of competition would exert downward pressure on  the price peculiar to that market.
A fall in price of sufficient magnitude would ultimately ensure that the initial excess supply would be eliminated.
This approach has considerable intuitive appeal when it is applied to the markets for apples or second-hand cars, and even when it is applied to individual labour markets.
However, the classical writers tended to transfer the same principles of adjustment from the microeconomic to the macroeconomic plane, though their applicability at this level of aggregation is altogether more problematical, as Keynes was to point out.
Since the demand for labour is a decreasing function of the real wage rate and the supply of labour is (perhaps) an increasing function of the real wage rate, they argued that the origins of general unemployment could be traced to the maintenance of a real wage rate, w 1 , which exceeded the market clearing real wage rate, w *;.
Given this diagnosis, the remedy for unemployment was patently clear: real wages should fall.
Moreover in a competitive market economy the requisite fall in real wages from w 1 to w *; would occur spontaneously.
The unemployed would vie with the employed by offering their labour services at lower wages.
Provided that labour is homogeneous in quality, employers would have the incentive to hire the cheaper labour.
The process of undercutting the existing wage rate would continue until all of those willing to work had been absorbed into employment.
The economic experience of the interwar period, particularly in Britain, posed weighty questions concerning the origins of general   unemployment.
It was clear to the classical writers that there were tens of thousands of workers who were unemployed and who were prepared to work at the going (real or money) wage rate.
The general level of wages exceeded the marginal disutility of employment.
Figure 5.1 Unemployment and the trades union labour supply function
So what forces impeded the real wage rate from falling so as to bring into employment those willing to work at the going wage rate?
If the going wage rate was ‘wrong’, as it appeared to be, what stood in the way of its downward revision?
The answer appeared to be obvious: the refusal of those workers in employment to accept wage cuts, coupled with the inability, for institutional reasons, of unemployed workers to undercut the general level of wages, resulted in a strong tendency to wage rigidity.
The ‘institutional’ barriers to price competition between employed and unemployed workers had arisen, of course, as a result of the pervasive powers of the trades union movement.
Unions were viewed as monopolistic combinations of labour which catered mainly for the interests of those of their members who were in employment at the expense of the unemployed.
In effect the competitive labour supply function had been supplanted over most of its range by what may be called the ‘trades union labour supply function’, illustrated by the bold lines in Figure 5.1.
The function  includes part of the competitive labour supply function, i.e. that segment of L s above and to the right of point B, but renders inoperative the remaining part, i.e. that segment of L s below and to the left of point B. Workers who are willing to work at less than the wage stipulated by trades unions (w 1 in Figure 5.1) will be excluded from active participation in the labour market for as long as these powerful combinations maintain their stranglehold as monopoly suppliers of labour.
In the above account the distinction between changes in money wages and changes in real wages has been deliberately blurred.
With rare exceptions the classical economists took it for granted that a reduction in the money-wage rate would be translated into the all important reduction in the real-wage rate which was required by marginal productivity theory.
The reasons for this puzzling association of money wage changes and real-wage changes in classical theory are not altogether clear, though we speculated in Chapter 2 that the influence of the quantity theory of money probably played an important part since it anchored the price level to the quantity of money in circulation, releasing the money-wage bargain to determine real wages.
A fallacy of composition, involving the illegitimate transfer of microeconomic methods of analysis to macroeconomics, also appears to have added to the confusion.
Real and money wages in the General Theory: what is involuntary unemployment?
Until recently no economists doubted that an all-round reduction in the rate of money wages might be expected to increase, and an all round enhancement to diminish, the volume of employment.
(A. C. Pigou, 1937, the opening sentence of his Presidential Address to the Royal Economic Society)
It is well known that Keynes opposed money-wage cuts as a cure for unemployment, but the reasons for his opposition have been widely misunderstood.
Indeed, the Keynesian model has often been accused of neglecting the labour market altogether, and in particular of neglecting optimizing behaviour in the labour market.
The irrational spectre of money illusion is often seen to lie behind the complex facade of income-expenditure models derived from the  system.
It is arguable that the recent resuscitation of classical ideas is a reaction against the alleged Keynesian neglect of optimizing behaviour in general and against rather mechanical income-expenditure models in particular.
From those brought up to regard the  system as the last word in representing the Keynesian system, such a virulent reaction is hardly surprising.
Keynes's theory of labour market adjustment has fallen victim to widespread ignorance and neglect.
We shall attempt to redress the balance in this section.
Piecing together Keynes's labour market analysis is not an easy task since the fragments are promiscuously scattered throughout the pages of the General Theory.
In addition there is, as yet, no consensus of opinion among Keynes scholars over his treatment of the labour market so that what is presented here must be regarded as the personal view of the author.
Much to the unease of many of his followers, Keynes retained the underlying behavioural relationships of the neo-classical model.
He thus accepted the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour and its corollary that a fall in the real wage rate is a necessary condition for a rise in employment.
On the supply side he also accepted the notion that there would exist some relationship between the willingness to work and the real wage rate.
If workers are to supply more labour they may require a reward in the form of a higher real wage rate in order to compensate them for the higher marginal disutility of employment.
A state of general excess supply in the labour market could therefore be depicted in a manner which the classical economists would instantly recognize and find acceptable.
Hence in Figure 5.1 the extent of general unemployment   could be measured by the horizontal distance AB, this level of unemployment being associated with a real wage rate W 1 .
(For reasons that will become clear later, the  schedule is irrelevant in the Keynesian system.)
The really fundamental point of dispute between Keynes's analysis of the labour market and that of his classical predecessors lay, not in the depiction of a state of general unemployment, but in his rejection of the classical theory of disequilibrium adjustment.
The analytical core which Keynes shared with Pigou did not extend to their respective prognoses of how an economy responds to excess supply in the labour market.
Keynes claimed that, even if the labour market were competitive, the real wage rate would not fall in the presence of a substantial excess supply of labour.
Excess supply would exert downward pressure on the money wage rate only: the level of real wages would remain largely unaffected by a steady reduction in the level of money wages which a state of persistent excess supply would entail.
It is the money wage alone which is determined by the bargains struck between workers and employers.
The real wage rate is not a variable which can be directly negotiated in the bargaining process.
Even though workers would be willing to offer their labour services at a lower real wage rate, and even though employers would be willing to hire more workers at a lower real wage rate, neither party to the bargaining process is capable of exerting downward pressure on this all important relative price.
Keynes summarized the fallacy that lay at the heart of the classical theory of labour market adjustment:
The traditional theory [of employment]maintains, in short, that the wage bargains between the entrepreneurs and the workers determine the real wage; so that , assuming free competition amongst employers and no restrictive combinations amongst workers, the latter can, if they wish, bring their real wages into conformity with the marginal disutility of employment offered by the employers at that wage.
If this is not true, then there is no longer any reason to expect a tendency towards equality between the real wage and the marginal disutility of labour.
(CT, p. 11, original italics)
The impotence of the two parties to the wage bargain to bring about a reduction in the real wage rate is what makes Keynesian unemployment involuntary.
Workers would prefer to be at point C rather than point A in Figure 5.1, while employers would be maximizing profit at point C as well as point A. Despite the scope for a Pareto-improvement in welfare if the real wage were reduced to w *;, the means of achieving such an improvement are absent in a money using economy.
The possibility of mutually advantageous trade which standard competitive theory would associate with point A is devoid of operational significance, not through any unwillingness on the part of workers or employers to exploit such an  opportunity, but through their impotence to affect the only price that matters in this market, the real wage rate.
Keynes asserted that the real wage rate is determined, not by bargains between workers and employers, but by ‘certain other forces’(GT, p. 13).
Let us assume that the economy inherits a real wage rate w 1 .
If there are no institutional or other barriers to the working of market forces, the general excess supply of labour associated with this real wage should lead to a decline in the level of money wages.
Keynes maintained that such a reduction would lead to a more or less equiproportionate reduction in the general level of prices.
He based this proposition on what he regarded as thoroughly orthodox Marshallian microeconomics which held that, in a perfectly competitive economy, the price of a commodity would equal its marginal cost of production.
Since labour is far and away the most important cost of production in the short run, a reduction in money wages will lower the marginal costs facing the representative firm which, on the assumption of marginal cost pricing, will lead to a fall in the price of output.
The process of price deflation is ‘balanced’ in the sense that the money wage, the level of marginal costs, and the price level will all decline equiproportionately.
Obviously a process of balanced deflation would entail no alteration of the real wage rate.
This very simple line of argument is illustrated in Figure 5.2.
Real national income is measured on the horizontal axis and the price level and the marginal cost of production are measured on the vertical axis.
Since the problem in hand is one of excess supply in the labour market, the actual level of income, Y 1 , will be less than its full employment value, Y *;.
In these circumstances elementary competitive theory suggests that money wages will fall.
Consider a step decline in the level of money wages from .
This will result in a downward displacement of the marginal cost curve from  to .
From the ‘expected price equals marginal cost’ principle the price level will decline from .
The real wage rate will remain unchanged, that is, if marginal costs comprise only labour costs, a situation Keynes considered to be likely in the short run.
What forces fix the level of real income at Y 1 ?
Keynes's answer is straightforward: effective demand.
But this answer begs a further question: are there any circumstances in which an all round reduction of   money wages and prices will stimulate the real value of desired expenditure and real national income?
Figure 5.2 Money wages and the absolute price level
Aggregate demand and money wages: the neo-classical synthesis
In Chapter 19 of the General Theory, the chapter entitled ‘Changes in money-wages’, Keynes confronted head on the question of the relationship between aggregate demand and the levels of money wages and prices.
He listed several possible links between the various components of aggregate expenditure on the one hand, and the levels of prices and money wages on the other.
To cut a long story short, he concluded that most of these effects were ambiguous but that there was one effect which could, in principle, be quite powerful in raising the level of real expenditure and income: for a constant nominal stock of money, a fall in the price level will raise the real money stock which may, in turn, exert significant downward pressure on the rate of interest.
To the extent that aggregate expenditure — and in particular private investment expenditure — is stimulated by lower interest rates, real income will rise in consequence.
The nexus linking changes in the price level to changes in real income via the rate of interest is known as the Keynes effect.
The Keynes effect is illustrated in Figure 5.3.
The nominal stock of money, M 1 , is assumed to remain unchanged in the face of balanced    deflation.
The fall in the price level from  raises the real money stock from  and reduces the rate of interest from .
The resultant increase in investment expenditure raises real income from .
Obviously this indirect mechanism by which real income rises as the price level falls could continue for as long as (a) the rate of interest continues to fall; and (b) the rate of investment continues to respond to these interest rate reductions.
In other words, provided that the liquidity trap is not reached and that investment remains sufficiently responsive to interest rate reductions, falling prices could conceivably establish levels of expenditure and real income which correspond to their full employment values, E *; and Y *; respectively.
Figure 5.3 The Keynes effect
Nevertheless, the path to full employment through balanced deflation is likely to be fraught with hazards.
Many unforeseen dangers may be lurking in the wings.
For example, the enhanced possibility of bankruptcy and default arising from failure to meet contracts fixed in money terms could have quite severe knock on effects for the whole financial system.
Firms and institutions which are otherwise financially sound could be hard hit by a protracted run of debt defaults.
The inability of debtors to honour their financial obligations to creditors could lead to a general financial crisis not dissimilar to the endemic banking crises of the early nineteenth century.
Many pre-Keynesian quantity theorists — most notably Irving Fisher — would have shuddered at the prospect of a prolonged bout of price deflation: the financial system might not be able to bear the strain.
Moreover, even if these undesirable side effects of deflation could be  disregarded and the progress towards a state of full employment did in fact correspond to the mechanism depicted in Figure 5.3, exactly the same result could be more expeditiously achieved simply by increasing the nominal money supply.
An increase in the real money supply can be brought about by the far more direct route of central bank intervention to increase the nominal stock of money by an amount sufficient to attain full employment.
Reliance on wage-price deflation is not only dangerous, it is wholly unnecessary.
But there was one mechanism which Keynes neglected to include in his list of the effects of wage-price deflation and which was to play an important part in the revival of the classical belief in the inherent tendency towards a state of full employment.
This is the celebrated (and often misunderstood) real-balance effect, occasionally also known as the Pigou effect.
At the heart of the real-balance effect lies the hypothesis that desired consumption expenditure depends not only upon the level of income and the rate of interest but also upon the real net worth of the private sector: that is  where  is the nominal value of private sector net worth deflated by the price level.
Even during periods of falling prices, some components of NW will remain fixed in nominal terms so that, unless other components of NW fall more rapidly than the price level, reductions in P will raise  which, in turn, will stimulate consumption expenditure.
The most obvious — and probably the most trivial — example of the real-balance effect is the impact of falling prices on the real value of bank notes in the hands of the private sector.
If one possessed a $100 bill, and if the price level fell ten thousandfold overnight, one would wake up next morning to find oneself effectively a millionaire.
So obviously these non-interest bearing, non-redeemable liabilities of the government (fiat money) are included in NW.
But the real-balance effect may also operate on a wider array of assets which constitute the net worth of the private sector, though there has always been controversy over the range of assets to which it is supposed to apply.
For example it is generally accepted that, since the real-balance effect concerns the net wealth of the private sector, indebtedness arising from within the private sector should be excluded from the definition of NW.
It follows that the money supply should not be regarded as part of NW since by far its largest component are bank deposits, a magnitude technically referred to as ‘inside money’: the assets of depositors are matched by the liabilities of bank creditors.
And what about government interest bearing liabilities (bonds for short)?
Do they figure in the definition of ‘outside money’?
Unfortunately a consensus view has yet to emerge on this question.
It used to be  thought that bonds should be included in a definition of the net worth of the private sector, but this has been challenged by R. J. Barro (1974), who has argued that bonds should not be regarded as part of the net worth of the private sector since the non-monetary liabilities of the government are a burden on this generation and on future generations.
Sooner or later this burden will have to be faced up to in the form of higher taxation either now or in the future.
Tax payers react to a rise in government spending funded through the sale of bonds by saving more now to meet future tax liabilities.
Barro is making the perfectly valid point that when the government incurs debt by issuing bonds it is acting as a mere go between on behalf of the private sector: the private sector is becoming more indebted to itself through the financial intermediation of the government.
Despite the power of Barro's ‘equivalence theorem’, it seems reasonable to acknowledge at least some role for government bonds in the definition of NW in addition to fiat money.
To the extent that the government, the major issuer of those assets which make up the private sector's net worth, does not alter its spending and taxation policies in response to a rising real value of its outstanding liabilities, aggregate spending will rise as the price level falls.
It will be recalled that the Keynes effect critically relies first upon the response of the rate of interest to wage-price deflation and secondly upon the response of investment to lower interest rates.
In contrast, the real-balance effect exerts a direct influence on the level of spending independently of what happens to the rate of interest.
It does not therefore run the risk of encountering those barriers which prevent the Keynes effect from operating, namely absolute liquidity preference and/or an investment function which is interest inelastic.
The real balance effect may be represented diagrammatically as a rightward shift in the IS curve.
The combined operation of the Keynes effect and the real-balance effect is illustrated in Figure 5.4.
It should be noted that the real-balance effect operates even in the degenerate cases depicted in Figures 4.12(a) and 4.12(b): even if the IS curve is vertical and the LM curve is horizontal, the real-balance effect will nevertheless raise demand and hence output and employment.
Both the Keynes effect and the real-balance effect were to form the essential ingredients of the professional consensus which emerged in the years following the publication of the General Theory known as the neo-classical synthesis.
According to this synthesis, Keynesian unemployment was a phenomenon which was primarily attributable to downwardly sticky money wages and prices, the obvious implication being that general unemployment would never arise if money wages and prices were perfectly flexible downwards as well as upwards.
This is, of course, identical to the conclusion reached by Pigou in his Theory of Unemployment:
With perfectly free competition there will always be a strong tendency toward full employment.
Such unemployment as exists at any time is due wholly to the frictional resistances [which]prevent wage and price adjustments being made instantaneously.
Figure 5.4 Keynes effect and real-balance effect
In other words rigidities and frictions in the response of money wages and prices to a state of general excess supply provide a practical justification for demand management policies.
These policies should be particularly aimed at adjusting the ratio of the nominal stock of money to the absolute price level since, following Modigliani (1944), the origins of general excess supply can be traced to a ‘misalignment’ between the money stock and the levels of money wages and prices.
Nevertheless, even with highly flexible wages and prices, the supposedly therapeutic properties of money wage reductions should be viewed with great circumspection.
Professor Patinkin, who was largely responsible for the rigorous formulation of the real-balance effect, has always urged caution in regarding price deflation as an acceptable alternative route for the attainment of full employment.
For a start the required reduction in the price level may have to be very large indeed before it has a significant impact on aggregate spending.
Secondly, even though static analysis of the sort featured in Figures 5.3 and 5.4 may point to the stimulating effect of price reductions, dynamic considerations such as the effects of bankruptcy and default during the process of price deflation  may serve to tighten the grip of recession rather than loosen it.
We have already noted Fisher's concern about the financial instability that a process of money wage-price deflation could bring in its train.
Finally, evidence from what was arguably the most traumatic period for capitalism, the post-1929 Depression in the United States, does not lend support to the real-balance hypothesis: ‘For the 1929–32 period as a whole there was an increase in real balances of 42 per cent, and a decrease in real income of 40 per cent ’(Patinkin, 1951).
Patinkin's point is that the comparison of positions of static equilibrium, one equilibrium being characterized by a considerably lower price level than the other, may be of very limited practical relevance.
Indeed, these comparisons could be dangerous if they are accorded too great a prominence in an analysis of the impact of money wage-price deflation on employment.
Throughout most of the post-war period acceptance of the neo-classical synthesis by the economics profession was confined to the plane of pure theory.
The Keynes effect and the real-balance effect were regarded as so weak and uncertain in practice that they rarely, if ever, featured in debates on economic policy matters.
The abstract musings of macroeconomists did not encroach on the hard world of economic decision making.
There was a widespread acceptance of the Keynesian view that far less painful alternatives to money wage cuts were available in the form of demand management policies.
Moreover, despite its ‘classical’ predictions, the neo-classical synthesis was firmly grounded methodologically in the principle of effective demand: the classical money wage-real wage-employment nexus had been completely abandoned in favour of the money wage-price level-aggregate demand-employment nexus.
However, in this latter nexus, the relation between the real wage rate and the level of aggregate demand — a relation which was accorded great prominence in the General Theory — was to become obscured almost to the point of invisibility.
For four decades it was supposed that Hicks's  model contained all of the basic ingredients of the General Theory approach to the theory of employment.
Interest rates apart, the price-theoretic aspects of Keynes's great work were ignored.
Aggregate demand and the real wage rate
The involuntary nature of Keynesian unemployment arises, as we saw earlier, from the inability of either workers or employers directly to exert the downward pressure on the real wage rate that was required by the   marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour.
Keynes accepted that an increase in employment would need to be underpinned by a reduction in the real wage rate but rejected the view that the forces of competition would automatically achieve this end.
Thus he wrote ‘The general level of real wages depends on the other forces of the economic system’(GT, p. 14, original italics).
What are these mysterious ‘other forces’ which are supposed to determine the real wage rate?
They effectively reduce to just one force: the level of effective demand.
But in what way do variations in effective demand alter the real wage rate?
There would, at first sight, appear to be no connection between these two variables.
In order to simplify exposition we shall assume that the level of money wages is given at W so that we are able to fix the position of the aggregate marginal cost curve in Figure 5.5(b).
Suppose there is a rise in aggregate demand brought about by an expansionary fiscal policy.
This is represented in Figure 5.5(a) by a rightward shift in the IS curve from .
From Figure 5.5(b) we see that the rise in output raises marginal cost and hence raises the price level of output.
Since the money wage rate is, by hypothesis, assumed to be constant at W, the real wage rate falls from  in Figure 5.5(c).
The amount by which the real wage rate will have to fall is mirrored in the amount by which prices will have to rise since the aggregate marginal cost curve in 5.5(b) is derived from the marginal physical product curve of labour.
Moreover, since any given LM curve is defined with respect to a particular real stock of money, the rise in the price level shifts the LM curve in a north-westerly direction from a position .
By means of this simple model, Keynes was able to accommodate the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour within his income-expenditure theory of employment, something of a tour de force.
The above brief account throws into sharp relief the essential differences between the Keynesian and classical theories of labour market adjustment.
In classical theory a spontaneous fall in the real wage rate is the initiating force tending to raise employment and output.
In Keynesian theory the direction of causation is reversed: the fall in the real    wage rate depicted in Figure 5.5 is the consequence, not the cause, of the rise in output.
Even in a perfectly competitive economy — the state of affairs normally regarded as most amenable to neoclassical modes of analysis — the real wage rate will remain unchanged for as long as the level of output remains unchanged; and output will remain unchanged for as long as the level of desired real expenditure remains unchanged.
In the absence of a fortuitous revival of private expenditure, the principal onus for raising the level of real expenditure falls upon the shoulders of the demand management authorities.
Expansionary monetary and fiscal policies will ultimately produce the required fall in the real wage rate which adherence to the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour entails.
Figure 5.5 Effective demand and the real-wage rate
Wage stickiness and money illusion
It is now widely acknowledged that Keynes accepted the classical theory of the demand for labour in the form of marginal productivity theory.
In contrast, turbulent confusion has always surrounded his theory of labour supply.
It is usually argued that the feature which distinguishes a Keynesian labour supply function from its classical counterpart is the replacement of the money wage rate, W, for the real wage rate,, in the former.
The ‘Keynesian’ function can be written  rather than, as in the classical model.
One implication of the Keynesian function is that, since , an increase in money wages will raise the supply of labour irrespective of what is happening to the price level.
Money wage increases are valued in their own right: workers pay no attention to the purchasing power of the money wage.
Workers are chronically prone to money illusion: if prices rise in the same proportion to the rise in the money wage, leaving the real wage rate unchanged, workers none the less supply more labour.
Leontief (1936) was the first of Keynes's critics to attack what he perceived to be a theory of labour supply grounded in irrational behaviour by workers.
The  formulation of the theory of labour supply violates the classical homogeneity postulate which states that a scalar multiplication of all nominal quantities should leave real quantities, and the functional relationships that underlie them, unchanged.
A doubling of both the money-wage rate and the price level should not alter the supply of labour.
In an uncharacteristically confused reply to Leontief's powerful criticisms, Keynes (CW, XIV, p. 109) appears to concede that he was, in fact, rejecting the postulate that demand and supply functions should be homogeneous of degree zero in nominal quantities.
His justification for this apparent rejection was not  theoretical at all: it was based on what he claimed was the ‘abundant evidence of experience’.
(The manner in which ‘evidence of experience’, abundant or otherwise, can cast light on the validity of the classical homogeneity postulate remains a mystery to this author.)
It would be inappropriate to delve more deeply into the history of economic thought.
However, we might pause to speculate how the above formulation of the Keynesian labour supply function came about.
In the author's view the main reason for the emergence of the  formulation lies in a confusion of observed fact for theoretical postulate.
It was Keynes's view that, in practice, the money wage rate was downwardly rigid.
This observation did appear to conform with the actual behaviour of money wages in the interwar period, particularly in Britain.
Unfortunately this purely empirical observation was remarked on at length in several passages of the General Theory, giving the false impression that it had some wider theoretical significance.
It was therefore natural for Keynes's interpreters to infer that the supply curve of labour was horizontal at an arbitrarily given money wage rate for all levels of employment up to full employment: after all, an implication of the unwillingness of workers to accept a wage cut is that they are refusing to supply their labour at a lower money wage.
This view is expressed diagrammatically in Figure 5.6.
This interpretation of the General Theory labour supply function seems initially quite plausible, but the further one pursues Keynes's chain of reasoning, the more apparent it becomes that he had something altogether different from the  formulation in mind.
We saw earlier in this chapter how the assumption of given money wages was not an intrinsic part of Keynes's theory: ‘The essential character of the argument is precisely the same whether or not money-wages, etc., are liable to change’(GT, p. 27).
Chapter 19 of the General Theory is devoted in its entirety to an exploration of the different routes through which reductions in money wages may affect the level of employment.
It is true that, for a variety of reasons to do with the structure of wage bargaining in Britain, Keynes did not consider it very likely that money wages would fall, even in the presence of substantial unemployment.
But this was an empirical observation which concerned the economic circumstances of a particular country at a particular period of time: it had nothing whatever to do with his general theory of employment.
It has nevertheless given rise to such widespread misunderstanding in subsequent interpretations of his model that Keynes would have done better to exclude all discussion of money wage rigidity from the main body of the General Theory.
Figure S.6 ‘Money illusion’ labour supply function
Further evidence against the  formulation of the labour supply function is provided by an examination of the definition of involuntary unemployment given on page 15 of the General Theory:
Men are in voluntarily unemployed if, in the event of a small rise in the price of wage-goods relatively to the money-wage, both the aggregate supply of labour willing to work for the current money-wage and the aggregate demand for it at that wage would be greater than the existing volume of employment.
This extraordinarily convoluted definition, the whole of which is in italics, must have been responsible for deterring thousands of readers from proceeding beyond page 15 of the General Theory, but it does make sense.
Consider Figure 5.7.
The hypothetical experiment which Keynes is undertaking is an examination of the consequences of a fall in the real wage rate brought about through a rise in the general price level, P (what he refers to as ‘the price of wage-goods’) in relation to the money wage, W. The initial real wage rate is  and the corresponding ‘existing volume of employment’ is 4,.
The fall in the real wage rate to  raises the demand for labour to  and (perhaps) reduces the supply of labour to .
Since , both the demand for and supply of labour still exceed L, the existing volume of employment, despite the reduction in the real wage.
In other words involuntary unemployment is still present in the labour market, though its extent is less than it was initially.
Once again the phenomenon that makes this sort of unemployment involuntary is the inability of workers and employers directly to lower the real-wage rate to w *;.
In Keynes's hypothetical experiment the reduction   in the real wage rate is brought about through a rise in the price level, which, in turn, is brought about through an increase in aggregate demand, though this is not made explicit in the definition (see Figure 5.4).
Figure 5.7 Keynes's definition of involuntary unemployment
Keynes on the sources of money wage stickiness
In the above account workers passively accept a reduction in their real wage rate from w to w 1 brought about through increases in the price level.
However there are many passages in the General Theory in which Keynes asserted that, even if a similar reduction in w could be brought about via the route of money wage cuts (and we have suggested above that money wage cuts will not have this effect), workers would be unwilling to allow their money wages to fall.
Workers are unworried by the erosion of W÷P resulting from increases in P, but they will strenuously resist the same erosion of W÷P resulting from reductions in W. At first blush this would appear to be yet another manifestation of the irrational phenomenon of money illusion affecting the supply of labour.
So what was Keynes driving at?
Despite what we said earlier about the inefficacy of money wage cuts in reducing the real wage, let us, purely for the sake of argument, allow that reductions in W and equiproportionate increases in P have the same impact in lowering the real wage.
Why do workers prefer to take real wage cuts in the form of price rises?
If money wage negotiations took place at a highly centralized level, with trades union leaders bargaining over the general level of wages, workers should be indifferent as between reductions in W and increases in P in effecting a given reduction in the real wage rate.
This is a requirement of rational behaviour.
But wage negotiations are very rarely conducted at such a high level of aggregation: wage bargaining is a fragmented, decentralized process.
Moreover, the industrial relations climate in most Western economies sets great store by the preservation of a particular pattern of wage differentials between different categories of labour.
(Witness the number of ‘comparability’ pay claims which have little to do with the tightness of labour markets.)
The accepted pattern of wage differentials need not be absolutely rigid, but, for as long as the supply of labour in one market depends inter alia upon wages payable in other markets, money wage reductions will not readily be forthcoming.
Workers will go to great lengths ‘to protect their relative real wage’(CT, p. 14, original italics): ‘the struggle for money-wages is…essentially a struggle to maintain a high relative wage…
’(CT, p. 252, original italics).
Since a process of individual wage reductions in such circumstances is bound to be ragged and discontinuous, it will be hedged about with uncertainty and apprehension.
Even though workers are prepared to accept a general reduction in the level of real wages, they are unwilling to take the first step of accepting money wage cuts in case other workers with whom they regard themselves as comparable fail to follow suit.
Workers are caught up in a form of ‘prisoners’ dilemma'.
The dominating strategy is non-cooperative: an individual group of workers has a clear interest in standing firm in resisting money wage cuts even though workers en masse may be better off if a cooperative strategy were pursued.
Game-theoretic considerations point to a conflict between collective and individual rationality.
Collective rationality may require a reduction in W which, in turn, requires reductions in  where W i is the money wage rate in the ith labour market.
However, considerations of individual rationality induce workers in the ith market to reject any move to revise W i downwards.
Similar resistance in the remaining (n -1) labour markets renders the general level of money wages downwardly inflexible.
This divergence between collective and individual rationality is not encountered when the means by which the real wage is reduced is via an increase in the absolute price level.
An increase in P is across the board, affecting all groups of workers equally and posing no threat to the  structure of established wage differentials.
It is therefore individually rational for workers to resist money wage reductions but to accept an erosion of their real wage rate through price increases.
Workers are not behaving irrationally since all workers are in the same boat when prices
Real wages and employment: was Keynes wrong?
[The first postulate of classical economics]means that, with a given organisation, equipment and technique, real wages and the volume of output (and hence employment) are uniquely correlated, so that, in general , an increase in employment can only occur to the accompaniment of a decline in the rate of real wages.
Thus I am not disputing this vital fact which classical economists have (rightly) asserted as indefeasible.
(GT, p. l 7)
But how indefeasible is the classical assertion which Keynes was so ready to accept?
In the years following the publication of the General Theory, doubts started to be expressed about Keynes's favourable attitude towards the classical theory of the demand for labour.
Had Keynes gone too far down the road of attempting to accommodate many of the central tenets of classical economics within the framework of his own theory of employment?
Criticism was particularly levelled at the basic prediction of marginal productivity theory that movements in real wages and movements in employment should be inversely correlated.
More technically movements in real wages should be countercyclical, with real wages falling in the upswing of the cycle and rising in the downswing.
The relationship of real wages to the phase of the trade cycle was subjected to empirical scrutiny in two celebrated papers, one by J. G. Dunlop (1938) using British data, and the other by L. Tarshis (1939) using American data.
The results of both investigations suggested that, far from moving countercyclically, real wages moved procyclically: increases in output and employment appeared to be correlated with increases in the real wage rate.
In a long reply to Dunlop and Tarshis, Keynes (1939) listed a number of possible explanations for the apparently procyclical behaviour of real wages.
One explanation from this list is of particular interest: if the economy is in an unusually deep recession, firms may be operating at levels of output at which the marginal cost of production is falling.
Moreover if the point of minimum marginal cost has not yet been reached, it follows a fortiori that the point of minimum average cost has not been reached either.
This is illustrated in Figure 5.8.
For all levels of output up to Y 3 , marginal cost is falling.
Hence an increase in output from Y 1 to Y 2 will reduce the price level from P 1 to P 2 while the level of money wages remains unchanged at W.
The real wage rate obviously rises as a result of an expansion of output over this range.
Keynes was nevertheless very cautious in accepting the phenomenon of diminishing marginal costs as a general characteristic even of an economy experiencing substantial levels of unemployment.
He insisted that ‘the critical point of upturn’(point A in Figure 5.8) would occur at a level of output ‘which is highly relevant for practical purposes’.
Hence a ‘sharply different theory [of the behaviour of real wages]…becomes applicable after the turning point has been reached.’
Circumstances alter cases: in deep recessions the economy is likely to be to the left of point A whereas in milder recessions the economy is more likely to be to the right of point A.
Nevertheless serious problems remain with Keynes's simple theory of the firm.
In his reply to Tarshis and Dunlop, Keynes referred almost exclusively to the marginal cost curve of the representative firm, neglecting the relationship between average and marginal cost.
If the normal U-shaped average cost curve is included in the analysis — as it is in Figure 5.8 — certain rather disturbing possibilities are opened up.
In particular at levels of output below Y 4 , the representative firm will be making a loss by equating price with marginal cost.
Such a situation cannot persist for long since firms would go out of business.
Points such as point A cannot describe the behaviour of firms in anything longer than the very short run.
This problem would not arise with the assumption of average cost pricing but other, potentially more intractable problems would then have to be tackled, in particular how such behaviour could be reconciled with the idea that firms are profit  maximizing organizations.
Perhaps there was more than a grain of truth in the remark of one of his closest colleagues that Keynes ‘had never spent the twenty minutes necessary to understand the theory of value’.
Real wages and employment: Patinkin's early contribution
On that rather unsatisfactory agnostic note matters rested for many years until Don Patinkin published his classic work, Money, Interest and Prices.
The grave doubts that had been cast upon the validity of marginal productivity theory in the late 1930s-doubts which Keynes himself had come to share, albeit reluctantly — had made very little impression on the literature.
The main reason for this was, of course, the dominance of the  model — a model in which the real-wage rate does not figure at all — in the teaching of macroeconomics.
Patinkin's book was to focus attention once again on the reaction of real wages to changes in the level of employment.
Patinkin argued that, in times of demand deficient unemployment, the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour was, quite simply, irrelevant.
Consider the assumptions which are required before we can regard the marginal productivity of labour curve as the actual demand curve for labour.
First, the size of the capital stock is fixed, an assumption which is characteristic of all short-run analysis and which is wholly unexceptionable.
The second, more questionable assumption is that, even in the short run, capital and labour are combined in variable proportions, that is, that a movement down the marginal productivity of labour curve will imply the employment of more workers with a given number of machines.
On the other hand a more appropriate short-run assumption is that labour and capital are combined in fixed proportions: x men, no more and no less, are required to work y machines.
The short-run capital-labour ratio (y/x in this example) is technologically fixed.
The assumption of a variable capital-labour ratio implied by marginal productivity theory is more acceptable in long-run analysis such as formal models of economic growth, but it is likely to be inapplicable in short-run analysis.
These two assumptions together imply that, under the stipulated conditions of perfect competition, the capital stock will always be fully utilized irrespective of the extent of unemployment in the labour market.
The capital stock, unlike the labour force, will always be fully employed.
However, Patinkin pointed out that, during a Keynesian recession, underutilized capacity is typically observed side by side with unemployed  labour: capacity utilization will fall and unemployment will rise as aggregate demand falls.
Consider the case depicted in Figure 5.9 where the economy starts in a position of full employment at point A. Suppose the level of aggregate demand were suddenly to fall, for example as a result of a decline in planned investment.
According to the analysis of the General Theory, the level of employment will fall from L *; to L 1 and the real wage rate will rise from w *; to w 1 .
At point B workers have been pushed off their labour supply function but employers remain on their labour demand function, albeit at a different point.
The capital stock will be just as fully utilized at point B as at point A, but fewer men will be required to operate the fixed number of machines.
Firms, unlike households, are assumed to be continuously in neoclassical equilibrium: given the value of the real wage rate, they produce just the right (profit maximizing) volume of output.
However, once we abandon the assumption that the capital stock can never be underutilized we are forced to recognize that the ‘off stage’ decline in aggregate demand will not only push workers off their ‘ideal’labour supply function, L s : it will also push employers off their ‘ideal’labour demand function, L d .
(Clower (1965) has called L s and L d the notional labour supply and demand functions respectively.)
The effective demand for labour function,, is the vertical line BD, the notional function L d being of significance only for purposes of comparing the constrained behaviour of firms with their preferred behaviour.
The fact that the marginal productivity principle is redundant in conditions of general unemployment
expresses the involuntariness with which firms, no less than workers, must be acting during periods of unemployment…
For just as the latter are then not receiving as much employment as they would normally like at the prevailing real wage rate, so the former are not providing as much as they would normally like.
Both firms and workers are being coerced by the same force majeure of insufficient demand in the commodity market.
Both are being prevented from achieving their optimal model of behaviour.
(Patinkin, 1965, p. 322)
In other words workers would like to be on the L s curve and employers would like to be on the L d curve but, following the decline in aggregate demand, neither workers nor employers are capable of achieving these objectives.
But what happens to the real wage rate following a fall in aggregate demand?
The short answer is: we do not know.
It could rise (e.g. towards w 1 ) as Keynes believed, it could fall (e.g. towards w 2 ) as Dunlop and Tarshis believed, or it could conceivably remain unchanged at its market   clearing level w *;.
By implication it is impossible to postulate any definite inverse correlation between changes in the real wage rate and changes in employment.
Keynes's later scepticism on the precise nature of this connection seems to have been amply justified.
Figure 5.9 General underutilization of factor resources
Having lain unnoticed for a number of years, Patinkin's insights have recently been elaborated and refined in the works of Robert Clower and in the writings of what may loosely be called the French Keynesian School, the most prominent member of which is Edmond Malinvaud (see Malinvaud, 1980 and 1985).
The notion of quantity rationing figures prominently in the works of these authors.
For example, they characterize a state of Keynesian unemployment as one in which workers cannot, in the aggregate, reach the L s curve in Figure 5.9 and in which employers, since they cannot sell all of the output that they would like to produce, cannot reach the L d curve.
The constrained or effective demand curve for labour is  in Figure 5.9.
Workers are said to be rationed in the labour market and firms are said to be rationed in the commodity market.
Workers and employers have been plunged by extrinsic forces into a suboptimal state in which neither group wishes to remain but from which they are powerless to extricate themselves.
No amount of ‘mutually advantageous trading’ will come to their rescue.
Concluding remarks
It is often claimed that one of the most conspicuous shortcomings of Keynesian macroeconomics lies in its lack of a coherent theory of  aggregate supply.
According to this view, against the great strengths of Keynes's principle of effective demand should be set the evident weaknesses of his supply-side analysis.
The application of the  apparatus was often uncritical and indiscriminate.
An implicit assumption appeared to be lurking in the background of the Hicksian model, namely, that at levels of activity significantly below full employment, the elasticity of supply of output as a whole was approximately infinity.
Changes in aggregate demand would evoke quantity changes and not price changes.
Only in the region of full employment would such a pattern of response cease to be operative.
The passive reaction of aggregate supply to changes in aggregate demand was usually formalized in the ‘reverse-L’ supply function derived from a similar labour supply function in Figure 5.6.
According to the  labour supply function, changes in the employment of labour which flow from prior changes in aggregate demand will not call forth changes in money wages when the initial state is one of less than full employment.
In these circumstances the levels of output and employment are entirely demand determined.
The behaviour of relative prices, and in particular the reaction of the real wage rate to excess supply in the labour market, gains no mention at all since the principal focus of attention is the response (or more accurately the lack of response) of absolute prices to changes in the level of aggregate demand.
Paradoxically the ‘neoclassical’ part of the neoclassical synthesis has surprisingly little to say about relative prices: the route back to full employment is through the downward revision of absolute prices.
The mechanism through which the real wage rate adjusts to variations in aggregate demand in Keynes's labour market analysis is ignored altogether.
This proved to be a fateful oversight since one of the most devastating criticisms to be levelled at Keynesian macroeconomics in recent years has been that it has such shaky foundations in microeconomics.
Stripped of the elaborate language of general equilibrium theory, what this criticism usually boils down to is a very simple question: if there is general excess supply in the labour market, what forces prevent the real wage rate from being adjusted downwards?
The  model is deafeningly silent on this question since the only relative price which figures in it is the rate of interest.
The fact that the General Theory model contains extensive, though fragmentary, analysis of the relationship between real wages and  employment is almost universally overlooked in expositions of the Keynesian system.
It is hoped that this chapter goes some way to redressing the balance: relative prices do matter in the General Theory, though they do not adjust in the manner suggested by the classical writers and by their monetarist/new classical descendants.
Nevertheless there is one area in which the Keynesian model leaves much to be desired in its treatment of aggregate supply.
This concerns the division of a given change in aggregate demand between price responses and output responses.
For example, will an increase in aggregate demand manifest itself principally in the form of an increase in output, as the naive  model suggests, or in the form of an increase in prices, as the equally naive quantity theory of money suggests?
If the result is a mixture of the two sorts of response, in what proportion will they be combined?
Not only is the  system incapable of answering this type of question, even the General Theory gives us few clues apart from the somewhat cursory treatment of the two elasticities, e p and e y , in Keynes's generalized quantity theory of money.
These problems assume major proportions when allowance is made for the possible dependence of the level and rate of change of money wages on the level of aggregate demand.
Enter the Phillips curve.
6
Inflation and the labour market
In the first 25 years after the Second World War the Keynesian approach to macroeconomic theory and policy came to dominate academic and governmental thinking in most Western economies.
So complete was the ascendancy of Keynesian ideas that the antecedent classical modes of analysis were abandoned by all but a few die-hard sceptics.
A neutered, lever pulling version of the General Theory emerged, finding its characteristic expression in the various manipulations which the  system had made possible.
The classical system had left so few remaining traces that the vast majority of students of economics could be forgiven for believing that, before Keynes, there was no macroeconomics.
Keynes's struggle to break free from the classical economics with which he was so profoundly imbued, and his recurrent comparisons with what he regarded as the most powerful, though flawed, alternative approach to macroeconomic matters, were almost totally ignored.
A hydraulic representation of his system dominated in which the historical evolution and context of Keynes's ideas could find no place.
The year 1936 was Year Zero for macroeconomics.
Keynesian economics, with its consumption function, investment function, liquidity preference schedule and the like, seemed the ideal testing ground for the application of rigorous statistical methods.
The econometric counterpart of the much elaborated  system was the vast array of empirical models of the economy which have enjoyed undisputed popularity until recent years.
The fact that Keynes had severe  reservations, occasionally bordering on outright hostility, towards the applicability of econometric methods to macroeconomics was swept to one side.
Econometricians searched for empirical regularities, eventually producing Keynesian models of quite staggering complexity.
The heyday of scientific economics had arrived at last.
But there was one conspicuous blot on this otherwise rosy landscape.
For all of its evident strengths, Keynesian economics did not stand comparison with classical theory in one vital respect: it was incapable of explaining the determinants of the levels of absolute price and money wages.
Despite its acknowledged faults, classical economics did at least constitute a complete system in the sense that, if one accepted its fundamental presumption of full employment, the magnitudes of all of the remaining macroeconomic variables could be determined.
In particular, recourse to the quantity theory of money enabled the classical writers to pin down the absolute price level and this, together with a knowledge of the full-employment real wage rate, w *;, made the money wage rate a determinate variable.
Broadly speaking, since M s fixed P, and since  was determined at its full employment value,, through the forces of competition in the labour market, the equilibrium value of W could be ascertained.
No such claim for completeness could be made on behalf of the Keynesian model since its raison d'être was the abandonment of the enabling assumption of full employment in order to explain the phenomenon of general unemployment.
Most representations of this model adroitly sidestepped the indeterminacy problem by assuming that the level of money wages was an institutionally determined datum.
(Critics of the Keynesian approach often pointed an accusatory finger at this assumption, claiming that it removed wage theory from the hands of economists and handed it over to sociologists.
Given the thinly disguised mutual suspicion which traditionally exists between economists and sociologists, it is scarcely surprising that most mainstream economists were deeply unhappy at what they regarded as an unjustified yielding of territory to an altogether less rigorous discipline.)
A coda was appended to the equations of the  system in the form of the restriction that  where W is an exogenously given value for the money wage.
From being underdetermined, the Keynesian model was made fully determinate by means of what many non-Keynesians regarded as a rather devious sleight of hand.
In general Keynesians recognized that changes in W could occur  from time to time, but the factors influencing these changes were extrinsic to the equations of the income-expenditure model.
In other words, the determination of the general level of money wages, and hence the absolute price level, was left dangling in the air, unexplained by the model.
Keynes himself was keenly aware of this important lacuna in respect of his treatment of money wages: ‘we are, as I have said, one equation short’(GT, p. 276).
As things turned out this theoretically suspect approach appeared to have been vindicated in practice by the economic experience of the post-war period.
Apart from the inflation associated with the Korean War, this period was marked by a combination of unprecedentedly low unemployment rates with price levels which were admittedly creeping upwards, but at rates which were so modest that they were regarded as tolerable.
The conjunction of low inflation and low unemployment came as a very pleasant surprise to those Keynesians who had feared that a policy commitment by governments to the goal of full employment would create an environment in which organized labour would press for ever higher levels of money wages.
No precise functional relationship was posited between the level of aggregate demand and the pressure on money-wages: it was simply feared that a stated and credible commitment to the objective of full employment might foster an atmosphere in the wage bargaining process in which money wages could run out of control.
The celebrated ‘problem of money wages’, which had so preoccupied Keynes and, subsequently, Joan Robinson, Richard Kahn, James Meade and Michal Kalecki, resulted from what they suspected would be a changed perception by organized labour of the policy responses of the monetary and fiscal authorities in the wake of the Keynesian revolution.
The days were long since gone when governments were prepared simply to ride out the turbulence of periodic recessions.
The advent of policy activism implied an adherence to policy rules radically different from those which had been applied previously.
This would lead, or so it was widely feared, to a change in labour market behaviour.
(A very similar point was made more rigorously three decades later in a provocative and potentially devastating critique of econometric policy evaluation by one of the leading lights of the new classical macroeconomics, R. E. Lucas (1976).)
Moreover, the unemployment rates with which post-war creeping inflations were associated were well below the rates which even the most sanguine of Keynesians would have regarded as feasible minima.
Keynes's lowest estimate for the minimum unemployment rate for interwar Britain was of the order of 5% (see R. F. Kahn, 1975).
Others, for example James Meade (1938), were more pessimistic: he considered the minimum unemployment rate for Britain in the same period to be in  the region of 11%.
As things turned out, however, the unemployment rate in Britain in the 1950s and 1960s only rarely exceeded 2%, there being no tangible evidence of an acceleration of inflation until after 1967.
Apart from a few lone voices (see, for example, R. F. Kahn's evidence to the Radcliffe Committee in 1958), most economists tended to shunt the problem of inflation to the nether recesses of their minds, concentrating instead upon other, more pressing problems such as the difficulties of reconciling a high level of employment with balance of payments equilibrium.
On that rather complacement note matters rested until 1958, the year in which A. W. Phillips of the London School of Economics published a paper which proved to be a landmark in the evolution of macroeconomic ideas.
Few articles can have made such a great and immediate impact on both the theoretical and practical planes.
Phillips had already become something of a celebrity after his construction — he was an engineer by training-of an ingenious machine which demonstrated the functioning of the macroeconomy by using various dyed liquids to represent different income and expenditure flows and the factors which influenced these flows.
With all of its interconnecting tubes, rarely can the concept of a leakage from the circular flow of income have assumed such a liquid manifestation!
Phillips's machine was the apotheosis of what came later to be known, rather disparagingly, as ‘hydraulic Keynesianism’(see Coddington, 1983).
Phillips had no master plan or grand theoretical design in mind when he undertook his celebrated study of the relationship between money wage inflation and unemployment in the United Kingdom for the period 1861 to 1957.
His paper was intended to be a tentative, exploratory investigation of British data and little else besides.
Nevertheless his results were quite remarkable.
There appeared to be a determinate, stable, inverse relationship between the rate of change of money wages and the unemployment rate which had continued to hold good for almost a century.
The shape of the inverse relationship is depicted in Figure 6.1.
The annual rate of change of money wages,, is measured along the vertical axis and the unemployment rate, U, expressed as a percentage of the total workforce, is measured along the horizontal axis.
The non-linear relationship has two asymptotes:(a) as the unemployment rate falls towards 0.8%, the rate of change of money wages tends to infinity;(b) as the unemployment rate rises towards 100%, the rate of change of money   wages tends to a lower bound of — 1.0%.
The curve crosses the U-axis at an unemployment rate of 5.5%.
Taking into account productivity growth, Phillips estimated that the unemployment rate which was required to produce a zero rate of price increase was around 2.5%.
Figure 6.1 The Phillips curve
Although Phillips hazarded some theoretical conjectures concerning the relationship he had uncovered, it was left to others, most notably R. G.
Lipsey (1960), to provide the analytical underpinning for this astonishing statistical regularity.
Lipsey's starting-point was the application of Samuelson's ‘correspondence principle’ to the disequilibrium dynamics of a micro labour market.
Consider the supply and demand conditions in the ith labour market (Figure 6.2).
The money wage rate is measured along the vertical axis, being the market clearing wage; and  are two arbitrarily given initial wage rates.
Along the horizontal axis are measured the supply of and demand for labour in the ith market, and  respectively.
The question which Lipsey then posed was: if there is initial disequilibrium in the ith labour market, at what rate will money wages change?
The answer which he proffered was equally simple: if the labour market is competitive, wages will change at a rate determined by both the sign and the extent of the initial disequilibrium.
For example, in Figure 6.2, two initial disequilibrium states are depicted.
The sign of the disequilibrium states is the same in both cases (positive, indicating the presence of excess demand) but they differ in the extent of the initial disequilibrium.
At an initial wage , the extent of the disequilibrium, measured by the ratio , is greater than at an initial wage .
The correspondence principle states that we should expect wages to be rising more   rapidly the larger is X i .
Thus .
Since X is larger at an initial wage  than at , wages will be rising more rapidly if the starting-point is .
As  approaches , both  and  vanish.
Figure 6.2 Samuelson's correspondence principle and the micro labour market
One possible pattern of dynamic adjustment is illustrated in Figure 6.3.
The rate of change of money wages is measured along the vertical axis and the excess demand variable,, is measured along the horizontal axis.
If the ith labour market initially experiences excess demand  money wages will rise at a rate .
On the other hand, if the initial state is one of excess supply  money-wages will fall at a rate .
The ith labour market is but one of n micro labour markets.
If all of the remaining (n -1) markets respond in a manner similar to the one outlined above, aggregation across labour markets will yield a determinate relationship between the overall rate of change of money wages,, and an index of aggregate excess demand for labour, X L , where  defined as the ratio .
Aggregating the microeconomic relationship  over all n labour markets yields the macroeconomic relationship .
The problem which the Phillips-Lipsey model then had to confront was one of measurability: not a directly observable magnitude.
For example, one may suspect that the labour market is overheating, i.e. that X L > 0, but without further quantitative information it is impossible to gauge the extent of the problem.
Phillips hit upon a plausible resolution of this difficulty by isolating a directly measurable proxy variable for the pressure of demand in the economy in general and in the labour market in particular: the unemployment rate, U. Although X L is an unobservable   magnitude, it is reasonable to suppose that it varies inversely with the unemployment rate.
In other words we should expect there to be a one to one inverse relationship, probably non-linear, of the form  where  and, probably,.
Moreover, since .
From the restrictions placed on  and  was to emerge the familiar Phillips curve:.
Figure 6.3 Dynamic adjustment of the micro labour market
The transition from a theory of money wage determination to a theory of price inflation is quite straightforward.
If we follow standard practice in assuming that prices are fixed as a mark up over variable costs and that the rate of productivity growth is exogenous, a modified Phillips curve of the form  emerges.
The choice of whether to use the money wage version,, or the price version , of the Phillips curve depends upon the nature of the problem being examined.
Lipsey appeared to have provided a theory of the determinants of money wage changes and, by integration, of the time path for the money wage rate which the economic profession found so convincing that it went virtually unchallenged for several years.
True, a minority of Keynesian economists in Britain continued to doubt the empirical validity of the Phillips curve, placing greater emphasis on cost-push forces which worked independently of the level of demand.
For them the Phillips curve was a statistical mirage, a trompe l'oeil.
But for other Keynesians, particularly in the United States, the Phillips curve furnished the last equation of the Keynesian model, supplanting once and for all that  notorious intruder, the condition .
Its arrival, long overdue, was greeted with great enthusiasm in these circles.
Indeed, the Phillips curve did seem to conform with much of what Keynes had written on inflation in the years after the General Theory, the most illuminating example of which is the pamphlet How to Pay for the War (1940).
In this pamphlet and elsewhere, Keynes proposed the inflationary gap theory of inflation: upward pressure on money wages and prices would be felt with increasing severity as the pressure of demand approached and eventually exceeded full employment output, Y *;.
Excess demand in the labour market, measured by Lipsey's X L index, will generally be matched by excess demand in the goods market, X G , defined as the ratio , where Y e is the equilibrium level of income.
Both X L and X G will vary in tandem with each other.
Thus Lipsey's postulated relationship between the rate of change of money wages and excess demand in the labour market not only possessed appealing microeconomic credentials, it also seemed to accord with much of what Keynes had written on the subject of inflation.
We have already noted Keynes's anxiety over his system being ‘one equation short’ in the sense that there was nothing to anchor the level of money wages and the absolute price level.
The relation , the theoretical basis of the Phillips curve, was interpreted as this ‘missing equation’ which finally closed the Keynesian model.
Since a knowledge of  could be used to trace the time path of money wages,, and since the magnitudes of X L and its twin X G could be explained by reference to the income-expenditure model, the Keynesian system was no longer underdetermined: the number of variables equalled the number of independent equations.
The relationship between aggregate demand and money wages was therefore two-way: the level of money wages influenced aggregate demand through a combination of the Keynes effect and the real-balance effect; and aggregate demand influenced the time path of money wages through the relation .
Keynesian economics no longer had to resort to the deus ex machina of postulating a ‘sociologically determined’ level of money wages.
An audible sigh of relief rose from the ranks of mainstream macroeconomists.
The Phillips curve and economic policy
It was not long after the unearthing of the Phillips curve that economists and, later, policy makers came to grasp the full force of what they thought to be its implications for the conduct of demand management by the monetary and fiscal authorities.
Following the pioneering work of Samuelson and Solow (1960), the Phillips curve came to be regarded as a trade off relation in that it clearly demonstrated the inflationary consequences of pursuing particular demand management strategies.
Expansionary monetary and fiscal policies could only be bought at the expense of higher inflation rates.
By contrast, contractionary policies would reap the benefits of lower inflation, but at the cost of higher unemployment.
Policy makers were faced with a dilemma: they had to trade off a ‘good’(high employment) against a ‘bad’(inflation).
The Phillips curve was regarded as an inescapable constraint on policy action which the authorities could only ignore at their peril.
The decision problem which confronted policy makers was given formal expression by Lipsey (1962).
When Samuelson and Solow wrote of trading off inflation against unemployment, what they were implicitly postulating was a policy makers' social welfare function,, from which could be derived social indifference curves.
These curves were concave to the origin: the nearer the curve was to the origin the higher the level of social welfare.
Three examples of such indifference curves are illustrated by  and  in Figure 6.4.
In this simple model the Phillips curve assumes a role analogous to that of the budget constraint in traditional price theory: it is the ineluctable constraint which must be incorporated into the maximization procedure.
The problem to be solved is thus:
The outcome of this thoroughly conventional static optimization procedure is, of course, a tangency solution at point T which yields a socially optimal pair .
In this way the Phillips curve came to be regarded as a ‘menu for policy choice’.
It was a list of options from which policy makers were compelled to make a decision.
Moreover, once the choice had been made, the preferred combination of inflation and unemployment was not only feasible now but was sustainable into the indefinite future.
In effect  became the target unemployment rate while , was the unpleasant, but inevitable, concomitant of this target rate.
This conclusion was the fons et origo of the barrage of criticism which was to be heaped on the notion of a stable trade off relation in the wake of Milton Friedman's   
Figure 6.4 Trading off inflation against unemployment
Presidential Address to the American Economic Association in 1967 (see below).
Full employment and the target unemployment rate
At first blush the analysis outlined above possesses considerable intuitive appeal, but the further one delves into the arguments that lie at its core, the more profoundly disturbing are its conclusions.
Although it was never stated so baldly, one implication of the Samuelson-Solow and Lipsey approach is that, since  is the target rate of unemployment, it is, in essence, the full employment rate of unemployment: it is that unemployment rate which the authorities regard as attainable, sustainable and, taking the good with the bad, ‘correct’.
But the analytical ramifications of this model are wide ranging and, in many respects, alarming.
The target unemployment rate, is the outcome of a set of normative political preferences which is expressed with rather spurious precision in the social welfare function .
But suppose there is change of government and that the newly elected political party puts greater store by the containment of inflationary pressure, being prepared by implication to tolerate a higher unemployment rate than the previous government.
In effect the form of the social welfare function will alter with the change of government and, in terms of Figure 6.4, a new tangency solution at, say, will become relevant.
What was formerly the target unemployment rate has been abandoned in favour of a new, higher rate.
It follows that  is not an objective number generated by considerations of overall balance in the labour market: its value turns critically on the political preferences of governments which are supposed to be in a position to define for themselves what unemployment rate will correspond to full employment and to be capable of action to achieve their newly defined objective.
Naturally, neoclassical economists will stand aghast at what they regard as an unwarranted political intrusion into the realm of positive economics.
They will not be alone.
Keynesians-at least that branch of the family which continues to read the General Theory — will also be profoundly disturbed that the concept of full employment has become the object of unwelcome normative inroads.
One has only to reflect on the enumeration of the varied properties of a state of full employment in the General Theory to realize that something is seriously wrong.
One of the few areas of common ground which both Keynes and Friedman occupy centres on the definition of a state of overall full employment: full employment prevails when the aggregate supply of labour, L s , equals the aggregate demand for labour, L d , at a unique, market clearing real wage rate, w *;.
It is that single level of employment where the marginal physical product of labour is brought into equality with the marginal disutility of employment at one and only one real wage rate: the marginal physical product of labour = w *; = the marginal disutility of employment.
Any unemployment which remains once this state of overall labour market balance has been achieved is frictional and structural in origin and is, by definition, invariant with respect to the level of aggregate demand.
From the point of view of demand management, therefore, frictional and structural unemployment is an irreducible minimum unemployment rate.
Governments should not be deluded into thinking that they can arrogate to themselves powers that they do not and cannot possess.
The Phillips curve: trade off or disequilibrium adjustment mechanism?
We have just dealt at some length with the interpretation of the Phillips curve as a trade off, as a ‘menu for policy choice’.
But how consistent is  this view of the Phillips curve with Lipsey's previous theoretical underpinning of the relation which we outlined earlier in this chapter?
How does Lipsey (1962) square with Lipsey (1960)?
Consider the original money wage version of the Phillips curve depicted in Figure 6.5.
According to Lipsey, money wages rise at a rate in excess of the rate of growth of productivity (q) when there is an excess demand for labour  which, in turn, implies that the unemployment rate is below .
But rising money wages serve to reduce the discrepancy between L d and L s (see Figure 6.2), with the result that unemployment rises.
The process of money-wage inflation reduces by successive degrees the magnitude of X L until it eventually vanishes.
The relation  is therefore a mechanism which illustrates how the labour market responds out of equilibrium.
It shows how money wage adjustments lead to a convergence on a unique, stable unemployment rate, U, which corresponds to a condition of zero excess demand in the labour market.
In other words  is simply a disequilibrium adjustment mechanism.
The arrows along the  function in Figure 6.5 indicate the direction in which wage inflation and unemployment move, for arbitrarily given initial values for  and , towards their centre of gravity, the pair .
If this interpretation of the  function is correct, that is, if  is in reality a disequilibrium adjustment mechanism, then it cannot be treated at one and the same time as a trade off relation.
Policy makers are not in a position to choose points along  since wage inflation and unemployment are always on the move towards q and  respectively.
What the ‘Phillips curve as adjustment mechanism’ approach suggests is that there   are competitive forces at work serving to eliminate initial excess demand, positive or negative, in the labour market.
Wage inflation may well be the consequence of excess demand in the labour market, but it is also the means by which excess demand is eventually squeezed out of the system.
Moreover the approach should work in reverse: if the initial state is one of excess supply in the labour market , money wage adjustments should nudge the economy back to a position of overall full employment at U.
The reaction function g(U) then merely becomes a formalization of what Pigou and other classical writers had been saying all along, namely, that downward revisions of the money wage rate would eradicate the phenomenon of general unemployment.
Readers will not need to be reminded of Keynes's objections to that theory of labour market adjustment!
Figure 6.5 Money wage version of the Phillips curve
Reaction: the expectations-augmented Phillips curve
If ever there was an ideal candidate for econometric testing, it was the Phillips curve.
Phillips's original exercise had many features which were attractive to applied econometricians: the initial empirical work had been rather haphazard, leaving many important hypotheses untested; the estimation techniques were simple; it was a reduced form equation, a collapsed version of a larger structural model, leading to the possibility of biases; in addition to the omission of many potentially significant explanatory variables, much refinement needed to be performed on the time series data.
In brief, it was a fertile testing ground for those wishing to demonstrate prowess in their mastery of econometric technique.
But, overshadowing all purely technical considerations, the Phillips curve had one attraction which made it even more irresistible: its subject matter was ‘important’.
Not only did it furnish the missing equation of the Keynesian system, it had also assumed a role of paramount significance in the formulation of macroeconomic policy.
Governments had to be persuaded that they were in a position to run their eyes down a list of options so as to gauge the inflationary consequences of a particular package of demand management policies.
Economists were being involved in the process of economic decision making in a manner which had been unknown previously, and most of them found this admission to the counsels of the influential and powerful to be very congenial.
The 1960s were the years of jaunty self-confidence among economists, and the reasons for this were not difficult to fathom.
Keynes had isolated the factors determining the levels of output and employment and had pointed to policies which could be implemented to achieve a state of full employment.
Others, most notably James Meade, had taken the all important step of opening up the Keynesian model so as to take account  of and explain international trade and capital flows.
Then the neoclassical synthesis had restored the price mechanism to its position of prominence in matters touching on the allocation and (perhaps) the distribution of resources.
Since monetary and fiscal policies had been assigned the role of guaranteeing the maintenance of full employment, the traditional neoclassical preoccupation with efficiency in the face of scarcity could come back into its own.
And, to add the final touch, Phillips's insight had filled the only remaining gap by proposing, albeit in skeletal form, an empirical model of inflation which was to be theoretically fleshed out by Lipsey.
Milton Friedman's widely reported remark that ‘We are all Keynesians now’ was an exaggeration, even for the time, but it did convey the Zeitgeist of the 1960s.
The mood of self-assured hubris among economists of this period was shaken to its very foundations in the later years of the 1960s.
Nemesis came in the form of a blistering rebuttal of policy activism in Milton Freidman's Presidential Address to the American Economic Association (see Freidman, 1968).
If Phillips's paper had been the landmark of empirical research in macroeconomics in the post-war period, Friedman's paper, published ten years later, enjoyed a similar status in the theory of macroeconomic policy.
The main thrust of Friedman's paper was to displace what he regarded as an ill-informed and misguided optimism among post-war Keynesians concerning the ability of governments to intervene in the economy to achieve particular policy objectives.
He singled out for special criticism two specific objectives which had figured so prominently in the application of Keynesian ideas:(a) the notion that the proper focus of attention for monetary policy was the attainment of targets for the rate of interest as opposed to targets for the supply of money;(b) that demand management policies could be adjusted in such a way as to achieve a target combination of inflation and unemployment which was sustainable indefinitely.
We have already examined Friedman's criticisms of proposition (a) in Chapter 3.
We shall now concentrate our attention on his criticism of proposition (b), the hypothesis that there exists a stable trade off relation between inflation and unemployment.
For Friedman, models which portrayed policy makers as having the power to choose from among differing combinations of inflation and unemployment were fantastic and potentially tragic exercises in self-delusion.
Such room for manoeuvre as existed in choosing between these two evils was only present in the very short run.
In the longer run a policy choice which involved positive inflation would lead to an acceleration in  the rate of inflation.
There only existed a trade off between the unemployment rate and the rate of increase in the rate of inflation.
We shall refer to this as the ‘accelerationist’ hypothesis.
Friedman's argument was very simple and held considerable intuitive appeal.
Take the case of a hypothetical economy which had had no experience of inflation in its recent history so that the rate of inflation which was expected to take place over the foreseeable future was zero.
In symbols,, where  is the expected rate of inflation.
According to the price inflation version of the Phillips curve, we must of necessity infer that the economy had been operating at a level of demand which was consistent with an unemployment rate U *; in Figure 6.6.
At point A, and : the unemployment rate is at its natural value, U *;, and the actual and the expected rates of inflation are equal to each other, both taking the value zero in our example.
Let us now suppose that our government falls under the influence of economists who advise it to treat  as a trade off relation in the manner outlined above.
Suppose that the government, guided by these false prophets, decides that it is prepared to trade off a positive rate of inflation for a lower unemployment rate.
It uses the monetary and fiscal instruments at its disposal to expand the economy with the aim of reducing the employment rate to, say,.
In other words it chooses to move up the Phillips curve from point A to a point such as point B which corresponds to its new perception of the ‘optimal’ unemployment inflation pair .
In its initial stages, this shift of policy priorities will appear to be vindicated by events: unemployment will be lower and inflation higher   than before.
But Friedman argued that matters do not rest there.
Far from it, for the precondition which enabled the authorities to move the economy from point A to point B will begin to break down: the expected rate of inflation will not remain at zero.
The experience of a positive rate of inflation will lead agents (workers, employers, borrowers, lenders, etc.) to abandon their former belief that prices would remain stable: agents will adjust their behaviour to these changed circumstances.
To take one example, how will workers respond to the realization that the rate of inflation is not zero, as they had expected it to be, but is in fact positive?
Previously their real and money wages had grown at a rate q, the rate of productivity growth.
Unless they adjust their money wage claims so as to protect its real value from erosion through price increases their real wages will no longer grow in line with the growth in productivity as before.
Workers therefore have an incentive to revise their expectation of inflation upwards and to lodge claims for money wage increases which fully reflect the extent of this revision.
Figure 6.6 A shift in policy priorities: lower unemployment bought at cost of higher inflation
Friedman then proposed two hypotheses, one general and the other specific, governing agents' behaviour in inflationary circumstances.
The general proposition was that inflationary expectations would be revised upwards when the actual, realized rate of inflation exceeded the expected rate of inflation.
The specific proposition was derived from the general and was put forward more tentatively: the rate at which the expected rate of inflation was revised upwards would be determined by the magnitude of the discrepancy between the actual and expected rates of inflation.
In symbols, rises when  — the general hypothesis and  — the specific hypothesis.
When expectations are revised in accordance with the specific hypothesis, behaviour is said to be adaptive.
The parameter  measures the speed with which expectations adapt to past errors in predicting the rate of inflation.
The adaptive expectations hypothesis had come to earlier prominence in Philip Cagan's (1956) path breaking study of the monetary dynamics of the European hyperinflations which followed the Great War.
Friedman applied it to the altogether more modest inflationary experience of the late 1960s.
Nevertheless we are still left with the nagging question: under what circumstances will the actual rate of inflation exceed the expected rate of inflation?
Inspection of Figure 6.6 provides an instant pointer to the answer: when policy makers attempt to hold the unemployment rate at a level below its natural rate, U *;.
In effect the Phillips curve depicted in Figure 6.6 is but one out of an infinite set of short-run Phillips curves, each  curve corresponding to a different expected rate of inflation.
Two short-run trade off relations, one corresponding to an expected rate of inflation  and the other to a higher expected rate of inflation , are illustrated in Figure 6.7.
The relation which Friedman proposed has entered the literature with the rather cumbersome title ‘the expectations-augmented Phillips curve’.
It postulates that the actual rate of inflation which prevails at any moment in time may be decomposed into two constituent parts:(a) an expectational component, measured by the variable ,(b) an excess demand component, measured, as in the Phillips-Lipsey model, by the magnitude of f(U).
The natural unemployment rate is that unique rate, U *;, at which the excess demand component, f(U), is exactly zero.
Moreover, once the precise mathematical form of f(U) has been unearthed by econometric testing, it is simplicity itself to arrive at an estimate of U *;— one has merely to evaluate the root of .
Obviously positive inflation may remain a feature of this hypothetical economy even if it is operating at the natural unemployment rate (i.e.  owing to the persistence of inflationary expectations.
In this case the economy will be in an inflationary equilibrium.
Any rate of inflation, positive, zero or negative, is compatible with U *; since the only necessary condition for an inflationary equilibrium is that inflationary expectations be fully realized, i.e. that .
The implicit assumption of the naive Phillips curve was that the expected rate of inflation was zero.
Phillips's omission of a price expectations term from his original study may have been warranted in practice owing to the low rates of inflation which were experienced from the Great War onwards; but when it comes to analyzing inflationary processes in general it is invalid.
The expected rate of inflation is not only an essential determinant of the actual rate of inflation, it is also endogenous to the system, being itself the outcome of past errors in predicting the rate of inflation.
Another way of approaching the accelerationist hypothesis is to rearrange slightly the equation for the expectations-augmented Phillips curve.
Let  denote the unanticipated rate of inflation, that is, that part of the rate of inflation which agents have failed to anticipate fully.
On rearrangement this yields 
Bearing in mind the adaptive expectations hypothesis, it follows that    
Figure 6.7 Short-run trade off relations
In other words, a trade off of sorts does exist after all: it is a trade off between the unemployment rate and the rate of change of the actual and expected rates of inflation.
Friedman (1968) concludes:
[T]here is always a temporary trade-off between inflation and unemployment; there is no permanent trade-off.
The temporary trade-off comes not from inflation per se, but from unanticipated inflation, which generally means, from a rising rate of inflation…
A rising rate of inflation may reduce unemployment, a high one will not.
There would thus appear to be some scope for policy activism, but, on further inspection, it turns out to be very limited indeed.
Unlike the original ‘menu for policy choice’ between inflation and unemployment, this is a trade off which no government worth its salt would dream of exploiting in all but the very short run.
For as long as the marginal disutility of inflation remains positive, there will eventually come a point at which the government will be compelled to pursue policies which will push the unemployment rate back towards its natural value.
Indeed, to the extent that inflationary expectations have built up a momentum of their own that it regards as excessive, the government may be forced to adopt demand management policies which aim to raise the unemployment rate above the natural rate so as to throw the process outlined above into reverse gear.
In order to erode inflationary expectations, deflationary policies may be called for which temporarily raise the unemployment  rate above U *;, thereby leading by degrees to downward revisions of the expected, and hence the actual, rate of inflation.
The non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment
Many economists would subscribe to much of the above analysis.
At the same time they would also wish to distance themselves from the connotations of full employment with which Friedman was to invest to the concept of the natural unemployment rate (see next section).
This more eclectic group of economists accept that there probably does exist at any particular moment in time a single unemployment rate at which inflation neither accelerates nor decelerates: they describe this by the acronym NAIRU, the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment.
Although they accept most of the reasoning behind the accelerationist hypothesis, these writers do not follow Friedman in identifying NAIRU with a condition of overall balance in the labour market.
The fact that the economy is at NAIRU does not imply the absence of involuntary unemployment.
To illustrate this point let us postulate a hypothetical, though possibly unattainable, unemployment rate U F which is the true full-employment unemployment rate: U F is that unemployment rate where  at w *;.
It is the rate of frictional and structural unemployment.
In Figure 6.8, the discrepancy between NAIRU and U F measures the extent to which exogenous cost-push factors influence an inflationary process at levels of activity which are well below what may be reasonably considered to   correspond to full employment.
The magnitude  may be taken as a measure of the inflationary bias which is imparted to the system by non-competitive forces, the most obvious of these forces being the influence of trades unions in the wage bargaining process.
Figure 6.8 Inflation and NAIRU
An application of the concept of NAIRU to British circumstances is contained in Richard Layard's (1986) book How to Beat Unemployment.
The theory that lies at the core of Layard's analysis is the ‘real wage resistance’ hypothesis: workers have a target real wage which they strive to achieve and defend through the wage bargaining process.
The target real wage rate is not a specific number but will depend upon the unemployment rate: the higher the unemployment rate, the less ambitious are union negotiators and the more prepared are they to settle for a lower real wage.
The inverse relation between the target real wage and the unemployment rate is illustrated by the curve TRW in Figure 6.9.
But there is, of course, another side to the wage bargaining coin.
There will exist a real wage rate (Layard calls this the ‘feasible real wage rate’) which employers are prepared to grant to workers.
The feasible real wage will be determined by, for example, unit labour costs and the mark up over unit labour costs.
It may alter as a result of a variety of extraneous factors, in particular supply-side shocks, but Layard assumes that it is invariant with respect to the unemployment rate.
The feasible real wage may thus be represented by the horizontal line FRW in Figure 6.9.
The unemployment rate at which the TRW curve intersect., with the FRW line defines NAIRU: it is the unique unemployment rate at which the real wage demands of workers can be reconciled with the real wage which employers are prepared to concede.
If the pressure of demand were such   that the unemployment rate was , the gap between TRW and FRW would provoke inflationary wage demands which would, if granted, push up prices.
Price inflation would feed into inflationary expectations, as in the Friedman version of the accelerationist hypothesis, resulting in even higher money wage demands in the next round of bargaining.
In this way the process of accelerating inflation gathers momentum.
It can only be halted by cutting back on demand, thereby raising the unemployment rate to NAIRU.
Figure 6.9 The determination of NAIRU
Nevertheless, despite certain superficial similarities, the models proposed by Friedman and Layard contain numerous points of difference, the most important being that, for Layard, NAIRU is not determined by the operation of competitive forces in the labour market.
The TRW curve cannot be derived mathematically from the L s curve which has formed the basis of our analysis of both the classical and Keynesian models of the labour market.
It is a relative — at several removes — of the  function mentioned briefly in Chapter 5.
The real wage rate w which reconciles the target real wage with the feasible real wage at NAIRU should not be taken as a measure of Keynes's ‘marginal disutility of employment’.
The target real wage rate is something altogether (dare one say it?)‘sociologically’ determined.
This gives rise to the conventional neoclassical objection to all models of this sort, namely, that the concept of a target real wage rate is ad hoc, arbitrary and not grounded in the rational calculus of profit and utility maximization which should be the starting-point of all economic enquiry at both the micro and the macro levels.
That the concept of a target real wage rate can be accounted for in terms of the behaviour of rational, maximizing agents is amply demonstrated in the works of Layard, of Carlin and Soskice (1990) and of the works of the new Keynesian school (see Chapter 8).
It is early days yet, but, in my view, these models may form a more useful basis for analyzing actual inflationary processes in particular economies than the ‘purer’ neo-Walarasian models favoured by modern monetarists.
Money illusion and the natural unemployment rate hypothesis mark II
When we examined Friedman's demolition of the idea of a stable trade off between inflation and unemployment, we noted how there remained some scope for policy activism.
Admittedly we also noted how hollow this observation rang in view of the fact that expansionary policies would entail accelerating inflation.
If taken to extremes, such policies carried within them the potential to precipitate a catastrophic decline into  hyperinflation.
Nevertheless, setting these consequences to one side for the moment, Friedman's analysis did appear to countenance the possibility of pursuing expansionary, neutral or contractionary demand management policies.
Monetary and fiscal policies could be combined in such a way as to achieve and maintain unemployment rates which differed from the natural rate.
But surely the proposition that the unemployment rate could be held below its natural value for fairly long periods of time runs counter to the neoclassical model of labour market behaviour?
How could a discrepancy between the actual and the natural unemployment rates be made to persist simply as a result of the actions of the monetary and fiscal authorities?
Was Friedman being unfaithful to the neoclassical Weltanschauung of which he was such a tireless defender?
Some saw the irrational spectre of money illusion lurking menacingly in the wings.
In my view there was indeed an inconsistency here, though it was an inconsistency which Friedman only recognized implicitly when he started putting forward an alternative model, radically different from his accelerationist hypothesis, which denied any direct role for aggregate demand in influencing the level of employment.
It will be recalled that, in the expectations-augmented Phillips curve, Friedman had assigned to aggregate demand a prominent, independent and direct role, summarized in the magnitude of f(U), in determining the actual rate of inflation.
In later versions of the natural rate hypothesis, Friedman was tacitly to abandon this view altogether.
Aggregate demand shocks (alterations in the stance of monetary and fiscal policies were increasingly referred to as ‘shocks’) only affected real variables such as output and employment to the extent that they produced a state of confusion in the minds of agents regarding the behaviour of relative prices.
The short-run inability to unscramble market signals was presumed to be the particular affliction of suppliers, i.e. the suppliers of commodities and the suppliers of factor services.
One way to appreciate the extent of Friedman's shift of position is to examine Figure 6.10.
This diagram is, of course, the old and familiar friend which we first encountered in Chapter 2 when discussing Pigou's theory of employment.
However it does have a rather novel twist: the actual and expected real wage rates, w and w e respectively, are measured along the vertical axis.
Suppose there is an increase in the money supply, M s , or, in an economy already experiencing positive inflation, an increase in the rate of monetary expansion,.
Prices and money wages will rise.
(So firm is the grip held by the revived quantity theory of money nowadays that few of the monetarists or new classical macroeconomists who followed in Friedman's footsteps bothered to elucidate the mechanism by which changes in M s (or in ) affect W and P. They just do.)
If money is neutral, money wages and prices should rise in proportion to the rise in the quantity of money and the levels of output and employment should remain unchanged in Y *; and L *; respectively.
Abstracting from inevitable stochastic disturbances, the neutrality of money requires that output and employment should never deviate from their full employment values.
But many monetarist writers recognized that deviations from Y *; and L *; do in fact occur over and above those attributable to white noise disturbances.
How do they account for this apparent non-neutrality of money?
Friedman's answer was disarmingly simple:
Suppose something, say a monetary expansion, starts nominal aggregate demand growing, which in turn produces a rise in prices and wages of, say, 2 per cent per year.
Workers will initially interpret this as a rise in their real wage because they still anticipate constant prices — and so will be willing to offer more labour (move up their supply curve), i.e. employment grows and unemployment falls.
Employers may have the same anticipations as workers about the general price level, but they are more directly concerned about the price of the products they are producing and are far better informed about that.
They will initially interpret a rise in the demand for and price of their product as a rise in its relative price and as implying a fall in the real wage rate they must pay measured in terms of their product.
They will therefore be willing to hire more labour (move down their demand curve).
(Friedman, 1975, pp.
20–1)
In terms of Figure 6.10, workers would like to move up their labour supply function to a position such as point B since they mistakenly think that the real wage rate has risen to, say,.
Employers, by contrast, mistakenly thinking that real wages have fallen to, say,, attempt to move down their labour demand function to a position such as point C. Assuming that actual trading in the labour market is determined on the short side, the level of employment rises to .
Employers and workers make mistakes in unscrambling what is happening to real wages, but it is essential that these mistakes be made in opposite directions.
By proposing this ingenious but patently artificial contrivance, Friedman was able to account for the non-neutrality of money in the short run.
Obviously once market signals are correctly decoded by agents, output and employment revert to their natural values and money is once again neutral.
Finally there is a fundamental characteristic of Friedman's mark II version of the natural rate hypothesis which, in the light of Chapter 5, arouses considerable alarm among Keynesians.
Figure 6.10 depicts a theory of labour market adjustment which is, to all intents and purposes, indistinguishable from that of A. C. Pigou and his classical contemporaries.
Keynes's refutation of this theory as a description of labour   market behaviour in a money using economy, and this formulation of a theory of labour market adjustment which was more appropriate to such an economy, have been glossed over by Friedman and his followers as if they were nothing more than minor, rather idiosyncratic footnotes in the history of economic ideas.
Figure 6.10 Friedman's account of disequilibrium in the labour market
At the risk of repetition, it is important to be quite clear why Keynes would have found Figure 6.10, and the disequilibrium dynamics which are grafted on to it, so profoundly erroneous.
In a money using economy, workers and employers are powerless to influence the real wage rate directly.
The only variable that they can revise directly in either an upward and a downward direction is the money wage rate, but revisions of the money wage rate will have no direct effect on the real wage rate owing to the sympathetic variations in the general level of prices that they would provoke.
Hence, no matter how competitive labour and commodity markets are (Keynes assumed perfect competition in the former and allowed for a high degree of competition in the latter), imbalances between the supply of and demand for labour would not be rectified through spontaneous variations in the real wage rate.
In the case of general unemployment where  the required fall in the real wage rate — the reader will recall that Keynes accepted the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour — would not be forthcoming even if perfect competition were the rule in all markets.
The reduction in the real wage rate which was a necessary concomitant of a rise in unemployment could only come about through an expansion of aggregate demand.
Now Keynes may well have been wrong in his critique of classical labour market analysis.
It is conceivable, as Friedman implicitly appears to suggest, that Pigou had been right all along.
If this is the case, however, several questions need to be answered in respect of classical theory before we can accept Pigou's rehabilitation as complete and can consign Keynes's theory of labour market adjustment to an unlamented oblivion: was classical theory guilty of confusing the workings of a money using economy with those of barter.
Was it muddled over the association between money wage changes and real wage changes?
If so, was the muddle caused by a fallacy of composition, illegitimately assuming that what held true in the small continued to hold true in the large?
Did classical theory surreptitiously admit the quantity theory of money — a theory which only holds good at full employment — through the back door in order to fix the price level independently of the level of money wages?
These are questions which were first posed over fifty years ago, but they have obviously made little lasting impact on a literature where the expenditure flows depicted in elaborations of the  model have been the principal focus of attention.
The neglect of these important questions to which Keynes attempted to provide answers could, to some extent, account for the recent disenchantment with the Keynesian approach to macroeconomic theory and for the parallel reaction in the form of the rise of new classical macroeconomics.
Involuntary unemployment and the new classical macroeconomics
The Pigou-Friedman view that competitive market economies tend to gravitate towards a state of overall full employment is now such a firmly entrenched proposition in macroeconomics that it has almost gained the status of an axiom.
Few adherents to the new classical macroeconomics trouble even to question it, let alone provide an analytical basis to justify it.
Textbooks on macroeconomics are written in which the assumption of full employment is taken as the starting-point.
‘Markets clear’ is the rallying cry of the new classical macroeconomics.
Problems which had preoccupied macroeconomists (Friedman included) for decades are ruled out of court by assumption.
The quintessence of this approach can be found in Lucas (1978):
Involuntary unemployment is not a fact or a phenomenon which it is the task of theorists to explain.
It is, on the contrary, a theoretical construct which Keynes introduced in the hope that it would be helpful in discovering a correct explanation for a genuine phenomenon: large-scale fluctuations in measured, total unemployment.
Is it the task of modern theoretical economics to ‘explain' the theoretical constructs of our predecessors?
This is a sweeping statement which makes little obvious sense on first reading, so let us dissect it more carefully.
The first sentence admits that involuntary unemployment may be a ‘fact or phenomenon’, that is, that it may exist; but that its possible existence does not require explanation from economic theorists.
The second sentence is perfectly unexceptionable apart from the fact that it appears to be in flat contradiction of the first: involuntary unemployment is a ‘theoretical construct’— surely theoretical constructs fall within the purview of economic theory!— which was developed to explain the very real and painful phenomenon of large-scale unemployment.
Sound stuff.
Unfortunately the third sentence sends us reeling back to square one in terms of methodological confusion: we are now told that just because Keynes had tried to provide a theoretical underpinning for the concept of involuntary unemployment does not, ipso facto, oblige subsequent theorists to ‘'explain’ the theoretical constructs of our predecessors'.
If the ‘theorist’ to whom Lucas was referring had, as his main area of interest, say, the axiomatic basis of social choice theory, his point would be well taken.
To corral pure theorists specializing into other fields of economics into the enclosure of  macroeconomic theory simply on the grounds that Keynes had been there before would be perverse in the extreme.
But when the ‘theorist’ in question is none other than Lucas himself, and when his views are being aired in an article called ‘Unemployment policy’, the befuddled reader is entitled to suspect that the confusion is not entirely one sided.
Reading Lucas's article from this side of the Atlantic at a time when unemployment in Britain seems about to hit a post-war high, one is tempted to conclude that there may, after all, be a grain of truth in the mischievous quip attributed to Oscar Wilde: Britain and America are united by a common culture but separated by a common language.
Conclusion
Friedman was almost single handedly responsible for the emergence of the intellectual chasm between Keynesians and monetarists which grew increasing wide in the 1960s and 1970s.
He had, of course, his followers, but they tended very much to follow in their master's footsteps.
Friedman's Presidential Address to the American Economic Association, and the articles which followed it, radically changed the agenda for macroeconomic research.
Friedman had breathed new life into the Pigovian theory of labour market adjustment which, until the late 1960s, most economists had regarded as defunct and thoroughly discredited.
This, coupled with the rise of a narrower version of monetarism, was to clear the ground for a far more extreme school of macroeconomics which would make adherents to old style monetarism look like liberal wimps.
The new classical macroeconomists are committed believers in the power of market forces, being fired with an almost evangelistic enthusiasm.
They sweep aside the qualifications and reservations which monetarists of the old school would occasionally express.
In the new classical theory, Friedman's conviction that money is neutral in the medium term is held to apply to the short run also.
Rational agents are not repeatedly and systematically duped by the actions of the monetary authorities.
They learn from past experience how to read the actions of the monetary authorities and, as a result, nullify even the short-run scope for non-neutrality that Friedman had earlier been prepared to countenance.
Apart from stochastic blips, markets always clear.
And this observation carries over into the theory of employment: the labour market also clears, and any unemployment which remains is entirely the result of voluntary decisions by workers to withdraw from the labour market while still being officially classified as unemployed.
We shall see in the next chapter how the combination of the new classical macroeconomics with the rational expectations hypothesis gave rise to the superneutrality of money: anticipated changes in the money supply have no effect whatsoever on the levels of output and employment.
7
Rational expectations and the new classical macroeconomics
Background
The arrival on the scene of the rational expectations hypothesis sent shock waves throughout the whole of macroeconomics.
To those of a committed neoclassical persuasion it appeared to be a godsend.
Monetarists had previously maintained that money was neutral only in the medium and long run, implying that there was some scope, albeit limited, for policy activism in the short run.
By contrast, the rational expectations hypothesis, when applied to the theory of inflation, appeared to indicate that money would be neutral in the short run also, thereby denying any role to policy activism.
This hypothesis is known under various names.
We shall use only two: the ‘invariance’ proposition and the ‘policy inefficacy’proposition.
The constricted room for manoeuvre that Friedman had been prepared to assign to monetary (but not fiscal) policy in affecting real variables was repudiated in the writings of the new classical school.
In many new classical models — most conspicuously those associated with Robert Lucas — unemployment was almost never allowed to deviate from its natural, full employment value.
Such fluctuations in the unemployment rate as were observed in practice came to be interpreted as fluctuations in the natural rate itself, not as deviations, temporary or otherwise, from the natural rate.
The rational expectations hypothesis, allied with the natural rate hypothesis had, so it was believed, driven the final nail into the coffin of policy activism and, by implication, of Keynesian macroeconomics.
The role of government in macroeconomic management had to be pruned to a bare minimum.
Monetary policy should steer a steady, clearly enunciated  and generally comprehensible course.
Targets for the rate of growth of the money supply should be announced and, once announced, should be strictly adhered to.
No tricks should be pulled in an attempt to achieve transitory, and ultimately worthless, short-term gains.
‘Monetary discipline’ and ‘public credibility’, key phrases in this approach, would ensure the most favourable backdrop for the private sector to get on with its proper business of creating and allocating wealth.
The provision of a placid monetary environment in which monetary policy was not itself a source of instability was the most that could be expected from the monetary authorities.
What is now known as the rational expectations revolution, in conscious contradistinction to the Keynesian revolution four decades earlier, came to dominate macroeconomics, particularly in the United States where disillusionment with Keynesian ideas was particularly strong.
Once the post-revolutionary fervour had simmered down and the revolutionaries had become convinced of their victory over Keynesianism, questions started to be asked as to why, from 1936 onwards, so many of their august mentors, some of whom had won Nobel Prizes, had subscribed to a point of view which had been shown to be so palpably erroneous.
It is hoped that this chapter will cast a little light on this question.
Needless to say the sense of elation with which the rational expectations hypothesis infected the new classical economists was not shared by Keynesians.
The widespread acceptance of the invariance proposition with which the rational expectations hypothesis was so closely associated was met with a variety of reactions: glacial disdain; head scratching incredulity; stony, deafening silence; deep shock.
The standing of Keynesianism seemed to ebb by visible degrees with the publication of each successive article which took as its starting-point the assumption of full employment.
If one were to count heads, particularly among younger economists, Keynesian ideas were being eclipsed at quite an astonishing speed.
The winter of Keynesian discontent probably occurred in the early 1980s, since when there have been signs of a marked rally.
The most widely held reason for the decline in Keynesianism was its supposed inability to explain the historically high rates of inflation which occurred in Europe and North America from the late 1960s onwards.
The Keynesian model, by which was usually meant the  model, is a fix-price theory which, by definition, is incapable of explaining why  variations in the absolute price level occur.
This accusation had been set temporarily to one side after the discovery of the Phillips curve and its subsequent absorption into income-expenditure models.
The missing equation had been found, the system had been closed and the Keynesian model at last formed a cohesive whole.
This cohesion came dramatically unstuck as a result of two developments, one theoretical and the other empirical.
On the theoretical front Milton Friedman and, independently, Edmund Phelps, had powerfully rejected the idea of a Phillips curve as a trade off relation.
If it was anything, the Phillips curve was a disequilibrium reaction mechanism, and even then it had been theoretically misspecified.
Phillips and Lipsey had measured the rate of change of money wages along the ordinate instead of the expected rate of change of real wages.
If one opts to play by neoclassical rules, as Lipsey in particular had, one should read the neoclassical rule book first.
At the time that Friedman was airing his dissatisfaction with the Phillips curve, the complex econometric models of inflation which its discovery had spawned were still predicting inflation reasonably well.
But this happy state of affairs did not last for very long.
After 1967, things started to go disturbingly awry on the empirical as well as on the theoretical front.
The rate of inflation had increased to alarming levels.
This, in itself, need not have posed much of a challenge to the conventional wisdom: if unemployment had been at unusually low levels at the time, the acceleration of inflation could have been explained in terms of the simple Phillips curve and contractionary demand management policies could have been implemented.
But this was not the case: unemployment was already higher than its average post-war value and was itself rising.
This pernicious combination of rising inflation and rising unemployment, usually referred to as ‘stagflation’, not only led economists to abandon the simple Phillips curve as a tool for modelling an inflationary process.
(Many Keynesians who had never accepted the Phillips curve regarded its ‘breakdown’ as the long overdue come uppance of an uninvited and unwelcome intruder.)
It also led to a fundamental questioning of the whole basis of the Keynesian model of which, since 1958, the Phillips curve had come to be regarded as an indispensable part.
By the early 1970s there was an almost tangible atmosphere of guilt by  association.
The fact that the Phillips curve had appeared on the scene over thirty years after the publication of the General Theory, and that, in the interim, Keynesianism had managed to flourish without it, made little impression on those critics who were determined to strike at Keynesianism with any weapon which was to hand.
The Phillips curve had been taken on board at the highwater mark of Keynesianism: by some mysterious logical twist its discredit was taken to imply that the ship itself would have to be scuttled.
So what is the rational expectations hypothesis and how does it interact with the new classical economics to produce the policy inefficacy proposition?
Does the claim that agents form their expectations rationally have any substantive bearing on the quite fundamental issues which divide Keynesians from new classicals?
Rational expectations and unanticipated inflation
In what follows the exposition will focus not upon the general nature of rational expectations equilibria, but on the relation between the criteria for rationality on the one hand and the debate on the unemployment-inflation trade off on the other, with the ultimate aim of arriving at the policy inefficacy proposition.
This is, after all, the most spectacular and controversial example of the radical implications of rational expectations in macroeconomics.
We have already seen how the endogeneity of inflationary expectations played a central role in Friedman's critique of the Phillips curve.
He claimed that, in a fully articulated theory of inflation, it was incorrect to assume that price expectations were static or, worse still, to ignore the role of price expectations altogether.
The expected rate of inflation,, is an endogenous variable, being determined in Friedman's model by past mistakes in predicting inflation.
If agents had underestimated the rate of inflation in one period, that is if , they will take steps to revise upwards their expectation of the rate of inflation in the next period, that is,.
The adaptive expectations mechanism was widely used as a formal representation of this process of expectations revision.
In the early 1970s considerable disquiet started to be expressed with the  implications for economic rationality of mechanical, error learning processes in general and with the adaptive expectations mechanism in particular.
It will be recalled from Chapter 6 that Friedman, while denying any lasting relationship between inflation and unemployment, nevertheless insisted that there did exist a relationship between unanticipated inflation and unemployment.
That is, where e t is a randomly distributed error term.
In other words, errors in predicting the rate of inflation were made up of two component parts: a random stochastic component which is, of its very nature, unpredictable; and a systematic component,, which is related to the level of aggregate demand as reflected in the unemployment rate.
The systematic component will persist for as long as the unemployment rate deviates from its natural value, U *;.
For example in Figure 7.1, the systematic component is zero at U *; but is positive at U l .
The prediction error attributable to the systematic component has a magnitude v t .
Moreover, for as long as authorities pursued a monetary policy which held the unemployment rate at U 1 , this prediction error will persist over time.
Thus  if the unemployment rate is held at U 1 for n periods.
Agents will be making persistent, systematic mistakes in predicting the rate of inflation.
They are always one step behind.
The first and most fundamental requirement of a rational expectations equilibrium is that expectational errors should be distributed around a mean value of zero.
In practice, of course, expectational errors are continually occurring: they are inherently unavoidable owing to the presence of the stochastic error term.
Agents will always be making mistakes, and some agents will be making larger mistakes than others, but the rational expectations hypothesis stipulates that these mistakes should, on average over time, cancel each other out.
In our inflation-unemployment example, this criterion of rationality requires that the mean value of v t — the difference between the actual and the expected rates of inflation — should equal zero.
That is 
Obviously the accelerationist hypothesis embodied in equation (7.1) violates this criterion.
The same mistake concerning the expected rate of inflation is made year in and year out.
The actual rate of inflation stays ahead of the expected rate by a constant margin which, for as long as the unemployment rate is held at U 1 , will never be closed.
For this reason the accelerationist hypothesis stands accused of being based on irrational behaviour, for rational agents should not make persistent mistakes.
We   referred above to the  term as the systematic component of an accelerationist inflationary process: from an educated prediction of the magnitude of  we should be able to make a reasonably good stab at inferring the value of .
But rationality requires that there should be no systematic element in the prediction error.
Figure 7.1 Inflation prediction error
Let us assume that agents have been flirting for a while with the use of the adaptive expectations mechanism but that, in the light of the persistent, systematic errors which this mechanism entails, they quickly abandon it.
Reliance on a predictive procedure which is linked mechanically to lagged values of the actual rate of inflation has been shown to be wholly inadequate.
How can agents improve their forecasts of inflation in an uncertain world?
It is at this point that the rational expectations model becomes more controversial.
It postulates that agents will have an incentive to seek out information on the underlying ‘correct’ model of the economy which, in combination with adaptive expectations, had accounted for the systematic errors of the past.
They will come to realize that the factor which had given rise to their positive, constant prediction errors under adaptive expectations was the excess demand component,.
In order to tighten up on their prediction of inflation, agents will take steps to predict  on the basis of information which was available at the end of period t -1.
In other words, they will form an estimate of the  term,.
The superscript ‘e’ denotes agents' subjective estimate of the  term in contrast to the objective conditional estimate of .
The subjective estimate could be based on pure hunch and guesswork at the end of period t -1, but in order to introduce a degree of empirical  testability into the model it is normally assumed that  is arrived at by some policy rule which includes on the right-hand side only those variables whose magnitudes are known at the end of the period t -1.
Since we have not, as yet, specified the instruments which will have to be used in achieving the target unemployment rate U 1 — should it be monetary or fiscal policy?
Should it be both?
If both, in what combination? etc. — we shall refer to a pseudo policy rule, of which the simplest example is, is the unemployment rate which is expected to prevail in period t, this expectation being formed at the end of period t -1 with the aid of a knowledge of .
What this pseudo policy rule amounts to is a presumption by agents that the demand management authorities consider an unemployment rate U, to be, in some sense, optimal and that they will adjust monetary and fiscal policies in such a way as to maintain this unemployment rate.
The authorities are thought of as having committed themselves to the maintenance of a particular unemployment rate irrespective of the inflationary consequences and of being prepared to carry over this policy at least into period t.
Of course, there is nothing to guarantee that the authorities will stick by the same decision rules: they could become so agitated by public concern over the build up of inflationary pressure that they could jettison their employment objective and opt for contractionary demand management policies.
Moreover, suspicion may grow in agents' minds during t -1 that the government may be on the verge of an about turn on employment policy.
Nevertheless, since only variables which are observable at the end of period t -1 are admissible into the policy rule, these gut feelings are not allowed to have any direct impact on how,, is arrived at, although they may have an indirect influence through some other measurable variable which is admissible into the policy rule.
Generally in rational expectations models in macroeconomics the policy rule generating the prediction for a variable comprises an equation whose determining variables typically comprise both lagged endogenous variables (e.g. values of  and lagged exogenous variables (e.g. ).
The common feature of these determining variables is that, being lagged, their values are known at the end of period t -1.
As might be expected, policy rules of quite formidable complexity have been  developed in the rational expectations literature, the best known of these being that proposed by Barro (1977) in which he attempts to model the process by which the growth in the money supply is determined and, on the basis of the prediction of what the money supply should have been given known values for its determining variables, to derive a time series for ‘anticipated’ changes in the money supply.
We shall see in what follows that the distinction between anticipated and unanticipated changes in policy instruments plays an essential role in the application of the rational expectations hypothesis to the study of macroeconomic phenomena.
Two additional criteria need to be satisfied before we can definitely conclude that expectations are being formed rationally.
Remaining with our inflation-unemployment example where , we need to impose an additional restriction on the behaviour of the prediction error.
Not only must the mean value of v t be zero, as required in equation (7.2), but the prediction error must also not be systematically correlated with lagged values of itself.
More formally this requires that restriction (7.3) be satisfied:
The covariance of v t with any lagged value of v t should be zero.
The reason for this once again centres on the role played by the information set available to agents at the end of period t -1, which we shall refer to by the symbol .
The information included in  can be exploited by agents to tighten up their subjective prediction for .
Suppose that v t is not serially uncorrelated, as restriction (7.3) requires, but that it bears the following, hitherto unsuspected relationship to :
Clearly once agents realize that v, exhibits this pattern of serial correlation, they can include the information contained in equation (7.4) to augment the information set , thereby eliminating any serial correlation which was previously present.
This is another example of a procedure which is characteristic of the rational expectations approach to the use of information: the elements of , must be exploited in such a way that no better predictor of  can be found without further, and by definition subsequent, enlargement of the information set.
Such information as is available at the end of t -1 is put to its best use.
This essential characteristic of a rational expectations equilibrium — the efficient use of the relevant available information — suggests another criterion for rationality: the method that agents employ to predict  should have a variance smaller than or equal to any other rival method of predicting .
We shall refer to this as the minimum variance  criterion.
Since the ‘correct’ model has the smallest variance of all, this criterion implies that agents employ a prediction method which is consistent with the model which ‘correctly’determines .
Rational expectations theorists had realized early on that requiring agents to be in possession of‘the correct model’ was straining the credibility of even the most sympathetic onlooker to breaking point.
Instead they took refuge in the weaker claim that agents, on average over time, behaved as if they possessed the correct underlying model for the purposes of prediction.
Agents may not know the correct model, but they behave as if they do.
In this case their prediction model mimics the behaviour of the correct model so closely that there is no incentive for them to seek out further information to refine their predictions.
(How agents perform this prodigious feat of mimicry without actually using some form of the correct model remains decidedly mysterious to this author.)
From the accelerationist hypothesis to the Lucas supply function
We have travelled a long way from the original accelerationist hypothesis as set out in Friedman's Presidential Address.
The aggregate demand component of an inflationary process,, no longer exerts an independent influence on the rate of inflation which is, in principle, separable from that of the expectations component,, as it had been in the Friedman (1968) version.
Expectations concerning the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies and their likely impact on the unemployment rate will enter into the rational formulation of inflationary expectations.
Moreover, the absorption of the rational expectations hypothesis into the new classical economics led to a further, altogether more radical claim: the monetary and fiscal authorities would succeed in depressing the unemployment rate below U *; only to the extent that they could inveigle agents into formulating erroneous expectations.
Thus the authorities' ability to raise the level of demand above Y *; is contingent on their success in deceiving the private sector into underanticipating inflation
This is not just a subtle shift of emphasis.
It is one thing to assert that a consequence of sustained expansion of demand will be a direct increase in the expected rate of inflation by a process which efficiently circumvents the gradual error learning mechanism posited by adaptive expectations: individuals will have an incentive to search for the origins of their expectational errors and take the steps appropriate to keeping them to an absolute, unavoidable minimum.
It is something altogether stronger to assert that the unemployment rate can only deviate from U *; as a result of  the monetary (and fiscal?) authorities catching the private sector unawares.
To take a specific example, the statement that a direct consequence of a publicly announced and widely believed monetary policy which aims at holding the unemployment rate at U 1 will be a higher expected rate of inflation does not imply the more extreme view that monetary policy can only reduce unemployment below U *; to the extent that the authorities increase the money supply at a rate in excess of what was generally anticipated.
The conflation of these two completely distinct hypotheses has merely served to muddy the waters still further in the already turbulent and confused debate between Keynesians and new classicals.
In order to understand how this conflation has arisen it is instructive to trace through the steps which need to be taken to derive the Lucas supply function from the accelerationist hypothesis, the basic element of which is equation (7.1) above.
This may also be written in the form  Since F () is monotonic, we may take the inverse of (7.5):
Now the Lucas supply function could be expressed in terms of equation (7.6).
However, the more usual way to represent it is not in terms of deviations of the actual unemployment rate from its natural rate but in terms of deviations of the logarithm of output, y, from its natural value, y *;.
One would normally expect there to exist an inverse relationship, derived, inter alia, from the short-run production function, between unemployment and the logarithm of output.
Let the relationship take the form:
It follows that 
In order to make the exposition more tractable let us assume that j () and  are linear so that, on rearrangement, an equation of the following general form is derived:
Since the error term, w t , is now a linear function of .
Equation (7.9) is one version of the Lucas supply function, but it is not its usual representation.
The term  normally appears on the right-hand side in place of.
In other words, the logarithm of the price level, p, appears on the right-hand side instead of the first derivative of its natural value.
Of course taking logarithms and dropping down one time derivative does little to alter the spirit of the analysis and does much to expose the intuition behind this very influential relation.
We shall therefore rewrite equation (7.9) in terms of the logarithm of the price level: where, once again,.
The Lucas supply function is the more radical successor to the accelerationist hypothesis advanced by Friedman.
It states that, apart from stochastic disturbances emanating from u,, deviations of output from its full employment, natural value can only be the result of errors in predicting the price level.
Hence a situation in which  is the outcome of a situation in which .
This prediction failure is, in turn, the result of a series of unanticipated actions by the monetary authorities, that is, unanticipated departures from the policy rule which had governed the conduct of monetary policy down to period .
Nevertheless, since a requirement of rationality is that the subjective expectation of the price level,, should equal the objective conditional mathematical expectation for , it follows that .
This is simply a more formal statement of the stipulation that, on average, expectations should be realized.
Moreover, since , it also follows that 
This is a most important result.
Deviations from a state of overall full employment must be randomly distributed around a mean of zero.
The origins of these short-lived discrepancies between y t and y *; are to be found in similarly transient deviations of p t , from .
Since the condition for rationality contained in restriction (7.3) rules out any systematic relation between v t , the prediction error, and lagged values of v t , it rules out by the same token any persistent deviation of y t from y *;.
That is,
Applying these results to the unemployment rate implies that  should be randomly distributed around a mean of zero and that  should not exhibit any systematic relationship with .
In other words, the  term in equation (7.1) loses all meaning as a systematic relation linking v t to U t .
The requirement that , or equivalently, that , produced empirical difficulties which involved the  problem of persistence.
It appeared that output and employment in one period were correlated with lagged values of these variables over the phase of the business cycle.
These perceptible correlations ran counter to the predictions of the invariance proposition.
Lucas has advanced certain ingenious theoretical devices to explain the phenomenon of persistence which we shall examine later in this chapter.
For the moment our principal concern will be to enquire into the forces which produce deviations of p, from,.
The aggregate demand — aggregate supply framework
Two distinct justifications for the market clearing, full employment assumption of the new classical macroeconomics are to be found in the literature.
The first has already been dealt with in Chapter 6 when we discussed Friedman's rehabilitation of Pigou's theory of labour market adjustment: in a competitive market economy, relative prices will respond in such a way as to eliminate any chance discrepancy between the demands for and supplies of goods and factors of production.
In particular, the real wage will adjust spontaneously so as to prevent the emergence of excess supply in the labour market.
Alterations in the level of aggregate demand have no significant impact on relative prices, although they may provoke temporary quantity responses owing to misperceptions concerning the behaviour of relative prices by the suppliers of goods (firms) and the suppliers of labour services (households).
But there is a second justification for the market clearing approach.
If one were to peruse the extensive range of surveys of the applications of the rational expectations hypothesis to macroeconomics, one would come across a different framework of analysis, one which is so widely accepted that it is rarely explained in any detail, still less is its theoretical basis probed critically or its conclusions called into question.
This is the aggregate demand-aggregate supply framework which, at its most elementary, postulates two functional relationships, one for the aggregate demand for output as a whole (AD) and the other for the aggregate supply for output as a whole (AS).
The novel feature of this approach is the manner in which both AD and AS are posited as functions of the absolute price level, p, in such a way that, other things being equal, there will exist an absolute price level which will equate AD and AS at the full employment level of output, y *;.
A sudden fall in aggregate demand resulting from, for example, fiscal contraction, will, in the short run, produce a fall in output, but eventually the induced fall in the absolute
price level will have a countervailing influence which will restore demand to its original equality with y *;.
Consider Figure 7.2 in which the logarithm of the absolute price level, p, is measured on the vertical axis and the logarithms of the supply of and demand for output are measured on the horizontal axis.
The aggregate demand function, AD, slopes downwards, indicating that, for constant values of our policy variable x, a lower absolute price level will entail a higher demand for output.
More formally,.
We shall have more to say about the properties of the AD function later in the chapter.
At this stage suffice it to say that the naive, unreconstructed quantity theory of money is normally introduced at this stage ‘purely for the purposes of exposition’.
The policy variable, x, becomes identified with the money supply, m (note that ).
In logarithmic form the Cambridge equation becomes:
The Marshallian k, and hence its , is constant so that, for a given value of m, there is a one to one inverse linear relation between y and p, where y is interpreted in this context as the demand for output as a whole, i.e. .
To depict the aggregate supply function we first need to draw a distinction between aggregate supply in the short run, where expectations may be sluggish in reacting to external events, and the long run where money is neutral and where the supply of output is invariant with respect to the nominal money supply and the absolute price level.
The long-run aggregate supply function, AS *;, is therefore a vertical line in (p, y) space, touching the y axis at y *;.
On that much — the shape of the long-run supply function — Keynesians and new classicals can agree: the willingness of firms to produce commodities does not depend upon the absolute price level.
Aggregate supply in the short run,, is more problematical.
Firms base their production plans for period t on the price they expect to prevail in t, this expectation being formed, as before, in the light of information available at the end of period t -1.
In other words,.
If the actual price level in t were equal to the expected price level,.
However if the actual price level turned out to be   higher in t than was expected at the end of t -1, firms would be more willing to produce extra output and y t , would exceed y *;.
This is, of course, precisely the behaviour which is hypothesized in the Lucas supply function: where u t , the stochastic error term, has been omitted.
Figure 7.2 Aggregate demand/aggregate supply framework
The upward slope of the  function reflects the response of firms to an actual value for p which turns out to be greater or less than they had expected at the end of t -1.
But this still leaves unanswered the question: what factors will produce a discrepancy between p and ?
Consider Figure 7.3.
An increase in m from , catches the private sector by surprise.
The AD schedule shifts upwards.
In Keynesian economics, this increase in aggregate demand occurring at an initial state of full employment will simply raise prices: there will be no output response even in the short run.
The economy moves from point A to point C and y never exceeds y *;.
Not so in new classical economics.
The increase in demand certainly raises prices but, since the increase in the money supply is unanticipated, so too is the increase in prices.
(Note the almost instantaneous impact of a change in the supply of money on aggregate demand and the absolute price level — where are the ‘long and variable’ lags of yesteryear?)
The Lucas supply function predicts that the economy  will move along  to a point such as point B at which both prices and output are higher than at A: prices rise to  and output rises to y t .
However, in the absence of a further aggregate demand shock, the realization in period t+ 1 that the money stock is now higher than previously will be incorporated into the information set 1, which is used to predict .
From equation (7.13) it is clear to agents that the price level appropriate to this money stock is P 2 so that, the economy moves to point C, output reverts to y *; and prices bear the entire brunt of the increase in the money stock.
Money is, once again, neutral.
Figure 7.3 An increase in the money supply
The hardy perennial question of how an increase in the money stock is divided between a fall in velocity, an increase in output and an increase in prices gets short shrift in the new classical macroeconomics.
Forget the string of elasticities with which Keynes embellished the simple quantity theory to arrive at his ‘generalized quantity theory of money’(see Chapter 4).
Keynes was concerned with producing a theory which was sufficiently general to embrace states of unemployment as well as full employment.
Since it is axiomatic to the new classical macroeconomics that market economies are characterized by states of more or less continuous full employment, Keynes's elasticities analysis is ruled out as irrelevant ex hypothesi.
In the new classical model the division of an increase in the money stock between price and output increases depends  upon the extent to which the change in the money stock was anticipated or not.
If the actual money stock in t is accurately predicted by agents at the end of period t -1 (in symbols ), the actual price level in t will equal the price level which was expected at the end of t -1 since expectations regarding the future behaviour of the money stock have been accurately generated by the efficient use of the information available in .
The economy will move directly from point A to point C without first stopping off at point B: no quantity response ensues from the monetary impulse.
On the other hand if the increase in the money supply takes the private sector completely by surprise so that the whole of this increase is unanticipated, the short-run response of output will be much more pronounced.
But how do rational agents put themselves in a position of being able to anticipate changes in the money stock?
Once again the new classical answer is simple, though by this stage common sense is being stretched to its limits.
Having accepted the empirical validity of the crudest form of the quantity theory of money, agents search for a policy rule which determines changes in the money stock.
Agents must try to burrow into the minds of central bankers to discover what motivates their actions governing the course of the money stock.
Under what circumstances will the central bank increase the money supply?
The traditional Keynesian view of the conduct of monetary policy has been to assign to it the role of interest rate and/or exchange rate stabilization.
The money supply should be adjusted in such a way as to fend off potentially damaging changes in the rate of interest and/or damaging changes in the exchange rate.
The money supply is of no intrinsic significance: it only matters to the extent that it may be manipulated in such a way as to achieve other intermediate objectives of macroeconomic policy such as interest rate or exchange rate stability.
Naturally, monetarists and their new classical successors see things very differently.
Control of the money supply should occupy centre stage in the conduct of macroeconomic policy.
The central bank should abandon attempts to use the money supply to peg interest rates and exchange rates since, if left alone, these rates will ‘naturally’ settle down to their equilibrium values (see Friedman (1968) for a powerfully expressed plea for central banks to desist from trying to peg interest rates).
The authorities should adopt a rule for the rate of growth of the money supply and should stick by it.
Suppose the central bank takes this line of argument seriously and opts for the following policy rule: where n is a constant.
Since m is the logarithm of M, the left-hand side of equation (7.14) measures the proportional rate of change of the money  supply.
The private sector will have an incentive to form an estimate of this policy rule and use the resultant knowledge to arrive at their subjective estimate of what they expect the money supply will be in period .
In this example, the rational expectation of m, is .
Since both n and  are known at the end of t -1, they are available for inclusion in the information set  which forms the basis for .
Moreover, if the monetary authorities continue to adhere to the policy rule specified in equation (7.14), the discrepancy between the actual money supply and the anticipated money supply will be, on average, zero.
That is,, where  since z t is a randomly distributed, serially uncorrelated error term.
An implication of the preceding analysis is that the monetary authorities can only alter the level of output by engineering unanticipated variations in the money supply which, in turn, implies that they are continually altering their policy rule.
But no matter how erratic the behaviour of the monetary authorities becomes, the private sector will sooner or later latch on to what is happening.
Indeed, following Lucas (1973), it could be argued that the more volatile are demand management policies, the more adept does the private sector become at unscrambling the ever changing signals sent out by monetary policy and the less volatile output will be in the face of repeated changes in the direction of monetary policy.
The general conclusion of the new classical macroeconomics is that the most that the monetary authorities can hope to achieve by shifting unexpectedly from one policy rule to another is to increase the variance of output around its given mean value of y *;, an objective which not even the most unrepentant policy activist would dream of advocating.
Reflections on the aggregate demand — aggregate supply framework
The policy inefficacy proposition derives its strength from the potent combination of the rational expectations hypothesis with the new classical macroeconomics.
In fact, it will be argued below that the rational expectations hypothesis, the target of so many misdirected Keynesian barbs, may be combined with a model which does not assume market clearing in such a way as to allow considerable scope for discretionary demand management policies.
The policy inefficacy proposition derives, not from the rational expectations hypothesis, but from the behavioural model which underpins the natural rate hypothesis of the new classical macroeconomics.
The principal repercussion of introducing rational expectations into macroeconomic models is to shorten dramatically the lags in adjustment which have traditionally preoccupied macroeconomists from widely differing ideological positions.
Take the example of an increase in the money supply.
In a new classical model, rational expectations will have the effect of eliminating many of the ‘long and variable’ lags of adjustment of the price level to an increase in the money supply so that the predictions of the simple quantity theory will be fulfilled with greater speed.
On the other hand, in a Keynesian model where an increase in the supply of money can generally be expected to have real effects, i.e. where output will rise, the private sector will be able rationally to predict these quantity effects from the correct model (in this case Keynesian) which is included in the information set .
In other words the rational expectations hypothesis is ideologically neutral (see the final section of this chapter).
There is nothing in the criteria which it stipulates for rational behaviour that confines its application to a market clearing framework.
The version of the natural rate hypothesis which we examined in the previous section contained just two behavioural relationships, the aggregate demand function and the aggregate supply function.
We shall examine each of these relationships in greater detail in this section since they embody ideas and concepts which may not, at first sight, be either realistic or plausible.
In most accounts of the aggregate demand function, the reasons which are advanced for the inverse relationship between AD and p reduce, in essence, to the interaction between three complementary mechanisms.
The first is the Keynes effect: asp falls, the real value of the money supply rises, the rate of interest falls and interest-rate-sensitive expenditures are stimulated.
See Chapter 5, Figure 5.3 for a fuller account of this effect.
The second is the real balance or Pigou effect: asp falls, the real value of private sector net worth rises which stimulates consumption expenditure.
Once again, see Chapter 5, Figure 5.4 for greater detail on this effect.
In the third, simple monetarist mechanism exemplified in the Cambridge equation for the demand for money (see equation (7.13) above) aggregate expenditure varies in proportion to changes in the real value of the money supply.
This mechanism — what we called the cash balance transmission mechanism in Chapter 3 — is direct, in contrast with the Keynes effect where the stimulus to expenditure arises only indirectly from reductions in the interest rate.
It is often erroneously confused with the real-balance effect since neither process requires the intermediation of the rate of interest.
However, the real-balance effect is a pure wealth effect, operating only on the real value of the stock of outside money, whereas the ‘money’ referred to in the Cambridge or Fisher equations is almost entirely inside money which does not constitute part of the net worth of the private sector.
The Keynes effect and the real-balance effect — the first and second effects-formed an integral part of the neoclassical synthesis which played such a prominent part in mainstream economics until recently.
(The third effect should strictly speaking be regarded as a substitute for the first since it assumes a zero, or at least a very low, interest elasticity of the demand for money whereas the Keynes effect assumes that it is reasonably powerful.)
The synthesis attributed demand deficient unemployment to downwardly rigid wages and prices.
It went further in claiming that there existed a hypothetical price level at which the combined operation of the Keynes effect and the real-balance effect would stimulate aggregate demand by an amount sufficient to absorb the involuntarily unemployed into employment.
On an operational level, however, the beneficial effects of price reductions on aggregate demand were never taken seriously in the neoclassical synthesis.
Debate was confined to the purely theoretical properties of the income expenditure model in which money wages and prices were allowed to go into free fall in the presence of general unemployment.
In the original neoclassical synthesis the practical relevance of a process of price deflation for establishing full employment was regarded as minimal.
The enormous extent by which prices might have to fall, together with the dynamic instabilities which might be encountered en route, were regarded as sufficient grounds for looking elsewhere for remedies for unemployment.
Inspection of Figure 7.2 should make it quite clear how the neoclassical synthesis has been modified by the new classical writers.
The rather flat negative slope with which the aggregate demand curve is normally drawn insidiously suggests that quite a modest reduction in the absolute price level — 10% perhaps — will give a significant positive boost to aggregate demand.
Orders of magnitude have changed.
While Leontief, Pigou and Patinkin were speculating on the effects on demand of what might have to be, in principle, quite massive price reductions, the AD-AS framework gives the impression that relatively small price changes would make a powerful impact on aggregate demand.
The neoclassical synthesis, which had started life as a series of ‘in theory, what would happen if…?’ questions, has been given operational teeth in the new classical economics.
The synthesis has assumed a practical significance far beyond anything that its originators would ever have anticipated or- and here I conjecture — have approved of.
Nevertheless, one aspect of the AD-AS approach deserves brief mention.
As far as its methodology is concerned this approach is firmly grounded in the income-expenditure approach of Keynesian macroeconomics.
Thus the AD function is simply a collapsed form of the familiar IS-LM diagram where the price level is not taken as constant but is allowed to vary.
The AD curve is a shorthand depiction in (p, y) space of what is happening to the IS and LM curves in Figure 5.4 as a result of falling money wages and prices.
The second behavioural relationship of this version of the natural rate  hypothesis, the aggregate supply function, also needs some amplification, particularly in respect of short-run supply responses to policy shocks.
The long-run aggregate supply function, AS *;, poses no problem.
It is in all respects identical to the description of the characteristics of a fully employed economy to be found in Keynes's General Theory.
Full employment output, y *;, is invariant with respect to the absolute price level and the nominal money stock.
Indeed Patinkin (1965) has suggested that one should regard Keynes's full employment aggregate supply function as one of an infinite set of vertical supply functions, each function corresponding to different values for the real wage rate as in Figure 7.4.
The full employment aggregate supply function is that unique function corresponding to the market clearing real wage rate, w *;.
At all other values for the real wage, output is constrained either by the unwillingness of firms to produce more output or by the unwillingness of households to provide more labour services but not by both at the same time.
Only at w *; will firms and households be unwilling to alter their realized behaviour.
So AS *; is the precise equivalent of the Keynesian  in Figure 7.4.
Problems of interpretation arise with the non-vertical short-run aggregate supply function .
Why do suppliers, including the suppliers of factor services, increase output in the short run as a result of an increase in the absolute price level?
Some new classical writers have sought to answer this question by referring to the ‘island parable’.
Suppose the economy is not one large, unified entity but is instead divided into a large number of islands.
Each island is subject to economy-wide variations in   demand as reflected in changes in the absolute price level for commodities, but news of what is happening on other islands and, by implication, of what is happening in the economy at large, takes time to filter through.
An increase in aggregate demand and the consequent increase in the absolute price level affect all islands equally, though the mechanism of demand diffusion is unclear.
On each island an increase in the demand for output is initially perceived as an increase in the demand for the island's output relative to that of other islands.
In other words an increase in aggregate demand is mistaken on each island for an increase in the relative demand for the output of each island.
The general increase in demand is misread by all of our hypothetical islanders: it is perceived on each island as an isolated (forgive the pun), specific phenomenon peculiar to that island.
The aggregated reactions of all islands is illustrated in Figure 7.5.
The initial rise in the general price level from p to P 1 which results from the shift in the AD function from AD to AD 1 is mistakenly interpreted on all of our hypothetical islands as an increase in the relative prices of their products.
The output of all islands is raised as a result of what is believed (mistakenly) on each island to be a favourable shift in the pattern of demand in their direction.
In terms of Figure 7.5, the rise in output from y *; to Y 1 is the result of a series of individual decisions which were based on the assumption that, although the price of each island's output had clearly risen to p 1 , the general price level in the rest of the economy would remain at p.
On all islands the dug-outs embark in an attempt to sell the extra output to the other islands.
Figure 7.4 Aggregate supply functions at different real wage rates
Eventually, of course, the dug-outs return with the news that prices and demand had increased on other islands also and that what had erroneously been considered to be a series of relative price and demand shifts turned out to have affected all islands equally.
When the realization of this news had permeated through to the remotest island, the initial market euphoria subsides, as does the level of output.
The price level on other islands can no longer be taken as fixed at p but will be seen to have risen.
Once information concerning the shift in the AD schedule has been fully grasped throughout the economy, output reverts to y *; the price level rises to p 2 and the relevant  function becomes .
Unfortunately the island parable raises at least as many additional questions as it answers.
First, by what mechanism are the demand and price signals so efficiently and rapidly diffused among all of the islands while information about events on other islands only becomes available  : gradually?
The process through which an increase in the supply of money has an almost simultaneous and direct impact on prices and demand on all islands is glossed over as if it were a matter of trifling importance.
This cavalier treatment of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is one of the least attractive features of the new classical approach.
It is also a feature which is likely to arouse the suspicions of the sceptical onlooker since it is part and parcel of a theory whose conclusions critically depend upon the combination of the sluggish dispersal of information on the one hand and the almost instantaneous diffusion of demand on the other.
Such a theory will find it hard to repudiate the accusation of being little more than a clever but patently transparent artifice.
Figure 7.5 The ‘island parable'
Secondly, what is supposed to be happening to the level of money wages following the increase in the money supply?
Presumably they rise in line with prices.
Workers could conceivably mistake a rise in money wages for a rise in real wage à la Friedman (1968), but the Friedman speculation only makes sense if employers think (perhaps mistakenly) that the real wage rate has fallen to a level such as in Figure 6.10.
The island parable focuses not upon the reactions of workers and employers to what may turn out to be imaginary variations in the real wage rate but upon the reactions of producers to variations in the prices  being paid for their products.
This begs the question: do producers respond only to perceived changes in the prices paid for their products in comparison to those paid for other products irrespective of what is happening to their costs of production?
Take the case of the inhabitants of an island who mistakenly think that the price which the rest of the economy is prepared to pay for its output has risen.
In the absence of further information to the contrary, we are justified in assuming that money wages and the prices of non-labour inputs have also risen in proportion to the rise in price of final output.
In deciding whether or not to increase the scale of their output, profit-maximizing producers will be favourably impressed by the rise in their product prices but, equally, they will be unfavourably impressed by the proportionate rise in input prices.
In such circumstances there is every reason for believing that the representative producer will not raise output at all and hence that y will not deviate from y *;.
Since the contributors to the literature on the new classical macroeconomics rarely take the trouble to furnish a fully articulated theory of the firm in which cost shocks are given equal prominence with demand shocks, one is entitled to take what they have to say on short-run supply responses with a large fistful of salt.
In the author's view the Lucas supply function comprises an arbitrarily concocted mishmash of conjectures and suppositions.
Hypotheses seem to be effortlessly improvised out of thin air, the resulting theory giving the distinct impression of being a rather facile extemporisation.
New classical macroeconomics and business cycles: unemployment as a leisure activity
Why does the measured unemployment rate vary so greatly over time?
Is it for the usual Keynesian reasons, that is, because of periodic changes in aggregate demand and consequent changes in the demand for labour?
Owing to their deep-rooted hostility towards the very concept of involuntary unemployment and their a priori conviction that the labour market clears ‘more or less continuously’, new classical macroeconomists are driven to look beyond this obvious explanation towards hypotheses which account for the acknowledged phenomenon of business cycles while at the same time preserving intact their beliefs in the robustness of all markets, including the labour market.
Their objective is, in many respects, similar to that of Alfred Marshall some eighty years earlier, namely to graft a theory of the cycle on to a theory of value which asserts that, in a competitive economy, the interaction between the forces of supply and demand will ensure that all markets clear.
To this end Lucas (1977, 1978) devised a model which was quite a remarkable demonstration of his virtuosity in operating within the confines of the market clearing framework to which he is such a committed adherent.
Lucas did not suggest that the observed fluctuations in unemployment were systematic deviations from the natural unemployment rate.
Quite the contrary: they were fluctuations of the natural unemployment rate.
His argument runs briefly as follows.
Workers face a choice between work and leisure along the lines suggested in the classical theory of labour supply (see Chapter 2).
Although, in principle, an increase in the real wage rate could raise the supply of labour significantly, in practice it appears that the ‘underlying’ supply of labour is fairly inelastic with respect to the real wage rate.
When workers experience a rise in the real wage rate they face a decoding problem: they must decide whether this increase is a permanent rise, that is a rise which is likely to endure into the foreseeable future, or a temporary rise, that is a rise which is likely to be reversed in the near future.
Generally speaking workers must decompose any given change in the real wage rate into a temporary component and a permanent component.
If the rise in the real wage rate is perceived as mainly a permanent increase, the supply of labour is unlikely to be affected very much, because of the stylized empirical generalization mentioned above.
On the other hand if it is perceived to be temporary, the effects on the supply of labour in the short run are likely to be substantial.
Carpe diem: workers will take advantage of the short-term opportunity for financial gain afforded by abnormally high real wages by working longer hours, postponing holidays, working weekends, etc.
The same behaviour operates in reverse: if the real wage rate is regarded as abnormally low, they will withdraw some of their labour services in the knowledge that they will be able to command a higher reward for their labour services when real wages return to normal.
This partial withdrawal of labour supply is the mirror image of an increased preference by workers for more leisure: a rise in unemployment is seen as a sort of holiday or, at the very least, as a manifestation of an increased demand for leisure.
Just as the measured unemployment is not ‘involuntary’, neither is the increased consumption of leisure ‘enforced’.
Involuntary unemployment and enforced leisure are Keynesian concepts which are precluded by assumption.
Workers are responding rationally and entirely voluntarily to external events.
Hence, even though unemployment may be fluctuating markedly over time, workers are never ‘off’ their notional labour supply curve.
They are riding happily along on the roller-coaster of the business cycle.
The preceding account assumes that workers are in a position to distinguish with a reasonable degree of accuracy between changes in their real wages which are temporary and those which are permanent.
The  larger the temporary component of a real wage change, the more significant will be the response from the suppliers of labour.
Lucas maintains that, in an economy in which all nominal prices are rising, workers face a twofold ‘signal extraction’ problem (see Sheffrin, 1983):(a) ascertaining whether the real supply price of labour is changing when all other prices are in a state of flux;(b) evaluating the temporary and permanent components of a change in real wages which, in the light of(a), may accompany across the board changes in prices.
Problem (b) has already been dealt with, but problem (a) reflects the difficulty of determining what is happening to relative prices when prices in general are rising.
In the labour market it reduces to the need by workers and employers to calculate what changes, if any, are taking place to the real wage rate when money wages and the absolute price level are rising.
In economies where there is a history of high and variable rates of inflation, workers and other suppliers will have become adept at the semiotics involved in decomposing price changes into relative price changes on the one hand and absolute price changes on the other.
They will be skilful at separating ‘noise’ from ‘signal’.
As a result they will be less susceptible to being ‘fooled’ or ‘surprised’by the actions of the monetary authorities.
On the other hand, in economies where rates of inflation have historically been relatively modest, the scope for confusion in decoding the messages imparted by price changes is greater.
In times of rising money wages, therefore, workers must first decide whether or not the real wage is rising (problem (a)), and secondly decompose any increase in the real wage which may be suspected to have occurred into a permanent component, eliciting minimal labour supply response, and a temporary component, which could elicit a significant rise in the supply of labour services (problem (b)).
The solution to problem (a) should be relatively straightforward in economies where information on changes in the cost of living is given prominent news coverage when up to date figures become available and where labour is organized under the umbrella of trades unions with sizable economic research departments.
In Britain, for example, there is no excuse for not knowing recent trends in the cost of living.
The most up to date figures are flashed on to television screens in news bulletins as soon as they are available, and when abnormal rises occur they make banner headlines in the press.
And one must add to this information on the very recent history of the price level the plethora of informed predictions by economic pundits of the likely future course of the price level.
There has long been a lucrative private market in econometric models and the predictions that arise from them: nowadays these predictions come free of charge in the daily media prognostications of the specialist forecasters.
In these circumstances is it realistic to assume that  workers, particularly workers covered by union agreements, make significant blunders in dividing W by P?
The idea that the temporary real effects produced by demand stimuli are due to a lack of information which is readily available at zero cost is surely far fetched when it comes to calculations of the real wage rate.
Problem (b), the task of apportioning a given perceived increase in the real wage rate between a temporary increase and a permanent increase, may prove to be altogether more formidable.
Presumably workers will have to derive a trend path for the growth in real wages and calculate temporary changes in real wages as deviations from this trend line.
Or perhaps more sophisticated methods are applied along the lines suggested by Friedman's permanent income hypothesis.
No matter: Lucas assumes that workers follow some procedure for arriving at an estimate of their normal or permanent real wage rate.
So let us take stock of where we have reached so far in our analysis of the Lucas business cycle model.
When prices are fluctuating, general confusion prevails regarding the behaviour of relative prices.
In particular workers may come to the conclusion that their real wage rate is fluctuating procyclically (this surmise may, in fact, turn out to have been erroneous, but that is another story): when prices are rising more rapidly than previously, workers suspect that the real wage rate has also risen.
A significant part of the suspected increase in the real wage rate will be conceived of as a temporary increase, eliciting a substantial supply response from workers.
This supply response takes a variety of forms depending on the institutional arrangements within particular labour markets, but the Lucas model postulates that there will be a diminished demand for holidays and other leisure activities and an increased demand for overtime or weekend working.
The temporary increase in the supply of labour will lead to an increase in employment and output, but since the rise in employment is entirely voluntary, the rise in output is a rise in the natural rate of output, y *;.
By this stage the reader may be becoming a little uneasy.
Granted that fluctuations in employment may result from fluctuations in the real wage rate around its permanent, normal value which may, in turn, give scope for intertemporal speculative behaviour in the supply of labour; granted that these fluctuations may be caused by the confusion surrounding fluctuations in the general price level or in the rate of inflation.
But by this stage the patient reader will be asking: what causes fluctuations in absolute prices?
Enter the quantity theory of money in its simplest guise.
Governments and their agents, the monetary authorities, are continually changing course in the conduct of their monetary policies.
These course changes give rise to significant fluctuations in the money supply and in the rate of monetary expansion which, in turn, set the Lucas business cycle in  motion.
By corollary monetary policies which are geared to stabilizing the rate of growth of the money supply (or, more generally, reducing the unanticipated component of a given change in the money supply) will eliminate the cyclical fluctuation in unemployment.
Lucas's account of the business cycle lays almost exclusive emphasis on supply-side phenomena such as the high degree of intertemporal substitutability between employment and leisure.
Workers are intertemporal speculators and abnormally high unemployment rates reflect the subjective speculation by workers that the real wage rate will rise to its normal value in the near future.
But once again microeconomic problems arise since there are two parties to the contract of employment.
How do employers react to the supposed increased willingness of workers to offer more labour services resulting from a monetary stimulus?
Since the new classical macroeconomics is grounded in old classical macroeconomics in its emphasis on the role of real wage adjustments in accounting for variations in employment, presumably they have also taken on board that essential element of the classical theory of employment, the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour (see Chapter 2).
Even if, for the sake of argument, one were to take at face value the Lucas hypothesis that an unanticipated increase in the money supply raises the notional supply of labour, what incentive do employers have to take on any extra labour?
If the real wage rate has temporarily risen, as workers are supposed to believe, employers will have the incentive to take on fewer workers.
Even if individual employers were fairly bullish about the prospects for their own firm and intend expanding output and employment, they would postpone doing so until the real wage rate had reverted to its permanent value.
In other words, speculative behaviour works both ways: workers may engage in it, but so too may employers.
Only when some convincing reason can be adduced for believing that both employers and workers not only misread market signals, but also misread them in the opposite direction from each other, will it be plausible to infer that both the supply of and demand for labour will rise with the general rise in prices and money wages.
Friedman (1968) had earlier wriggled out of this tight corner by assuming that only workers, not employers, were subject to short-run money illusion: workers were supposed to think that the real-wage rate had risen while, as it turns out, it had fallen ex post.
For Friedman the realized decline in the measured real wage rate — a decline which only becomes apparent to workers with the passage of time — was sufficient incentive for employers to take on more labour.
Later Friedman (1975) shifted position somewhat in that he allowed for employers' mistakes concerning the behaviour of the real wage rate: the ex post real wage need never deviate from its market clearing value for  fluctuations in the level of employment around its natural value to occur.
Only when employers perceive real wages to be abnormally low will they be prepared to take the workers up on their offer of extra labour.
Lucas's account of the effects of monetary expansion on the level of employment could not be more different from that of Keynes's General Theory, in which an increase in the money supply, by reducing the rate of interest, raises the level of demand.
The consequent rise in the level of output raises the price level relative to the level of money wages, i.e. it reduces the real wage rate.
The level of employment rises as a result of the complementary stimulus to the demand for labour afforded by the rise in the demand for commodities and the fall in the real wage rate.
Action by the monetary and fiscal authorities may succeed in relaxing the constraints imposed on the behaviour of the private sector by a deficiency of aggregate demand.
In Lucas's model a deficiency of aggregate demand can never occur since markets always clear.
Any fluctuations in measured unemployment which may, from time to time, be observed is the result of workers' fluctuating preferences between work and leisure.
Unemployed workers are like unemployed actors: they are ‘just resting between engagements’.
Side by side with the increasing popularity of monetary theories of the cycle, the late 1970s witnessed the emergence of alternative theories of the business cycle which, though firmly rooted in new classical macroeconomics, attributed the causes of the business cycle to real as opposed to monetary phenomena.
Real theories of the cycle bear many of the family characteristics of the earlier monetary theories, in particular the retention of the intertemporal substitutability theorem within a market clearing framework.
These theories are ‘real’ in the sense that they trace the origins of business cycles to supply-side shocks such as exogenous shifts in technology.
To take a specific example, let us assume that the production function all of a sudden shifts ‘upwards’.
The marginal physical product of labour curve shifts to the right.
Real wages and output rise in consequence.
Workers face the signal extraction problem of deciding whether the increase in real wages is transitory or lasting.
To the extent that a significant proportion of the increase is regarded as transitory, the supply of labour will rise.
From now on the chain of events is very similar to that of monetary theories of the cycle.
Whereas the critical statistic in monetary models is the unanticipated increase in the money supply, the all important statistic in real models is  the variance of capital productivity.
Changes in output which cannot be accounted for by changes in the input of capital and labour are assumed to be accounted for by autonomous shocks in technology.
The bewildering ingenuity of the new classical macroeconomists is matched only by the tenacity with which they cling to the market clearing paradigm.
It is small wonder that Keynesians stood in perplexed amazement when they tried to relate the new classical theory of unemployment to the unemployment rates which were being experienced in the late 1970s.
For example, this theory is incapable of accounting for the phenomenon of redundancies: workers surely do not want to be made redundant in order to indulge their desire for longer holidays.
Is it not far fetched and fanciful to regard lay-offs and redundancies as cleverly disguised methods of electing to consume more leisure?
To a Keynesian this explanation for general unemployment sounds perversely counterintuitive.
Britain in the early 1990s appears to be on the precipice of the worst recession since the 1930s.
How do the new classical macroeconomists explain that predicament?
Given that they have ruled out of court the concept of demand deficient unemployment, the new classical writers have left themselves with no alternative explanation: if markets are clearing, they must be clearing at different measured unemployment rates.
Governments should learn to treat published unemployment statistics with much greater circumspection than was the case in the past.
For the new classicals, high unemployment rates should not be the object of discretionary government intervention since they are mere epiphenomena.
For Keynesians, persistently high unemployment rates are an indication that the labour market is not clearing, that there is chronic excess supply in the labour market, and that some action by the monetary and fiscal authorities may eventually be warranted.
Rational expectations in a Keynesian context: a naive example
In the preceding analysis the rational expectations criteria were introduced piecemeal within a context which assumed market clearing, at least in the fairly short run.
This seemingly symbiotic link has been damaging to the more general applicability of these criteria in other contexts.
Indeed, one of the reasons for the rapid absorption of the rational expectations hypothesis into new classical circles was that the underlying model of neoclassical economics in general and new classical macroeconomics in particular was the belief that this hypothesis conformed with the distinguishing feature of neoclassical theory, that of profit and utility maximization.
Agents maximize, and part of the maximization procedure  is the efficient use of all information available at reasonable cost.
Keynesian economics, by contrast, was supposed to be built upon non-maximizing, ad hoc assumptions and constructs such as fixed prices and money wages, money illusion, curious ‘psychological laws of consumption’, etc.
As usual, these critics of Keynesian theory were referring to the IS-LM model in which tangency solutions and the like make no appearance whatsoever.
The fact that the Keynesian consumption function is based on maximizing behaviour by households which are already quantity constrained in the labour market was splendidly demonstrated by Barro and Grossman (1976)(yes, the same Barro).
Moreover the Keynesian analysis of the labour market as set out in Chapter 5 should have made it fairly clear that Keynes was not denying any of the neoclassical assumptions motivating self-interested households and firms to engage in trade in attempts to achieve Pareto-efficiency.
What he was denying was their ability to achieve the outcomes to which the opportunities for mutually advantageous trade clearly pointed.
Workers and employers, motivated by the self-interest of neoclassical theory, endeavour to arrive at trades which would, if they became effective, clear the labour market.
Nevertheless the only means at their disposal — cutting money wages — will fail to produce the required outcome for all of the reasons outlined above.
Moreover the commonly held view that the rational expectations hypothesis is the natural offspring of neoclassical and new classical economics has considerably limited the wider application of the concept of rational expectations in macroeconomic models which do not take the assumption of market clearing as their point of departure.
The same sort of guilt by association which had tainted Keynesian economics in the wake of the Phillips curve débâcle has tainted the rational expectations hypothesis owing to its close connection, through Keynesian eyes, with the policy inefficacy proposition of the new classical macroeconomics.
The fact that the rational expectations hypothesis is a free-standing set of criteria which can be applied to a wide variety of macroeconomic models was rarely grasped by early Keynesian critics.
A corrective is clearly called for in the form of an illustrative counterexample.
Consider the chain of reaction which follows from an increase in the money supply in the IS-LM system.
‘Shocks’ of this type form the  bedrock of the new classical literature which, combined with the rational expectations hypothesis, yield the superneutrality result outlined above.
In the standard account of expansionary monetary policy illustrated in Figure 7.6, the economy is seen to move from point A to point B very quickly owing to the immediate impact that the increase in the supply of money has upon the rate of interest.
After a while, however, entrepreneurs, realizing that interest rates are now lower, start to invest more, thereby raising income and the rate of interest.
The economy embarks on a rather sluggish crawl up the new LM curve until it eventually comes to rest at point C where there is a new, higher equilibrium level of income, Y 2 
How does the introduction of the concept of rational expectations alter the above account?
First, there is the question of the correct model on which agents base their expectations of the outcomes of particular policy actions.
We shall assume not only that the IS-LM model is the correct model but also that agents know that it is the correct model.
Suppose that the increase in the money supply is announced in time to be included in  that agents fully believe the central bank, and that the central bank behaves in period t in the way that it announced it would behave at the end of t -1.
In other words, the realized change in the money supply is fully anticipated and hence .
In the new classical model such exact anticipation will generate — random errors apart-a perfect forecast of the price level in period t.
By contrast, in this example, the fact that the unanticipated change in the money supply is zero, coupled with   the inclusion of the ‘correct’ model depicted in Figure 7.6 in the information set , will generate a similarly perfect forecast of the new equilibrium level of output in period t, that is, Y 2 .
In symbols, on account of the fact that .
If this is the case the economy will move with great speed from point A to point C, completely bypassing point B. At no stage in the rapid transition from A to C has any criterion of the rational expectations hypothesis been violated.
What has happened is that all of the tiresome lags in adjustment of activity to changes in monetary policy which used to worry macroeconomists have been dramatically foreshortened by the introduction of the rational expectations hypothesis.
Figure 7.6 Fully anticipated increase in money supply with Keynesian ‘correct’ model
The moral of this simple tale should be clear.
The rational expectations hypothesis does not pose a threat to Keynesian theory in the way that was thought to be the case when it first entered into macroeconomics.
The rational expectations hypothesis challenges macroeconomists of widely differing outlook to re-examine the short-run dynamics of their respective models so as to check that no assumption of irrational behaviour has been implicitly or inadvertently embedded within the structure of the model.
Unfortunately, even when this fairly uncontroversial observation is accepted, the debate occasionally assumes an additional layer of confusion when the underlying structure of the Keynesian model is called into question on account of the supposedly irrational behaviour of the suppliers of labour in that model.
Should the rational expectations hypothesis be grafted on to a ‘correct’ model which is basically the Keynesian theory of economic activity?
It is sometimes darkly hinted that there is little point of applying the rational expectations hypothesis to a model which is so irredeemably based on the non-optimizing (i.e. irrational) assumptions of sticky money wages and money illusion.
The reader who wishes to recap on why the Keynesian treatment of the theory of labour supply is not based on irrational behaviour is referred to Chapter 5, the section entitled ‘Wage stickiness and money illusion’.
Concluding remarks
The strong links between the rational expectations hypothesis and the new classical macroeconomics initially sent out confusing signals.
Partly this was a matter of timing: both approaches penetrated the mainstream of macroeconomics at more or less the same time.
Partly this was because many of the enthusiastic supporters of the rational expectations hypothesis also tended to subscribe to the market clearing paradigm.
But by far the most powerful link connecting the two approaches was the common  assumption of economic rationality.
By implication, other approaches were based on irrational behaviour.
Although most of this chapter has been given over to an exposition of the policy inefficacy proposition which was grounded in the aggregate demand-aggregate supply framework where variations in the absolute price level figure prominently, the reader should note that many new classical writers simply take it for granted that, in a competitive economy, markets clear on average over time.
Unlike Lucas, these writers rarely attempt to justify this conviction formally, preferring instead to allude vaguely to the Walrasian model of general equilibrium and to the behavioural assumptions which underpin that model.
As usual the assumptions centre on the motives that spur Homo  conomics to action: firms maximize profits and households maximize utility.
It beggars belief how the fairly uncontroversial assumption of traditional price theory that agents optimize subject to constraints should be taken by these writers as sufficient grounds for supporting the inference that all markets clear.
Although this area of research is beyond my technical competence, I am assured by experts in neo-Walrasian economics that very strong apriori restrictions need to be imposed before even a glimmer of a general market clearing solution can be discerned.
The likes of Arrow, Hahn and Malinvaud would certainly not rule out the possibility of Keynesian demand deficient unemployment.
The hypothesis that firms aim to maximize profits and that households aim to maximize utility does not, ipso facto, imply that markets will always tend to clear.
The path breaking work by Barro and Grossman (1976) elegantly shows how the existence of Keynesian unemployment alters the nature of the budget constraint subject to which agents optimize.
For example, if all of a sudden households discover that they can no longer sell as much of their labour services as they would ideally like, their realized incomes will be reduced.
Their utility functions may remain unchanged, but the income constraints which now confront them have altered.
This is the second round of Clower's ‘dual decision hypothesis’: agents must now optimize subject to constraints which are themselves partly determined by realized outcomes.
If household income falls short of full employment income (Y < Y *;) for Keynesian reasons, no one would suggest that household decisions will continue to be based on the palpably false premise that households will be able to sell as much of their labour services as they would ideally like.
The constrained maximization problem becomes one where the level of income for the representative household ceases to be a choice variable, as it is in new classical theory, but becomes a datum, determined at the aggregate level by effective demand.
In other words, the conventional assumption that agents attempt to optimize does not guarantee that the eventual outcome of such  attempts will be a market clearing equilibrium.
Referring back to Figure 5.9 in Chapter 5, it is evident that households would prefer to be at point A rather than at points B or C, but that they have no means at their disposal to effect the move to this optimal position.
Workers can optimize until they are blue in the face and still remain powerless to reach their notional labour supply function L s .
The reader will by now have become thoroughly jaded with the constant repetition of this fundamental tenet of Keynesian economics, but how do the new classical writers respond to it?
The simple answer is, they do not.
Perhaps Lucas gave one too many hostages to fortune when he jocularly confessed in an interview, ‘In economics, you can get a book out written in English like Harberler's Prosperity and Depression without being able to read it.
Or Keynes's General Theory.
I still can't read Keynes [laughter]’(R. E. Lucas in A. Klamer (1984), p. 30).
Not even the most unreconstructed Keynesian would ever claim that the General Theory was an easy read.
Quite the contrary — at times it is infuriatingly obscure.
Nevertheless, the peremptory dismissal of the book which established the modern discipline of macroeconomics is disconcerting.
Disconcerting but, on further reflection, hardly surprising when one bears in mind that, for more than two generations, Keynesian economics has been taught almost exclusively through the medium of the IS-LM model.
The General Theory appears to have assumed the dubious status of a ‘classic’: a work to which everyone refers but which no one reads.
8
Recent developments in Keynesian macroeconomics
Despite the sustained onslaught from the monetarists and, more virulently, from the new classical macroeconomics, the Keynesian research programme has continued to make significant progress on a variety of fronts.
We shall briefly discuss three interconnected lines of enquiry and, although the success of these approaches is hard to evaluate at this stage, they have certainly raised many issues which either expose the incompleteness of the simple Keynesian model or point to fundamental inadequacies within it.
The first development of the Keynesian system which we shall consider revolves around the important distinction between classical and Keynesian unemployment and highlights the policy implications which flow from this distinction.
The second area of current research in macroeconomics centres on a phenomenon known as hysteresis.
Economists working in this field are attempting to find answers to the question of why the various estimates of NAIRU exhibit a persistent tendency to rise over time.
The third major development in Keynesian macroeconomics is the growing literature on ‘prices versus quantities’: when there is a nominal demand shock, why do quantities (output and employment) bear more of the onus of adjustment than prices (money wages and the absolute price level)?
We shall examine these three lines of enquiry below.
But there is a fourth major avenue of current research which, for reasons of its technical complexity, cannot be covered in this book.
This concerns the  analytical deficiencies in the treatment of the relationship between stocks and flows in Keynesian macroeconomics.
For example, the Keynesian saving function in which the rate of acquisition of new financial and real assets is a function of the level of income has long been a source of dissatisfaction.
Many prominent Keynesians have sought to replace the simple  formulation and substitute in its place a set of equilibrium relationships between stocks (e.g. the desired stock of financial assets) and flows (e.g. the flow of national income).
This is in marked contrast with the IS-LM system where the only stock-flow equilibrium relationship which is explicitly modelled is between the stock of money and the flow of income, this being summarized in the LM curve.
No other stock-flow relationship enters the analysis.
This neglect of stock-flow equilibrium relationships is equally conspicuous in the treatment of the process of capital formation: in common with all short-run macroeconomic models, the IS-LM system posits a constant stock of physical capital while at the same time permitting the rate of net investment to vary.
But how is it possible to reconcile a variable rate of capital formation with a fixed stock of capital?
The answer which is usually proffered is a variant of the ‘snapshot’ argument: the stock of capital is so large in comparison with variations in the relevant flows that it would take a timespan considerably longer than the Keynesian short run for variations in the rate of net investment to have a significant impact on the size of the stock of capital.
Fortunately much recent research in the Keynesian tradition has sought answers to many of these stock-flow problems, though once again a consensus view has yet to emerge.
Classical and Keynesian unemployment: models of temporary equilibrium
A general dissatisfaction with the lever-pulling macroeconomic models that the IS-LM model had spawned gathered momentum in the early 1970s.
The feeling that Keynesian economics, at least in its textbook distillation, lacked robust microfoundations had become widespread.
One reaction to this rather clichéd allegation took the extreme form of the new classical macroeconomics which jettisoned Keynesian ideas lock, stock and barrel, and which reinstated a modified, rather more mathematical version of the old classical system.
The new classical school was distinctly more categorical in both analysis and prescription than its predecessor of over six decades earlier.
For example, the extensive list of qualifications and caveats which Marshall appended to his exposition of the quantity theory of money had threatened to cast such a long shadow over its  validity that Marshall appeared to take freight and retarait behind the ceteris paribus stipulation which so typified his approach to economics.
By contrast with the old classical school, qualification, self-doubt or simple pragmatic open-mindedness are not conspicuous attributes of the adherents to the new classical macroeconomics.
Since the publication of the General Theory there had always been a nagging sense of unease at the treatment of prices in Keynesian macroeconomics.
The mid-1960s saw the development of models of temporary equilibrium, which took as their starting-point the assumption that the initial values of relative and absolute prices were arbitrarily given in the short run.
Models of temporary equilibrium, exemplified in the work of Barro and Grossman (1976) and of Edmond Malinvaud and the French Keynesian school, were inspired by the exceptionally penetrating insights of Robert Clower (1965 and 1967).
Although a satisfactory account of these models requires a level of technical exposition well beyond the scope of this book, the basic question which they attempted to answer is quite simple to grasp.
In what circumstances will an initial state of general unemployment require the real wage to fall for employment to increase, and in what circumstances will the real wage rate have to rise for employment to increase?
This is the point at which the by now famous distinction between classical and Keynesian unemployment enters the picture.
To reduce the extent of classical unemployment the real wage rate must fall, while to reduce the extent of Keynesian unemployment the real wage may have to rise, or at least remain unchanged.
Not surprisingly, expansionary demand management policies will be successful in reducing Keynesian unemployment.
On the other hand, if they are undertaken in isolation, these same policies could actually exacerbate the problem of unemployment if the unemployment is classical in origin.
It is clearly imperative to arrive at a correct diagnosis of the origins of involuntary unemployment.
The sources of classical unemployment have already been touched upon in Chapter 2.
General unemployment occurs when the initial real wage rate, w 1 exceeds the market clearing real wage rate, w *;.
Workers are off their notional labour supply function, L s , but employers are on their notional labour demand function, L d .
The marginal productivity condition of perfect competition is continuously operative so that, given the conventional shape of the short-run production function and of its derivative, the marginal physical product of labour function, an increase in the demand for labour will have to be accompanied by a reduction in the real wage rate.
The reader will recall how Keynes would not have disagreed with a single syllable of the above diagnosis.
Where Keynes and Pigou parted company was in the mechanism through which the requisite decrease in  real wages would occur.
Pigou argued that, in a competitive economy, unemployed workers would vie with employed workers in an attempt to gain employment, possibly at the expense of those already in work.
The only means at the disposal of the unemployed would be to offer their labour services at money wages which were lower than those being commanded by the employed.
The general decline in the level of money wages would lead to reductions in real wages, which in turn would encourage employers to hire more workers.
It follows that the persistence of unemployment was the result of forces which prevented this mechanism from operating freely.
The most obvious culprits were the monopolistic practices of the trades unions which impeded the downward adjustment of money (and hence real) wages.
The policy implications of the old classical approach were far reaching, particularly insofar as they suggested that measures should be taken to curb the exercise of monopoly power by trades unions.
Despite the failure of the old classical writers to form a coherent set of policy prescriptions, their view remained that any attempt to reduce general unemployment must have as its cornerstone policies which would reduce real wages.
Although the partial equilibrium diagram in Figure 2.6 conveys the gist of the classical position, an alternative diagrammatic representation of the same approach in terms of simple general equilibrium theory turns out to be more illuminating when we contrast states of classical unemployment with states of Keynesian unemployment.
The first step in the construction of this diagram is to consider separately the conditions for equilibrium for the representative firm on the one hand, and for the representative household on the other.
To illustrate different positions of equilibrium for the firm, consider Figure 8.1.
Two points of neoclassical equilibrium for the firm, points A and B, lie along the short-run production function,.
Consider point A. The slope of the production function,, measures the marginal physical product of labour at this point.
It is clear that the slope of the tangent to the production function at this point is also equal to the marginal product of labour.
Hence the angle of the arrowhead measures the marginal product of labour.
Applying the marginal productivity theory of the demand for labour in perfect competition permits us to interpret the same angle as a measure of the real wage rate.
We therefore observe that, with a real wage rate w 1 , the tangency solution of conventional price theory yields values for both the profit maximizing level of output,, and the demand for labour,, for the representative firm.
A fall in the real wage rate from w 1 to w 2 results in both a rise in the notional demand for labour to    and a rise in the notional supply of output to Y 2 .
Clower referred to magnitudes such as as ‘notional’ quantities in the sense that firms, if they are constrained only by the parameters of their production function and a given real wage rate, w 1 , would ideally like to supply  output and demand  labour services.
These magnitudes are the outcomes of hypothetical thought experiments on the part of firms.
The L d curve in Figure 2.6 is a partial equilibrium depiction of one of the outcomes of this more general optimization procedure.
Figure 8.1 Equilibrium for the firm
A very similar analysis may be applied to depict states of equilibrium for the representative household.
Consider an indifference curve  in  space.
Households exchange their labour services for goods.
It is normally posited that the marginal disutility of employment is an increasing function of the actual level of employment.
This hypothesis generates an infinite set of indifference curves which are convex to the L axis.
One such indifference curve is .
For a real wage rate w 1 , utility maximizing households would be willing to exchange  of their labour services in exchange for  goods.
This optimization procedure thus yields the equilibrium values for two important magnitudes: the notional supply of labour,, and its mirror image, the notional demand for goods, y d .
A state of general equilibrium can be depicted by combining Figures 8.1 and 8.2 in Figure 8.3.
Point Z is a position of Walrasian equilibrium in the sense that both the goods market and the labour market are cleared at    a real wage rate w *;.
Both firms and households are in equilibrium.
Neither group has any incentive to alter its mode of behaviour.
Figure 8.2 Equilibrium for the household
Figure 8.3 Walrasian equilibrium
But what would happen if the real wage rate were wrong?
What would happen if the real rate w 1 , a value in excess of the market clearing real wage, w *;?
Figure 8.4 illustrates such a state of disequilibrium.
The optimal position for households is represented by point B, while point A represents the optimal position for firms.
Hence there is notional excess supply in the labour market , which is necessarily mirrored in notional excess demand in the goods market .
This is the upshot of a more general principle of general equilibrium theory known as Walras's Law.
When households initially decide the flow of their labour services that they are willing to supply at different values for the real wage rate they are simultaneously deciding the quantities of goods which they demand in exchange for those services.
The decision that determines  is simply the flip side of the decision that determines L s .
The magnitude y d is the demand for goods which would materialize if households actually managed to sell all of the labour services which they notionally offer.
Figure 8.4 Classical unemployment
At this stage the ‘short-side’ rule is normally introduced.
Actual trading in the labour market will be determined by whichever quantity is the smaller, the supply of labour or the demand for labour.
More formally , where L denotes the actual amount traded in the labour market and where ‘min’ refers to the minimum — or, in this case, minor-quantity inside the parentheses.
Inspection of Figure 8.4 reveals  that, since : the actual employment of labour will be demand determined.
The application of the short-side rule to the goods market reveals that : the actual volume of output, Y, will be determined on the supply side.
The economy will settle down at point A, a position of neoclassical equilibrium from the point of view of firms, though obviously not from the point of view of households, which would prefer to be at point B. Households must therefore revise downwards their planned expenditure on goods in the light of their failure to sell all of their labour services.
The magnitude y d thus ceases to have any practical relevance since it is an entirely hypothetical quantity: if  labour services were sold, the demand for goods would be  But this representation of the aggregate demand for goods is patently misleading since realized trading in labour services and goods only amount to  and  respectively.
In other words, effective demand is conditioned by actual trading in the labour market.
The level of effective excess demand,, is zero, despite the fact that notional excess demand,, is positive.
The level of notional excess demand is the magnitude which is relevant to Walras's Law, but it is of no operational significance either for firms or for households.
As Clower pointed out, it takes a strange contortion of language to characterize the 1930s as a period in which the basic problem was that of an excess demand for goods!
The concept of quantity rationing is obviously relevant here.
Since households cannot sell their notional supply of labour services, i.e. , they are said to be rationed in the labour market.
Households are similarly rationed in the goods market, i.e. , on account of(a) their failure to sell  labour services and (b) the unwillingness of firms to produce any more than Y. By way of contrast, firms are in continuous neoclassical equilibrium and are not subject to quantity rationing in either the goods market or the labour market.
They are hiring just the right number of workers,, that the calculus of profit maximization dictates.
By the same token they are producing just the right level of output,.
No external quantity constraints impinge upon the behaviour of firms.
General unemployment is the most conspicuous outcome of this failure to reach a Walrasian equilibrium.
Such unemployment is labelled classical in the sense that its sole root cause is an excessively high real wage .
Quantity constraints on firms do not figure at all.
A necessary and sufficient condition for the eradication of classical unemployment is hence a direct downward adjustment of the real wage rate to a level where .
Once this adjustment has been achieved, a state of Walrasian general equilibrium will prevail (see Figure 8.3).
Precisely how this requisite adjustment is effected is rarely discussed satisfactorily in this literature, particularly when one bears in mind the  close connection between changes in money wages and changes in prices which is such a prominent feature of the pricing decision in most advanced market economies.
To take a concrete example, an established characteristic of the pricing decision across many Western economies over several decades has been the tendency for firms, particularly firms in the manufacturing sector, to set prices as a mark up over variable costs, the most prominent among which is the money wage.
If the phenomenon of mark up pricing (alternatively known as ‘administered’ pricing) is as widespread as is generally believed, what instruments of macroeconomic policy can governments bring to bear to alter — in this context, to reduce the real wage rate?
Malinvaud assigns a special role to prices and incomes policies to effect a differential adjustment of W in relation to P, but how such a policy would operate in the absence of quite massive and probably unacceptable levels of state interference both in wage bargaining and in the pricing decisions of firms remains a disconcertingly moot point.
Prices and incomes policies have been justified historically on the grounds that, if successful, they serve directly to scale down the rates of increase of money wages and absolute prices while minimizing the rise in unemployment which a policy of demand restriction would entail.
In other words, prices and incomes policies were devised with the objective of short-circuiting the painful process of adjustment to a lower rate of inflation.
On the other hand apologists for such policies rarely if ever sought to justify them on the grounds that they would reduce the real wage rate à la Malinvaud.
Of course, in open economy models of temporary equilibrium, alterations in the nominal exchange rate might do the trick of reducing real wages through their impact on the terms of trade; but, in the case of a devaluation, this would succeed only to the extent that the phenomenon of real wage resistance were not encountered.
In brief, the mechanisms through which policy makers might bring about a reduction in classical unemployment have not been systematically worked through in most models of temporary equilibrium.
Both the origins of classical unemployment and the nature of the remedy for it remain stubbornly obscure.
The second broad category of general unemployment is labelled Keynesian.
The origins of Keynesian unemployment must be traced, not to wrong relative prices — specifically to a wrong real wage — but to a deficiency of aggregate demand.
As we saw in Figure 5.
9 in Chapter 5, it is perfectly conceivable that Keynesian (demand deficient) unemployment is consistent with a real wage which is at its market clearing value, w *;.
Point Z locates a position of Walrasian equilibrium; but this point is unattainable despite the fact that the real wage rate is at its market clearing value.
The economy finds itself in a suboptimal state of temporary equilibrium at point C owing to a sales constraint on output: firms would ideally like to produce Y *; output and employ L *; workers but, being unable to sell all of this output and employ this number of workers, they are obliged to produce a level of output Y 1 compatible with constraint on sales and hence employ only L 1 workers.
The fact that Y 1 falls short of Y *; is attributable to a deficiency of aggregate demand.
Both firms and households would prefer to be at point Z but they are prevented from realizing their optimal mode of behaviour by a general lack of demand in the economy.
In terms of the simpler partial equilibrium framework illustrated in Figure 8.6, both firms and households are off their notional labour demand and supply functions.
Points Z and C in Figure 8.5 correspond to points  and  in Figure 8.6.
At C and , two marginal conditions fail to be satisfied: the real wage rate is neither a measure of the marginal disutility of employment nor a measure of the marginal physical product of labour.
The traditional marginal conditions of simple price theory cease to be operative in the presence of Keynesian unemployment.
(Recall Keynes's retention of the ‘real wage equals marginal product’ principle, so that only the first marginal condition failed to hold in the General Theory model.)
It follows that no adjustment of the real wage rate may be required to reduce unemployment.
In our example the real wage rate remains at its market clearing value, w *;, despite the presence of involuntary unemployment.
In contrast with the case of classical unemployment, the short-side rule no longer applies:.
In fact L s and L d , interpreted as notional quantities, are equal, but both    magnitudes exceed the amount of realized trading in the labour market, L.
Figure 8.5 Keynesian unemployment
Figure 8.6 Partial equilibrium depiction
Models of temporary equilibrium attribute the persistence of both classical and Keynesian unemployment to the short-run stickiness of money wages and prices.
In the long run the economy will tend to gravitate towards a position of Walrasian equilibrium.
In this vein Malinvaud (1983) writes: ‘[T]he Walrasian equilibrium…is appropriate for long-run economic analysis, because in the long run prices are actually flexible and play the role that was traditionally given to them.’
In order to come to grips with the reasoning behind this rather sanguine conclusion we must consider three important magnitudes: the money wage rate, W, the absolute price level, P, and the nominal stock of outside money, OM.
In most of the models of temporary equilibrium the only financial asset which is explicitly modelled is the stock of fiat money effectively notes and coin in circulation.
Other financial assets — bonds, equities, inside money-scarcely feature at all.
The relationship between these three important variables is supposed to determine the characteristics of a state of temporary equilibrium.
In essence classical unemployment stems from an inappropriate relationship between W and P, i.e. , while Keynesian unemployment stems from an inappropriate relationship between OM and P.
This latter relationship needs some amplification.
The expenditure decisions of the private sector depend upon an extensive array of variables — the rate of interest, the real wage rate, the realized level of income, etc.
Within this array of determining variables, great prominence  is accorded to the ratio , the stock of real balances.
Consumption expenditure depends, inter alia, on the stock of real balances.
The higher is , the higher is consumption expenditure and the higher is the level of aggregate demand.
The ratio  can rise either as a result of an increase in OM or through a fall in P. The only route through which OM can rise is a temporary budget deficit financed by the issue of fiat money.
This is the case where the graphic monetarist image of governments printing or minting new money is quite literally accurate since no alternative source or finance is available to them as a result of the restrictive assumptions of the model.
Once OM has been ‘topped up’ by a sufficient infusion of new money, the budget can again be balanced.
A similar chain of reasoning applies to the real-balance effect.
With a constant nominal stock of fiat money, a falling price level raises , which raises consumption expenditure, which in turn raises the level of aggregate demand.
To appreciate how a falling price level serves to stimulate employment, consider Figure 8.7.
Point B represents a state of labour market clearance: the  curve which passes through point B is the usual notional demand for labour function which would apply if employers were not subject to a sales constraint in the goods market.
The only factor which determines the position and slope of this function is the short-run production function.
The  curve is, however, something altogether different since it is the effective, as opposed to the notional, demand for labour function: its position is determined by the effective demand for goods   which will, in turn, depend upon the magnitude of .
The initial stock of real balances fixes the  function to the left of the notional demand for labour function.
The horizontal distance AB measures the extent of Keynesian unemployment.
Figure 8.7 Falling prices and the demand for labour
What this diagram clearly exposes is the temporary nature of Keynesian unemployment in these models.
With the passage of time, money wages and prices will be revised downwards in the presence of excess supply in both the labour market and the goods market.
Real balances will rise, and so too will aggregate demand.
The sales constraint on firms will progressively diminish and the  function will shift to the right.
This process will continue until a price level is reached which is so low as to make  so high as to ensure that the effective labour demand function eventually coincides with the notional labour demand function.
For a given initial stock of nominal money balances,, there will exist a unique absolute price level, P *;, which will establish full employment.
This is a similar conclusion to that of the neoclassical synthesis except that there is no scope for the Keynes effect to operate.
This is hardly surprising since temporary equilibrium models lack a coherently articulated theory of interest which would allow the Keynes effect to be activated.
The phenomenon of liquidity preference can find no place in a model that admits of only one asset, fiat money.
The full burden of long-run equilibriation is thrown on to the slender base of the real balance effect.
Now while it is plausible to argue that consumption expenditure will partly depend upon the real value of private sector net worth, to concentrate all attention on a tiny fraction of this magnitude is to lose all sense of proportion.
Sheer orders of magnitude matter, and the orders of magnitude do not come down on the side of the real-balance effect.
To take the British example, I would hazard that the ratio of real balances to total private sector net worth is less than 1% (see Dow and Saville (1988) for a breakdown of the constituent parts of private sector wealth).
The undoubted benefits of the greater mathematical rigour which these models incorporate may have been bought at the cost of a loss of perspective on the world ‘out there’.
One would have thought that the Great Depression years in the United States had provided a suitable testing ground for the efficacy of the real-balance effect, but, as Patinkin pointed out at an early stage in the development of the neoclassical synthesis, a large increase in real balances appeared to be accompanied by a large fall in output.
The experience of this catastrophic episode in American economic history can do little to inspire confidence in the recuperative powers of advanced market economies.
The broad distinction between classical and Keynesian unemployment has far-reaching implications for the conduct of macroeconomic policy.
If  unemployment is classical, steps must be taken to reduce the real wage rate.
Policies of demand expansion are worse than useless since they could intensify the rationing of households in the goods market.
On the other hand, if unemployment is Keynesian, steps must be taken to boost aggregate demand.
Policies to reduce the real wage rate in the face of Keynesian unemployment could make matters far worse since a common feature of temporary equilibrium models is the positive functional dependence of consumption expenditure on the real wage rate.
Real wage cuts, by reducing aggregate demand, raise the level of Keynesian unemployment.
In most of the early work on quantity constrained models it was assumed that any observed general unemployment had to be either classical or Keynesian but not both at the same time.
This monocausal approach had the advantage of clarity of distinction but it could be highly misleading as a guide to macroeconomic policy since it is perfectly conceivable that classical and Keynesian unemployment may coexist at one and the same time.
For example, it is possible that  and that .
In other words, a given level of unemployment may comprise a classical component attributable to excessive real wages and a Keynesian component attributable to deficient aggregate demand.
We must therefore confront the empirical problem of separating out classical from Keynesian influences in order to answer a very simple question: is the unemployment which is observed in a particular economy over a given period of time predominantly classical or predominantly Keynesian in origin?
R. M. Coen and B. G. Hickman (1987) have attempted to provide a tentative answer to this important question.
Figure 8.8 represents a simplified version of their model.
The real wage is measured along the vertical axis and labour services are measured along the horizontal axis.
The L d curve is the notional demand curve for labour, i.e. along L d firms are not subject to quantity constraints in either the goods market or the labour market.
The  curve, by contrast, is the effective demand curve for labour: firms, considered in the aggregate, cannot sell more than Y units of output on account of a sales constraint in the goods market, which in turn is the result of a deficiency of aggregate demand.
The downward slope of the effective labour demand function reflects the hypothesis that, even if they face quantity constraints in the goods market, firms would be willing to employ more workers if the real wage rate were lower.
Figure 8.8 Coen-Hickman model
The total volume of the available labour force is L F .
Since there will always be some unemployment which can be attributed to microeconomic factors, the maximum feasible level of employment will fall short of L F .
The natural level of employment, that is that level of employment consistent with overall labour market clearance at a real wage rate w *;, is L *;.
The discrepancy between L F and L *; is thus a measure of the natural unemployment rate U *;.
But the natural unemployment rate is only part of the total unemployment rate which is measured by the horizontal distance DA.
Total unemployment can be decomposed into three constituent parts: Keynesian unemployment, measured by CB; classical unemployment, measured by BA; and natural unemployment, measured by DC.
Coen and Hickman's empirical methodology proceeds as follows.
First arrive at an estimate of the natural unemployment rate.
Secondly, estimate the magnitude of the wage gap, that is the magnitude of .
Thirdly, estimate the elasticity of the constrained labour demand function with respect to the real wage rate.
The second and third results will jointly yield an estimate for the classical component of observed unemployment.
This estimate of classical unemployment, when added to the first estimate  of natural unemployment, will determine the magnitude of the Keynesian component of observed unemployment.
The Keynesian component is clearly a residual which is arrived at by subtracting the natural and classical components from overall unemployment.
Coen and Hickman conclude that, by and large, observed unemployment rates in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Austria from the early 1970s have their origins in deficient aggregate demand.
While classical factors were often present, and for brief periods predominated, Keynesian factors were the proximate forces accounting for the rise in unemployment over this period.
This is the result of the combined effects of a low estimated real-wage elasticity of demand for labour and of controversially low estimates of the natural unemployment rates for these four countries.
Coen and Hickman rightly mistrust the use of NAIRUs to form estimates of natural unemployment rates.
Not only are estimates of NAIRU notorious for their lack of robustness, they also have a disconcerting tendency to shadow the actual unemployment rate suspiciously closely.
The case of the United Kingdom is particularly graphic.
In the first column in the following table they compute the average unemployment rates over four sample periods.
In the second column they insert the corresponding estimates for NAIRU which they had extracted from a variety of empirical studies.
Is it mere coincidence that, over a period in which the observed unemployment rate rose almost fivefold, the estimate for NAIRU rose almost fourfold?
The suspicions of the disinterested onlooker are likely to be aroused against the whole notion of NAIRU as an operationally useful construct.
Moreover even if these sceptical grumblings are set to one side, are we to interpret the proposition that there has been a secular rise in NAIRU as pointing to a rise in the natural unemployment rate?
Coen and Hickman dispense with the common practice of linking changes in NAIRU with changes in the natural unemployment rate, preferring  instead to rely on demographic and other data to arrive at direct estimates of the natural rate, estimates which do not take as their reference point the behaviour of the rate of inflation.
They thereby avoid a circularity of reasoning which has plagued the natural rate-NAIRU literature from its earliest days: if a sustained rise in the unemployment rate is not accompanied by an abatement of inflationary pressure, then this literature can admit of only one explanation — that NAIRU, a concept which has often been conflated with that of the natural unemployment rate, must itself have risen.
Many ingenious hypotheses have been advanced to account for this supposed rise in NAIRU, the most promising of which is the notion of hysteresis discussed in the next section.
As James Tobin pointed out in his comments on the Coen and Hickman paper, a feature of their approach which exposes it to criticism from those macroeconomists who accept some variant of the NAIRU hypothesis is that it lacks a coherent explanation of the relationship between unemployment, be it Keynesian, classical or some mixture of the two, and inflation.
Tobin colourfully dubs these critics as ‘Euro-pessimists’ or ‘Euro-hypochondriacs’.
Even if it is accepted that a substantial proportion of any given unemployment rate is Keynesian in origin, Euro-pessimists fear that any expansion of demand to reduce such unemployment will hit up against supply-side constraints.
These supply constraints are not the usual physical barriers to increased output imposed by the productive potential of the economy.
Rather they take the form of the greater danger of an intensification of the wage-price-expectations spiral which would result from an expansion of demand.
The more extreme Euro-pessimists would view any attempt at expanding demand to reduce unemployment as being necessarily inflationary.
They are likely to be distinctly unimpressed by the policy implications of the taxonomic exercise undertaken by Coen and Hickman.
A thorough examination of the inflationary repercussions of policies to reduce both classical and Keynesian unemployment needs to be undertaken before such policies can be advocated safely.
The decomposition of observed unemployment rates into their classical and Keynesian parts can only serve as a first step in the formulation of macroeconomic policy since such an exercise must take place within a broader framework which encompasses concepts such as short- and long-run Phillips curves, the natural unemployment rate, and NAIRU.
For example, how should policy makers react if, having been persuaded that the larger part of observed unemployment is Keynesian, they are also persuaded that NAIRU lies well within the range BC in Figure 8.8?
The larger is the interval CE, the greater are the inflationary dangers inherent in removing Keynesian unemployment by a traditional demand expansion.
So we must go further in our exploration of the ever more complex relationship between inflation and unemployment.
Hysteresis and the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment
The concept of the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, NAIRU, was introduced into macroeconomics in the 1970s as a more acceptable version of the Friedman-Phelps notion of the natural unemployment rate, denoted above by the symbol U *;.
One of the problems which arose from Friedman's definition of the natural unemployment rate was that, apart from a list of qualifications mostly of a microeconomic nature, it appeared to possess characteristics which were usually associated with an economy in overall full employment.
If the actual unemployment rate coincides with the natural rate, we must infer following Friedman, that the overall supply of labour equals the overall demand for labour at the market clearing real wage rate.
As we saw above, Friedman went further: the natural unemployment rate was also a stable equilibrium unemployment rate in the sense that deviations from the natural rate, produced, typically, by misguided monetary policies, would only be transitory.
as if this further proposition were not strong enough, Friedman went on to claim yet another property for the natural rate: the natural unemployment rate was that unique rate at which inflationary expectations were exactly fulfilled and hence was that unique rate at which agents had no incentive to revise their expectations of inflation either upwards or downwards.
Thus in the original formulation by Friedman, the natural unemployment rate possesses two analytically separable characteristics:(a) it corresponds to a state of overall full employment;(b) it is that single rate at which the expected rate of inflation, and hence the actual rate of inflation, is neither rising nor falling.
Many non-monetarist economists were prepared to absorb characteristic (b) into their macroeconomic models, but were reluctant to take on board its more strictly classical partner, characteristic (a).
These economists were ready to accept that there probably did exist a particular unemployment rate at which inflation was neither rising nor falling but they were unwilling to associate this rate with a state of overall full employment.
The concept of NAIRU referred only to the behaviour of the actual and the expected rate of inflation.
It bore no connotation of overall equilibrium in the labour market.
Any particular estimate of NAIRU could include a large proportion of workers who were involuntarily unemployed.
Nevertheless, even though the concept of NAIRU was considerably  more palatable to mainstream macroeconomists than the Friedman natural unemployment rate, it hit up against formidable practical problems.
Consider what were generally believed to be the policy implications of the NAIRU hypothesis.
If a government wishes to take action to reduce the rate of inflation, it must deflate aggregate demand along traditional Keynesian lines, thereby raising the actual unemployment rate, U, above NAIRU.
The more severe is the deflation of demand, the larger will be the induced discrepancy between U and NAIRU and the more rapidly will the rate of inflation fall.
Moreover once inflation has levelled out at an acceptable rate, aggregate demand can be expanded once again with the result that the actual unemployment rate will fall back towards NAIRU.
To the extent that policies are widely publicized and are regarded as credible by agents, the grafting on of the rational expectations hypothesis simply speeds up the process of adjustment to a lower rate of inflation.
Many governments, most prominent among which was the former Conservative government of Mrs Margaret Thatcher, accepted the logic of the above argument and were thereby persuaded to swallow the bitter pill of demand deflation and abnormally high unemployment rates in exchange for the boon of a sustained fall in the rate of inflation.
Unfortunately the application of the anti-inflation policies which were associated with this particular interpretation of the NAIRU hypothesis was to expose many unforeseen drawbacks.
From the 1970s onwards governments restricted aggregate demand by a variety of means.
Although politicians tended to steer clear of acknowledging this aspect of policy too publicly, in their more candid moments they admitted that this cure for inflation went hand in glove with a rise in unemployment above NAIRU.
For as long as U remains above NAIRU, inflation should be falling.
The catch phrase ‘If it isn't hurting, it isn't working’ came to epitomize this approach to anti-inflation policy.
Unfortunately the predictions of this very simple hypothesis were not borne out by the facts of subsequent experience.
The deflation of aggregate demand and the rise in unemployment did appear to reduce the rate of inflation, but once unemployment had settled down at a higher level, the rate of inflation ceased to fall.
An unemployment rate well in excess of what had hitherto been considered to be a stable NAIRU was failing to produce sustained reductions in the rate of inflation beyond the initial impact effect of the fall in aggregate demand.
Some critics of the  NAIRU concept hazarded that, if there was any connection at all between unemployment and inflation, it was likely to run from changes in the unemployment rate to changes in the rate of inflation.
Hence rising unemployment should be correlated with falling inflation, but once unemployment has steadied at a new, higher level, so the rate of inflation will also steady at a new, slightly lower, but probably still unsatisfactory level.
At the very least the NAIRU hypothesis stands in need of radical modification if it is to serve as a useful guide to the conduct of anti-inflation policy.
There are two alternative ways of reacting to the stylized facts outlined above.
The first is to jettison the whole notion of NAIRU.
This would certainly accord with a powerful strand of Keynesian opinion in Britain which, from the outset, had regarded the unearthing of the Phillips curve with great circumspection and which, despite the subsequent deluge of econometric studies of the relationship between unemployment, inflation, and inflationary expectations, remained unconvinced that there existed any precise relationship between the rate of increase in money wages and the pressure of aggregate demand.
These cost-push Keynesians could look at the bleak unfolding of events from the late 1970s onwards with a justifiable sense of Schadenfreude.
To a considerable extent I share many of the views of these writers.
However there was a problem which the cost-push explanation of inflation found impossible to surmount, namely, that it does not readily lend itself to rigorous empirical verification.
Consider just one instance, one in which there has been, according to a version of the cost-push hypothesis, an intensification of trades union militancy.
How on earth does one set about devising a convincing measure of something as impalpable, though nevertheless real, as the degree of trades union militancy?
All attempts at providing such a measure have proved to be abortive.
Moreover, cost-push writers tend to subscribe to several versions of the same basic hypothesis at one and the same time.
It is perfectly possible, for example, to attribute upward pressure on wages to real wage resistance in certain circumstances and to competitive inter-union leapfrogging in other circumstances.
Indeed, it is likely that both phenomena will be at work simultaneously within an industrial relations structure such as prevails in Britain where trade unions are anxious not only to protect the real wages of their members from erosion by exogenous price increases but also to preserve their position in the pecking order of wage differentials.
We saw earlier how such explanations of inflation were greeted with pontifical disdain by monetarists.
At one stage writers who subscribed to a cost-push position were in danger of having their economists' union cards taken away from them.
The basis for the mainstream dismissal of the cost-push hypothesis concerned, as we indicated, its untestability.
The techniques of applied econometrics could not be deployed upon a hypothesis in which most of the relevant variables could not be directly measured and in which the focus of attention was continually shifting sometimes leapfrogging was the problem, sometimes real wage resistance, sometimes a Marxian class struggle for shares in the national income, but at most times some miscellany of all three problems was present contemporaneously.
The grunts of exasperation among applied econometricians were almost audible.
The reaction of the mainstream in macroeconomics was to pursue a second, less extreme line of inquiry.
Instead of switching allegiance to the ‘unscientific’ or, worse still, the ‘sociological’cost-push hypothesis, most economists have kept faith with the concept of a determinate NAIRU and have attempted to recast it in a way which would help to explain why NAIRU tends to track the path of the actual unemployment rate so closely.
One particular attempt at explaining the troubled experience of the 1980s retained the notion of NAIRU but claimed that NAIRU was not a constant number but depended on the past history of the unemployment rate.
The behaviour of NAIRU, which we shall also call the equilibrium unemployment rate, is itself path dependent.
Powerful ratchet effects produce a situation in which a sustained rise in unemployment above NAIRU results in a rise in NAIRU itself.
Following upon a sustained reduction in aggregate demand, a succession of doors slam shut.
Changing metaphor, the equilibrium unemployment rate is seen to be shackled to the actual rate.
Only during the transitional period when unemployment is rising will the chain be lengthened somewhat.
However once the unemployment rate has stabilized at a new, higher level, so too will the equilibrium rate of unemployment.
This rather skeletal account of the phenomenon of hysteresis, suggesting a connection between the time paths of the actual and the equilibrium  unemployment rates, needs to be substantially fleshed out.
Through what mechanisms will a rise in the unemployment rate have only an evanescent impact on the rate of inflation?
Three distinct mechanisms feature in the literature on hysteresis:
1.
The insider-outsider mechanism.
2.
The effect of the growth in numbers of the long-term unemployed on the money wage bargain.
3.
The dependence of the size of the capital stock on the degree of capacity utilization and hence on the level of aggregate demand.
Insider-Outsider Effects
Insider-outsider models are a more rigorous articulation of ideas which have been current in one form or another for many years, particularly in British Keynesian circles.
Formal insider-outsider models are exemplified in the recent work by Lindbeck and Snower (1986) and Blanchard and Summers (1986).
Insiders are those workers who are currently employed and who are in a position to exercise considerable muscle in the wage bargaining process owing to the major discontinuity between the skills possessed by insiders and the skills possessed by outsiders.
Most of the insiders' skills are assumed to be firm specific, acquired over the years and difficult to replicate in the short to medium run.
Because of this skill differential between insiders and outsiders, and hence the strong preference of firms to continue to employ insiders, the power of outsiders, who are unemployed, to affect the outcome of the wage bargain struck between firms and insiders is minimal over a significant range of wage changes.
The model presented below is a simplified version of that contained in Carlin and Soskice (1990).
Three characteristics describe the behaviour of insiders:
1.
Because of the significant skill differential between insiders and outsiders, insiders can be treated at a first approximation as monopolists.
2.
Insiders attempt to maximize the utility only of the representative employed worker (that is, the representative insider); they attach no utility to the welfare of unemployed workers (outsiders).
3.
Insiders are hermetically sealed from the intrusion of outsiders by the assumption of zero labour turnover.
The demand for labour for all firms, L D , is a function (a) of the real wage rate, w, and (b) of the level of effective demand for output as a whole, y D .
A decline in the level of aggregate demand will reduce y D , thereby shifting the L D curve to the left in (w, L) space.
Firms set prices as a mark up over average cost.
In its simplest form this reduces to equation (8.1): where  is the fractional mark up and LP is output per worker.
If we define the fraction m as 
In other words, the real wage rate equals output per worker minus real profits per worker.
Numerous empirical studies have suggested that both m and LP are invariant with respect to alterations in normal levels of output and employment.
Hence equation (8.2) defines a price determined real wage (PRW) which employers seek to defend from erosion in the face of money-wage demands by insiders in order to protect their real profitability.
This price determined real wage is represented in Figure 8.9 by the horizontal line PRW.
The initial level of employment for insiders is L 1 , determined by the intersection of the PRW line with the initial demand for labour curve,.
The contraction in aggregate demand brought about through restrictive macroeconomic policies serves to shift the demand for labour curve to a position .
What are the wage-price dynamics which ensue from this contraction in aggregate demand?
The representative insider now fears that his job, which he had previously assumed to be safe, might now be in jeopardy.
He is therefore prepared to countenance a reduction in his real wage so as to stave off the threat of dismissal.
Let us assume that insiders are now   willing to accept a real wage reduction so as to protect their jobs.
Figure 8.9 represents this as a fall in the real wage acceptable to the L 1 insiders from w 1 to w 2 .
If initially money wages and prices were rising at 10% per annum, insiders attempt to reach point B by restricting their money wage claims to, say, 5% per annum , that is , they are willing to accept a 5% cut in real wages.
But can they achieve this real wage cut?
Can they reach point B, thereby preserving their privileged position as insiders?
The answer is negative.
The reduction in the rate of increase of money wages will, through the mark up pricing hypothesis, lead to a similar decrease in the rate of price inflation, leaving the real wage rate unchanged at w 1 .
In other words, instead of preserving a level of insider employment L 1 at a lower real wage rate w 2 , the level of employment among insiders falls to L 2 owing to the inability of insiders directly to influence the real wage rate.
The number of insiders who are displaced into the pool of outsiders is .
Outsiders, even those who were until recently insiders, cannot penetrate the ranks of the insiders and, as a result, can no longer influence the course of wage bargaining.
Once the level of insider employment has levelled out at L 2 there is no longer an incentive to moderate the pace of money wage demands which will continue at 5%.
The volume of equilibrium unemployment has therefore been swollen by the influx of  former insiders: NAIRU has risen.
The key  feature of all models of hysteresis is obviously present in the insider-outsider model: it is only during the process of adjustment from a higher to a lower level of employment that there will be significant downward pressure on the rate of increase of money wages and prices.
Figure 8.9 Hysteresis as insider-outsider phenomenon
As was intimated earlier, less formal approaches to the inflationary biases which may be endemic within certain systems of industrial relations have been in circulation among Keynesians for many decades.
For many Keynesians, and certainly Keynes himself, the celebrated ‘problem of money wages’ was essentially one which could only be tackled on a political as opposed to an economic front.
Generally speaking the ‘political’ cure for inflation comprised some form of prices and incomes policy, and was regarded as the only alternative to the less palatable ‘economic’cure of demand deflation.
In the heady days immediately following the Keynesian revolution, many of Keynes's followers began to express concern at the consequences which might flow from a commitment to full employment.
Whereas the massive unemployment which had plagued the interwar period has at least served to keep the lid on money wages, the switch to Keynesian policies, with their emphasis on the objective of maintaining full employment, might open a Pandora's box of inflationary money wage claims.
The transformation of the industrial relations climate which would be brought about by adherence to Keynesian principles could produce a potentially catastrophic spiral of money wage increases leading to price increases leading to a build-up of inflationary expectations.
Many Keynesians went further.
They argued that, even if governments were prepared to use demand restriction and high unemployment to reduce, or at least to contain, upward pressure on money wages, there was no longer any guarantee that such policies would work.
In the British case the problem lay in the structure of collective bargaining.
Trades unions, which regarded their principal objective as being to protect the interests of their employed members (insiders), were not particularly moved — public rhetoric apart — by the plight of outsiders.
Providing that there was no threat to their members' jobs, trades unions felt that they had a free hand in wage negotiations, often seeming to pluck numbers out of thin air and try it on with employers.
A long list of criteria was trundled out to justify the eminent reasonableness of their wage claims: their members had fallen behind in the league table of wage differentials; the cost of living had increased; productivity had risen; firms' profits were  high and their members were entitled to their ‘fair’ share.
And lurking behind the smoke screen of public utterances justifying their case, there remained that most potent of sanctions, the strike threat, and with it the knowledge that employers would not defy the union by taking on and training outsiders to fill the boots of striking insiders.
The problem, neatly summarized by Blackaby (1980), was that Britain's collective bargaining structure lay betwixt and between two polar extremes: at one extreme was the highly centralized system which was prevalent in some countries of continental Europe; at the other extreme was the model of atomistic competition in labour markets which appeared to feature only in textbooks.
Britain's union structure was one of a series of ‘fragmented monopolies’, each monopoly looking over its shoulder at other monopolies and exploiting the comparison whenever it was to its advantage.
The behaviour of these fragmented monopolies is unlikely to be affected by abnormally high levels of unemployment.
Admittedly the zeal with which trades unions seek to achieve increases in the money wages of their members is likely to be tempered in times of rising unemployment, an outcome which is also predicted in the more formal models of hysteresis.
The difference between the old Keynesian and the new Keynesian approaches arises from the latter's retention, albeit in radically modified form, of the notion of an equilibrium unemployment rate, and the former's wholesale rejection of the usefulness of the NAIRU concept.
Hysteresis and the long-term unemployed
A second line of inquiry focuses on the role played by the long-term unemployed in the wage bargaining process.
Statistically there appears to exist a stable relationship between the proportion of the long-term unemployed in the total unemployment rate, denoted by the symbol LT, and the actual unemployment rate.
This relationship is represented in Figure 8.10.
A rise in the unemployment rate from U 1 to U 2 tends to raise the proportion of that rate consisting of the long-term unemployed from LT 1 to LT 2 .
Enter the distinguishing behavioural hypothesis of this version of the hysteresis model: the higher the proportion of long-term unemployment in overall unemployment, the smaller will be the impact of any given unemployment rate upon the bargaining power of trades unions.