

16
Money and Interest Rates
For the next two chapters we are going to look at the special role that money plays in the economy.
In this chapter we start by having a general look at the relationship between the amount of money in the economy and the level of economic activity.
What effect do changes in the amount of money have on the four macroeconomic objectives?
Right from the start we shall see that there is considerable disagreement between economists about just what the effects are.
Before going any further we next have to define precisely what we mean by ‘money’— not as easy a task as it sounds.
Money is more than just notes and coin.
It includes a number of other items as well.
In fact the main component of a country's money supply is not cash but deposits in banks and other financial institutions.
Only a very small proportion of these deposits are kept by the banks in their safes or tills in the form of cash.
The bulk of the deposits appear merely as bookkeeping entries in the banks' accounts.
This may sound very worrying.
Will a bank have enough cash to meet its customers' demands?
The answer is yes.
Only a small fraction of a bank's total deposits will be withdrawn at any one time, and banks always make sure that they have the ability to meet their customers' demands.
The chances of banks running out of cash are practically nil.
If the main components of money supply are various deposits in financial institutions, we must examine these institutions and the various types of deposit if we are to going to get a clear definition of money.
Section 16.2 looks at the key institutions and their role in the UK financial system.
This enables us in section 16.3 to understand the definitions of money that are officially used in the UK.
Unfortunately there is not just one definition but seven!
The reason is that there is no clear border line between what should and what should not count as money.
Thus certain items (such as building society deposits) are included in some definitions but not in others.
Having looked at the various definitions of money supply, section 16.3 goes on to consider what causes the money supply to change.
What causes it to rise?
What causes it to fall?
In section 16.4 we turn to why people demand money — not the silly question it may seem.
We are not asking why people want to obtain money: that is obvious.
What we are asking is what determines the amount of money people want to hold, whether in cash or in some form of account.
If people choose to hold money, they are thereby choosing not to spend it on goods and services or on acquiring some other form of asset such as stocks and shares or property.
Having looked at what determines the supply and demand for money, we then put   them together and see what determines equilibrium in money markets.
Chapter 17 then looks at how the government alters the supply of money in the economy and influences the money market.
16.1 The role of money in the economy
The amount of money in the economy can have a major effect on aggregate demand.
Changes in aggregate demand will affect any or all of the four macroeconomic problems: the rate of growth of output, the rate of inflation, the level of unemployment and the balance of payments.
The way in which changes in money supply influence the economy is a fiercely debated subject in macroeconomics.
Monetarists argue that changes in money supply have a large effect on aggregate demand.
This in turn has a large effect on inflation and the balance of payments, but in the long run little or no effect on output and employment.
Keynesians argue that changes in money supply have a rather uncertain effect on aggregate demand.
Any changes in aggregate demand that do occur, however, will affect output and employment as well as inflation and the balance of payments, depending on the amount of slack in the economy.
Because of the rather uncertain link between money supply and aggregate demand, Keynesians argue that the government should try to influence aggregate demand directly through fiscal policy.
Money supply and aggregate demand
If money supply changes, what is the mechanism by which it will affect aggregate demand?
Monetarists argue that there is a direct mechanism.
As such, if the  government's monetary policy involves expanding the supply of money, aggregate demand will rise directly.
Keynesians, however, argue that the mechanisms are indirect and unreliable.
As such the effects of changing the money supply will be uncertain.
The direct transmission mechanism
People desire to hold a certain proportion of their assets in money form.
This creates a demand for money (M d ).
If the supply of money in the economy (M s ) increases, there will be more money available than people require to hold (M s > M d ).
They will therefore spend the surplus, thus increasing aggregate demand:
There is thus a direct transmission mechanism from an increase in money supply to an increase in aggregate demand.
Why will aggregate demand fall if the supply of money falls?
Indirect transmission mechanisms
An indirect transmission mechanism is where a change in money supply first affects some intermediate variable.
This intermediate variable then affects aggregate demand.
There are two main indirect mechanisms.
The first is via changes in interest rates.
The second is via changes in the exchange rate.
Via changes in interest rates.
An alternative to spending money on goods and services is to purchase securities (e.g. government bonds, company shares).
Thus with an increase in money supply, the demand for securities will rise above their supply.
This will cause their price to rise.
These securities yield a given interest or dividend which is payable on the original face value of the security, not on its current market price.
For example, the government may issue some bonds today with a face value of £100 which pay £10 interest per year.
(The interest that the government has to pay will reflect the market rate of interest at the time when the bonds are issued.)
These bonds will be redeemed by the government at their face value at some specified date in the future, say in twenty years' time.
In other words, the holders of the bonds will be paid £100 on that date (known as the ‘maturity date’).
In the meantime, of course, the holders of the bonds may want to sell them.
This they can do through a stockbroker, who will sell them via the stock market to people who want to buy such bonds.
The current market price of such bonds will be determined by demand and supply.
It may be above or below the face value.
But whatever the current price of the bond, the government will continue to pay the same fixed sum, year in, year out.
The higher the current market rate of interest, the lower will be the market price of existing bonds.
This has to be so otherwise no one would be willing to buy old bonds.
For example, if the current rate of interest were 20 per cent , no one would be willing to pay £100 for a bond that only yielded £10 per year.
The bond's market value would have to fall to around £50.
At that price an annual payment of £10 would be equivalent to a 20 per cent rate of interest.
Table 16.1 shows how the market price and the market rate of interest vary with each other for a bond yielding £5 per year.
Complete a similar table showing the market price for a bond yielding £6 per year when current market rates of interest are 6 per cent, 4 per cent and 8 per cent .
So let us return to what happens when money supply rises.
People will buy more securities.
This will drive up the price of securities and hence will drive down their   current market rate of interest.
It is the same story with company shares (or equities as they are called).
A rise in money supply causes more shares to be purchased.
This drives up share prices.
But given that companies pay a dividend (based on current profit) per share, the higher the price of the shares, the lower the dividend will be as a percentage of that price.
Thus an increase in money supply will lower interest rates.
Lower interest rates will make it cheaper for firms and individuals to borrow.
Borrowing and hence spending will thus increase:
The question is, will interest rates be strongly or only slightly affected by changes in money supply, and will aggregate demand be strongly or only slightly affected by changes in interest rates?
Keynesians and monetarists do not agree on this.
We will examine their disagreement in Chapter 18.
Via changes in the exchange rate.
In recent years many economists have argued that there is another important indirect mechanism through which changes in money supply affect aggregate demand.
This is the exchange rate.
This is an important mechanism if a country (a) has a high proportion of imports and exports to national income and (b) operates under a system of floating exchange rates.
A rise in money supply will cause an increase in the demand for imports and for foreign assets.
There will thus be an increase in the supply of pounds coming on to the foreign exchange market.
This will cause a fall in the exchange rate (a depreciation).
Less foreign currency will be obtained for a pound; or put another way, more pounds will be obtained for a given amount of foreign currency.
For exporters who price their exports in foreign currency, a fall in the exchange rate will mean that they earn more pounds per unit sold.
This will encourage them to sell more exports.
At the same time imports will now be more expensive.
Less will therefore be purchased.
The effect of more exports and less imports is to increase aggregate demand:
(Where er is the exchange rate, X is expenditure on exports and M is expenditure on imports.)
Whether in the long term this will lead to a permanent increase in output, or whether it will simply lead to higher prices, is again a fiercely debated question.
Certainly prices can be expected to rise somewhat.
This is due directly to the higher price of imported goods and imported raw materials, and indirectly to the rise in wages that will be necessary to maintain workers' standard of living.
We will examine this mechanism in detail in Chapter 22, when we focus on the balance of payments and exchange rates.
The functions of money
If changes in money supply have a major effect on the economy, and if the government therefore attempts to control the supply of money, it is important to have a clear understanding of (a) the purposes of money and (b) the definition of money.
The main purpose of money is as a ‘medium of exchange’.
It also has three other important  functions .
A medium of exchange
In a subsistence economy where individuals make their own clothes, grow their own food, provide their own entertainments, etc., people do not need money.
If people want to exchange any goods, they will do so by barter.
In other words, they will do swaps with other people.
The complexities of a modern developed economy, however, make barter totally impractical for most purposes.
Someone else may have something you want, but there is no guarantee that they will want what you have to offer them in return.
What is more, under a system of capitalism where people are employed by others to do a specialist task, it would be totally impractical for people to be paid in food, clothes, cars, electrical goods, tickets to entertainments of various kinds and so on.
What is necessary is a medium of exchange which is generally acceptable as a means of Medium of payment for goods and services and as a means of payment for labour and other factor services.
‘Money’ is any such medium.
Have you ever engaged in any form of barter?
(Have you ever swapped things?)
If so, why did you do this rather than selling your unwanted items and then buying the items you wanted?
Are there any circumstances in which barter is superior to the use of money?
Money may be in the form of some physical item that is actually handed from one person to another: for example, gold, silver, other coin, banknotes, or even something like cigarettes.
To be a suitable physical means of exchange, money must be light enough to carry around, must come in a number of denominations, large and small, and must not be easy to forge (see Box 16.3).
Alternatively, money must be in a form that enables it to be transferred indirectly through some acceptable mechanism.
For example money in  the form of bookkeeping entries in bank accounts can be transferred from one account to another by the use of such mechanisms as cheques, standing orders and direct debits.
How does money aid the specialization and division of labour?
A means of storing wealth
People need a means whereby the fruits of today's labour can be used to purchase goods and services in the future.
People need to be able to store their wealth: they want a means of saving.
Money is one such medium in which to hold wealth.
It can be saved.
A means of evaluation
Money is the unit used to value goods, services and assets.
It allows the value of one good to be compared with that of another.
In other words, the value of goods is expressed in terms of prices, and prices are expressed in money terms.
It also allows dissimilar things to be added up.
Thus a person's wealth or a company's assets can best be expressed in money terms.
Similarly, a country's national income is expressed in money terms.
There are, however, serious problems with relying on money prices as the means of evaluating income and wealth:
Money prices may be distorted by monopoly power.
They will ignore externalities.
Simply adding up the money incomes of individuals in order to get a measure of their total incomes ignores questions of the distribution of income.
Why else may money prices give a poor indication of the value of goods and services?
A means of establishing the value of future claims and payments
People often want to agree today the price of some future payment.
Thus workers and managers will want to agree the wage rate for the coming year.
Firms will want to sign contracts with their suppliers specifying the price of raw materials and other supplies.
When people employ a builder to repair their house, they will probably want to agree a price beforehand.
The use of money prices is the most convenient means of measuring future claims.
What should count as money?
What items, then, should be included in the definition of money?
Must an item be able to fulfil all four functions of money to be able to be classed as money?
Unfortunately, there is no clear answer to this.
There is no sharp border line between money and non-money.
Cash (notes and coin) obviously counts as money.
It readily meets all the functions of money.
Goods (fridges, cars and cabbages) do not count as money.
But what about various financial assets such as bank accounts, building society accounts and stocks and shares?
Do they count as money?
The answer is ‘It depends’: it depends on how narrowly money is defined.
Narrow definitions of money only include items that can be spent directly: items such as cash and current accounts in banks (since they can be spent directly by using cheques).
Note that cheques and credit cards, although they are used to pay for goods directly, do not themselves count as money.
Rather it is the balance (or credit limit) in the account on which they are drawn that counts as money.
Broad definitions of money also include various items such as deposit accounts in banks that cannot be spent directly but which can nevertheless be readily converted into cash.
In terms of the broad definition of money would a deposit account passbook count as money?
In the UK there are several different measures of money supply — some narrow, some broad.
In order to understand their significance and the ways in which money supply can be controlled, it is first necessary to look at the various types of account in which money can be held and at the various financial institutions involved.
This we do in section 16.2.
SUMMARY
1.
How changes in money supply affect aggregate demand is a highly controversial issue.
Monetarists argued that changes in money supply have a direct and powerful effect.
Keynesians argue that they have an indirect and uncertain effect.
2.
The direct mechanism is where an increase in money supply leads people directly to spend the resulting excess of money supply over money demand.
3.
The indirect mechanism operates via interest rates or exchange rates.
In the former, a rise in money supply leads to a fall in interest rates, which in turn leads to an increase in consumption and investment.
In the latter, a rise in money supply leads to a fall in the exchange rate, which leads to a rise in exports and a fall in imports.
4
Money's main function is as a medium of exchange.
In addition it is a means of storing wealth, a means of establishing the value of future claims and payments.
5
Narrow definitions of money include items that can be directly spent: cash and money in cheque-book and debit card accounts.
Broad definitions of money also include items that can be readily converted into cash.
16.2 The financial system in the UK
The role of the financial sector
There are many different types of institution that make up the financial sector, from banks to building societies to various institutions in the City of London.
They are jointly known as financial intermediaries.
They all have the common function of providing a link between those who wish to lend and those who wish to borrow.
In other words, they act as the mechanism whereby the supply of funds is matched to the demand for funds.
As financial intermediaries these institutions provide four important services.
Expert advice
Financial intermediaries can advise their customers on financial matters: on the best way of investing their funds and on alternative ways of obtaining finance.
This should help to encourage the flow of savings and the efficient use of them.
Expertise in channelling funds
Financial intermediaries have the specialist knowledge to be able to channel funds to those areas that yield the highest return.
This too encourages the flow of savings as it gives savers the confidence that their savings will earn a good rate of interest.
Financial intermediaries also ensure that projects that are potentially profitable will be able to obtain finance.
They help to increase allocative efficiency.
Maturity transformation
Many people and firms want to borrow money for long periods of time, and yet many depositors want to be able to withdraw their deposits on demand or at short notice.
If people had to rely on borrowing directly from other people, there would be a problem here: the lenders would not be prepared to lend for a long enough period.
If you had £100 000 of savings, would you be prepared to lend it to a friend to buy a house if the friend was going to take 25 years to pay it back?
Even if there was no risk whatsoever of your friend defaulting, most people would be totally unwilling to tie up their savings for so long.
This is where a building society comes in.
It borrows money from a vast number of small savers, who are able to withdraw their money on demand or at short notice.
It then lends the money to house purchasers for a long period of time by granting mortgages (typically these are paid back over 20 to 30 years).
This process  whereby financial intermediaries lend for longer periods of time than they borrow is known as maturity transformation.
They are able to do this because with a large number of depositors it is highly unlikely that they would all want to withdraw their deposits at the same time.
On any one day, although some people will be withdrawing money, others will be making new deposits.
Risk transformation
You may be unwilling to lend money directly to another person in case they do not pay up.
You are unwilling to take the risk.
Financial intermediaries, however, by lending to large numbers of people, are willing to risk the odd case of default.
They can absorb the loss because of the interest they earn on all the other loans.
This spreading of risks is known as risk transformation.
What is more, financial intermediaries may have the expertise to be able to assess just how risky a loan is.
Which of the above are examples of economies of scale?
In addition to channelling funds from depositors to borrowers, certain financial institutions have another important function.
This is to provide a means of transmitting payments.
Thus by the use of cheques, credit cards, standing orders, etc., money can be transferred from one person or institution to another without having to rely on cash.
Financial institutions in the UK
The different financial intermediaries can be grouped according to the types of deposit taking and lending in which they specialize.
Commercial banks
These include the familiar high street banks such as Barclays and the National Westminster.
They specialize in providing branch banking facilities to individuals.
They operate current (cheque-book) accounts, on most of which overdraft facilities can be arranged, and deposit accounts, which by offering a higher interest rate but no cheque book are designed to encourage savers.
They also provide personal loan facilities and financial advice to their customers.
Unlike most other financial institutions, they are involved in operating the payments system: the transmission of money through cheques, standing orders, direct debits, etc.
The category of commercial banks also includes overseas banks.
These have grown enormously in recent years, especially since the abolition of foreign exchange controls in 1979.
Although they have made some ventures into the high street, their major specialism is the finance of international trade and they deal extensively in the foreign exchange market.
Merchant banks
These specialize in receiving large deposits from and making large loans to industry.
They often act as ‘brokers’, arranging loans for companies from a number of different sources.
They also offer financial advice to industry and ‘accept’ bills of exchange (see pages 660–4).
They provide assistance to firms in raising new capital through the issue of new shares.
Examples of merchant banks are Rothschilds and Hambros.
Savings banks
These were originally set up to provide savings facilities rather than current account and clearing facilities.
The Trustee Savings Banks were one of the best known of such institutions.
Today, however, the TSB is just another high street bank, offering the same facilities as all the others.
The one remaining example of savings banks in the UK is the National Savings Bank (NSB).
This is a government-run institution and operates through post offices.
The savings deposited in the NSB are called ‘national savings’ and are lent to the government.
Building societies
These specialize in granting loans (mortgages) for house purchase.
They compete for the savings of the general public through a network of high street branches.
They include many familiar names such as the Halifax, the Woolwich and the Nationwide Anglia.
Unlike commercial banks they are not public limited companies, their ‘shares’ being the deposits made by their investors.
Finance houses
These specialize in providing hire-purchase finance for the purchase of consumer durables such as cars and electrical goods.
This is normally arranged through the retailer, which will offer credit to its customers.
Finance houses also lease out capital equipment to firms.
Their main source of funds are banks, but they do also receive deposits from the general public.
Several finance houses are subsidiaries of commercial banks.
Discount houses
These institutions, unique to the UK, play an absolutely central role in the monetary system.
Their specialism is in lending and borrowing for very short periods of time from one day to up to about three months.
There are nine discount houses, all members of the London Discount Market Association.
Despite their importance they are not household names as they do not deal with the general public.
(Have you heard of King & shaxson or Gerrard & national ?)
We will examine these various institutions in more detail later, as we see just how the financial system operates.
At this stage, however, it is worth noting an important trend in recent years.
Increasingly, the boundaries between the different financial institutions are becoming less clear cut.
For example, in the past there was a clear distinction between banks and building societies.
Today, however, they have become much more similar, with building societies now offering current account facilities and cash machines, and commercial banks granting mortgages.
In fact, in 1989 the Abbey National Building Society became a public limited company and thereby ceased to be a building society, becoming instead a bank.
This is all part of a trend away from the narrow specialization of the past and towards the offering of a wider and wider range of services.
Inevitably, as this trend continues the services offered by the various institutions will increasingly overlap.
At the heart of the financial system of a country is the central bank.
In the case of the UK this is the Bank of England.
Its role is to oversee and regulate the activities of the different financial institutions.
It has the task of ensuring the stability and efficiency of the financial system.
It also has the task of carrying out the government's monetary policy.
In order to understand how these various institutions affect the economy and the  part they play in the operation of monetary policy, we need to examine some of their activities and functions in more detail.
Deposit taking and lending: liabilities and assets
Liabilities
Customers' deposits in banks and other deposit-taking institutions such as building societies are liabilities to these institutions.
This means simply that the customers have the claim on these deposits and thus the institutions are liable to meet the claims.
There are two major types of deposit: sight deposits and time deposits.
Sight deposits.
Sight deposits are any deposits that can be withdrawn on demand by the depositor without penalty.
They are sometimes called ‘demand deposits’.
In the past, sight deposits did not pay interest.
In recent years, however, banks have introduced various types of interest-bearing sight account.
The most familiar form of sight deposit are current accounts at banks.
Depositors are issued with cheque books which enable them to spend the money directly without first having to go to the bank and draw the money out in cash.
Cheque guarantee cards facilitate the process.
A recent development with current accounts has been the introduction of debit cards.
These cards are used rather like credit cards.
You hand them to the shop assistant when making a purchase and your current account is automatically debited by the amount of your purchase.
This process is usually done electronically via a machine at the shop's cash till (see Box 16.5).
Banks hope that in time the use of these cards will substantially reduce the number of cheques that are written, since debit-card transactions are much cheaper for the banks to process than transactions by cheque.
An important feature of current accounts is that banks often allow customers to be overdrawn.
That is, they can draw on their account and make payments to other people in excess of the amount of money they have deposited.
This facility is a crucial ingredient in the process whereby the money supply expands.
If person A is given an overdraft and then draws a cheque on the account and pays it to person B, person B's bank account has been credited and he or she can draw this money even though person A never deposited the money in the first place.
Time deposits.
These deposits require notice of withdrawal.
They pay interest.
With some types of account a depositor can withdraw a certain amount of money on demand, but will have to pay a penalty of so many days' interest.
They are not cheque-book accounts.
The most familiar form of time deposits are the deposit and savings accounts in banks and the various savings accounts in building societies.
No overdraft facilities exist with time deposits.
The distinction between sight and time deposits has become increasingly blurred in recent years, with interest being paid on current accounts and with instant-access, no-penalty, high-interest accounts.
Assets
A financial institution's assets are items it owns and its claims on others.
Banks and certain other financial institutions, such as building societies, need to hold a certain amount of their assets as notes and coin.
This is largely used as ‘till money’ to meet the day-to-day demands by customers for cash.
Cash, however, earns no interest for banks.
The vast majority of banks' assets are therefore in the form of various types of loan — to individuals and firms, to other financial institutions and to the government.
These are ‘assets’ since they represent claims that the banks have on other people.
Some of these loans are for short periods.
Overdrafts to customers are often granted for a few days or weeks.
Some loans to other financial institutions may be loans ‘at call’.
These are loans that the banks can reclaim on demand.
Some institutions, such as building societies, have few if any short-term assets.
Others, such as the discount houses (as we shall see later), have assets that are almost entirely short term.
Other loans are for much longer periods.
For example, banks grant personal loans to customers to be repaid in instalments over a set number of years (typically six months to five years).
Building societies' major assets are mortgage loans.
These are very long-term and are typically paid back over 25 years.
Deposit taking and lending: retail and wholesale deposits and loans
An important distinction is that made between retail and wholesale deposits and loans.
Retail deposit taking and lending are the familiar type done by the high street banks, the National Savings Bank and the building societies, through their various branches.
The terms of deposits and loans are published and are at standard rates of interest for each category.
Interest rates are adjusted from time to time to reflect market conditions, and will be chosen to balance long-term inflows of deposits with the demand for loans: higher interest rates attracting more deposits and reducing the demand for loans.
Wholesale deposits and loans are those by and to firms who want to deposit or borrow large sums of money.
These may be for short periods of time to account for the non-matching of the firm's payments and receipts from its business.
They may be for longer periods of time, for various investment purposes.
These wholesale deposits and loans are very large sums of money.
Banks thus compete against each other for them and negotiate individual terms with the firm to suit the firm's particular requirements.
The rates of interest negotiated will reflect the current market rates of interest and the terms of the particular loan/deposit.
Very large loans to firms are often divided (‘syndicated’) between several banks.
Liquidity and profitability
Financial institutions keep a range of liabilities and assets.
The balance of items in this range is influenced by two important considerations: profitability and liquidity.
Profitability.
Profits are made by lending money out at a higher rate of interest than that paid to depositors.
Liquidity.
The liquidity of an asset is the ease with which it can be converted into cash without loss.
Cash itself, by definition, is perfectly liquid.
Some assets, such as money lent at call to other financial institutions, are highly liquid.
Although not actually cash, these assets can be converted into cash on demand with no financial penalty.
Other assets, however, are much less liquid.
Personal loans to the general public or mortgages for house purchase can only be redeemed by the bank as each instalment is paid.
Other advances for fixed periods are only repaid at the end of that period.
Other assets, such as government bonds — i.e. loans to government for a fixed number of years — are somewhere in the middle.
They can be sold quickly on the Stock Exchange if banks are short of cash.
But their price fluctuates with market conditions and the banks may be unwilling to sell them if their current market price is too low.
In other words, they can easily be converted into cash but may involve some loss.
Financial institutions must maintain sufficient liquidity in their assets to meet the demands of depositors.
Profitability is the major aim of banks and most other financial institutions.
However, the aims of profitability and liquidity tend to conflict.
In general, the more liquid an asset, the less profitable it is, and vice versa .
Advances to customers are profitable to banks but highly illiquid.
Cash is totally liquid, but earns no profit.
Thus financial institutions like to hold a range of assets with varying degrees of liquidity and profitability.
To economize on cash holdings (which earn no interest), financial institutions hold other highly liquid assets which act as reserves, but which nevertheless earn them   some interest (see pages 658–60).
The greater the liquidity of its liabilities, and the more volatile the demands of depositors are for cash, the greater the proportion of liquid assets the institution must hold.
The ratio of an institution's liquid assets to illiquid assets is known as its liquidity ratio.
For example, if a bank had £100 million of assets, of which £10 million were liquid and £90 million were illiquid, the bank would have a 10 per cent liquidity ratio.
If a financial institution's liquidity ratio is too high, it will make too little profit.
If the ratio is too low, there will be the risk that customers' demands may not be able to be met: this would cause a crisis of confidence and Possible closure.
Institutions thus  have to make a judgement as to what liquidity ratio is best — one that is neither too high nor too low.
They are guided and persuaded in this process by the Bank of England.
Commercial banks
By far the largest element of money supply is bank deposits.
It is not surprising, then, that banks play an absolutely crucial role in the monetary system.
Under the 1979 and 1987 Banking Acts, a monetary sector was defined.
This consists of a series of financial institutions whose activities are supervised by the Bank of England.
The largest group of institutions in the monetary sector are the recognized banks.
(Also included are the National Girobank, the discount houses and the banking department at the Bank of England.)
To be a recognized bank, a bank must be granted a licence by the Bank of England.
This requires it to have paid-up capital of at least £5 million and to meet other requirements about its asset structure and the range of banking services it offers.
If a bank is not recognized, it cannot use the word ‘bank’ in its title (unless it is an overseas bank operating in the UK and it is made clear that it is using the title ‘bank’because it is entitled to do so in its country of origin).
All the major banks in the UK and most of the larger foreign ones are in fact recognized by the Bank of England.
The most important of the recognized banks in the UK for the functioning of the economy and for the implementation of monetary policy are the clearing banks.
These are the main retail banks in the UK and include the familiar high street names: Barclays, Lloyds, Midland, National Westminster, Co-operative Bank, Abbey National, Royal Bank of Scotland, TSB, Bank of Scotland, Clydesdale Bank and Standard Chartered.
Banks and the transmission of payments: the clearing system
The clearing banks are so called because they operate a central clearing house in London.
This is a means of settling banks' debts with each other on a daily basis.
It enables cheques, standing orders and other means of payment to be cleared rapidly.
But how does it work?
Let us examine the case of just two banks, say Lloyds and Midland.
Each day all the cheques written by Midland customers that Lloyds customers have received and paid into their accounts are sent by Lloyds branches to its head-office clearing department and are added up.
Likewise all the cheques that Lloyds customers have written and have been deposited in Midland accounts are sent to Midland head office and are added up.
Every day the two banks take the bundles of each other 's cheques along to the clearing house and exchange them.
The values of the two bundles are compared.
If Midland customers have paid, say, £1 million more to Lloyds customers than Lloyds customers have to Midland customers, Midland makes a single payment of £1 million to Lloyds, drawn on Midland's account in the Bank of England.
A simple bookkeeping entry adjustment is made.
(As we shall see, all recognized banks keep accounts with the Bank of England.)
The debt has been settled.
The cheques are then passed back to the branches on whose accounts they are drawn.
The two banks then make the necessary adjustments to all their individual customers' accounts.
This procedure is carried out for each pair of banks.
When customers of one branch deposit cheques from customers of a different branch of the same bank, the clearing house is not involved.
Clearing simply takes place within the bank.
Increasingly, the process of clearing is done electronically rather than manually, the information to debit or credit individuals' accounts being sent down the line to the  various branches by computer.
Direct debits, standing orders and debit-card payments are cleared entirely by computer.
The clearing system, being nationwide and increasingly computerized, makes for a very efficient system of transmitting payments.
It is a long way from barter!
Would there be any drawbacks of a completely automated system of clearing, whereby the branch of a bank into which a cheque was paid simply fed the information into a nationwide computer and the computer then (a) debited the account at the branch on which it was drawn and (b) for clearing purposes added the amount to the total paid from the one bank to the other on that day?
Banks and the transformation of maturity: liabilities and assets
Apart from providing a mechanism for the transmission of payments, the other important role of the banks is to provide financial intermediation.
As we have seen, this involves maturity transformation.
In other words, the average liquidity of bank deposits is greater than that of bank loans.
Banks borrow short and lend relatively long.
That is how they make their profit.
To understand this process in more detail and to prepare the way for showing how money supply expands or contracts, we must examine the particular types of deposit and loan (of liability and asset).
Table 16.2 shows the total liabilities and assets of UK recognized banks at the end of January 1990.
They are set out in the form of a balance sheet.
Sterling liabilities
Time deposits form the largest item, accounting for around 50 per cent of the total.
Sight deposits are the other major item, accounting for around 28 per cent.
Up to the mid-1980s, there was a sharp  distinction between most time and sight accounts as far as personal customers were concerned (i.e. at the retail level): time accounts paid interest whereas sight accounts did not.
Today the distinction is more blurred.
Some sight accounts still do not pay interest.
These types of account normally have more extensive overdraft facilities or involve smaller overdraft charges.
Other sight accounts, however, do pay interest at a rate only slightly below that on time accounts.
This development has made sight accounts more popular with many customers, offering as they do the benefits of a time account (namely, interest) but with instant access with no loss of interest, and cheque-book and debit-card facilities.
As you can see from the figures, the bulk of sight deposits are from the private sector: individuals and firms.
In the case of time deposits, although private-sector deposits are the largest component, a substantial proportion are from the monetary sector: in other words, from other banks and other financial institutions.
Inter-bank lending has grown over the years as money markets have become deregulated and as deposits are moved from one currency to another to take advantage of different rates of interest between different countries.
A large proportion of overseas deposits are inter-bank deposits (from foreign banks).
Certificates of deposit (CDs) are certificates issued by banks to customers (usually firms) for large deposits of a fixed term (e.g. £100 000 for eighteen months).
These certificates can be sold by one customer to another, thereby transferring ownership, and are thus relatively liquid to the depositor but illiquid to the bank (see Box 16.6).
The use of CDs has grown rapidly in recent years.
Their use by firms has meant that, at a wholesale level, sight accounts have become less popular.
Items in suspense and transmission are funds in the process of being transferred from one customer's account to another.
Capital and other funds include shareholders' funds and internal funds of the banks themselves.
The Bank of England oversees the activities of the banks.
It must ensure that the banking system is stable and that therefore banks have adequate liquidity.
It also has the responsibility for controlling the money supply, which largely consists of bank deposits.
For both these reasons the Bank of England will need to monitor and if necessary influence the level of bank deposits.
Those deposits which the Bank of England considers important for these purposes are known as eligible liabilities.
These are total sterling deposits less (a) those having an original maturity in excess of two years,(b) various inter-bank deposits, since to count these would essentially be double counting, and (c) 40 per cent of items in transit.
Sterling assets
In order to fulfil the twin aims of liquidity and profitability banks hold a whole range of assets.
Ideally they would like these assets to be as illiquid as possible, since the less the liquidity, the higher the rate of interest they can charge.
But they must always have sufficient liquidity to cover the possibility of any withdrawals.
The shorter the average maturity of their deposits, the greater will have to be the liquidity of their assets.
The balance sheet in Table 16.2 shows the various sterling assets of the recognized banks in descending order of liquidity.
Notes and coin by definition are totally liquid.
This is the money that banks keep in their safes or tills for everyday use.
Operational balances in the Bank of England are like the banks' own current accounts and are used for clearing purposes.
They can be withdrawn in cash on demand and are thus also totally liquid.
They do not earn interest.
The amount that banks hold in cash and operational balances is up to them and depends on the demand for cash that they expect from their customers.
Since they earn no interest, the banks like to keep as little as possible of their assets in these two forms.
As you can see from Table 16.2, they account for a tiny fraction of total assets.
All recognized banks (and all other institutions within the officially defined monetary sector) are required to keep cash balances in the Bank of England to the value of l/2 per cent of their eligible liabilities.
These cash ratio deposits are non-operational: in other words, the banks cannot withdraw them.
Even though banks hold only very small amounts of cash, they nevertheless hold a large amount of other relatively liquid assets which act as reserves, but which at the same time earn interest.
The largest category of these is market loans.
Market loans consist of a variety of different loans from a few hours to a few weeks, mainly to other banks or to financial institutions such as the discount houses which specialize in short-term lending and borrowing.
The market for short-term loans and deposits is known as the money market.
The most liquid of the market loans are money at call and short notice lent to the discount houses.
Money at call is money which can be withdrawn at only a few hours' notice.
It is sometimes referred to as ‘overnight money’.
Money at short notice is money lent for up to fourteen days.
Money at call is the main reserve that banks draw on if they are short of cash.
It is obvious, then, that the discount houses play a crucial role in the UK monetary system.
Recognizing this importance, the Bank of England requires the banks to keep deposits with the discount houses of at least 21/2 per cent of their eligible liabilities.
Other UK market loans are primarily short-term loans to, or assets in, other banks.
For example, if one bank has excess cash and another a shortage of cash, the first bank could make a short-term loan to the second.
Certificates of deposit are an important part of other UK market loans.
The bank with surplus cash could buy CDs on the money market that had been issued by another bank.
In addition to loans to other banks, the category of ‘other market loans’ also includes short-term loans to local authorities and building societies.
If a bank has a surplus of cash, why might it choose to make a market loan with it rather than giving extra personal loans or mortgages to its customers?
Market loans account for some 26 per cent of banks' sterling assets and are thus a major source of liquidity to individual banks.
Note, however, that although short-term loans from one bank to another may provide an individual bank with liquidity, they do not provide the banking system as a whole with liquidity.
Suppose there was a sudden surge in demand for cash from the general public.
Would the existence of inter-bank market loans help to meet the demand in any way?
(We will look at the answer to this problem later on.)
Bills of exchange are of three types: Treasury bills, local authority bills and commercial bills.
A bill of exchange is a certificate whereby the issuer (the borrower) promises to pay a certain amount of money on some specified future date.
The purchaser of the bill is thus giving the issuer of the bill a loan from the date of purchase until the date of maturity.
Bills pay no interest.
In order to make it worthwhile for people to buy bills, therefore, they must be sold below their face value (i.e. at a discount).
The discount price will depend on current short-term rates of interest on comparable investments in other assets.
The higher the rates of interest on other assets, the lower will be the price that people will be prepared to pay for bills (and hence the higher their rate of discount).
For example, if interest rates are currently 12 per cent on other equivalent assets, a £100 000 bill will be sold for approximately £97 000, which will earn the purchaser an approximately 3 per cent rate of discount over the three months, which is equivalent to approximately 12 per cent per annum .
(Note that a rate of discount is calculated on the face value not the purchase price.
This is different from the way that rates of interest are calculated.
Interest rates are based on the initial sum, not the sum at the end of the period.
So, for example, £3000 interest for an investment of £97 000 is somewhat more than 3 per cent : it is 3/97 × 100 = 3.09 per cent .)
Treasury bills are issued by the Bank of England on behalf of the government.
They are, in effect, loans to the government.
They are issued for three months (91 days) at a weekly tender (an auction where bids are submitted in writing).
The price that they are sold for, and hence their rate of discount, will depend on demand and supply.
Demand and supply will ensure that the rate of discount will reflect market rates of interest.
But the Bank of England can nevertheless influence the rate of discount by altering the amount of Treasury bills it sells.
In fact this is the major way in which the government seeks to alter market rates of interest.
(This is examined in Chapter 17.)
They are thus of great importance in the management of the economy despite their small total in banks' balance sheets.
Local authority bills are also three-month bills and provide an important source of short-term finance to local authorities.
Commercial bills are issued by firms.
They have grown in importance in recent years as a way of financing trade, and in particular of tiding firms over the period from when they have to buy inputs to when they are able to sell the finished output.
They are issued for anything from one month to twelve, but three months is typical.
The main purchasers of bills are the discount houses, which then sell many of them at a slightly higher price, to the banks.
The banks do not buy bills directly from the issuers.
They only buy them from discount houses, and then only after the bills are a few weeks old.
Bills can be very easily bought and sold, and their market price steadily rises throughout the three months, with little fluctuation, until the face value is reached on maturity date.
They therefore provide a secure and highly liquid asset for the banks.
If a discount house buys a £50 000 Treasury bill for £48 000 at roughly what price will it sell it to a bank after six weeks?
Investments are of two major types.
Investments in public-sector stock are mainly in short-dated government bonds (see Table 16.3).
As explained in section 16.1, their price fluctuates inversely with the current market rate of interest.
Since a rise in interest rates can cause quite a severe fall in the price of bonds, banks could make a   considerable capital loss if they were forced to sell them at such times.
Thus although they can easily be sold, they are not very liquid.
If, however, a bond only has a short time left to maturity, it will be much more liquid: its market price will be near its face value.
Thus banks are very willing to hold these ‘short-dated’ bonds.
Banks normally  do not hold bonds with more than five years to maturity and a large proportion of their bonds have less than one year to maturity.
Examine the bond prices given in Table 16.3.
How do the prices relate to (a) their interest payments (on face value) and (b) their closeness to maturity?
Other investments are largely in subsidiary banks in the UK or abroad.
Banks do not invest in company shares (equities) or company bonds (debentures).
Advances are the major profit-earning asset for the banks and account for over 60 per cent of their sterling assets.
Advances include all the various forms of loan to households and firms.
The three major categories at retail level are overdrafts, personal loans for fixed periods, and mortgages.
Miscellaneous assets largely consist of payments owed but not yet received from other banks.
The Bank of England has the power to require banks to make ‘special deposits’ in the Bank of England.
These deposits are then frozen — they cannot be withdrawn by the banks.
They are thus a simple mechanism of reducing banks' liquidity and hence the amount of lending that banks can safely do.
The special deposits are only released when the Bank of England feels that the time is right to allow credit to expand again.
The government after 1980 chose not to use this method of controlling bank lending and hence the figure for special deposits in Table 16.2 is zero.
The facility still remains for them to be used should the government so choose.
As we have seen, it is important for banks to maintain adequate liquidity.
This means that the banks must hold enough cash and assets that can be readily turned into cash to be able to meet any demands from their customers.
The following assets are defined by the Bank of England as being liquid:
Operational balances with the Bank of England.
Money at call and short notice with the discount houses.
Bills of exchange: Treasury, local authority and certain commercial bills.
Government bonds with less than a year to maturity.
Before 1981, these assets were known as ‘reserve assets’ and banks were required to hold a 12½ per cent‘reserve assets ratio’.
This meant that reserve assets had to be at least 12½ per cent of eligible liabilities.
Today the only statutory requirement is the ½ per cent cash ratio that banks must keep with the Bank of England.
It is largely up to the banks themselves to decide on the ratio that they consider to be ‘prudent’: i.e. the ratio that provides them with enough liquid assets to enable them to meet any demands for cash.
Nevertheless the Bank of England still requires banks (and other institutions in the monetary sector) to maintain sufficient liquidity, and from time to time it can order them to increase their liquidity ratio if it feels that this is necessary.
The actual ratio that the Bank of England considers to be prudent will depend on the type of bank and its proportion of sight deposits to demand deposits.
(Note that the Bank of England does not regard cash in tills as a reserve asset.
The reason is that this is cash that banks are likely to need anyway, and which cannot therefore be used to meet an increase in demand for cash.)
Why are government bonds which still have eleven months to run regarded as liquid, whereas overdrafts granted for a few weeks are not?
The role of the London money market
It is through the London money market that the Bank of England exercises its control of the economy.
The market deals in short-term lending and borrowing.
It is normally divided into the ‘classical’ or ‘discount’market and the ‘parallel’or ‘complementary’market.
The discount market
There are three groups of participants in the discount market:(a) the Bank of England and other issuers of bills,(b) the discount houses and (c) the banks.
Central in the relationship are the discount houses.
They lend money short term to the government (through the Bank of England), to local authorities and to firms by buying bills of exchange.
To do this they obtain money from the banks by borrowing money at call and short notice and by selling them bills.
This relationship is illustrated in Figure 16.1.
The discount houses provide an important service to the banks by allowing them to hold extremely liquid assets (money at call) which nevertheless earn interest.
They also provide an important service to issuers of bills by offering a specialist market for such bills.
In recent years the discount houses have not only borrowed from banks, but also lent to them by purchasing certificates of deposit.
Like banks, the discount houses make their profit by a process of maturity transformation: by borrowing short and lending long — or to be more precise, by borrowing very short indeed and lending slightly less short.
They borrow from the banks for as little as a few hours' notice of recall by the banks (money at call), and lend to the government, local authorities and firms for typically three months (bills of exchange).
They pay a slightly lower rate of interest on money at call than they earn by discounting bills.
The liability and asset structure of the discount houses can be illustrated by looking at their balance sheet.
Table 16.4 shows the combined balance sheet of the nine discount houses at the end of January 1990.
As we have seen, if banks are short of cash they can call in loans from the discount houses.
But then the discount houses in turn may be short of liquid assets to meet this demand.
What can the discount houses do?
In such circumstances (known as ‘the last resort’) the Bank of England will always step in and lend to the discount houses, or purchase bills of exchange from them   before the bills have reached maturity.
The preferred method in recent years has been to purchase commercial, bills.
(The Bank of England is normally only prepared to buy commercial bills if they have been accepted, i.e. insured against default (‘underwritten’) by an acceptance house or other recognized bank.
These are called fine bills.)
The process of purchasing bills by the Bank of England is known as rediscounting.
In being prepared to lend to the discount houses or to buy bills from them, the Bank of England is the ultimate guarantor of sufficient liquidity in the monetary system and is known as lender of last resort.
The rate of rediscount, however, will be a penal one.
It will be higher than the Treasury bill rate.
The discount houses will therefore not like to sell bills to the Bank of England unless they are forced to.
If they are forced to, they are said to be ‘in the Bank’.
This is not as uncommon as you might at first think.
In fact it is often a deliberate policy of the Bank of England to create a shortage of liquidity in the economy to force discount houses to be in the Bank.
But why should the Bank of England do this?
It does it if it wishes to force up interest rates.
If the Bank of England puts up its rediscount rate, discount houses will have to put up their rate of discount on bills (i.e. pay a lower price for them).
This will have a knock-on effect throughout the economy, and will drive up interest rates generally.
Just how the Bank of England does this, we will examine in Chapter 17.
The parallel money markets
The parallel money markets include the following:
The inter-bank market (loans from one bank to another from one day to up to several months).
The market for certificates of deposit.
The local authorities market (local authority bills, short-term bonds and other short-term local authority borrowing or deposits).
The inter-companies deposit market (short-term loans from one company to another arranged through the market).
The foreign currencies market (dealings in foreign currencies deposited short term in London).
Finance house borrowing (short-term borrowing to finance hire purchase).
The parallel markets have grown in size and importance in recent years.
The main reasons for this have been (a) the opening-up of markets to international dealing, given the abolition of exchange controls in 1979,(b) the deregulation of banking and money market dealing and (c) the volatility of interest rates and exchange rates, and thus the desire of banks to keep funds in a form that can be readily switched from one form of deposit to another, or from one currency to another.
The main areas of growth have been in inter-bank deposits, certificates of deposit and the foreign currency markets.
Although the Bank of England does not deal directly in the parallel markets and does not provide ‘last resort’ lending facilities, it nevertheless closely monitors the various money market rates of interest and if necessary seeks to influence them, either by its dealings in the discount market or by ‘indicating’the direction it would like to see interest rates move.
1.
Why should Bank of England intervention to influence rates of interest in the discount market also influence rates of interest in the parallel markets?
2.
If the Bank of England indicates that it would like to see interest rates rise, why should dealers in the parallel markets take any notice?
The Bank of England
We end this section by having a closer look at the Bank of England, the UK's central bank.
All countries have a central bank and they fulfil two vital roles in the economy.
The first is to oversee the whole monetary system and ensure that banks and other financial institutions operate as stably and as efficiently as possible.
The second is to act as the government's agent, both as its banker and in carrying out monetary policy.
Just how closely a central bank works with the government will vary from country to country.
In the UK the Bank of England works in very close liaison with the Treasury, and although it may privately disagree with Treasury policy it is always obliged to carry it out.
This requirement was made explicit in 1946 when the Bank of England was nationalized.
In some other countries central banks are more independent of the government and can take much more initiative in deciding monetary policy.
Within these two broad roles the Bank of England has a number of different functions.
We have already come across some of these in looking at other institutions.
We can now give a complete list.
It issues notes
The Bank of England is the sole issuer of banknotes in England and Wales.
(In Scotland the clearing banks issue notes.)
The issue of notes is done through the Issue Department, which organizes their printing.
This is one of two departments of the Bank of England.
The other is the Banking Department.
Table 16.5 shows the balance sheets of these two departments on 17 January 1990.
As you can see from the balance sheet for the Issue Department, the note issue is backed by government and other securities (such as fine bills purchased from the discount houses).
The amount of banknotes issued by the Bank of England depends largely on the demand for notes from the general public.
If people draw more cash from their bank accounts, the banks will have to draw more cash from their balances in the Bank of England.
These balances are held in the Banking Department.
The Banking Department will thus have to acquire more notes from the Issue Department, which will simply print more in exchange for extra government or other securities supplied by the Banking Department.
Thus the amount of notes in circulation is always more at Christmas time.
The size of the note issue also depends on Bank of England intervention in the money market.
If the Issue Department buys government securities (either old ones   soon due to mature or new ones issued by the government), it will buy them with extra money that it prints.
It acts as a bank
To the government.
It keeps the two major government accounts: the ‘Exchequer’ and the ‘National Loans Fund’.
Taxation and government spending pass through the Exchequer.
Government borrowing and lending pass through the National Loans Fund.
The government tends to keep its deposits in the-Bank of England (the public deposits item in the balance sheet) to a minimum.
If the deposits begin to build up (from taxation), the government will probably spend them on paying back government debt.
If, on the other hand, it runs short of money, it will simply borrow more.
To the recognized banks.
The bankers' deposits item in the balance sheet refers to the cash ratio and operational balances of the banks.
As we have seen, the operational balances are used for clearing purposes between the banks and to provide them with a source of liquidity.
To overseas central banks.
These are deposits of sterling held by overseas authorities as part of their official reserves and/or for purposes of intervening in the foreign exchange market in order to influence the exchange rate of their currency.
It manages the government's borrowing programme.
Whenever the government runs a budget deficit, it will have to finance that deficit by borrowing.
It can borrow by issuing either gilt-edged securities (government bonds) or Treasury bills.
The Bank of England organizes this borrowing.
Even when the government runs a budget surplus the Bank of England will still have to manage the national debt (the accumulated borrowing from the past).
The reason is that old bonds will be maturing and new issues of bonds will probably be necessary to replace them.
When an old issue of bonds is approaching maturity, the Bank of England will probably enter the market to buy them back over a number of weeks or months, rather than waiting to the maturity date and then suddenly releasing a large amount of liquidity into the economy.
When a new issue of bonds is made, the Bank of England will set a minimum price somewhat below the £100 face value and then invite tenders for these bonds above or at the minimum price.
It will allocate them in descending order from the highest  priced bid to the lowest.
Any unsold bonds (known as ‘tap stock’) will then be released on to the market in an orderly way at a price set by the Bank of England.
Any temporary shortfall of money for the government is met by issuing Treasury bills.
The issuing of bonds and bills will also depend on the government's monetary policy.
This is examined in Chapter 17.
It supervises the activities of banks and other financial institutions
It advises banks on good banking practice.
It discusses government policy with them and reports back to the government.
It requires all recognized banks to maintain adequate liquidity: this is called prudential control.
For , it requires banks to keep money at call with the discount houses to a minimum of 2% per cent of their eligible liabilities.It monitors the activity of banks, which are required to submit monthly reports to it, and it attempts to spot any bank that is likely to face difficulties.
It provides support to prevent banks getting into difficulties
As lender of last resort to the discount houses, it ensures that there is always an adequate supply of liquidity to meet the legitimate demands of depositors in recognized banks.
It may also come to the rescue of ailing banks.
For , in 1984 the Johnson Matthey Bank collapsed.The Bank of England stepped in, took over the running of it and provided sufficient loans to cover the demands of its creditors.
Of course, if the Bank of England's supervision were perfect, rescue packages such as this would be unnecessary.
It operates the government's monetary and exchange rate policy
Monetary policy.
By careful management of the issue and purchase/rediscounting of government bonds and Treasury bills, the Bank of England can manipulate interest rates and influence the size of the money supply.
Details of this are given in Chapter 17.
Exchange rate policy.
The Bank of England manages the country's gold and foreign currency reserves.
This is done through the exchange equalization account.
By buying and selling foreign currencies on the foreign exchange market, the Bank of England can affect the exchange rate.
For example, if there were a sudden selling of sterling (due, say, to bad trade figures and a resulting fear that the pound would depreciate), the Bank of England could help to prevent the pound from falling by using reserves to buy up pounds on the foreign exchange market.
Intervention in the foreign exchange market is examined in detail in Chapter 22.
1.
Would it be possible for an economy to function without (a) a central bank;(b) discount houses?
2.
What effect would a substantial increase in the sale of government bonds and Treasury bills have on interest rates?
SUMMARY
1.
Financial intermediaries include commercial banks, merchant banks, the National Savings Bank, building societies, finance houses and discount houses.
Between them they provide the following important functions: giving expert advice, channelling capital to areas of highest return, maturity transformation, risk transformation and the transmission of payments.
2.
Banks aim to make profits, but they must also maintain sufficient liquidity.
Liquid assets, however, tend to be unprofitable and profitable assets tend to be illiquid.
Banks therefore hold a range of assets of varying degrees of profitability and liquidity.
3.
Commercial banks' liabilities include both sight and time deposits.
They also include certificates of deposit.
Their  assets include in descending order of liquidity: notes and coin, balances with the Bank of England, market loans (including money at call with the discount houses), bills of exchange (Treasury, commercial and local authority), investments (government bonds and inter-bank investments) and advances to customers (the biggest item, including overdrafts, personal loans and mortgages).
4.
The money market is the market in short-term deposits and loans.
It consists of the discount market and the parallel money markets.
The discount market centres on the activities of the discount houses.
They lend money to the government, firms and local authorities by discounting bills of exchange and to banks by purchasing certificates of deposit.
They borrow from the banks at call and short notice.
They also receive finance from the banks by selling them bills they have purchased.
The Bank of England operates in the discount market by buying (rediscounting) and selling bills.
It thereby seeks to manipulate interest rates.
It is always prepared to lend to the discount houses in the last resort in order to ensure adequate liquidity in the economy.
5.
The parallel money markets consist of various markets in short-term finance between various financial institutions.
6.
The Bank of England is the UK's central bank.
It issues notes; it acts as banker to the government, to the commercial banks, to various overseas central banks and to certain private customers; it manages the government's borrowing programme; it supervises the activities of banks and other financial institutions; it provides support to prevent banks getting into difficulties; it operates the government's monetary and exchange rate policy.
16.3 The supply of money Definitions of the money supply in the UK
Monetarists argue that changes in the supply of money have a crucial effect on the economy.
If inflation is to be controlled, they maintain, then the money supply must be controlled.
Keynesians see money supply as less important, but even they do not believe that money supply can be ignored.
If money supply is to be monitored and possibly controlled, it is obviously necessary to measure it.
But what should be included in the measure?
As we have seen in section 16.2, money does not just include cash.
It also includes bank deposits.
But which deposits?
Herein lies a problem.
There are several different ways we can define money supply, depending on which types of deposit we include and which types we exclude from our definition.
In the UK, until July 1989, there were no fewer than seven different definitions!
Now these have been reduced to five.
The definitions can be put into two groups: narrow money and broad money (see Table 16.6).
Narrow money
M0.
This is the narrowest definition of money.
It consists of notes and coin (both in circulation and in banks' tills), and the operational balances that banks hold in the Bank of England.
It is sometimes referred to as the ‘broad monetary base’(‘broad' because it includes operational balances in the Bank of England as well as cash).
This is a relatively new measure of money supply, first introduced in 1982.
It is one of the easiest measures for the government to control, but it has been frequently criticized as being of little use as an indicator of spending power in the economy since it excludes the most important component of money supply, namely bank deposits, and includes money in banks' tills which is the money that banks need to keep in their tills as a ‘float’.
Ml.
This was an older narrow definition, in fact the only one until a few years ago.
It included notes and coin in circulation with the general public (but not in banks' tills), and sterling private sector sight deposits in banks.
This measure was dropped in 1989.
There were three reasons for this:
Increasingly, sight deposits pay interest.
The amount of these deposits will therefore vary with the rate of interest.
Such accounts are frequently used by firms   to make short-term large deposits — when, for example, they have a temporary surplus of funds.
They are not therefore directly related to people's requirements to hold a medium of exchange.
They are wholesale not retail deposits, and yet they were still included in M1.
On the other hand, there are various time deposits that earn interest in banks, building societies and the National Savings Bank which are used by the public as an alternative means of holding money that is used for expenditure purposes.
These retail deposits were not included in M1.
In July 1989 the Abbey National Building Society became a retail bank.
Had M1 been retained as a narrow measure of money supply, it would have shown a sudden increase as the sight deposits in the Abbey National would now have been included.
Given the blurring of the distinction between banks and building societies, it was felt that now was the time to drop those measures (M1 and M3) which included bank deposits but not building society deposits.
M2.
To take account of the weaknesses of M1 as a definition of narrow money, a new definition, M2, was introduced in 1982.
This is M1 minus the wholesale sight deposits but including all retail deposits (both sight and time).
Broad money
In addition to retail deposits, broad definitions also include wholesale deposits.
M3 (now abandoned) only included bank deposits.
M4 and M5, however, include building society deposits too.
M5 also includes various money market instruments.
Each of the broad measures includes all those items contained in M1.
So let us see how each of the broad measures builds up from there.
M3.
This consisted of M1 plus all sterling private-sector time deposits in banks (but not building societies), plus private-sector holdings of bank certificates of deposit.
Along with M1 this was the oldest definition of money.
M4.
This is M3 plus private-sector deposits in building societies and private-sector holdings of certificates of deposit in building societies.
To avoid double counting, it is necessary to subtract building society deposits in banks and building society holdings of bank certificates of deposit.
Otherwise if, say, £1 million was deposited in a building society and the building society then deposited the £1 million in a bank, it would count as £2 million — a clear case of double counting.
M4c.
All the other measures of money supply only include sterling.
M4c, by contrast, includes both sterling and foreign currency private-sector deposits.
In other respects the definition is the same as M4.
M5.
This is M4plus various other holdings of liquid assets.
These include bills of exchange eligible for rediscount at the Bank of England, short-term loans to local authorities, short- and medium-term deposits in the National Savings Bank and certificates of tax deposit.
1
Why would the inclusion of money deposited at call with the discount houses in any of the definitions be a case of ‘double counting?
2.
None of the measures includes public-sector deposits.
Why do you think this is?
The proliferation of measures gives some indication of just how ambiguous the term ‘money supply’ is.
To talk about controlling the money supply is too vague.
A major problem is that the measures do not all move together.
For example, if people switched deposits from time deposits to sight deposits, M1 would rise but M4 would remain unchanged.
The government, recognizing this problem, tries to gain an overall impression of the growth of money supply rather than concentrating on one measure alone.
In recent years it has paid particular attention to M0, M4 and M5.
With the exception of M0, all the definitions of money supply include bank deposits as the major item.
When governments attempt to control the money supply, therefore, they must seek to control the size of bank deposits and thereby control the amount of bank lending and hence total expenditure in the economy (aggregate demand).
To understand how money supply expands and contracts, and how it can be controlled, it is thus necessary to understand what determines the size of bank deposits.
Banks can themselves expand the amount of bank deposits, and hence the money supply, by a process known as ‘credit creation’.
The creation of credit: the simplest case
To illustrate this process in its simplest form, assume that banks have just one type of liability — deposits — and two types of asset — balances with the Bank of England (to achieve liquidity), and advances to customers (to earn profit).
Banks want to achieve profitability whilst maintaining sufficient liquidity.
Assume that they believe that sufficient liquidity will be achieved if 10 per cent of their assets are held as balances with the Bank of England.
The remaining 90 per cent will then be in advances to customers.
In other words, the banks operate a 10 per cent liquidity ratio.
Assume initially that the combined balance sheet of the banks is as shown in Table 16.7.
Total deposits are £100 billion, of which £10 billion (10 per cent) are kept in balances with the Bank of England.
The remaining £90 billion (90 per cent) are lent to customers.
Now assume that the government spends more money — £10 billion say, on roads or the National Health Service.
It pays for this with cheques drawn on its account with the Bank of England.
The people receiving the cheques deposit them in their banks.
Banks return these cheques to the Bank of England and their balances correspondingly increase by £10 billion.
The combined banks' balance sheet now is shown in Table 16.8.
But this is not the end of the story.
Banks now have surplus liquidity.
With their balances in the Bank of England having increased to £20 billion, they now have a liquidity ratio of 20/110.
If they are to return to a 10 per cent liquidity ratio, they need only retain £11 billion as balances at the Bank of England (£11 billion £1 l0 billion = 10 per cent).
The remaining £9 billion they can lend to customers.
But then when customers spend this £9 billion in shops and the shopkeepers deposit the cheques back in the banks, thereby crediting the banks' Bank of England accounts again, the banks can make further loans based on these new deposits.
10 per cent(i.e. £0.9 billion) must be kept back in the Bank of England, but the remaining 90 per cent (i.e. £8.1 billion) can be lent out again.
When this is deposited back in banks, again 10 per cent must be retained and the remaining 90 per cent can be lent out.
This process goes on and on until eventually the position is as shown in Table 16.9.
The initial increase in balances with the Bank of England of £10 billion has allowed banks to create new advances (and hence deposits) of £90 billion, making a total increase in money supply of £100 billion.
This effect is known as the money (or bank) multiplier.
In this simple example with a liquidity ratio of  (i.e. 10 per cent), the money multiplier is 10.
An initial increase in deposits of £10 billion allowed total deposits to rise by £100 billion.
In this simple world, therefore, the money multiplier is the inverse of the liquidity ratio (L).
Money multiplier = l/L
If banks choose to operate a 20 per cent liquidity ratio and receive extra cash deposits of £10 million:(a) How much credit will ultimately be created?(b) By how much will total deposits have expanded?(c) What is the size of the money multiplier?
The creation of credit: the real world
In practice the creation of credit is not as simple as this.
There are two major complications.
Banks' liquidity ratio may vary
Banks may choose a different liquidity ratio.
At certain times, banks may decide that it is prudent to hold a bigger proportion of liquid assets.
Their ‘prudent’ liquidity ratio has risen.
The prudent ratio depends very much on how banks see their requirements for liquidity changing in the near future.
If Christmas or the Summer holidays are approaching and people are likely to make bigger cash withdrawals, banks may decide to hold more liquid assets.
They may also do so if they anticipate that their liquid assets may soon be squeezed by government monetary policy.
Customers may not want to take up the credit on offer.
Banks may wish to make additional loans, but customers may not want to borrow.
There may be insufficient demand.
But will the banks not then lower their interest rates, thus encouraging people to borrow?
Possibly, but it is not as simple as this.
Banks must keep all their interest rates in line with other financial institutions in order to remain competitive.
If banks lower the interest rates they charge to borrowers, they must also lower the rate they pay to depositors.
But then depositors may switch to other institutions such as building societies.
Thus, just because banks have acquired additional liquid assets, it does not automatically follow that they will create credit on the basis of it.
Just as a change in liquid assets may lead to little or no change in credit, so a change   in credit may occur with little or no change in liquid assets.
For example, if there is an upsurge in consumer demand for credit, banks may be very keen to grant additional loans and thus make more profits, even though they have acquired no additional liquid assets.
They may simply go ahead and expand credit, and accept a lower liquidity ratio.
Obviously they will be much more willing to do this if they already have plenty of spare liquidity.
Why might a bank with a given amount of liquid assets be more willing to expand its mortgage loans for house purchase than to expand its personal loans for the purchase of consumer goods?
Banks may not operate a simple liquidity ratio
The fact that banks hold a number of fairly liquid assets, such as money at call, bills of exchange and short-dated bonds, makes it difficult to identify a simple liquidity ratio.
Which items should count as liquid?
To illustrate the problem consider the following case.
Assume (a) that banks hold just three types of asset: cash, bills and advances;(b) that they operate a 10 per cent liquidity ratio; and (c) that they acquire additional cash deposits of £1 million.
If bills are counted as liquid, then the banks can purchase up to £1 million of extra bills and still create the full £9 million of credit.
The bills are equivalent to cash.
If, however, bills are not counted as liquid, then for each extra £1 worth of bills they purchase, they can grant £10 worth less credit (.
£9 less created, and £1 displaced by the (non-liquid) bills).
Thus whether near money assets such as call money, bills and short-dated bonds count as liquid may affect the amount of credit created.
In the past, the Bank of England has required banks to hold a certain liquidity ratio and has specified those assets that were to count as liquid (see page 662).
Since 1981, however, there has no longer been any statutory reserve ratio (other than the requirement that banks must hold deposits at call with the discount houses of at least 2½ per cent of their eligible liabilities).
There is therefore no simple universal money multiplier applying to all banks.
Of course, banks still have to maintain adequate liquidity, but in practice they do not see a clear-cut dividing line between liquid and non-liquid assets.
They try to maintain a rough balance across the liquidity range, but the precise composition of assets will vary as interest rates on the various assets vary, and as the demands for liquidity vary.
In practice, therefore, the size of the money multiplier will vary and is thus difficult to predict in advance.
Is the following statement true: ‘The greater the number of types of asset that are counted as being liquid, the smaller will be the money multiplier’?
What causes money supply to rise?
There are four sets of circumstances in which the money supply can rise.
Banks choose to hold a lower liquidity ratio
If banks choose to hold a lower liquidity ratio, they will have surplus liquidity.
The banks have tended to choose a lower liquidity ratio over the years, and certainly a lower cash ratio.
A major reason for this has been the move by customers away from cash transactions to cheque and credit card transactions.
What effects do EFTPOS and ATMs (see Box 16.5) have on (a) banks' prudent liquidity ratios;(b) the size of the money multiplier?
The surplus liquidity can be used to expand advances.
As these loans are spent and find their way back to the banks as additional deposits, so the money supply expands.
The impetus to expand advances may come from the banks themselves.
The aggressive promotion of credit cards and the advertising of personal loans are familiar examples.
The impetus may come from the customer.
As an economy pulls out of recession, the demand for loans is likely to rise.
Banks with surplus liquidity will normally be happy to meet this demand.
An inflow of funds from abroad
If the government intervenes in the foreign exchange market to maintain a rate of exchange below the equilibrium, there will be an excess demand for sterling.
The government may do this in order to help exporters, since a low exchange rate will make exports cheaper for foreigners to buy.
The excess demand is illustrated in Figure 16.2.
It is equal to Qsubd;-Q s at an exchange rate of er1.
To maintain the exchange rate at this level the Bank of England will have to supply sufficient pounds on to the foreign exchange market to close the gap.
In other words, it will have to buy up the excess foreign currencies on offer with extra pounds — pounds it has created, thereby building up the foreign currency reserves.
The money supply will thus increase.
When this sterling is used to pay for UK exports and is then deposited back in the banks by the exporters, credit will be created on the basis of it, leading to a multiplied increase in money supply.
What we have been describing here is a total currency flow surplus.
This is a net surplus on all elements of the balance of payments (current plus capital) but excluding the reserves.
As we saw back in section 12.5, the building-up of reserves counts as a deficit (an outflow from the balance of payments account to the reserves account).
This deficit on the reserves part of the balance of payments account will exactly match the surplus on the remainder of the account.
Changes in money supply from this source are likely to be much greater under a fixed than a floating exchange rate.
Under a fixed exchange rate a currency flow surplus is likely to persist for some time.
The money supply will thus continue to grow.
Eventually, however, the rise in money supply will eliminate the surplus.
The reason is that the increase in money supply will raise aggregate demand.
This in turn will lead to more imports.
It may also lead to higher inflation, which, if pushed above that of the UK's overseas competitors, will reduce exports and increase imports.
The net effect will be to eliminate the currency flow surplus.
The demand curve for sterling will shift to the left and the supply curve will shift to the right until they intersect at the fixed rate of exchange.
At that point the money will stop rising (at least from this source).
Under a totally free floating rate, total currency flow surpluses will be eliminated by an appreciation of the exchange rate.
If, however, the Bank of England attempts to maintain an exchange rate below the equilibrium, it must continue to supply extra sterling to meet the shortfall and thus continue to expand the money supply.
A similar effect to the above will be experienced if depositors in foreign currencies wish to switch their deposits into sterling in the UK — in response, say, to higher  interest rates in the UK.
The demand for sterling will shift to the right.
(Of course, if the exchange rate is allowed to appreciate, this effect will be eliminated.)
The money supply will also expand, but not via the balance of payments, if depositors of sterling in banks overseas redeposit their sterling in the UK.
This is a direct inflow of sterling and hence a direct increase in the money supply.
In an open economy like the UK, with an absence of exchange controls, movements of sterling and other currencies into and out of the country can be very large, leading to large fluctuations in the money supply.
Describe the process whereby a currency flow deficit will lead to a fall in the money supply.
The government can take deliberate steps to offset the monetary effects of currency flow surpluses or deficits.
This process is known as sterilization.
It is examined in Chapter 22.
A public-sector deficit: a PSBR
As we have seen before, the public-sector borrowing requirement is the deficit of the whole public sector (central government, local government and the nationalized industries): it is the difference between public-sector expenditure and public-sector receipts (from taxes, national insurance, rates and nationalized industry sales).
To meet this deficit the government has to borrow money.
This borrowing is likely to affect the money supply.
In general, the bigger the PSBR, the greater will be the growth in the money supply.
Just how the money supply will be affected, however, depends on the form the borrowing takes.
There are six possible forms.
Assume in each case a PSBR of £1 billion.
1.
The government sells securities to the Bank of England.
The Bank of England purchases £1 billion of government securities, and credits the government's account at the Bank of England by £1 billion.
The government, when it spends this £1 billion, pays with cheques drawn on its account at the Bank of England.
When the recipients of these cheques pay them into their banks, the banks will present the cheques to the Bank of England, and their own balances at the Bank of England will rise by £1 billion.
Thus banks' liabilities (customers' deposits of government payments) and assets (balances with the Bank of England) have both increased by £1 billion.
Money supply has therefore increased by £1 billion.
Since banks' balances with the Bank of England are liquid assets, credit will probably be created.
A multiplied process of money expansion will occur.
2.
The government sells securities to overseas purchasers.
This will lead to an inflow of foreign currency.
A multiplied process of money expansion will occur just as in the case of a total currency flow surplus outlined above.
(This assumes that the government does not allow the exchange rate to appreciate.)
3.
The Bank of England, on behalf of the government, sells Treasury bills to the banking sector.
If £1 billion of Treasury bills are sold to the discount houses, the discount houses will borrow money at call from the banks, or sell bills to the banks, to pay for these Treasury bills.
Banks will thus acquire £1 billion of extra call notes and bills, but their cash or balances at the Bank of England will be reduced by £1 billion.
When, however, the government spends the £1 billion and the money finds its way back to the banks, the banks' balances at the Bank of England will rise back again by £1 billion.
There has thus been no overall change in balances at the Bank of England, but  banks' holdings of call notes and bills have risen.
To the extent that these are regarded as liquid assets, they can be used as the liquidity base for additional loans to customers.
A multiplied process of money expansion will occur.
4.
The government sells bonds to the banks.
If £1 billion of bonds are sold to the banks, the banks' balances at the Bank of England will be reduced by £1 billion.
When the government spends the money and it is deposited in the banks, the banks' balances at the Bank of England will be restored.
Banks have thus had an increase of £1 billion deposits (new money) on their liabilities side, and £1 billion of government bonds on their assets side.
The liquidity ratio, however, has now been reduced, since bonds (except for very short-dated ones) are regarded as illiquid.
If banks are already operating at their minimum prudent liquidity ratio, they must reduce advances (and hence deposits) by £1 billion, which will exactly match the £1 billion increase in deposits from the PSBR.
In this case there will have been no expansion of the money supply at all.
5.
The government sells bonds and Treasury bills to the general public and non-bank firms (collectively known as the ‘non-bank private sector’).
This will have no effect on the money supply.
When the public buy the bonds or bills they will draw money from their banks.
When the government spends the money it will be redeposited in banks.
There is no new money.
It is just a case of existing money changing hands.
6.
The government borrows foreign currency, thereby directly financing government imports.
This will not affect money supply since it involves no sterling transactions and hence will not affect banks' sterling deposits.
Thus financing the PSBR by methods 1, 2 and 3 will lead to a multiple growth in money supply (assuming sufficient demand for credit).
Financing it by method 4 will lead to little or no growth in the money supply.
Financing it by methods 5 and 6 will lead to no growth in the money supply at all.
Note that if there is a public sector surplus (public-sector debt repayment or PSDR), this will either reduce the money supply or have no effect, depending on what the government does with the surplus.
The fact that there is a surplus means that the public sector is spending less than it receives in taxes, etc.
The initial effect, therefore, is to reduce the money in the economy: it is being ‘retired’ in the Bank of England.
If the government then uses this money to repay the national debt by buying back more bonds and Treasury bills than it issues, this will release the money back into the economy again.
If the bonds and bills are bought from the general public (the ‘non-bank private sector’), the net effect is zero.
The money paid by taxpayers over and above government expenditure merely returns to taxpayers again (albeit differently distributed).
If, however, the government buys back Treasury bills from the banking sector or bills or bonds from the Bank of England, there will be a net reduction in the money supply.
As far as the banks are concerned, they have no change in their balances in the Bank of England (the government spends less money but then returns it to the banks by buying bills), but banks have fewer bills and hence fewer liquid assets.
If banks' liquidity ratios are now below the prudent minimum, they will have to make a multiplied contraction in credit.
If the government buys back bonds from the Bank of England, the money is not released: it remains retired.
Whether there is a PSBR or a PSDR, it is clear that the method the government uses to borrow or pay back debt will affect how much the money supply changes.
In general, money supply growth will be higher (or its decline lower), the more the  government borrows from the banking sector rather than the non-bank private sector (or repays to the non-bank private sector rather than the banking sector).
Here, then, is a fourth source of monetary growth.
A change in the method of financing the national debt
Even if there is no change in the level of the PSBR, the rate of change of money growth will be affected by the way in which government finance is raised.
The government's choice of how to raise finance depends on its monetary policy (which we will consider in the Chapter 17).
In practice the government's choice is somewhat limited.
Although it can choose whether to sell bonds or Treasury bills, it cannot decide just who is to purchase them — banks/discount houses, the general public or foreigners.
1.
If the government borrows but does not spend the proceeds, what effect will this have on the money supply if it borrows from (a) the banking sector;(b) the non-bank private sector?
2.
If the government buys back £1 million of maturing bonds from the general public and then, keeping the total amount of its borrowing the same, raises £1 million by selling Treasury bills to the discount houses, what will happen to the money supply?
The flow-of-funds equation
All these effects on money supply can be summarized using a flow-of-funds equation.
This shows the components of a change in money supply.
A change in money supply is a flow into (increase) or out of(decrease) the money stock.
(Remember the distinction between stocks and flows.)
In other words, if we want to compare the size of the money stock at one point in time (M st ) with that of a previous point in time (M st-1 ), we have to look at the flow (change) of money between those two points  
So what does  consist of?
The answer is given in the flow-of-funds equation, which consists of four major items (or ‘counterparts’ as they are known).
The following flow-of-funds equation is the one most commonly used, that for M4:
Public-sector borrowing (item 1) will lead to a direct increase in the money supply, but not if it is funded by selling bonds and bills to the non-bank private sector.
Such sales (item 2) have therefore to be subtracted from the PSBR.
But conversely, if the government buys back old bonds from the non-bank private sector, this will further increase the money supply.
The initial increase in liquidity from the sale of government securities to the banking sector is given by item 1.
This increase in their liquidity will enable banks to create credit.
To the extent that this extra lending is to the UK private sector (item 3), money supply will increase, and by a multiple of the initial increase in liquidity (item 1).
Bank lending may also increase (item 3) even if there is no increase in liquidity or  even a reduction in liquidity (item I is zero or negative), if banks respond to increases in the demand for loans by accepting a lower liquidity ratio.
Finally, if there is a currency flow surplus and hence a net inflow of funds from abroad (item 4), this too will increase the money supply.
A currency flow deficit will appear as a negative figure.
Also included in item 4 is that part of the PSBR that is funded by borrowing in foreign currency.
Since, as we saw when looking at the financing of the PSBR, such borrowing does not increase the money supply, it reduces the otherwise expansionary effect on the money supply of the PSBR.
It thus enters item 4 with a negative value.
The flow-of-funds equation we have just described is a simplified version of the one actually used in official statistics to analyze the components of changes in M4.
The equation can easily be modified to show changes in M2 or M5.
Table 16.10 shows the components of changes in M4 for 1986 and 1989.
It is  interesting to compare the two years.
In 1986 there was a public-sector deficit (PSBR), which therefore had the effect of increasing the money supply.
In 1989, however, there was a public-sector surplus (PSDR), which, other things being equal, would, have reduced the money supply.
But as you can see quite clearly from the table, other things were not equal: there was a massive release of liquidity to the private sector from the repayment of public debt (item 2) and an even more massive increase in bank lending (item 3), although this was to some extent offset by a large increase in the currency flow deficit (an outflow of funds under item 4).
The relationship between money supply and the rate of interest
Simple monetary theory often assumes that the supply of money is totally independent of interest rates.
This is illustrated in Figure 16.3.
The money supply is ‘exogenous’.
The supply of money is assumed to be determined by government: what the government chooses it to be, or what it allows it to be by its choice of the level and method of financing the PSBR.
More complex models, and especially Keynesian models, assume that higher interest rates will lead to higher levels of money supply, as in Figure 16.4.
The reasons for this are as follows:
Increases in money supply may occur as a result of banks expanding credit in response to the demand for credit.
This assumes that banks have surplus liquidity   in the first place.
Higher demand for credit will drive up interest rates, making it more profitable for banks to supply more credit.
Higher interest rates may encourage depositors to switch their deposits from sight accounts (earning little or no interest) to time accounts.
Since money is less likely to be withdrawn quickly from time accounts, banks may feel the need to hold less liquidity, and therefore may decide to increase credit, thus expanding the money supply.
Higher interest rates attract deposits from overseas.
This increases the money supply in the same way as does a balance of payments surplus.
An upward-sloping supply curve assumes that interest rates are determined by the market: by the interaction of supply and demand for money.
An increase in demand for money raises interest rates, which in turn increases the supply of money (see sections 16.4 and 16.5).
If, however, the authorities were to control interest rates, the supply curve might become downward sloping.
The sequence is as follows.
If the authorities raise interest rates, this will reduce the demand for credit and this in turn will reduce the credit that banks create.
In these circumstances, raising interest rates reduces the supply of money.
In both cases, supply is merely reflecting demand and is thus endogenously determined.
With the upward-sloping supply curve, higher demand leads to higher interest rates and higher supply.
With the downward-sloping supply curve, higher interest rates lead to lower demand and lower supply.
SUMMARY
1.
Money supply can be defined in a number of different ways, depending on what items are included.
M0, the narrowest definition, only includes cash and banks' operational balances in the Bank of England.
M1 is cash in circulation plus all sight bank deposits (both wholesale and retail).
M2 is cash in circulation plus all retail deposits (including time deposits and building society deposits).
M3 is M1 plus bank time deposits and certificates of deposit.
M4 is M3 plus building society deposits.
M5 is M4 plus various money market instruments (e.g. bills).
M1 and M3 were dropped from official statistics after July 1989.
2.
Bank deposits are a major proportion of money supply (except M0).
The expansion of bank deposits is the major element in the expansion of the money supply.
3.
Bank deposits expand through a process of credit creation.
If banks' liquid assets increase, they be can used as a base for increasing loans.
When the loans are redeposited in banks, they form the base for yet more loans, and thus takes place a process of multiple credit expansion.
l he ratio of the increase of money to an expansion of the liquidity base is called the ‘money multiplier’.
It is the inverse of the liquidity ratio.
4.
In practice it is difficult to predict the precise amount by which money supply will expand if there is an increase in banks' liquidity.
The reasons are that banks may choose  to hold a different liquidity ratio; customers may not take up all the credit on offer; and there may be no simple liquidity ratio given the range of near money assets.
5.
Money supply will rise if (a) banks choose to hold a lower liquidity ratio and thus create more credit for an existing amount of liquidity;(b) there is a total currency flow surplus;(c) the government runs a PSBR and finances it by borrowing from the banking sector or from abroad;(d) the government switches its method of financing the national debt to borrowing from the banking sector or from abroad.
6.
The flow-of-funds equation shows the components of any change in money supply.
A rise in money supply equals the PSBR minus sales of public-sector debt to the non-bank private sector, plus banks' lending to the private sector (less increases in banks' capital), plus inflows of money from abroad.
7.
Simple monetary theory assumes that the supply of money is independent of interest rates.
In practice, a rise in interest rates will often lead to an increase in money supply.
But conversely if the government raises interest rates the supply of money may fall in response to a lower demand for money.
16.4 The demand for money
The motives for holding money
The demand for money refers to the desire to hold money: to keep your wealth in the form of money, rather than spending it on goods and services or saving it by purchasing financial assets such as bonds or shares.
It is usual to distinguish three reasons why people want to hold their assets in the form of money.
The transactions motive.
Since money is a medium of exchange, it is required for conducting transactions.
But since people only receive money at intervals (e.g. weekly or monthly) and not continuously, they require to hold balances of money in cash or in sight accounts.
The precautionary motive.
Unforeseen circumstances can arise, such as a car breakdown.
Thus individuals often hold some additional money as a precaution.
Firms too keep precautionary balances because of uncertainties about the timing of their receipts and payments.
If a large customer is late in making payment, a firm may be unable to pay its suppliers unless it has spare liquidity.
The speculative or assets motive.
Certain firms and individuals who wish to purchase financial assets such as bonds, shares or other securities, may prefer to wait if they feel that their price is likely to fall.
In the meantime they will hold idle money balances instead.
This speculative demand can be quite high when the price of securities is considered certain to fall.
Money when used for this purpose is a means of temporarily storing wealth.
Similarly, people who at some time in the future will require foreign currency (people such as importers, holiday makers, or those thinking of investing abroad or in foreign securities) may prefer to wait before exchanging pounds into the relevant foreign currencies if they believe that the sterling price of these currencies is likely to fall (the pound is likely to appreciate).
The transactions and precautionary demand for money: L 1 
The transactions plus precautionary demand for money is termed L 1 .
‘L'stands for liquidity preference: that is, the desire to hold assets in liquid form.
Money balances held for these two purposes are called active balances: money to be used as a medium of exchange.
What determines the size of L 1 ?
The major determinant of L 1 is national income (Y).
The bigger people's income, the more their purchases and the bigger their demand for active balances.
The frequency with which people are paid also affects L 1 .
The less frequently they are paid, the greater the level of money balances they will tend to hold.
For example, people paid £100 per week, whose expenditure is spread evenly over the week and who spend all the £100 by the end of the week, will have roughly £50 (in the bank or in cash) on average: that is , mid-way between pay days.
People paid £400 per month will have roughly £200 on average: that is, mid-month.
Income is the same in both cases, but monthly paid people will have a much higher demand for active balances.
Will students in receipt of a grant or an allowance who are paid once per term have a high or a low transactions demand for money relative to their income?
The rate of interest has some effect on L 1 , albeit rather small (see Figure 16.5).
At high rates of interest, people may feel it worthwhile to put some of their income in a savings account on pay day and draw it out again as they need it later in the month.
The inconvenience of doing this makes the effect on transactions demand rather limited.
The effect is likely to be bigger on the precautionary demand: a higher interest rate may encourage people to risk tying up their money.
Firms’ active balances are more likely to be sensitive to changes in r than individuals'.
The elasticity of L 1 with respect to changes in the rate of interest will also depend on how money is defined.
The demand for narrow money M0 or M1 is likely to be more elastic than the demand for broad money M3, M4 or M5.
A rise in the rate of interest may encourage people to switch from sight to time deposits.
The demand for narrow money will fall, but the demand for broad money (which includes both sight and time deposits) will remain the same.
Other determinants of L 1 include the season of the year: people require more money balances at Christmas, for example.
Also, any other factors that affect consumption will affect L 1 .
The increased use of credit cards in recent years has reduced both the transactions and precautionary demands.
Paying once a month for goods requires less money on average than paying separately for each item purchased.
Also the possession of a credit card reduces or even eliminates the need to hold precautionary balances for many people.
The speculative (or assets) demand for money: L 2 
The speculative demand for money balances is termed L 2 .
Money balances held for this purpose are called idle balances.
People who possess wealth, whether it be wealthy people or simply small savers, have to decide the best form in which to hold that wealth.
Do they keep it in cash in a  piggy bank, or in a current account in a real bank; or do they put it in some interest bearing time account; or do they buy stocks and shares or government bonds; or do they buy some physical asset such as a car or property?
In making these decisions, people will have to weigh up the relative advantages and disadvantages of the various alternative assets.
Assets can be compared according to two criteria: liquidity and the possibility of earning income.
Just as we saw in the case of a bank's assets, these two criteria tend to conflict.
The more liquid an asset is, the lower is likely to be the income earned from holding it.
Thus cash is totally liquid to the holder: it can be used to buy other assets (or spent on goods) instantly, but it earns no interest.
Stocks and shares, on the other hand, are not very liquid since they cannot be sold instantly at a guaranteed price.
(They can be sold pretty well instantly, but if share prices are depressed, a considerable loss may be incurred in so doing.)
But stocks and shares have the potential of earning quite a high income for the holder, not only in terms of the dividends paid out of the firms' profits, but also in terms of the capital gain from any increase in the shares' prices.
Buying something like a car is at the other end of the spectrum from holding cash.
A car is highly illiquid, but yields a high return to the owner.
In what form is this ‘return’?
The major determinant of L 2 is expectations of changes in the earning potential of securities and other assets.
If the earning potential of an asset goes up, people will be likely to switch to that asset from others with a lower earning potential.
Thus, for example, if people believe that the stock market is about to go through a period of ‘boom’ with share prices going up rapidly, they will switch some of their wealth into stocks and shares.
Thus the greater the earning potential of non-money assets, the less will be the demand for money (with its zero earning potential in the case of M0 and much of M1, and with only a relatively low earning potential in the case of broader definitions).
The major determinants of expectations of assets' earning potential are (a) expectations about changes in security prices and interest rates, and (b) expectations about changes in the exchange rate.
Security prices and interest rates
If the market price of securities is high, the rate of interest (i.e. the rate of return) on these securities will be low (see section 16.1).
Potential purchasers of these securities will probably wait until their prices fall and the rate of interest rises.
Similarly, existing holders of securities will probably sell them while the price is high, hoping to buy them back again when the price falls, thus making a capital gain.
In the meantime, therefore, large speculative balances of money will be held.
L 2 is high.
If, on the other hand, the rate of interest is high, then L 2 is likely to be low.
To take advantage of the high rate of return on securities, people buy them now instead of holding on to their money.
Would the demand for securities be low if their price was high, but was expected to go on rising?
The relationship between L 2 and the rate of interest (r) is shown in Figure 16.6.
The inverse relationship between r and L 2 gives a downward-sloping curve.
Keynes recognized the possibility of a minimum below which the rate of interest would not fall, since below such levels the rate of interest on securities would not cover the costs and risks of holding them.
If the rate of interest approached this   minimum level, no speculators would wish to buy securities.
Instead they would prefer to hold idle money balances in the knowledge that, if they wait, the rate of interest will go up again.
The speculative demand becomes virtually infinite at this minimum rate of interest.
According to Keynesian theory, any extra money people have at this interest rate will simply go into idle balances.
This is known as the liquidity trap.
Expansion of the money supply in these circumstances may lead to no additional expenditure, only additional idle balances.
As with L 1 , the elasticity of L 2 depends on how money is defined.
Only this time it is the other way round.
Only very short-term speculative balances will be held in sight deposits: they will be held mainly in time deposits which earn some interest, but which are still totally risk free.
Thus it is the demand for time deposits, and hence broad money, that varies with speculative demand and hence interest rates.
Speculative demand and the exchange rate
In an open economy like the UK where large-scale movements of currencies across the foreign exchanges take place, expectations about  changes in the exchange rate are a major determinant of the speculative demand for money.
If people believe that the pound is likely to appreciate, they will want to hold sterling until it does appreciate.
For example, if the current exchange rate is £1 = $1.50 and speculators believe that it will shortly rise to £1 = $1.75, then if they are correct they will make a 25c per £1 profit by holding sterling.
The more quickly people believe that the exchange rate will rise, the more they will want to hold sterling (as money).
If, however, people believe that it will be a slow rise over time, they will want to buy sterling assets (such as UK government bonds) rather than money, since such assets will also earn the holder a rate of interest.
Conversely, if people believe that the exchange rate is likely to fall in the near future, they will economize on their holdings of sterling, preferring to hold their liquid assets in some other currency — the one most likely to appreciate against other currencies.
Graphically, changes in expectations about the exchange rate will have the effect of shifting the L 2 curve in Figure 16.6.
There is a further complication here.
Expectations about changes in the exchange rate will themselves be influenced by the interest rate (relative to overseas interest rates).
If the UK rate of interest goes up, people will want to deposit their money in the UK.
This will increase the demand for sterling on the foreign exchange market: there will be a short-term capital inflow into the UK (the capital account of the balance of payments will go into surplus).
The effect will be to drive up the exchange rate.
Thus if people believe that the UK rate of interest will rise, they will also believe  that the rate of exchange will appreciate, and they will want to hold larger speculative balances of sterling.
The introduction of the ‘foreign exchange dimension’ into our analysis will have two effects on the L 2 curve.
First, the curve will become more elastic.
We have already seen that, if the rate of interest is high, people will tend to believe that it is likely to fall and will thus not wish to hold speculative balances of money; instead they will buy securities while their price is low and their rate of interest is still high.
Now we add another reason for not holding speculative balances: if the rate of interest is currently high and is likely to fall, the exchange rate will also be likely to fall.
People will thus choose to keep their liquid assets in other currencies.
Conversely, if the rate of interest is low and is thought likely to rise, the speculative demand is likely to be very high.
Not only will people hold money in anticipation of a fall in security prices, but they will also hold money (sterling) in anticipation of an appreciation of the exchange rate.
Secondly, the curve will become more unstable.
Expectations of changes in the exchange rate do not just depend on current domestic interest rates.
They depend on the current and anticipated future state of the balance of trade, the rate of inflation, the current and anticipated levels of interest rates in other major trading countries, the price of oil, and so on.
If any of these cause people to expect a lower exchange rate, the speculative demand for money will fall: L 2 will shift to the left.
Which way is the L 2 curve likely to shift in the following cases?(a) The balance of trade moves into deficit.
(b) People anticipate that foreign interest rates are likely to rise substantially relative to domestic ones.
(c) The domestic rate of inflation falls below that of other major trading countries.
(d) Which way will the L 2 curve shift if people believe that the pound is about to depreciate?
The total demand for money: L 1 + L 2 
Figure 16.7 shows the total demand for money (L) plotted against the rate of interest (r).
This is found by the horizontal addition of curves L 1 and L 2 in Figures 16.5 and 16.6.
This curve is known as the ‘liquidity preference curve’.
Any factor, other than a change in interest rates, that causes the demand for money to rise will shift the L curve to the right.
For example, a rise in national income will cause L 1 to increase, and thus L will shift to the right.
An increased use of credit cards will shift L 1 to the left, and hence also L.  
Which way would the liquidity preference curve shift (or swing) in the following two cases?(a) A general movement of employers towards paying people monthly rather than weekly.
(b) The inclusion of time deposits in the definition of the money supply.
Additional effects of expectations
We have talked about expectations and their importance in determining the speculative demand for money.
In particular we have looked at (a) the effect of interest rates on people's anticipations of future security prices and (b) the effect of expectations about exchange rate movements.
There are two other ways in which expectations can influence the demand for money, and make it more unstable.
Expectations about prices.
If people expect prices to rise, they may reduce their money balances and purchase goods and assets now, before prices do rise.
This will tend to shift L to the left.
(Note, though, that once prices have risen, people will need more money to conduct the same amount of transactions.)
Expectations of interest rate levels over the longer term.
If people come to expect that interest rates will normally be higher than they used to be, then any given interest rate will seem lower relative to the ‘normal’ rate than it used to be.
People will be more inclined to hold speculative balances of money in anticipation of a rise in interest rates.
This will tend to shift L upwards.
Since both of these effects are likely to occur during a period of higher inflation, the two of them will be working in opposite directions.
In an era of uncertainty about inflation and interest rates, people's expectations will be hard to predict.
They will be volatile and susceptible to rumours and political events.
In such circumstances, the L curve itself will be hard to predict and will be subject to considerable shifts.
Generally, it is likely that the greater the uncertainty, the greater will be the preference for liquidity, and the greater the risk of tying money up in risky assets.
Keynesian and monetarist views on the demand for money
Keynesians and monetarists disagree over the shape and stability of the liquidity preference curve (the demand for money curve).
In fact this is one of the most crucial areas of disagreement between them.
Keynesians argue that the L curve is relatively elastic and unstable, as in Figure 16.8(a).
Monetarists argue that it is relatively inelastic and stable, as in Figure 16.8(b).
The shape of the demand for money curve
The disagreement here is over the substitutability of assets.
Are other assets a close substitute for money?
Are non-money assets such as stocks and shares, bonds and property close substitutes for each other?
To understand the debate we must introduce the concept of portfolio balance.
People hold a whole range (or ‘portfolio’) of assets, from money at one end of the spectrum of liquidity to physical assets such as property and consumer durables at the other.
Between the two extremes come the various financial assets such as bonds and shares.
The balance of assets in people's portfolios will depend on the relative returns on these assets.
If the return on one type of asset goes up, people will switch to holding more of that asset in their portfolios.
The more substitutable one asset is for another, the more readily people will switch.
For simplicity let us group assets into just three types: money, financial assets and physical goods.
Keynesians.
Keynesians argue that money and financial assets are relatively close substitutes for each other.
They are alternative means of holding wealth.
Money has the advantage of liquidity and hence lack of risk.
Financial assets have the advantage of earning income.
People thus switch between them as the balance of advantage changes.
As interest rates go up, the balance of advantage shifts towards holding financial assets which earn these higher interest rates.
People thus hold less of their wealth in the form of money.
The demand for money falls significantly.
The L curve is elastic.
Physical goods, by contrast, are not seen by Keynesians as being close substitutes for financial assets (and certainly not for money).
They are far too illiquid.
Thus the stress on money as a means of storing wealth and the close substitutability of money and other financial assets give an elastic liquidity preference curve.
Monetarists.
Monetarists stress the function of money as a medium of exchange and play down its role as a store of wealth.
It is thus not a close substitute for financial assets.
If the rate of interest changes, there will be relatively little shifting between money and financial assets.
The L curve is inelastic.
At the same time monetarists argue that physical goods are a relatively close substitute for financial assets.
If, therefore, the rate of interest falls on financial assets, then people, rather than shifting away from financial assets toward money, will buy more physical goods instead.
The stability of the demand for money curve
Keynesians argue that expectations about inflation, exchange rates and interest rates frequently change and have significant effects on the holding of speculative balances of money.
Given the importance of money as a means of storing wealth, these balances can be sizeable.
As a result any given percentage change in speculative balances will cause a relatively large percentage change in the overall demand for money.
The L curve is thus likely to shift around and be hard to predict.
Monetarists argue that the L curve does not shift very much.
The reason is that they deny the significance of speculative balances and argue that overwhelmingly money is held as a medium of exchange.
Any shifts in the L curve are therefore likely to be gradual in response to longer-run changes in income or institutional influences on holding money (such as credit cards and cash machines).
Evidence
Evidence suggests that the L curve is relatively elastic.
The degree of elasticity depends on which measure of money is chosen.
The demand for narrow money is less interest elastic than the demand for broad money.
Why would the demand for MO be very inelastic indeed?
Evidence is far less clear on the stability of the L curve.
It depends very much on which measure of money is chosen, which period of history is examined, and what form of monetary policy the government is operating.
The implications of the Keynesian and monetarist views for monetary policy, and the evidence supporting them, are examined in subsequent chapters.
SUMMARY
1.
The three motives for holding money are the transactions, precautionary and speculative (or assets) motives.
2.
The transactions-plus-precautionary demand for money (L 1 ) depends primarily on the level of national income, the frequency with which people are paid and institutional arrangements (such as the use of credit or debit cards).
It also depends to some degree on the rate of interest.
The transactions-plus-precautionary demand for narrow money is more interest elastic than for broad money.
3.
The speculative demand for money (L 2 ) depends primarily on anticipations about future movements in security prices (and hence their rate of return) and future movements in exchange rates.
If security prices are anticipated to fall or the exchange rate to rise, people will demand to hold more (domestic) money balances.
4.
The demand for money is also influenced by expectations of price changes and the levels of interest rates over the longer term.
5.
Keynesians argue that the demand for money is elastic with respect to interest rates and also unstable.
They stress the importance of money as a means of storing wealth, and argue that (broad) money is a close substitute for financial assets.
Thus people will readily switch back and forth from money to other assets.
6.
Monetarists argue that the demand for money is inelastic with respect to interest rates and also fairly stable over time.
They stress the importance of money as a medium of exchange, and argue that money is not a close substitute for financial assets.
Thus people will not switch back and forth, but will hold a relatively constant amount of money.
16.5 Equilibrium
Equilibrium in the money market
Equilibrium in the money market will be where the demand for money (L) is equal to the supply of money (M s ) This equilibrium will be achieved through changes in the rate of interest and the exchange rate.
For the moment let us ignore the exchange rate and concentrate on changes in the rate of interest.
In Figure 16.9, equilibrium is achieved with a rate of interest re and a quantity of money Me.
If the rate of interest were above re, people would have money balances surplus to their needs.
They would use this to buy securities and other assets.
This would drive up the price of securities and drive down the rate of interest.
As the rate of interest fell, so there would be a contraction of the money supply (a movement down along the Ms curve) and an increase in the demand for money balances especially speculative balances, since people would increasingly judge with lower interest rates that now was not the time to buy securities (there is a movement down along the liquidity preference curve).
The interest rate would go on falling until it reached re.
Equilibrium would then be achieved.
Similarly, if the rate of interest were below re, people would have insufficient money balances.
They would sell securities, thus lowering their prices and raising the rate of interest until it reached r e .
A shift in either Ms or L will lead to a new equilibrium quantity of money and rate of interest at the new intersection of the curves.
What effects will the following have on the equilibrium rate of interest?
(You should consider which way the demand and/or supply curves of money shift.)(a) Banks find that they have a higher liquidity ratio than they need.
(b) A rise in incomes.
(c) A growing belief that interest rates will rise from their current level.
In practice there is no one single rate of interest.
Different assets have different rates of interest.
Table 16.11 gives examples of the rates of interest on various assets at the end of January 1990.
Equilibrium in the money markets, therefore, will be first where the total demand for and supply of money are equal.
This is achieved by adjustments in the average rate of interest.
Secondly, it will be where demand and supply of each type of financial asset separately balance.
This is achieved by changes in relative interest rates in the  different parts of the market.
If, for example, there was excess demand for short-term loans (like money at call) and excess supply of money to invest in long-term assets (like bonds), short-term rates of interest would rise relative to long-term rates.
Equilibrium in both the money market and in national income
Changes in money supply (or demand) will affect national income via changes in the rate of interest.
It is a three stage process.
This is illustrated in Figure 16.10:
In diagram (a) a rise in money supply (M s ) will lead to a fall in the rate of interest (r): this is necessary to restore equilibrium in the money market.
In diagram (b) the fall in r will lead to a rise in investment and other forms of borrowing (I).
Since borrowing money will be cheaper, investment will cost less.
In diagram (c) the rise in investment (being an injection) will lead to a multiplied rise in national income (Y) and aggregate demand (AD).
The rise in income will be less than that shown in diagram (c), however, since any rise in income will lead to a rise in the transactions demand for money, L 1 .
L will shift to the right in diagram (a), and thus r will not fall as much as illustrated.
Thus investment (diagram (b)) and income (diagram (c)) will not rise as much as illustrated either.
Trace through the effect on the rise in the demand for money.
How big will the effect of changes in money supply be on output, employment and prices?
The effect on national income will be bigger:
The less elastic the liquidity preference curve: this will cause a bigger change in the rate of interest.
The more interest elastic is the investment curve: this will cause a bigger change in investment.
The lower the marginal propensity to withdraw (mpw), and hence the flatter the withdrawals function: this will cause a bigger multiplied change in national income and aggregate demand.
The change in aggregate demand will have a bigger effect on output and employment, the more elastic is the aggregate supply curve.
This is illustrated in Figure 16.11.
Aggregate demand rises from AD to AD'.
With the more elastic aggregate supply curve AS 2 , national output rises to Y 2 .
With the less elastic curve AS 1 , output only rises to Y 2 .
All these issues — the shape and stability of the L curve, the shape and stability of the I curve and the shape of the AS curve — are highly controversial.
Generally, Keynesians argue that increases in money supply have a small and uncertain effect on aggregate demand because the L curve is elastic an unstable and because investment is not very responsive to changes in interest rates; but that any increase that does occur in aggregate demand is likely to affect output and employment if there is demand-deficient unemployment: AS is relatively elastic until full employment is approached.
Monetarists argue that increases in money supply have a large effect on aggregate demand (certainly in the long run) because the L curve is inelastic and investment is responsive to changes in interest rates; but that this increase in aggregate demand will simply be reflected in the long run in higher prices: the AS curve is vertical.
These arguments will be examined in Chapters 18 and 19.
Equilibrium when interest rates are controlled
If the government controls interest rates and the supply of money reflects the demand, then the analysis becomes somewhat different.
As explained on page 680, the supply of money curve will be downward sloping.
In the extreme case, the supply will depend exclusively on demand.
Banks will merely supply whatever is demanded: in this case the supply curve is the same as the demand curve.
In Figure 16.12 the supply curve, M s1 , equals the demand curve, L. A rise in interest rates from r 1 to r 2 will reduce both the demand and supply of money from Q 1 to Q 2 .
In the less extreme case, the supply of money depends to some extent, but not exclusively, on demand.
The supply of money curve will be steeper than the demand curve: like M s2 in Figure 16.12.
If the authorities raise interest rates to r 2 , there will be a disequilibrium.
There will be excess liquidity in the economy .
In this case either there will be downward pressure on interest rates, or the authorities will have to take other measures to reduce this liquidity.
The whole question of controlling money supply and interest rates is the subject of Chapter 17.
Equilibrium in an open economy
Finally let us see what happens when money supply changes in an open economy with floating exchange rates.
How does the change in the supply of money affect the exchange rate, and how in turn does this affect equilibrium in the money market and in the real economy?
Let us assume that initially the exchange rate was in a stable equilibrium with no shifts in the demand for and supply of sterling.
Now let us assume that the money supply increases.
The supply of money will thus exceed the demand.
This has three direct effects:
Part of the excess balances will be used to purchase foreign assets.
This will therefore lead to an increase in the supply of pounds coming on to the foreign exchange markets.
The excess supply of money in the domestic money market will push down the rate of interest.
This will reduce the return on UK assets below that on foreign assets.
This, like the first effect, will lead to an increased demand for foreign assets and thus an increased supply of pounds on the foreign exchange market.
Speculators will anticipate that the higher supply of sterling will cause the exchange rate to depreciate.
They will therefore sell sterling and buy foreign currencies.
The effect of all three is to cause the exchange rate to depreciate.
This will have two effects on aggregate demand:
Imports will be more expensive relative to home-produced goods.
People will thus buy fewer imports and more home-produced goods.
Withdrawals (W) will thus fall and consumption of domestic goods (C d ) will rise.
The initial effect on exporters depends on how exports are priced.
If they are priced in dollars, D-Marks or some other foreign currency, they will now earn more pounds and will therefore be more profitable for exporters.
Exporters will thus increase their production.
If exports are priced in pounds, they will now be cheaper in foreign currency terms for foreigners to buy.
The demand for UK exports will thus increase.
Either way, a rise in exports, being an injection into the circular flow of income, will raise aggregate demand and hence lead to a multiplied rise in income.
The various effects are illustrated in Figure 16.13:
In diagram (a) a rise in money supply will cause the rate of interest to fall from r 1 to r 2 .
In diagram (b) the rise in money supply plus the fall in the rate of interest will cause the exchange rate to depreciate from er 1 to er 2 .
In diagram (c) the fall in the exchange rate will cause a fall in imports and a rise in exports.
This, coupled with the effect on investment of a fall in interest rates, will cause a multiplied rise in national income from Y 1 to Y 2 .
Note that the lower interest rate causes a capital account deficit on the balance of payments as people buy foreign assets.
This is matched (as it must be if the government does not use the reserves to support the pound) by a current account surplus as exports rise and imports fall.
The full effect will not be as large as that illustrated.
This is because the increased national income will cause an increased transactions demand for money.
This will shift the L curve to the right in diagram (a), and thus lead to a smaller fall in the rate of interest than that illustrated.
Trace through the effects of a fall in the supply of money.
In the extreme case where the aggregate supply curve is vertical, the increased money supply will simply lead to higher prices.
In such a case the rise in the transactions demand for money will match the rise in the supply of money.
Interest rates will rise back up to the original level.
The exchange rate depreciation will then simply match the rise in prices.
Monetarists take this extreme view.
Any increase in the money supply, they argue, will simply lead to higher prices and a lower exchange rate.
A 10 per cent rise in money supply will lead to a 10 per cent rise in prices and a 10 per cent depreciation of the exchange rate (assuming no inflation abroad).
If foreign prices rose on average by 4 per cent and UK prices rose by 10 per cent, how much would the pound have to depreciate?
We will examine the relationship between money and exchange rates in more detail in Chapter 22.
SUMMARY
1.
Equilibrium in the money market is where the supply of money is equal to the demand.
Equilibrium is achieved through changes in the interest rate and the exchange rate.
2.
The interest rate mechanism works as follows:(a) a rise in money supply causes money supply to exceed money demand; interest rates fall;(b) this causes investment to rise;(c) this causes a multiplied rise in national income but (d) as national income rises so the transactions demand for money will rise, thus preventing quite such a large fall in interest rates.
3.
Keynesians argue that effects (a) and (b) are weak and unreliable, making monetary policy an unreliable weapon for controlling aggregate demand.
Monetarists argue that they are much stronger and more predictable, but that any change in aggregate demand will (in the long run) simply affect prices and not output and employment.
4.
The exchange rate mechanism works as follows:(a) a rise in money supply causes interest rates to fall;(b) the rise in money supply plus the fall in interest rates causes an increased supply of domestic currency to come on to the foreign exchange market; this causes the exchange rate to fall;(c) this will cause increased exports and reduced imports, and hence a multiplied rise in national income.
Monetary Policy
17.1 Attitudes towards monetary policy
Monetary policy is the deliberate attempt by the authorities (a) to control the supply of money, or (b) to control interest rates, or (c) to ration the amount of credit granted by banks.
Monetary policy is highly controversial.
Economists are not agreed (nor are politicians for that matter) on how effective it has been or can be, or on what form it should take.
Government attitudes towards monetary policy have undergone enormous changes since 1945.
In the Keynesian era from 1945 to the end of the 1960s, fiscal policy was seen as the major weapon for controlling the economy.
Monetary policy was relegated to the fairly minor role of preventing excessive fluctuations in interest rates.
For most of this period, this simply meant allowing money supply to expand to accommodate increases in aggregate demand associated with expansionary fiscal policy (otherwise the shortage of money would have driven up interest rates).
It also meant allowing money supply to contract, or grow less rapidly, when deflationary fiscal policies were pursued.
During the 1970s there was a major swing in the attitudes of many economists and politicians.
The rise of monetarism was accompanied by increased importance being attached to monetary policy.
There were a number of factors leading to this.
The main ones were as follows:
The failure of Keynesianism to account for and provide solutions to the growing problem of stagflation.
Fiscal policy had failed, perhaps monetary policy could provide the answer.
Increased academic interest in monetary economics, and in particular increased evidence, most notably that of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz in their Monetary History of the United States, that there is a direct causal link between growth in the money supply and inflation.
The growth of the radical right in politics, and the subsequent elections of Reagan, Thatcher, Kohl and others.
The radical right is committed to laissez-faire policies, with the main economic role of the government reduced to that of providing ‘sound money’.
This means controlling the money supply to control inflation.
Stable prices will then allow the market mechanism to give clear, unambiguous signals of relative scarcities.
This will help enterprise to flourish, and output and employment should grow.
The high point of monetarism came in the early 1980s.
Governments round the world made the control of inflation the number one short-term macroeconomic objective.
To achieve this they pursued tight monetary policies which in many cases involved setting targets for the growth in money supply.
In the UK the Conservative government adopted a medium-term financial strategy (MTFS).
This involved setting targets each year for the growth of money supply over the following four years: the targets got progressively tighter over the four years, thus ‘putting the squeeze on inflation’.
To achieve these money supply targets the MTFS also included targets for cutting the public sector borrowing requirement.
From the mid-1980s the UK, along with several other countries, began to adopt a more pragmatic approach to monetary policy.
It had been found difficult to control money supply and to keep it within target ranges.
Anyway, as elections approached it was not always politically desirable to have a tight monetary policy.
It is easier to win elections if the economy is growing rapidly — a government can cope with any resulting inflation after the election!
But perhaps one of the main reasons for abandoning monetary targets was the desire to prevent exchange rate fluctuations, and the use of changes in interest rates to achieve this.
As we shall see, if the interest rate is used to control exchange rates, it cannot at the same time be used to achieve money supply targets.
What form should monetary policy take?
In framing its monetary policy, a government must address itself to a number of important questions:
What are the goals of monetary policy?
Is the aim simply to control inflation, or does the government wish also to affect output and employment, or does it want to control the exchange rate?
Where does monetary policy fit into the total package of macroeconomic policies?
Is it seen as the major or even sole macroeconomic policy weapon, or is it merely one of several policy weapons, and possibly a minor one at that?
What element of the monetary system should the government seek to control?
Should it be the supply of money, and if so which measure?
Should it be the demand for money, and if so how should that be measured?
Or should it be the rate of interest, and if so at what level?
Should the government take a long-term perspective or a short-term perspective?
Should it adopt a target for money supply growth, say, and stick to it come what may?
Or should it adjust its policy as circumstances change and attempt to ‘fine-tune’ the economy?
How reliable is monetary policy in controlling monetary variables?
Just how successfully can a government control money supply or interest rates?
Keynesian and monetarist attitudes towards monetary policy
Keynesians and monetarists give very different answers to these questions.
Keynesians see the prime role of macroeconomic policy as stabilizing aggregate demand at or near ‘full employment’ income.
The prime weapon for managing demand is discretionary fiscal policy, with monetary policy being used merely as a back-up to this.
If stagflation becomes a problem, then demand management policies (both fiscal and monetary) should be used to eliminate demand-deficient unemployment, with back-up ‘supply-side’ policies being used to cure the remaining unemployment.
Such policies would involve government intervention to provide better training and job information to reduce occupational immobility, and grants to firms to set up in areas  of high unemployment to reduce regional imbalances.
Inflation not resulting from excess demand could possibly be controlled by a prices and incomes policy.
Keynesians see monetary policy, therefore, as merely one part of a much larger package of policies.
What is more, they see monetary policy as rather ineffective.
They make three points here:
It is difficult to control money supply, and impossible to control it precisely.
The link between money supply and aggregate demand is weak and unpredictable.
Thus if it is aggregate demand that requires controlling, monetary policy is a poor weapon to do this.
If monetary policy is to be used to control aggregate demand, it will be through interest rate changes.
Thus it is best to control interest rates directly, rather than relying on changes in money supply to affect them.
Monetarists see the prime role of macroeconomic policy as providing an environment conducive to private enterprise and investment.
This is the way, they claim, to bring long-term increases in output and employment.
To create this environment, two types of policy must be pursued: monetary policy and free-market-orientated supply-side policies.
They reject the Keynesian approach to monetary and fiscal polices which sees them as discretionary, essentially short-term, demand management policies.
Both policies, monetarists argue, involve considerable time lags, which can make them destabilizing.
Instead a much longer-term perspective should be taken.
There is a strong causal link, they claim, between money and prices.
Long-run price stability therefore requires long-run control over the money supply.
This involves setting targets for money supply into the future, and then using monetary policy to ensure that these targets are met.
Monetary policy, they argue, providing it is carefully designed and executed, can control the money supply.
Supply-side policies, they say, should be geared (a) to removing impediments to the working of the market — impediments such as restrictive practices and nationalization and (b) to fostering competition, by creating incentives, reducing taxes and removing bureaucratic obstacles to small businesses.
SUMMARY
1.
During the 1970s and 1980s governments around the world attached increasing importance to monetary policy and less importance to fiscal policy.
This was due to an increased acceptance of monetarist arguments and a rejection of Keynesian ones.
2.
Keynesians argue that monetary policy is an unreliable means of controlling aggregate demand.
Instead governments should use fiscal policy combined with a policy of relatively stable interest rates.
3.
Monetarists argue that monetary policy is a powerful weapon.
A stable economy is best achieved by ensuring a steady and low rate of growth in the money supply.
4.
In framing its monetary policy a government must have a clear idea of what the goals of the policy are, which monetary variable it is going to attempt to control and by what means, whether to take a long-term or short-term perspective, and how the policy fits in with other policies.
17.2 Varieties of monetary policy
Control of the money supply over the medium and long term
As explained in Chapter 16, there are four possible sources of monetary growth:(a) banks choosing to hold a lower liquidity ratio (probably in response to an increase in the demand for loans);(b) a balance of payments surplus;(c) public sector  borrowing;(d) a change in the method of financing the national debt.
If the government wishes to restrict monetary growth over the longer term, it could in theory attempt to control any of these four.
Banks' liquidity ratio
The authorities (the government operating through the Bank of England) could impose statutory minimum reserve requirements on the banks to prevent them choosing to reduce their liquidity ratio and choosing thereby to create more credit.
A major problem with imposing restrictions of this kind is that banks may find ways of getting round them.
After all, banks would like to lend and customers would like to borrow.
It would be very difficult for the Bank of England to regulate and police every single part of the UK's complex financial system.
If it succeeds merely in regulating part of the system, then something called Goodhart's law is likely to come into operation.
This law (named after Charles Goodhart, formerly of the Bank of England) states that attempts to regulate one part of the financial system will merely divert business to other parts which are unregulated (see Box 17.1).
Total borrowing may thus continue to increase.
Monetarists are opposed to this form of monetary control, arguing that banks, like any firm, ought to be free to compete in the market, free from government restrictions.
Imposing reserve requirements on banks is ‘anti-market’ and could lead to banks becoming inefficient.
So how else can the government discourage banks from increasing their lending if the banks are only too willing to expand credit and accept a lower liquidity ratio?
The answer is to curb the long-run demand for money.
This will normally involve keeping interest rates high.
The problem with this is that it will drive up the exchange rate and thus make it harder for firms to export.
A total currency flow surplus
Total currency flow surpluses will only occur if the government keeps the exchange rate below the equilibrium by continuing to sell the domestic currency on the foreign exchange market.
Since governments are unlikely to do this over the long term, this will not be a long-term source of excessive monetary growth.
The PSBR and its method of financing
If the public-sector borrowing requirements (PSBR) is financed by borrowing from the Bank of England or by the sale of Treasury bills to the banking sector, the money supply will increase.
If it is financed by selling bills or bonds outside the banking sector or by selling bonds to the banks, the money supply will not increase.
If there is no increase in money supply, however, the increased demand for loans by the government will ‘crowd out’ lending to the private sector.
To attract money the government will have to offer higher interest rates on bonds.
This will force up private sector interest rates and reduce private-sector borrowing and investment.
This financial crowding out, as it is called, could be offset to some extent by an increase in the speed at which money circulates — the velocity of circulation.
If existing money circulates faster, there will be less shortage of money and less upward pressure on interest rates.
The velocity of circulation will rise if there is a reduction in idle balances.
The more idle balances fall, the more money will be available for spending.
But why should idle balances fall?
This is simply the result of a downward sloping liquidity preference curve.
As interest rates begin to rise, so people choose to hold less idle balances.
The more elastic the liquidity preference curve, the more idle   balances will fall.
Nevertheless, unless the liquidity preference curve is totally elastic, some financial crowding out will occur.
(Crowding out is examined in detail in Chapter 18.)
If governments wish to reduce monetary growth and yet avoid financial crowding out, they must therefore reduce the level of the PSBR.
Monetarists argue that governments should make reductions in the PSBR (as a proportion of national income) the central part of their medium- and longer-term monetary strategy.
Not only is this desirable as a means of restricting monetary growth, but, if it involves cutting government expenditure (as opposed to increasing taxes), it will also increase the size of the private sector relative to the public sector  and it is the private sector that monetarists see as the main source of long-term growth in output and employment.
In the UK, the Conservative government's medium-term financial strategy introduced in 1980 attempted to do just this.
As well as setting targets for the growth of money supply, it also gave targets for the PSBR as a percentage of GDP.
The original MTFS is shown in Table 17.1.
As it turned out, actual PSBR was considerably higher than the target figures.
Nevertheless the government continued setting targets for a reduction in PSBR.
The April 1985 figures are shown in Table 17.2.
How could long-term monetary growth come about if the government persistently ran a public-sector surplus (public-sector debt repayment, PSDR)?
Short-term monetary control: what should governments attempt to control?
Monetary policy may be off target.
Alternatively, the government may wish to alter its monetary policy.
Assume, for example, that the government wishes to operate a tighter monetary policy in order to reduce aggregate demand.
What can it do?
For any given supply of money (M s ) there will be a particular equilibrium rate of interest at any one time: where the supply of money (m s ) equals the demand for money (L).
This is shown as r 1 in Figure 17.1.
Thus to operate a tighter monetary policy the authorities can do the following:
Reduce money supply and accept whatever equilibrium interest rate results.
Thus if money supply is reduced to Q 2 in Figure 17.1, a new higher rate of interest, r 2 , will result.
First raise interest rates to r 2 and then manipulate the money supply to reduce it to Q 2 .
Keep interest rates low (at r 1 ) in order, say, to keep down the costs of investment, but also reduce money supply to a level of Q 2 The trouble here is that the government cannot both control the money supply and keep interest rates down without running into the problem of disequilibrium.
Since the demand for money now exceeds the supply by Q 1 — Q 2 some form of credit rationing will have to be applied.
There is a fourth possibility, but this is not primarily monetary policy.
This would be to reduce the demand for money (i.e. shift the demand for money curve (L) to the   left).
A contractionary fiscal policy would probably be necessary here.
This would reduce aggregate demand directly and thus reduce the transactions demand for money.
This would allow money supply to be reduced without raising interest rates or having to resort to credit rationing.
The following sections look at various techniques of monetary policy in each of the three categories:(a) controlling the money supply,(b) controlling interest rates and (c) rationing credit.
Techniques to control the money supply
The possible techniques available to the authorities have one major feature in common: they involve manipulating the liquid assets of the banking system.
The aim is to influence the total money supply by affecting the amount of credit that banks can create.
Suppose, in the simplest possible case, banks operate a rigid 10 per cent cash ratio and just have two types of asset: cash and advances.
Suppose that the government is able to reduce cash by £1 million; then with a money multiplier of 10 (= 1/cash ratio), advances must be reduced by £9 million, bringing a total £10 million reduction in deposits and hence in money supply.
This is illustrated in Table 17.3.
If banks operated a rigid 12 ½ per cent cash ratio and the government reduced the supply of cash by £1 million, how much must credit contract?
What is the money multiplier?
Before they can actually apply techniques of monetary control, there are two preliminary decisions the authorities must make:
Should a statutory liquidity ratio be imposed on the banks, or should the banks be allowed to choose whatever ratio they consider to be prudent?
Should the authorities attempt to control a range of liquid assets, or should they focus on controlling just the monetary base — either the narrow monetary base  (banks' balances with the Bank of England) or the broad monetary base, M0 (banks' balances with the Bank of England plus notes and coin)?
Before 1981 statutory liquidity ratios were imposed on the banks.
Since 1981, however, banks have been left to decide their own prudent liquidity ratios.
Before 1981 the authorities concentrated on a whole range of liquid assets and on broad measures of money supply, like M3: the argument being that it is broad liquidity that determines credit creation and broad measures of money that influence aggregate demand.
After 1981 government opinion shifted in favour of focusing on the monetary base, as this is more easily controlled by the authorities, and after 1984 the government started targeting M0 as well as M3 in its medium-term financial strategy.
In 1985 all targets except for M0 were abolished.
This, it might seem, meant that the government was from that point firmly committed to controlling the monetary base rather than broader liquidity.
In reality it was simply a recognition that the government had abandoned any serious attempt to keep monetary growth within targets.
The government was still monitoring all measures of money and a whole range of liquid assets.
It was just that monetary policy was now more directed to managing aggregate demand or to influencing the exchange rate, depending on whatever was the most politically pressing.
Thus targeting was abandoned, but the government still continued to use various techniques of monetary control.
There are three techniques that have been used to control money supply.
Each one affects banks' liquidity.
Open-market operations
Open-market operations are the purchase or sale by the Bank of England of government securities (bonds or Treasury bills) in the open market.
These purchases or sales are not in response to changes in the PSBR or PSDR, and are best understood, therefore, in the context of an unchanged PSBR or PSDR.
If the government wished to reduce the money supply, the Bank of England would sell more securities.
When people buy these securities, they pay for them with cheques drawn on banks.
Thus banks' balances with the Bank of England are reduced.
If this brings bank reserves below their prudent ratio (or statutory ratio, if one is in force), banks will reduce advances.
There will be a multiple contraction of credit and hence of money supply.
The effect will be limited if the extra securities are Treasury bills (as opposed to bonds) and if some are purchased by discount houses and banks.
The reduction in one liquid asset (balances with the Bank of England) will be offset to some extent by an increase in another liquid asset (Treasury bills).
Open-market operations are more likely to be effective in reducing the money supply, therefore, when conducted in the bond market.
If the government wishes to increase the money supply, the Bank of England would purchase back securities.
When people pay these Bank of England cheques into their banks, the banks' balances with the Bank of England will rise.
Credit creation can take place.
1.
Assume that a bank has the following simplified balance sheet.
Now assume that the Bank of England repurchases £5 million of government bonds on the open market.
Assume that the people who sell the bonds all have their accounts with this bank.
Draw up the new balance sheet directly after the purchase of the bonds.
Then draw up the eventual balance sheet after credit creation has taken place.
2.
Why would it be difficult for the Bank of England to predict the precise effect on money supply of open-market operations?
Funding
Funding is where the Bank of England, if it wishes to reduce the money supply, issues more government bonds, but at the same time fewer Treasury bills.
Banks' balances with the Bank of England will be little affected, but to the extent that banks hold fewer bills, there will be (ceteris paribus) a reduction in their liquidity.
Funding is thus the conversion of one type of government debt into another.
In the mid-1980s the government engaged in overfunding.
This is where the government makes a net issue of bonds to the (non-bank) private sector in excess of the total PSBR.
As with open-market operations and ordinary funding, the sale of securities to the private sector leads to a squeeze on banks' balances at the Bank of England.
As a result banks may have to call in money from the discount houses, which, in turn being short of liquidity, have to sell bills back to the Bank of England (acting as lender of last resort).
If there are insufficient Treasury bills to be rediscounted by the Bank of England, the discount houses will have to sell other bills, such as commercial bills that have been accepted by an acceptance house or bank.
In 1984 the Bank of England built up a ‘commercial bill mountain' through overfunding (see Box 18.5).
If the government issues £1 million worth of extra bonds and buys back £1 million worth of Treasury bills, will there automatically be a reduction in credit (by a multiple of £1 million)?
Special deposits
Banks can be required to deposit a given percentage of their deposits in a special account at the Bank of England.
These special deposits are frozen, and cannot be drawn on until the authorities choose to release them.
They are thus illiquid.
They provide a simple means of reducing banks’ liquidity and hence their ability to create credit.
Releasing special deposits allows banks to create more credit.
A particular variant of special deposits, used on and off during the 1970s, was supplementary special deposits (‘the corset’).
The authorities set limits to the expansion of bank deposits.
Whenever these limits were exceeded, banks were required to place a proportion of them in special deposits.
The more the limits were exceeded, the bigger was this proportion.
This was a form of automatic, as opposed to discretionary, monetary policy.
In theory it was a very simple way of keeping money supply within limits: within a corset.
The more that deposits expanded, the tighter would become the corset.
Although all three techniques have been used in the past, they have not been used as the prime form of monetary policy.
Instead the authorities have tended to concentrate on controlling interest rates and hence the demand for money.
Techniques to control interest rates
If in Figure 17.2 the authorities wished to reduce the demand for money to Q 2 , they would raise interest rates to r 2 .
How, then, can the authorities control interest rates?
Interest rates are controlled by the Bank of England, through its operations in the discount market.
The Bank of England (‘the Bank’) is the lender of the last resort.
If commercial banks are short of liquid assets, they will have to call in money from the discount houses.
The discount houses, as a result, may themselves become short of liquid assets.
They will be forced to borrow from the Bank, as lender of last resort, or get the Bank to rediscount (buy) bills of exchange.
The Bank can choose what rate of interest or rediscount to charge the discount houses.
This in turn will affect interest rates generally throughout the economy.
Until 1972 this rate of interest was called Bank rate.
The clearing banks used to change their interest rates on advances and deposits automatically by the same amount that Bank rate changed.
Thus by changing Bank rate the authorities could directly change banks' interest rates.
This would then stimulate other institutions to change their rates too, in order for them to remain competitive with the clearing banks.
From 1972 to 1981 Bank rate was replaced by minimum lending rate (MLR).
This too was the rate at which the Bank of England would lend to the discount houses in the last resort.
Unlike with Bank rate, however, the clearing banks were not obliged to change their rates when MLR changed.
Nevertheless, they usually did.
There were two reasons for this.
First the Bank of England would usually back up any change in MLR with open market operations in the bond or more likely the bill market.
If, for example, the authorities wished to pursue a tighter monetary policy, they would raise MLR and at the same time sell more government bonds and Treasury bills.
These open-market sales would lower the price of bonds and bills, and hence raise their rate of interest to match the rise in MLR.
Further, purchases of these securities by the general public would reduce banks' liquidity, as people paid with cheques drawn on their bank accounts.
The banks might then be obliged to call in money from the discount houses.
This, plus direct purchases of some of the bills by the discount houses, would reduce the liquidity of the discount houses, which then would be forced to borrow from the Bank of England at the new higher MLR.
Before 1981 the Bank of England as a matter of course deliberately sold sufficiently large amounts of Treasury bills to keep the discount houses short of liquidity.
Discount houses are obliged to purchase any Treasury bills not purchased by other people or institutions.
Having to pay this new higher MLR would force the discount houses to tender a  lower price for bills, in order to get a higher rate of discount.
Higher rates of discount on bills would in turn drive up interest rates on other types of borrowing and lending that compete with bills (e.g. short-term bank loans).
At the same time, if discount houses ran the risk of borrowing at a new higher MLR they would try to borrow more money at call and would be prepared to pay a higher rate of interest to do so.
Banks would then divert assets from advances to call money, which would create a shortage of money for advances and drive up their rate of interest.
In other words, a rise in MLR had a knock-on effect on interest rates throughout the economy.
Secondly, MLR was seen as a signal of government intention.
A rise in MLR was a sign that the authorities wanted to pursue a tighter monetary policy.
As a result banks would tend to raise their rates in anticipation of a general rise in rates.
Since 1981 a formally announced MLR has been abandoned, and the Bank of England no longer keeps discount houses deliberately short of liquidity as a matter of course.
Nevertheless the Bank still actively intervenes to affect interest rates.
It does this by altering the supply of Treasury bills on offer, at times when it is trying to reduce liquidity; or by altering the amount of bills (eligible commercial bills and local authority bills as well as Treasury bills) it is prepared to buy, at times when it is trying to provide more liquidity.
In other words, it conducts open-market operations in the bill market with the intention of achieving a particular interest rate rather than a particular supply of liquid assets.
Assume that the Bank of England wishes to raise interest rates.
Assume also that the discount houses have surplus liquidity and that the Bank of England is selling Treasury bills.
The greater the supply of Treasury bills on offer by the Bank, the lower the price the discount houses will be prepared to pay for them, and hence the higher the rate of discount (r) they must receive.
Thus in Figure 17.3(a), a rise in Treasury bill issue from S 1 to S 2 will raise the discount rate from r 1 to r 2 .
Thus the Bank of England can alter the discount rate by altering the supply of Treasury bills.
Now assume that discount houses have insufficient liquidity and are forced to borrow from the Bank of England.
Since 1981 the Bank prefers not to lend as such, but rather to purchase (‘rediscount’) bills from the discount houses.
The Bank does not announce its rediscount rate, but instead invites the discount houses to offer it bills.
If the price asked by the discount houses is thought to be too high, the Bank will refuse to purchase them.
This will drive down the price and hence drive up the rate of rediscount (r).
The discount houses will thus try to economize on the bills they offer   to the Bank by, say, offering a higher rate of interest on money at call, and thus encouraging further such deposits from the banks.
Thus in Figure 17.3(b), the supply of bills on offer by the discount houses to the Bank falls as the rate of rediscount rises (the supply curve of bills by the discount houses is upward sloping).
The Bank, by rejecting offers at r 1 , is in effect reducing its demand for bills (D 1 to D 2 ), and thereby drives up the rediscount rate to r 2 .
In either case (the Bank selling more or buying fewer bills), there will be a knock-on effect on interest rates throughout the economy, just as there used to be with MLR.
In recent years the government has returned to announcing interest rate changes, and thus the current system is similar to the old MLR system.
Note that, although the current approach to monetary policy focuses on the rate of interest in order to affect the demand for money, this approach is still backed up by measures to control the money supply.
Thus in Figure 17.4, if the authorities want to raise the rate of interest from r 1 to r 2 , their actions in the discount market outlined above will reduce money supply from Q 1 to Q 2 , to ensure that r 2 is an equilibrium rate of interest.
Apart from wanting to control the domestic demand for money, there is another reason why the Bank of England sometimes alters interest rates.
This is to influence the rate of exchange.
If it raises interest rates, using the techniques described above, this will encourage people overseas to deposit their money in the UK.
This will increase the demand for sterling on the foreign exchange markets and hence cause an appreciation of the exchange rate.
As we shall see later in the chapter, however, there is a potential conflict between using interest rates to control the demand for money and using them also to control the exchange rate.
Techniques to ration credit
In the past, and particularly in the late 1960s, governments attempted to keep interest rates low so as not to discourage investment.
This frequently meant that the demand for money exceeded the supply of money that the authorities were prepared to permit.
Thus in Figure 17.5, if the authorities keep interest rates at r 1 , and yet do not allow money supply to expand beyond Q 2 , there will be excess demand for money of Q 1 — Q 2 .
Faced with this excess demand, the authorities had to ration credit.
There were three possible techniques open to the authorities.
Suggestion and request (sometimes called ‘moral suasion’).
This could be qualitative  where the Bank of England requested the banks to discriminate between borrowers.
For example, they might be asked to restrict the amount of credit granted to private individuals for consumption, or to property speculators.
It could also be quantitative.
This was where the Bank of England requested banks to restrict total lending.
This most frequently involved the use of ceilings: banks being told not to allow advances to expand by more than a certain percentage compared with the previous year.
Directives.
The Bank of England has the legal power to order banks to obey its requests.
In practice it has never had to invoke this law.
Hire-purchase controls.
The authorities could restrict hire purchase credit by specifying minimum deposits or maximum repayment periods.
One technique of monetary control, which amounts to a form of credit rationing, is to vary the statutory reserve ratio that banks must adhere to.
Clearly this policy option would not be open in the UK as long as there effectively are no statutory reserve requirements and it is up to banks to decide their own prudent ratio.
If, however, the central bank sets the reserve ratio, then by simply increasing it, it can force banks to reduce their non-reserve assets (mainly credit).
Table 17.4 illustrates the effect of raising the ratio from 20 per cent to 25 per cent.
Initially the banks have reserve assets of £10 billion and advances, etc. of £40 billion, giving total assets of £50 billion (of which £10 is 20 per cent).
Increasing the reserve ratio to 25 per cent forces banks to reduce their advances, etc. to £30 billion, giving total assets of £40 billion (of which £10 billion is 25 per cent).
This is equivalent to credit rationing because banks would like to continue lending the £40 billion (or even more), but are being prevented from doing so by the authorities.
Minimum reserve ratios are widely used around the world to restrict credit, including in the USA, Japan, Canada and all the EC countries other than the UK and Luxembourg (see Box 17.3).
SUMMARY
1.
In the medium and long term, the major sources of monetary growth are banks choosing to operate with a lower liquidity ratio and government borrowing.
2.
Banks choosing to operate with a lower liquidity ratio could be prevented by the authorities imposing statutory reserve requirements on banks.
Although this practice is commonplace throughout the world, the authorities in the UK have preferred not to use this method, regarding it as ‘anti-market’.
Instead they have chosen to rely on using interest rates to curb the demand for credit.
3.
In the UK, the government has tried to limit the size of the PSBR, or even to run a PSDR, in order to keep monetary growth in check.
4.
In the short term, the government can use monetary policy to restrict the growth in aggregate demand in one of three ways:(a) reducing money supply directly,(b) reducing the demand for money by raising interest rates, or (c) rationing credit.
5.
The money supply can be reduced directly by using open market operations.
This involves selling more government securities and thereby reducing banks' reserves when their customers pay for them from their bank accounts.
Alternatively, funding can be used.
This is where the government increases the ratio of bonds to bills.
Since bills are a reserve of banks, this too will reduce banks' liquidity.
Finally, banks' liquidity can be  reduced directly by techniques such as special deposits.
6.
Interest rates can be controlled by order of the central bank.
This used to be the system operated in the UK when banks had to set their interest rates in line with Bank rate.
Today the Bank of England influences interest rates by its operations in the discount market.
By selling more bills or buying back fewer, it can force down their price and hence force up the rate of discount.
This then has a knock-on effect on interest rates throughout the economy.
7.
Credit rationing in the UK has not been favoured by The Conservative government of the 1980s and early 1990s.
In the past, rationing took the form of requests to the banks by the Bank of England, and hire-purchase controls.
The manipulation of statutory reserve requirements is another form of credit rationing which is used in many countries.
17.3 Problems of monetary policy
Medium- and long-term control over the money supply
A government committed to a sustained reduction in the growth of the money supply over a number of years will find this very difficult unless it restricts the size of the public-sector deficit.
The Thatcher government in the 1980s recognized this and made reducing the PSBR the central feature of its medium-term financial strategy.
There are serious problems, however, in attempting to reduce the PSBR.
Automatic fiscal stabilizers
Reducing the PSBR must involve either reducing government expenditure or raising taxes, or some combination of the two.
This is deflationary and may lead to a recession.
But in a recession automatic fiscal stabilizers come into force which will tend to push the PSBR back up again.
Lower incomes and lower expenditure will mean that less taxes are paid.
At the same time, higher unemployment will involve increased government expenditure on unemployment benefits.
This was a major problem for the Thatcher government in the early 1980s, when despite efforts to cut government expenditure the PSBR remained high.
The desire to cut taxes
Governments gain popularity by cutting taxes, not by increasing them.
The Thatcher government in particular, throughout its terms of office, repeatedly committed itself to cutting the burden of taxation, and thereby to increasing incentives and encouraging enterprise and initiative.
But cutting taxes raises the PSBR.
The difficulty in cutting government expenditure
Cuts in government expenditure are politically unpopular.
The Thatcher government as soon as it came into office met considerable opposition in Parliament, from public opinion, from local authorities and from various pressure groups, to ‘cuts’.
What is more, much of government expenditure is committed a long time in advance and cannot easily be cut.
As a result the government may find itself forced into refusing to sanction new expenditure.
But this will mean a decline in capital projects such as roads, housing, schools and sewers, with the net result that there is a decline in the country's infrastructure and long-term damage to the economy.
The less successful a government is in controlling the PSBR, the more it will have to borrow through bond issue to prevent money supply from growing too fast.
This will mean high interest rates and the problem of crowding out.
President Reagan found it difficult to reduce the US budget deficit for the same   reasons.
As a result US interest rates had to be kept at a high level.
This tended to crowd out investment in the rest of the world, as other countries raised their interest rates too to prevent an excessive outflow of money to the USA and the resulting depreciation of their currency against the US dollar.
There is a further reason why it is difficult to restrain the growth of the money supply over the longer term.
Over the years, individuals have increasingly used cheques and credit cards for transactions, and firms have increasingly used various forms of trade credit.
Thus people's cash requirements have proportionately reduced (see Box 16.5).
Banks therefore require to hold a lower liquidity ratio, and can create more credit.
Thus, over time, for any given PSBR, the money supply will tend to rise.
In the mid-1980s, as the UK pulled out of recession, so automatic stabilizers worked in reverse.
The fall in unemployment meant a fall in government expenditure on unemployment benefits.
The rapid rise in incomes meant a substantial rise in tax revenues, despite cuts in tax rates.
The effect on the PSBR was dramatic.
It disappeared and from 1987 was replaced by a public-sector surplus (PSDR).
A PSDR should have made it easier to restrain the growth of the money supply.
But the problem here was that, with the buoyant economy, the demand for credit was high.
Banks, being prepared to operate with a lower liquidity ratio, were only too pleased to supply the credit being demanded.
The conclusion from all this is that the state of the economy will have a crucial effect on the demand for and supply of money.
If, therefore, the government wishes to control the demand for and supply of money, it must actively intervene in money markets.
For the remainder of this section we will look at the problems associated with such intervention.
Practical difficulties in controlling money supply in the short run
The authorities may experience considerable difficulties in controlling the money supply.
Difficulties occur whether they focus on the monetary base or on a wider range of liquid assets, and whether they impose statutory ratios or allow banks to determine their own prudent ratios.
Problems with monetary base control
Assume that the authorities seek to control M0, the broad monetary base.
This could be done by imposing a statutory ‘cash’ ratio on banks (where ‘cash’is M0: i.e. notes and coin and banks' balances with the Bank of England).
Assume that a statutory ratio of 10 per cent is imposed.
Then provided the authorities control the supply of ‘cash’ by, say, open-market operations, it would seem that they can thereby control the creation of credit and hence deposits.
There would be a money multiplier of 10.
For every £1 million decrease in cash, money supply would fall by £10 million.
There are serious problems, however, with this form of monetary base control:
Banks could hold cash in excess of the statutory minimum.
For a time, therefore, they could respond to any restriction of cash by the authorities by simply reducing their cash ratio toward the minimum, rather than having to reduce credit.
Goodhart's law.
Unless cash ratios were imposed on every single financial institution, the control of certain institutions' lending would merely shift business to other uncontrolled institutions.
Alternatively, if those banks subject to statutory cash requirements were short of cash, they could attract cash away from the uncontrolled institutions.
Similarly, banks could encourage the general public to withdraw less cash: for example, by making time deposits more attractive than sight deposits or by encouraging a greater use of credit cards.
Problems would also be experienced if the authorities sought to control the narrow monetary base: namely, banks' balances with the Bank of England (but not cash in tills).
Monetary base control is often discussed in the context of controlling the narrow base.
These problems could be eased by (a) bringing as many institutions as possible under control and (b) backing up open market operations with a rigorous use of special deposits applied across the range of financial institutions.
The problems of the switching of business away from the banks is known as disintermediation.
To avoid this problem and to allow the greatest freedom of competition between financial institutions, the alternative is to use monetary base control with no statutory cash ratio.
But this too has problems, some of which are the same as with a statutory cash ratio:
Banks may vary their prudential ratio, depending on how much cash they anticipate customers are likely to need in the near future.
When the base is squeezed by open-market operations, etc., the banks may be able to economize on cash balances by encouraging customers to switch to time accounts which have less risk of large cash withdrawals.
Banks may keep cash balances surplus to their requirements in times of ‘easy’ money to enable them later to resist open market operations when the authorities are attempting to squeeze the base.
Goodhart's law may still apply.
There may still be disintermediation.
Even though open-market operations may be effective in reducing bank lending, people may still be able to borrow money from other financial institutions at home or abroad: institutions which may have surplus liquidity.
If, for example, banks refuse overdrafts, people may well borrow from building societies by extending their house mortgages.
Some of this money may find its way back to building societies, which can then lend it out again to other customers.
Thus although the monetary base is controlled, spending still expands.
Alternatively, banks, unable to lend at home, may encourage business customers to take a loan in a foreign currency from one of their overseas branches and then convert the currency into sterling.
With an absence of foreign exchange controls this is not difficult.
There is one major problem with monetary base control, with or without a statutory cash ratio, that is perhaps the most serious of all.
The Bank of England, as lender of the last resort, is always prepared to lend cash if it is demanded.
This makes it virtually impossible to have a precise control of the monetary base.
Trace through the effects of a squeeze on the monetary base from an initial reduction in cash to banks' liquidity being restored by the rediscounting of bills.
Will this restoration of liquidity by the Bank of England totally nullify the initial effect of reducing the supply of cash?
(Clue: what is likely to happen to the rate of interest?)
Thus despite the fact that the Thatcher government in the early 1980s was committed to a tight control of money supply and set targets for the broad monetary base M0, and despite the fact that the authorities have expressed interest in monetary base control, this has not been the form of policy pursued.
1.
Why is increasing the monetary base a less reliable means of increasing the money supply than decreasing the monetary base is of decreasing the money supply?
2.
Given the difficulties of monetary base control, would you expect M0 and broader measures of the money supply, such as M4, to rise and fall by the same percentage as each other?
Explain.
Problems with controlling broad liquidity
One solution to the problems of monetary base control would be for the authorities to attempt to control broader measures of liquidity.
Targets for M3 were an important part of monetary policy from 1976 to 1985, and for part of the time other broader measures (similar to the modern definition of M5) were targeted.
How would such a policy work?
Assume that the authorities want to operate a tight monetary policy.
They sell bonds on the open market.
Banks, now short of cash, call in money from the discount houses, which are in turn forced to borrow from the Bank of England.
The Bank of England lends by rediscounting bills.
Thus although the Bank of England has been obliged to restore the amount of cash it had withdrawn  from the system, there has been an equal and opposite decrease in bills plus money at call held by the banks.
Banks' overall liquidity has thus been reduced.
Open-market operations should therefore be much more effective in reducing general liquidity than in reducing the monetary base.
Note here that open-market operations must be conducted in the bond market not the bill market, since selling Treasury bills would merely exchange one liquid asset for another!
Focusing on the control of broad liquidity also allows another method of control, namely funding, to be used.
By merely converting short-term debt (Treasury bills) into long-term debt (bonds), the authorities can reduce liquidity without increasing the size of the national debt — a problem with open-market operations.
Just as with a cash ratio, the authorities could impose a statutory liquidity ratio or they could merely allow banks to set their own prudent liquidity ratio.
An example of a statutory liquidity ratio was the minimum 121/2 per cent reserve assets ratio imposed on banks from 1971 to 1981.
These reserves included balances with the Bank of England, money at call, bills of exchange and government bonds with less than one year to maturity.
But despite the advantages of focusing on broad liquidity, there were considerable problems in operating statutory reserve requirements:
As with cash ratios, banks could hold reserve assets above the statutory minimum, thus helping them to resist a squeeze on reserves (but not indefinitely).
Goodhart's law again!
Business could switch to uncontrolled institutions.
Not all reserve assets were under government control.
If, for example, the authorities attempted to reduce Treasury bills through funding, the banks could increase their holdings of other types of bill instead.
Even those assets whose supply is controlled by the authorities are not all held by the controlled institutions.
Thus if more bonds and fewer Treasury bills were issued, the banks could still obtain the same amount of bills as before (by paying a higher price), with other buyers getting less.
Similarly, they can persuade other holders of bills to exchange them for time deposits in banks, by offering a higher rate of interest on time deposits; something they can do if the demand for advances is high and hence higher interest rates can be charged on advances.
Even if there is no statutory reserve ratio, it is still difficult to control liquidity:
Banks may vary their prudent liquidity ratios.
Banks may keep surplus liquidity to help them resist a squeeze.
Disintermediation may still occur as customers turn to institutions such as finance houses which, by specializing in longer-term loans, are prepared to operate with less liquidity.
‘It is easier to control the monetary base than broader money, but it is less relevant to do so.’
Do you agree with this statement?
The effect on interest rates
A policy of controlling money supply can lead to severe fluctuations in interest rates.
This can cause great uncertainty for business and can be very damaging to long-term investment and growth.
The problem is more acute if the overall demand for money is inelastic and is subject to fluctuations.
Thus in Figure 17.6, with money supply controlled at M s even a fairly moderate increase in demand from L to L' has led to a large rise in interest rates from r to r 1 .
And yet, if the authorities are committed to controlling money supply, they will have to accept that equilibrium interest rates may well fluctuate in this way.
Difficulties in selling bonds
The use of open-market operations or funding to reduce money supply involves selling more bonds.
The authorities may find it difficult to do this.
If potential purchasers believe interest rates will rise in the future (highly likely when the government is attempting to operate a tighter monetary policy), they will hold off buying bonds now and may even attempt to sell bonds before bond prices fall.
Thus the authorities may be forced into a large immediate increase in bond interest rates.
Problems with credit rationing
To overcome many of the above problems, governments in the past, and particularly in the late 1960s, have resorted to various forms of credit rationing, such as ceilings on bank lending, requests to banks to discriminate between customers, and hire purchase controls.
There are three potential advantages of credit rationing:
It allows interest rates to be kept lower.
For example, in Figure 17.7, if interest rates are to be kept at r and money supply at Q 2 , the excess demand for money Q 1 — Q 2 can be eliminated by rationing.
It affects lending directly.
It thus tackles head on the problem of excess or deficient aggregate demand.
Altering banks' liquidity or the rate of interest are indirect methods of controlling spending.
It allows the authorities to discriminate between loans for productive investment and loans merely for consumption or speculation.
However, the problems of credit rationing can be serious:
Given that there is surplus liquidity that banks are prevented from using to grant loans, Goodhart's law may apply quite severely.
Credit rationing is unlikely to apply to all financial institutions.
In the late 1960s it only applied to the clearing banks.
Other financial institutions (foreign banks, finance companies, clearing banks' subsidiaries, etc.) expanded their activities.
Given plenty of liquidity in the economy, these institutions, by offering higher interest rates than the clearing banks, attracted deposits and were thus able to expand their loans.
To avoid this, credit rationing would have to extend to all institutions.
The more complex the banking system, the more difficult it is to do this.
Banks may resist the attempts at rationing.
They would like to lend and have the liquidity to do so.
They may thus find ways to get round the controls.
Credit rationing stifles competition between banks.
It prevents efficient banks from expanding.
Customers may be forced to borrow from inefficient banks or other financial institutions, probably charging higher interest rates.
Banks may favour their established customers, especially the larger ones.
This would discriminate against the growth of small, new firms, which may rely on bank loans to finance their investment.
Hire-purchase controls may have serious disruptive effects on certain industries (e.g. cars and other consumer durables), whose products are bought largely on hire-purchase credit.
The Thatcher government was always very much opposed to the use of credit rationing, since it prevents free competition in financial markets.
Is credit rationing easier to implement if banks operate as a cartel or if they are highly competitive?
Problems with controlling interest rates
As long as people want to borrow, banks and other financial institutions will normally try to find ways of meeting the demand.
In other words, in the short run at least, the supply of money is to a large extent demand determined.
For this reason the authorities prefer to control the demand for money, and to do this the Bank of England, as lender of the last resort, alters its lending rate to the discount houses.
Even though this is the current preferred method of monetary control it is not without its difficulties.
The problems centre on the nature of the demand for loans.
If this demand (a) is unresponsive to interest rate changes or (b) can be significantly affected by other determinants (such as anticipated income or foreign interest rates), then it will be very difficult to control the demand for loans by controlling the rate of interest.
Problem of an inelastic demand for loans
If the demand for loans is inelastic, as in Figure 17.8, any attempt to reduce demand (e.g. from Q 1 to Q 2 ) will involve large rises in interest rates (r 1 to r 2 ).
The problem will be compounded if the demand curve shifts to the right, due, say, to a consumer spending boom.
High interest rates lead to the following problems:
They may discourage investment plans and hence long-term growth.
Governments might prefer ‘less important’ borrowing to be curtailed.
They add to the costs of production, to the costs of house purchase and generally to the cost of living.
They are thus cost inflationary.
They are politically unpopular, since the general public do not like paying higher interest rates on overdrafts, credit cards and mortgages.
The necessary bond issue to restrain liquidity will commit the government to paying high rates on these bonds for the next twenty years or so.
High interest rates encourage inflows of money from abroad.
This makes it even more difficult to restrain bank lending.
Inflows of money from abroad drive up the exchange rate.
This can be very damaging for export industries and industries competing with imports.
Many firms suffered badly in 1980 when as a result of a high interest rate policy (plus North Sea oil's effect on the balance of payments) the exchange rate soared to over £1 = $2.30 (from only £1 = $1.60 some three years earlier).
Evidence suggests that the demand for loans may indeed be quite inelastic.
The reasons include the following:
A rise in interest rates, particularly if it deepens a recession, may force many firms into borrowing merely to survive.
This increase in ‘distress borrowing’ may largely offset any decline in borrowing by other firms or individuals.
Although investment plans may be curtailed by high interest rates, current borrowing by many firms cannot easily be curtailed.
Similarly, high interest rates may discourage householders from taking on new mortgages, but existing mortgages are unlikely to be reduced.
High interest rates may discourage many firms from taking out long-term fixed interest loans.
Instead they may borrow from banks whose loans are shorter-term variable-interest loans.
This extra borrowing from banks will reduce the overall fall in demand for bank loans, thus making the demand less elastic.
Problem of an unstable demand
Accurate monetary control requires the authorities to be able to predict the demand curve for money.
Only then can they set the appropriate level of interest rates.
Unfortunately, the demand curve may shift unpredictably, making control very   difficult.
The major reason for unpredictable shifts is speculation: speculation against changes in interest rates, exchange rates and the inflation rate, and changing business confidence in the prospects of economic growth.
If people think interest rates will rise and bond prices fall, in the meantime they will demand to hold their assets in liquid form.
The demand for money will rise.
If people think exchange rates will rise, they will demand sterling while it is still relatively cheap.
The demand for money will rise.
If people think inflation will rise, the transactions demand for money may rise.
People spend now while prices are still relatively low.
If people think the economy is going to grow faster, the demand for loans will increase as firms seek to increase their investment.
In all these cases, it is very difficult for the authorities to predict what people's speculation will be.
Speculation depends so much on world political events, rumour and ‘random shocks’(such as a coal strike or worse than expected trade, unemployment, PSBR or inflation statistics).
If the demand curve shifts very much, and if it is inelastic, then monetary control will be very difficult.
Furthermore, it will mean that the authorities will have to make frequent and sizeable adjustments to interest rates.
These fluctuations can be very damaging to business confidence and may discourage long-term investment.
Why does an unstable demand for money make it difficult to control the supply of money?
Conclusions
It is impossible to use monetary policy as a precise means of controlling aggregate demand.
It is especially weak when it is pulling against the expectations of firms and consumers, and when it is implemented too late.
Nevertheless, if the authorities operate a tight monetary policy firmly enough and long enough, they should eventually be able to reduce lending and aggregate demand.
But there will inevitably be time lags and imprecision in the process.
An expansionary monetary policy is even less reliable.
If the economy is in recession, no matter how low interest rates are driven, people cannot be forced to borrow if they do not wish to.
Few economists, therefore, argue that monetary policy can be used to ‘fine tune’ the economy.
Even monetarists would accept that monetary policy is best regarded as the means of keeping monetary growth within fairly broad medium- or long-term target ranges.
This was very much the approach of the Thatcher government's medium-term financial strategy in the early and mid-1980s.
SUMMARY
1.
It is difficult to control the growth of the money supply over the longer term without controlling the growth of the PSBR.
This will be difficult to do in a period of stagflation.
In a recession, automatic fiscal stabilizers will cause a growth in government expenditure and a cut in tax revenues.
What is more, tax increases or cuts in government expenditure are politically unpopular.
Even if the PSBR is reduced, this may be insufficient to prevent the growth of credit, especially if banks are prepared to operate with a lower liquidity ratio.
2.
All forms of short-term monetary policy involve problems.
Controlling either the monetary base or broad liquidity is difficult given that the Bank of England is always prepared to provide liquidity to the discount houses as lender of last resort.
Also there are the problems of disintermediation, as customers switch their borrowing away from those banks short of liquidity, and the problem of banks resisting the squeeze on liquidity by operating with a lower liquidity ratio.
If the government is successful in controlling the money supply, there then arises the problem of severe fluctuations in interest rates if the demand for money fluctuates and is relatively inelastic.
3.
Credit rationing provides a means of directly reducing aggregate demand without having to raise interest rates.
It stifles competition between banks, however, and encourages banks to discriminate (perhaps unfairly) between customers.
Banks may also try to evade the controls, and disintermediation is likely to occur towards those institutions that are not controlled.
4.
The form of monetary policy that has been favoured in recent years is the control of interest rates.
Higher interest rates, by reducing the demand for money, effectively also reduce the supply.
Nevertheless there are problems with this approach too.
With an inelastic  demand for loans, interest rates may have to rise to very high levels in order to bring the required reduction in monetary growth.
They are politically unpopular and discriminate against those with high borrowing commitments, such as those with large mortgages.
Also high interest rates have the effect of driving up the exchange rate, which in turn can be damaging to exports.
Controlling aggregate demand through controlling interest rates is made even more difficult as a result of fluctuations in the demand for money.
These fluctuations are made more severe by speculation against changes in interest rates, exchange rates, the rate of inflation, etc.
5.
It is impossible to use monetary policy as a precise means of controlling aggregate demand in the short term.
Nevertheless in the long term, if the policy is pursued rigorously enough, many economists argue that it is the most effective way of keeping inflation under control.
18
Keynesian and Monetarist Controversies I: The Control of Aggregate Demand
There is no current orthodoxy in macroeconomics.
The debate between Keynesians and monetarists shows no signs of being settled.
What is more, there are not just two clear-cut sets of theories and policies in this debate.
There are different varieties of Keynesians and monetarists.
For example, one of the most influential developments in macroeconomics in recent years has been the rise of the new classical school — an extreme form of laissez-faire monetarism.
Furthermore, the debate is not just between Keynesians and monetarists.
At the other end of the political spectrum from the new classical school are the various Marxist schools.
The stagflation of the 1970s and the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s are seen by such economists as symptoms of a growing crisis of the capitalist system.
Then there are many economists who shun labels and who do not wholeheartedly embrace any one school.
These ‘eclectic’ economists prefer to look at each element of the debate and assess it as dispassionately as possible in the light
At the centre of these debates are the key questions of how well does a free-market economy meet the various macroeconomic objectives, and to what extent can government intervention improve things?
The market economy involves both demand and supply.
The debate correspondingly branches into two.
One part of the debate focuses on aggregate demand.
What are the determinants of aggregate demand?
What is the relationship between money supply and aggregate demand?
How does aggregate demand respond to changes in interest rates?
How effectively can the government control aggregate demand through either fiscal or monetary policy?
The other part of the debate focuses on aggregate supply.
What is the shape of the aggregate supply curve?
How responsive is it to changes in aggregate demand?
What are the determinants of aggregate supply?
Can the government influence aggregate supply, and how?
We will consider aggregate supply and supply-side policies in Chapters 19 and 20.
This chapter looks at the debate over aggregate demand.
18.1 Monetary policy and aggregate demand
The quantity theory of money
A simple illustration of the controversy over the effects of monetary policy on aggregate demand is provided by the quantity theory of money (see page 536).
One version of this theory is expressed in the following equation: PQ will thus be the money value of national output sold (i.e. national income, Y).
MV will be the total spending on national output, and therefore must be equal to PQ.
For example, if money supply were £10 billion, and money as it passed from one person to another was spent on average eight times a year on national output, then total spending (MV) would be £80 billion a year.
And thus the value of goods sold (PQ) must also equal £80 billion.
Refer back to the version of the quantity equation we looked at in Chapter 13 (page 536).
What is the relationship between the term k in that version and the term V in the version we have just looked at?
The quantity equation is true by definition.
MV is necessarily equal to PQ because of the way the terms are defined.
The equation itself, therefore, is not the subject of debate: it is simply an identity.
What a change in M does to P, however, is a matter of debate.
The controversy centres on the assumptions made about two of the terms, V and Q: whether and how they are affected by changes in the money supply (M).
How a change in M affects V and Q will determine what happens to P.
The velocity of circulation (V)
Monetarists argue that variations in the velocity of circulation (V) are predictable and moderately small, especially over the longer run.
More importantly, they argue that over the longer run V is determined totally independently of the money supply (M).
Thus an increase in M will leave V unaffected, and there will be a corresponding rise in MV. In other words, a change in money supply (M) brings a corresponding change in expenditure (MV):
where the bar over the V term means that it is exogenously determined: i.e. determined independently of M.
Monetarists therefore claim that monetary policy is an extremely powerful weapon for controlling aggregate demand.
If V is constant, will (a) a £10 million rise in M give a £10 million rise in MV;(b) a 10 per cent rise in M give a 10 per cent rise in MV?
(Test your answer by fitting some numbers to the terms.)
Keynesians argue that V tends to vary inversely with M, but also rather unpredictably.
An increase in money supply will not necessarily have much effect on spending; instead people may simply increase their holdings of idle speculative balances, with a corresponding decline in the speed with which money circulates (V).
How much extra  idle balances people will hold will depend on their expectations of changes in interest rates, prices and exchange rates.
Since expectations are difficult to predict, the amount by which V will fall is also difficult to predict:
Keynesians therefore claim that monetary policy is an extremely unreliable weapon for controlling aggregate demand.
The quantity of national output (Q)
Monetarists argue that aggregate supply is inelastic in the long run (see Figure 18.1 (a)), and therefore output (Q) is determined independently of aggregate demand.
Any rise in MV will be totally reflected in a rise in prices (P):
The stock of money therefore determines the price level, and the rate of increase in money supply determines the rate of inflation.
Thus monetary policy is the means of controlling inflation, and in the long run, control of the money supply will not affect output (Q) and employment.
It is this emphasis on controlling the money supply that has led to the title ‘monetarist’.
If both V and Q are constant, will (a) a £10 million rise in M lead to a £10 million rise in P;(b) a 10 per cent rise in M lead to a 10 per cent rise in P?
(Again, try fitting some numbers to the terms.)
Keynesians argue that aggregate supply is relatively elastic except when full employment is approached (see Figure 18.1(b)).
Thus Q is variable.
A tight monetary policy therefore, to the extent that it does affect aggregate demand, is likely to reduce Q as well as P, especially when there is resistance from monopolistic firms and unions to price and wage cuts:
If monetary policy is successful in reducing aggregate demand, it can lead to a lasting recession.
The variability of V is the subject of this section.
The variability of Q is the subject of Chapter 19.
Monetary policy's effect on aggregate demand: the traditional Keynesian transmission mechanism
In order to assess the arguments over the variability of V it is necessary to see just how a change in money supply is transmitted through to a change in aggregate demand.
Keynesians stress that transmission mechanisms are indirect: changes in money supply affect aggregate demand indirectly via changes in interest rates or exchange rates.
We looked at these mechanisms in Chapter 16.
Here we focus on the interest rate mechanism.
Shortly we will look at the role of exchange rates.
Recall Figure 16.10: it is reproduced as Figure 18.2.
Changes in money supply affect aggregate demand in three stages:
1.
A rise in money supply from M to M' will lead to a fall in the rate of interest from r 1 to r 2 .
2.
A fall in the rate of interest will lead to more investment and any other interest sensitive expenditures (from I 1 to I 2 )
3.
A rise in investment will lead to a multiplied rise in national income (from Y 1 to Y 2 ).
The problem, though, according to Keynesians is that stages 1 and 2 are unpredictable and perhaps rather weak.
Problems with stage 1: the money-interest link
The problem of an interest-elastic demand for money.
According to Keynesians, the speculative demand for money is highly responsive to changes in interest rates.
The speculative demand can be quite large.
Keynesians point to the large sums of money that move around the money market as firms and financial institutions anticipate changes in interest rates.
If people believe the rate of interest will rise, and thus the price of bonds and other securities will fall, few people will want to buy them.
Instead there will be a very high demand for liquid assets (money and near money).
The demand for money will therefore be very elastic in response to changes in interest rates.
The demand for money curve (the liquidity preference curve, L) will be shallow and may even be infinitely elastic at some minimum interest rate.
This is the point where everyone believes interest rates will rise, and therefore no one wants to buy bonds.
Everyone wants to hold their assets in liquid form.
With a very shallow L curve (as in Figure 18.3), a rise in money supply from M to M' will only lead to a small fall in the rate of interest from r 1 to r 2 .
Once people believe that the rate of interest will not go any lower, any further rise in money supply will   have no effect on r.
The additional money will be lost in the ‘liquidity trap’.
People simply hold the additional money as idle balances.
Keynes himself saw the liquidity trap as merely a special case: the case where the economy is in deep recession.
In such a case, an expansion of money supply would have no effect on the economy.
In more normal times, an expansion of money supply would be likely to have some effect on interest rates.
The problem of an unstable demand for money.
A more serious Keynesian criticism is that the liquidity preference curve (L) is unstable.
People hold speculative balances of money when they anticipate that interest rates will rise (security prices will fall).
But it is not just the current interest rate that affects people's expectations of the future direction of interest rates.
There are many factors that could affect such expectations:
Changes in foreign interest rates.
UK interest rates would have to follow suit if the authorities wished to maintain a stable exchange rate.
Changes in exchange rates.
With a falling exchange rate, the authorities may raise interest rates to protect sterling.
Statements of government intentions on economic policy.
Good or bad industrial news.
With good news, people tend to buy shares.
Newly published figures on inflation or money supply.
If inflation or the growth in money supply are higher than anticipated, people will expect a rise in interest rates in anticipation of a tighter monetary policy.
Similarly, a consumer boom, to the extent that it increases the transactions demand for money and increases imports, will encourage the authorities to increase interest rates in order to keep money supply on target.
Thus the L curve can be highly volatile.
With an unstable demand for money, it is difficult to predict the effect on interest rates of a change in money supply.
Go through each of the above six factors that affect expectations and consider what would cause people to anticipate a fall in interest rates.
A policy of targeting money supply is also criticized by Keynesians for similar reasons.
A volatile demand for money that shifts about as expectations change can cause severe fluctuations in interest rates if the supply of money is kept constant.
These fluctuations in interest rates will cause further uncertainty and further shifts in the speculative demand for money.
A policy of targeting money supply can therefore add to the volatility of the velocity of circulation (V).
The effect on interest rates of a shift in the demand for money when money supply is kept to a target is illustrated in Figure 18.4.
Keynesians argue that it is best to focus on controlling interest rates, and to adjust money supply to whatever level is necessary to meet the target interest rate.
Thus if the target rate of interest in Figure 18.5 is r*, and the authorities estimate the demand for money to be L, they should allow the money supply to be Q 1 .
If demand increases to L', then the authorities should allow the money supply to rise to Q 2 .
A policy of controlling interest rates is likely to cause a more stable demand for money, with fewer shifts in the speculative demand.
This in turn will further aid the process of controlling interest rates.
Although the authorities in the UK have sought to control interest rates by their operations in the discount market, this relates much more to Figure 18.4 than Figure 18.5, especially during the first part of the 1980s.
For any given demand for money, they seek to adjust interest rates so as to make the demand for money equal to the target money supply.
Thus in Figure 18.4, if the demand for money increased to L', and the money supply target was Q 1 , the authorities would raise interest rates to r 2 .
This policy necessarily involves the interest rate fluctuating with the demand for money.
Keynesians are critical of this policy, arguing that the uncertainty over interest rates, combined with a generally too restrictive monetary policy and a correspondingly too high average interest rate, is very damaging to business investment and hence long-term growth.
Problems with stage 2: the interest rate-investment link
Again there are two types of criticism that Keynesians make about this link.
The first is that investment is insensitive to changes in interest rates.
The second is that investment is volatile and unpredictable.
The problem of an interest-inelastic investment demand.
After the war many Keynesians argued that investment was unresponsive to interest rate changes: that the I curve in Figure 18.2(b) was steep.
In these circumstances a very large change in interest rates would be necessary to have any significant effect on investment and aggregate demand.
Investment, it was argued, depends on confidence of future markets.
This relationship is explained by the accelerator theory or similar theories.
If confidence is high, firms will continue to invest even if interest rates are high.
They can always pass the higher costs on to the consumer.
If confidence is low, firms will not invest even if interest rates are low and borrowing is cheap.
Evidence seemed to confirm the interest inelasticity of investment demand.
Few Keynesians hold this extreme position today.
The evidence for an inelastic investment demand has been challenged.
Just because investment was not significantly lower on occasions when interest rates were high, it does not follow that investment is unresponsive to interest rate changes.
The high interest rates might well have depressed investment if other things had remained equal, but there may have been changes in other factors that helped to maintain investment: in other words, the I curve shifted to the right.
The most obvious example is changes in consumer demand.
If consumer demand rose, this would both cause the high interest rate and encourage higher investment.
Figure 18.6 shows a steep investment demand curve.
If the rate of interest rises from r, to r 2 there is only a small fall in investment from I 1 to I 2 .
Now draw a much more elastic I curve passing through point a.
Assume that this is the true I curve.
Show how the rate of interest could still rise to r 2 and investment still only fall to I 2 if this curve were to shift.
Even if fixed investment in plant and machinery is not very interest sensitive, there are other components of aggregate demand that may well be: for example, investment in stocks, consumer demand financed through credit cards, bank loans or hire purchase, and the demand for houses financed through mortgages.
The problem of an unstable investment demand.
Today the major worry about the interest-investment link is not that the investment curve is inelastic, but rather that it shifts erratically with the confidence of investors.
Such confidence is highly volatile.
For example, assume in Figure 18.7 that the authorities increase money supply and this lowers interest rates from r to r 1 .
Other things being equal, the level of investment will rise from Q to Q 1 .
If, however, firms believe that the economy will now pull out of recession, their confidence will increase.
The investment curve will shift to I 2 and investment will increase quite markedly to Q 2 If, on the other hand, firms believe that inflation will now rise, which in turn will later force the authorities to pursue a tighter monetary policy, their confidence may well decrease.
The investment curve will shift to I 3 and the level of investment will actually fall to Q3.
Monetary policy is only likely to be effective, therefore, if the government can ‘sell’ it to the people, so that people have confidence in its effectiveness.
This psychological effect can be quite powerful.
It demands considerable political skill, however, to manipulate it.
The Keynesian analysis of the exchange rate transmission mechanism
The traditional Keynesian mechanism can be extended to an open economy to take into account international capital flows and movements in the exchange rate.
The mechanism is still indirect.
But this time it includes the exchange rate as an intermediate variable between changes in the money supply and changes in aggregate demand.
There are four stages in the mechanism:
1.
A rise in money supply will cause a fall in interest rates.
2.
A fall in interest rates will lead to an outflow of short-term capital from the country.
This will cause a depreciation of the exchange rate (assuming the authorities allow it to).
3.
This will cause a rise in demand for exports and a fall in demand for imports.
4.
This will cause a multiplied rise in national income.
The four stages are illustrated in Figure 18.8.
Stage 1 will tend to be more powerful than in a closed economy.
The liquidity preference curve will tend to be less elastic.
The reason is that, as interest rates fall, although people may buy fewer UK securities, they will not simply switch to holding idle balances of sterling.
Instead, fearing a depreciation of sterling, they may well switch to holding other currencies.
Just how much people will switch out of sterling depends on how much they think the exchange rate will depreciate.
But these expectations are highly unpredictable.
Thus stage 1 may be relatively strong, but just how strong is very difficult to predict.
Stage 2 is likely to be very strong indeed.
Given the openness of international financial markets, the ease of transferring large amounts of capital from one country to another and the huge amounts of short-term capital in the international monetary system, international capital flows can be enormous in response to interest rate changes.
Thus only a relatively small change in interest rates is necessary to cause a relatively large capital flow.
Stage 3 may be quite strong in the long run.
Given time, the demand by consumers abroad for UK exports and demand in the UK for imports may be quite elastic.
In the short run, the effect may be rather limited.
But here again, the size of the effect is uncertain and could be quite large.
It depends on people's expectations of exchange rate movements.
If people think that the exchange rate will fall further, importers will   buy now before the rate does fall and they have to pay more for the imports.
Exporters, on the other hand, will hold back as long as possible before shipping their exports: if the rate does fall, they will earn more sterling per dollar's worth of exports.
These actions will tend to push the exchange rate down.
This will tend to ‘hasten’ the long run.
But such speculation is very difficult to predict as it depends on often highly volatile expectations.
If importers and exporters believe that the exchange rate has bottomed out, what will they do?
Stage 4 is the familiar multiplier, only this time triggered off by a change in imports and exports.
To summarize: the effects of a change in the money supply might be quite strong, but their precise magnitude is usually highly unpredictable.
The effects of changes in money supply will depend also on just how free the exchange rate is.
If the government intervenes to ‘peg’(i.e. fix) the exchange rate or even to prevent excessive fluctuations, the transmission mechanism will not work in the same way as we have described.
Alternative exchange rate systems (or ‘regimes’, as they are called) are examined in Chapter 22.
Monetary policy's effect on aggregate demand: the monetarist transmission mechanism
The direct mechanism
Monetarists stress the direct transmission mechanism.
If money supply increases, people will have more money than they require to hold.
They will spend this surplus.
Much of this spending will go on goods and services, thereby directly increasing  aggregate demand:
The theoretical underpinning for this is given by the theory of portfolio balance.
People have a number of ways of holding their wealth.
They can hold it as money, or as financial assets such as bills, bonds and shares, or as physical assets such as houses, cars and televisions.
In other words, people hold a whole portfolio of assets of varying degrees of liquidity — from cash to central heating.
Now assume that money supply expands.
People will find themselves holding more money than they require: their portfolios are unnecessarily liquid.
Some of this money will be used to purchase financial assets, and some to purchase goods and services.
As more assets are purchased, this will drive up their price.
This will effectively reduce their ‘yield’.
For bonds and other financial assets, this means a reduction in their rate of interest.
For goods and services, this means a reduction in their marginal utility/price ratio: a higher level of consumption will reduce their marginal utility and drive up their price.
The process will stop when a balance has been restored in people's portfolios.
Do you think that this is an accurate description of how people behave when they acquire extra money?
This mechanism has been criticized by Keynesians.
Just how is the extra money injected into people's portfolios in the first place?
There are two possible means in the short term.
An expansionary fiscal policy financed by an increased money supply.
In this case, people receive the extra money either through tax cuts or through increased government expenditure.
But in these circumstances, claim Keynesians, it is fiscal policy that is causing the resulting increase in aggregate demand through its effect on people's real incomes.
The use of monetary techniques.
If credit rationing has been in force, then a relaxation of controls will increase borrowing and spending.
But monetarists frown on the use of credit rationing as being ‘anti-market’.
If the monetarists' preferred method of control is used — namely, open market operations — the working of the direct mechanism is unclear.
An open-market operation involves people exchanging bonds and bills for money.
Therefore the resulting extra money in their portfolios has not involved any increase in wealth.
People have more money but fewer bonds and bills.
Any increase in the ratio of shares and physical assets in people's portfolios will be due simply to the new lower interest rates on bonds.
Certainly in the short run, therefore, the direct mechanism may be weak if working through open-market operations.
The indirect mechanisms
Monetarists also see monetary policy operating through the indirect mechanisms.
The traditional interest rate mechanism.
This, they argue, is more powerful than in traditional Keynesian theory, because stages 1 and 2 are much stronger.
1.
The liquidity preference curve (L)(Figure 18.2(a)) is relatively inelastic.
This is because of the much smaller role played by speculative balances.
A reduction in the rate of interest (r) following an increase in money supply may well make bond holding less attractive, but this does not mean that the extra money will be mainly held in idle balances.
Again, it can be used to purchase other assets such as houses.
2.
The investment demand curve (1)(Figure 18.2(b)) is relatively elastic.
Monetarists criticize Keynesians for concentrating merely on investment.
Instead they stress the wide range of expenditures that are interest sensitive, such as expenditure on consumer durables.
With a steep L curve and a shallow I curve, the effect on aggregate demand will be much greater.
Redraw the three diagrams of Figure 18.2 with a steeper L curve and a shallower I curve.
Show how an increase in money supply will have a larger effect on national income.
The exchange rate transmission mechanism.
Monetarists argue that, in an open economy with free-floating exchange rates, the effect of an increase in the money supply is stronger still.
Any fall in interest rates will have such a strong effect on international capital flows and the exchange rate that the rise in money supply will be relatively quickly and fully transmitted through to aggregate demand.
Short-run variability of V. Even though monetarists stress the direct mechanism and a relatively inelastic L curve, they do admit to some variability of the velocity of circulation (V) in the short run.
To the extent that interest rates and yields do fall with an expansion of the money supply, people may well hold larger money balances: after all, the opportunity cost of holding that liquidity (i.e. the interest sacrificed by not holding bonds, etc.) has been reduced.
If people hold relatively more money, the velocity of circulation is thereby reduced, thus reducing the effect on aggregate demand.
Furthermore, the direct mechanism may take time to operate.
In the meantime V will fall.
Monetarists also recognize that the demand for money can shift unpredictably in the short run with changing expectations of prices, interest rates and exchange rates.
Thus V is unpredictable in the short run, and hence the effect of monetary policy on aggregate demand is also unpredictable in the short run.
For these reasons monetarists argue that monetary policy cannot be used for short-run demand management.
Here at least, then, there is a measure of agreement between Keynesians and monetarists.
Long-run stability of V. The main claim of monetarists is that the velocity of circulation (V) is relatively stable over the longer run, and any changes that do occur are the predictable outcome of institutional changes, such as the increased availability and use of credit cards.
One reason why V remains relatively stable in the long run, despite an increase in money supply, is that sufficient time has elapsed for the direct mechanism to have worked fully through.
The other reason is the effect on inflation and consequently on interest rates.
This works as follows.
Assume an initial increase in money supply.
Interest rates fall.
V falls.
But if money supply goes on rising and hence expenditure goes on rising, inflation will rise.
This will drive up nominal interest rates (even though real interest rates will stay low).
But in choosing whether to hold money or to buy assets, it is the nominal rate of interest that people look at, since that is the opportunity cost of holding money.
Thus people economize on money balances and V rises back again.
(Note that in extreme cases V will even rise to levels higher than before.
This is likely if people start speculating that prices will rise further.
People will rush to buy goods and assets before their prices rise further.
This action will help to push the prices up even more.
This form of destabilizing speculation took place in the hyper-inflation of Germany in the 1920s, as people spent their money as quickly as possible.)
With a predictable V in the longer run, monetary policy then becomes the essential means of controlling the long-term path of aggregate demand.
For this reason monetarists favour a longer-term approach to monetary policy.
This involves setting targets for the growth of the money supply: the approach adopted in the Thatcher government's medium-term financial strategy of the early 1980s that we looked at in Chapter 17.
Is money supply exogenous or endogenous?
Money supply is exogenous (independently determined) if it can be fixed by the authorities and if it does not vary with aggregate demand and interest rates.
In Figure 18.2(a) the M ‘curve’ would be vertical.
It would only shift if the government chose to alter the money supply.
Money supply is endogenous (determined within the model) if it is determined by aggregate demand and hence the demand for money: banks simply expanding or contracting credit in response to customer demand.
The extreme monetarist position is that money supply is wholly exogenous.
The extreme Keynesian position is that money supply is wholly endogenous.
In reality money supply is partly exogenous and partly endogenous.
The authorities are able to influence money supply by the policies examined in Chapter 17, but also banks and other financial institutions have considerable scope for creating credit in response to demand.
If monetarism is adopted as the basis for policy, the authorities must reduce the endogenous element to a minimum.
One approach is to impose statutory reserve or cash requirements on banks and all other financial institutions, and then engage in tough open-market operations, possibly backing them up with special deposits (again applied to all financial institutions).
Eventually, a contractionary monetary policy of this form must work.
There is much more of a problem, however, if the authorities wish to expand the money supply.
They can increase the monetary base through open market operations or the release of special deposits, but they cannot force banks to lend if customers do not want to borrow.
Many monetarists reject statutory ratios as being anti-market.
Relying on banks' prudent ratios, however, which can vary considerably, makes precise control of the money supply very difficult indeed.
As we saw in Chapter 17, the authorities in the UK recognize the difficulties in controlling the money supply directly.
They therefore influence the supply of money indirectly by controlling interest rates and hence the demand for money.