

David Charlton ‘A maître d'orchestre…conducts’: new and old evidence on French practice
THE WOODCHOPPER.
[…]And I saw a man who was holding a stick, and I believed that he was going to castigate the bad violins, for I heard many of them…
And he made a noise as if he were splitting wood, and I was astonished that he did not dislocate his shoulder, and the vigour of his arm terrified me…
And I beheld that they called that ‘Beating the time’ and although it was beaten, most forcibly, the musicians were never together.
F.W. von Grimm, The Little Prophet of Boehmischbroda (1753), trans.
Oliver Strunk
Such was the powerful rhetoric of Grimm and Jean-Jacques Rousseau that the very conducting habits in Paris which they denigrated in the mid-18th century seem to have affected all views about practice during the following decades.
Rousseau's jibes about woodchopper-like activities at the Opera were still being rebutted in 1791; but the ghost of the Little Prophet was far from laid to rest.
It haunts the pages of Adam Carse's The orchestra from Beethoven to Berlioz (1948), which conjectured that up to 1810 at the Opera the chef would ‘hammer out the beat for the choruses and dances audibly on the floor, a table, or a music desk’ Later in the same book Carse modified his stance, but concluded (wrongly, as we shall see) that it was the first violin who determined the ‘interpretation [and]artistic side of the rendering’.
(Carse is still being recommended to students in the recent literature.)
Even the article ‘Conductor’ in the New Grove dictionary of opera is, unfortunately, misleading: for all its caution, it attempts to paint the whole period from 1750 to Napoleon, and in doing so unjustifiably reinforces certain impressions we recall from the powerful pens of the Encyclopedists:
At the Paris Opéra in the 18th century, a Batteur de mesure marked time audibly by striking a large stick against a music stand at the front of the stage.
Despite the complaints of Rousseau and many others, this practice continued into the 19th century.
It is, however, likely that the audible beat was intermittent rather than constant, and that it functioned mainly to co-ordinate the chorus and dances on stage, rather than to control the solo singers or instrumentalists.
Four elements here are open to criticism:(1) the term batteur de mesure had become discredited and much less used by 1790, because of its association with the bad old days;(2) the ‘large stick’ whatever its size in 1750, got markedly smaller by 1790;(3) there was no unified body of opinion which attacked ‘woodchopping’over the decades: in fact Rousseau's text, and those of his epigones, aspired to make musico-political points in favour of Italian opera as much as about beating time;(4) audible stick signals cannot be said, at least after 1781, to have ‘co-ordinated’chorus and ballet, if that implies ‘heard as a matter of course’; the evidence shows that no audible signal was thereafter heard as a matter of course .
If the present article cannot answer every question raised by Carse, it will answer this one: ‘did they [at the Opéra]or did they not beat time with a baton throughout the whole opera?’(p.311).
By textual analysis of documents it is possible to build up an impression; we shall conclude that Paris was a significant cradle of modern conducting.
While some use will be made of an article on early ensemble direction by David Camesi, it is the case that the author did not primarily concern himself with French evidence.
Disdain for the stick
Using the word ‘conducting’ without qualification makes for unhistorical assumptions.
One way to tackle these is to recall the words of musicians who were disturbed by unitary control.
Quite a lot of written opinion is found about those ‘up front, albeit often prescriptive or satirical.
Rarely was the voice of the rank and file committed to paper.
Moritz Hauptmann (1792-1868) played the violin at Dresden (1812) and Kassel (1822):
The cursed little white stick of wood always did annoy me, and when I see it domineering over the whole orchestra, music departs from me…
[Under the Italian dual-control tradition]when everything goes of its own accord, I am in quite another world.
This compares closely with feelings ascribed by Gretry to opera orchestras obliged to follow a baton:
The players become cold and indifferent when they do not follow the soloist directly; the stick that directs them humiliates them, takes away their natural wish to excel…
Earlier practice was assumed to be a group activity to which all lent potential imaginative content.
In a sense the music existed rather for the participants than the hearers; thus they wished only to be helped, or nudged, not commanded, when in danger of error.
There was a paradoxical set of forces in play in the late 18th century.
On one hand there seems to have been strong appreciation of fine results achievable under dual control of violin and keyboard, as in Italian opera.
Old-fashioned church practices, with foot-stamping and arm-waving, were reviled.
On the other hand, there were ‘Romantic’ straws in the wind: strong personalities who directed without instrument (in Berlin, J.F. Reichardt; for Paris, see below); and the move towards an ‘international’concert repertory which took responsibility away from the keyboardist (by tradition, the composer) and placed it with the violin leader.
This was perfectly effective, since leaders knew how to motion with their instrument to give the tempo while playing, not to mention other techniques.’
Neal Zaslaw has pointed out a semantic correspondence to this: in German usage, the difference between ‘old-fashioned church practices’ and opera/concert practice (dual-system) was manifest in the two words tactieren (literally, ‘giving the tactus’) and dirigieren.
The Mozarts kept these terms rigorously separated, as though emphasizing a corresponding world of musical difference.
Vocabulary is an important factor in assessing Paris's habits, but that picture has been clouded by polemic and the fact that its musical theatres developed their own methods of direction.
Concerts were different:
Even from the time Rousseau was writing [the 17505]the baton went out of use in Parisian concerts…
At court [in the 17805], where one is more constrained by etiquette, and old habits die hard, use of the baton has been kept up in grand ceremonial concerts.
The superintendents…have at least stopped using it in a noisy and disagreeable way
A key figure in Paris concerts was Pierre La Houssaye (1735-1818), a prodigy whose training was Italian (under Tartini, among others), and whose Parisian concert direction, from the violin, was regularly praised from 1776 on.
La Houssaye was also appointed musical director of the Comédie-Italienne in 1781 (see final section).
French terminology
On 6 December 1729 Prince Antoine I of Monaco (1709-31) wrote to the composer Destouches, recently appointed directeur of the Paris Opera.
I trust you have not forgotten that I was [in Isse, Destouches's 1697 pastorale héroïque]your conducteur at Fontainebleau, when the king heard it.
[…]nowhere, except Paris, is it performed better than here, and you would doubtless be well instructed to see me sometimes beat time [battre la mesure]and give the tempos [mouvemens]with Lully's famous stick [canne].
It's a relic that I preserve religiously…
By canne, which could mean ‘cane’ in the English senses of a hollow reed or a light walking-stick, Antoine implies something rather long unless he uses the word wholly jokingly.
Antoine evidently waved it, but he also makes a distinction between ‘giving the tempos’ and ‘beating time’.
So the stick may have been used both audibly to establish speed, and visibly during the course of a piece.
Significantly, he follows the use of conducteur by recalling more recent occasions on which he beat  time.
He appears to equate the two functions broadly, but does not call himself a batteur de mesure.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau was commissioned in 1749 to write on music for the Encyclopedie of Diderot and D'Alembert, which first came out between 1751 and 1765.
Much of what he wrote for it was re-used in his highly influential Dictionnaire de musique (1768).
A basic term was maître de musique, the one who ‘understood composition’ and ‘directed’the musicians, not in any particular place or with anything definite in his hand.
A maître was to ‘beat time’(bat la mesure); but Rousseau defined this latter verb as ‘marking the tempo with movements of hand or foot’: visible and audible signals.
I take this to apply equally well to a non-player (arm-waver), a violinist, or a keyboardist.
Other duties of the maître are defined in the article ‘Ensemble’: ‘It is for maîtres de musique, conducteurs and chefs d'orchestre above all to guide, or hold back, or hurry along the musicians so as to obtain ensemble everywhere.’
After this, Rousseau explains that a good premier violon will, ‘through a certain exaggeration in performance’, ‘imprint the [musical]character strongly into every ear’, taking his cue from the main voice-line.
What did conducteur (or conduire) actually mean at the time?
Neither Rousseau, nor Meude-Monpas's Dictionnaire de musique (1787), nor the Encyclopedie (1751-65), nor its Supplement (1776-7), nor the Encyclopedie methodique (1791) defines them overtly.
Conduire (literally, ‘to guide along a path’: to give direction) can presumably be compared to dirigieren; but I doubt that battre la mesure can be likened to tactieren.
The violin-leader La Houssaye was admired in 1777 as a premier violon mostly worthy to direct (conduire) his orchestra in a concert.
Another virtuoso violinist, Pierre Gavinies (1728-1800), was remembered by Meude-Monpas to have been an ‘excellent conducteur d'orchestre’.
The terminological association of conducteur and the verb battre la mesure by the Prince de Monaco was to continue.
I detect a growing distinction between the noun ‘batteur de mesure’(as ‘tactus-giver’; ‘woodchopper’) and the verb ‘battre la mesure’(more linked with ‘conduire/conducteur’: directing).
For example, a close reading of the entry ‘Maître de musique’ in Meude-Monpas's dictionary suggests that it was written with the art of Pierre-Montan Berton (1727-80) in mind: the article concludes with a eulogy to him as ‘a sovereign master of the orchestra’, i.e. at the Paris Opera from 1755.
Musician who directs [conduit]an orchestra without playing any instrument.
He beats time [bat la mesure]using a scroll or stick [bâton].
A good Maître de musique is a rarity.
Not only  must he indicate the speed, the entries and dynamics, but must, so to speak, communicate his thoughts to the musicians whom he guides [conduit].
But no entry is given by Meude-Monpas for ‘Batteur de mesure, and it is relevant to note that Meude-Monpas's stated purpose was not to be academic about things, but to write for the ordinary reader.
A similar use of terms occurs when Gretry discusses Berton's famous successor, Jean-Baptiste Rey (1734-1810): ‘Impetuous and wise,[Rey]follows the singer or dancer, directing [conduisant]a large orchestra whose confidence he deserves.’
Explicit evidence of the discrediting of the noun batteur de mesure, even at the Opera, occurred in 1800, when the aged and eccentric administrator A.P.J. Devismes du Valgay wrote to the Courrier des spectacles announcing a competition for an assistant to Rey.
A batteur de mesure…is in my opinion the most essential artist at the Opera; the entire fate of the theatrical performance rests in his hands, and I have to say in all truth that citoyen Rey is beyond all praise in this regard.
Devismes was challenged on this terminology a week later by a reader signed ‘G…‘, who makes it clear that batteur de mesure now meant a mechanical beater, not a true musical director such as Rey:
Doubtless there is a batteur in the wings or for the chorus, the orchestra only needing a maître de musique, or let us say a conducteur; a batteur de mesure being not the ‘most essential artist at the Opera’ but the most intolerable…
[In fact Rey,]who is beyond my congratulation for his talents as conducteur, hardly any longer lets us perceive that he holds a baton.
As we shall see later, the last phrase helps confirm that
Rey guided his charges with a physical fluidity befitting our concept of a ‘conductor, and certainly did not employ regular audible stick signals.
Performance before 1755
The following sections deal with the Paris Opéra, dividing practice into related areas of consideration.
Some important iconographic sources have been published by Neal Zaslaw, especially relating to 1674 and 1747.
The relevant 1674 images show two different occasions, both courtly.
One is an open-air performance of Alceste, the other a concert.
The batteurs are acting very differently.
In the concert, with no music or stand in sight, the musician holds a scroll in each hand, quite high relative to head level.
The two scrolls are grasped not at their extremity, but some way towards the middle.
But in Alceste the batteur is close by the stage and holds only one implement, not positioned very high, grasped perhaps near to its end.
It is within reach of the stage's edge and seems to be of medium length, not an elongated canne.
By the 1740s a decline in general discipline seems to have set in.
Symptomatic of old assumptions were the careers of François Francoeur le cadet (1698-1787) and François Rebel (1701-75).
Both were sons of Opera musicians, both began as players in its orchestra, and they rose to become controllers of its music by 1740.
Rebel was the more active batteur, and two illustrations show the style of direction in his period of influence.
Illus.3 and 5a show performances of 1745 and 1747 respectively.
Details of the batteurs (illus. 2 and 5b) show an end-held baton of no great length.
The 1747 baton seems especially solid, however.
In both images the director is in action, positioned up against the stage, back to the band.
But we should note that the 1747 image shows a scene where only principals are singing (Zaslaw identifies it as Act 5, scene 4 of Lully's Armide), whereas in 1745 dancing is in progress.
We cannot treat drawings like photographs.
Yet the activity of musical direction displayed in both contexts (solo and ensemble) accords with other evidence, brought forward now for the first time.
It is drawn from the historical review of ‘Baton de mesure’ published in 1791 by P.L. Ginguene (1748-1816).
Ginguene noted that in the period when Baroque style was current, and even after, Opéra soloists sang pretty freely for contexts, he specifies ‘airs, monologues, duos, etc.’ 'Singers thought they had the right to hurry or slow down, according to what the words seemed to demand or, more often, according to whim' The ‘orchestra’had to accompany ‘sometimes note for note, these uneven, shaky lines’.
Ginguene's most valuable next sentence suggests that the director's baton had been waved all the time: it ‘indicated by its strokes the end of each so-called bar and, by the various signs that it traced in the air, the various interpolations or divisions of that bar.’
The epithet ‘so called’ refers sardonically to the varied metres used in the older style of recitative.
The claim is thus made that solo music at least recitative was conducted or coordinated visually.
In August 1752 Eustachio Bambini's Italian singers began their command performances of intermezzos and opere buffe at the Paris Opéra (possibly in consequence of its poor financial shape; in 1749 the king had passed its privilege to the City of Paris).
Elisabeth Cook's recent account of the ‘Querelle des Bouffons’ shows an extensive political dimension, which should alert us to the nature of associated rhetoric.
And in the first main pamphlet (January 1753) Grimm conceived of ‘the Woodchopper’(see the epigraph above).
We have to assume from this that Rebel was liberal with audible stick signals.
Easily forgotten, perhaps, is the fact that the Opéra orchestra accompanied Bambini's singers.
Research is still required to show how they were directed; but Fetis reports that Bambini's son played the harpsichord.
If Italianate principles were used, then the absence of any audible stick-signals must have seemed deafening!
By December the same year (Lois Rosow notes)‘the inspecteurs [Francoeur and Rebel], apparently weary of the Querelle des Bouffons, asked to retire from the Opéra.’
Not until 1754 did Bambini's troupe finally leave.
If it was then the case, as William Weber wrote, that ‘La musique ancienne returned to dominate…as never before’ in the actual repertory, matters of performance practice, by contrast, certainly did not stay static.
Change had been triggered.
But before we follow this trail we must investigate the rhetoric of the Querelle, and its legacy.
On ‘woodchopping’
Except at the Opéra and at court, French maîtres exercised control ordinarily without a scroll or baton (normally, in Paris, using the violin).
Since the Paris Opéra was such an exceptional institution, and its orchestra and chorus so numerous, all French writers felt obliged to treat it as a special case.
Rousseau's influential articles, however, had the additional purpose of discrediting the style of music associated with that place.
Filled with hyperbole, their agenda was to vaunt Italian music not simply as such, but also as a metaphor for social liberty.
The following definitions are best known from his Dictionnaire de musique (1768), but date essentially from the early 1750s.
BATON DE MESURE: A very short rod or even a scroll of paper used in a concert by the Maître to control the rhythm and indicate metre and tempo.
At the Paris Opéra there is no scroll of paper but a good thick rod of very hard wood, struck forcibly by the Maître so as to be heard at a distance.
BATTRE LA MESURE: To indicate the tempo by movements of the hand or foot…
The French only ever tap out the downbeat, and indicate the others by various movements of the hand to right and left.
[…]How shocked one's ears are at the Paris Opéra by the unpleasant and continual noise made with his baton by the conductor.
ORCHESTRE:[Rousseau gives ten reasons why the Paris Opéra orchestra makes the least effect of any European orchestra, the seventh of which is]the unendurable noise of the baton which covers and deadens the whole effect of the ensemble.
Rousseau's judgements and highly insulting remarks about the Opéra's instrumentalists were calculated to discredit the whole establishment: the ‘woodchopper’ was just the most prominent symbol of authoritarian decadence.
Being stationed next to the stage, Rousseau complained, its maître de musique could not manage the ensemble properly; audible use of the baton was loud and frequent; French music was doomed to this crude practice because it intrinsically lacked regular rhythm (unlike Italian music).
In exploiting the fact that wayward delivery by soloists forced their accompanists to bend to their expression (as we noted earlier), Rousseau rhetorically confused such solo licences with the existence of notated flexible metres in Baroque recitative.
Nor did he distinguish clearly between practices in solo and tutti sections.
Readers were to be left with the impression that a ‘woodchopper’ beating out the time audibly and often was the inevitable result and proof of unmusical French ‘good taste’: one preferring permanent metrical chaos.
He summed this up in a celebrated punning joke:
L'Opéra de Paris est le seul Theatre de l'Europe ou l'on batte la Mesure sans la suivre; partout ailleurs on la suit sans la battre.
Only at the Opéra do they beat time without obeying it; everywhere else in Europe they obey it without beating it.
(Dictionnaire de musique: ‘Battre la mesure’)
In his novel La nouvelle Heloise (1761) Rousseau implied that the tapping went on even during solo singing:
But if by chance some slightly tripping air should occur, then there's a universal stamping; you hear the entire parterre moving, noisily and awkwardly, to follow a certain member of  the orchestra.
[Footnote by Rousseau:]The Woodchopper.’
This tradition of smart literary ridicule in the service of Italianate music bore fruit; so Ange Goudar jokes in 1777 that ‘The Italians regard the Opéra as a company of blind people: they need a stick to guide [se conduire]each other’.
A theatre annual for 1791, extolling the fine orchestra (under La Houssaye) of the new Italianate Theatre de Monsieur, claims that French ensembles ‘want to be reassured by a donkey-stick [guideâne]’ But these are shafts on behalf of Italian opéra as a whole, trading on memories of Rousseau's ridicule and the mere fact that the Opéra was directed by a conducteur.
1755 to 1781
In 1755 Pierre-Montan Berton won the job of maître de musique at the Opéra by competition.
He had spent a short period there as a singer, then formed a reputation at Bordeaux and elsewhere as a gifted opéra director and arranger.
Immediately after his appointment,
M. Berton made advantageous changes in the Opéra orchestra, which by his pains became the best in Europe: it was to him alone we owe that surprising precision, that taste, feeling, and fine and apt expression which characterize this orchestra.
Though Berton rose through the administrative ranks, he continued to direct: here was the Berton remembered by Meude-Monpas:
This man, if without great genius, saw at a glance the effect which would be produced by any opéra you showed him.
He took in all its parts and, as sovereign master of the orchestra, gave it a hitherto unimagined degree of firmness.
Musician to the end, he died through insisting on conducting a new revival of Castor et Pollux when he should have been nursing an illness.
Berton did compose, but preferred to be a musical updater of repertory works.
This presumably allowed him to show the orchestra in an optimally effective role at all times, in the transition to Classical style.
The obituary specifically credited Berton's reforms with giving Gluck and Piccinni ‘docile soloists, and an orchestra disposed to perform everything’, namely those scores in the ‘more demanding’ style of the 1770s.
Certainly, he broke the old directorial mould.
The next important figure was Francoeur le neveu (Louis-Joseph, 1738-1804) who became assistant maître in 1764 and maître from 1767 to 1779.
La Borde thought highly of him (see next section) but he did not create the reputation made by J.B. Rey (1734-1810); Rey was in fact ‘head-hunted’:
[Berton]then learnt that M. Rey was  acquiring the greatest reputation in the kingdom by the skill with which he directed [conduisait]the main provincial orchestras.
M. Berton regarded him alone as capable of directing [diriger]the large Paris Opéra orchestra, after himself.
He contracted with him in 1775 to come to the capital, and put him with M. Francoeur, to conduct [battre la mesure].
Rey became assistant in 1776 and chief in 1781.
His story, which spanned three decades, is resumed below.
Chorus and ballet practice
Under Berton's direction the harpsichord player had increasingly limited responsibility, and traditionally none respecting chorus and ballet music.
After 1776 the instrument seems to have been removed altogether.
However, the conducteur was aided during choruses from another direction — a chorus-master acting as sub-conductor.
The chief conducteur directed essentially by visible signals.
Two sources from the 1770s can be adduced.
In a section on Italian music in La Borde's compendious Essai sur la musique the writer takes up a position against those of ‘the opinion that the woodchopper (nickname for the Maître applied by critics of this practice) should be banished, and the tempo be guided by ear alone’ The reason was that
In a big theatre performance will never be perfect unless the beat is understood more by the eyes than the ears, because sometimes the chorus is almost wholly in the wings, and almost always divided between two sides.
‘The orchestra is hardly heard at the back of the stage, where singers are, so the beat cannot be reliably picked up by ear: instead the singers must use their eyes.
Returning to snipe at Rousseau's humorous dictum (quoted earlier) the writer retorts:
It is not true that they beat time without obeying it, since choruses [at the Opéra]are often sung perfectly.
It is not true that elsewhere they obey it without beating it, since one beats time wherever choruses are sung.
In other words, by the 1770s and after Berton's reforms, debate had nothing at all to do with audible stick signals, but everything to do with the presence of a conducteur, communicating visually.
Effectively the 19th-century polemic between adherents of Italianate dual-control and adherents of single directorial control had begun already.
It was Grétry who testified from personal experience that it was both distance and the dancers that caused the main problems:
The baton is, however, necessary at the Opéra, where large choruses are frequently sung in the wings…it must not be thought that such a distant group of singers can hear the  orchestra, however numerous: each person sings in his neighbour's ear, and I have sometimes surprised myself by singing off the beat and incorrectly conducting [conduisant]the chorus surrounding me.
The chorus-master, you may say, could move forward and glance at the baton; so he does: but…if a crowd of dancers occupies the downstage area, the baton is no longer visible.
So the batteur de mesure strikes on his desk, which is very disagreeable to hear.
But we must accept that these occasional audible signals were not even meant to be heard by all the chorus singers: they were to be heard by the sub-conductor(s), who would then relay the beat visually.
We have already cited the 1800 correspondent to the Courrier des spectacles on the subject of mechanical time beaters: ‘Doubtless there is a batteur in the wings or for the chorus…
’ Any audible signal probably took the form of one stroke per bar: Rousseau and Meude-Monpas agreed that French practice, in whatever context, was to tap out the down-beat only; the Italians always tapped out the first two beats, if there were three or four beats per bar.
We may not really know the frequency with which Rousseau heard it, but well before the Revolution it was heard only in extremis.
Another witness is that excellent musician and observer N.E. Framery in the Encyclopedie methodique.
He notes that chorus singers were required to act; far from the orchestra, perhaps even hidden, they were distracted by ‘sounds within' So it was indispensable to have a conducteur to communicate ‘by emphatic gestures and sometimes by the sound of the baton’ However,
Since today they [the chorus]are almost all excellent musicians and the maître [Rey]is very skilful, he rarely uses this latter means, and one almost never notices the way he exercises his influence.
Ginguené and Framery also provided evidence about physical size of batons.
As will be seen in illus.1, which represents the Paris Opéra in about 1806, the baton is quite small.
‘It is no longer, as Rousseau says, a good thick stick of very hard wood’ noted Framery.
Its evident thinness corresponds also to Ginguene's observation: ‘this thick rod which Rousseau mocks…has since got much more diminutive’.
That is not to claim that illus.1 wholly corresponds to what was used in 1790, or even 1806: but on the other hand, it appears to be plausible in the light of these important contemporary writers.
George Smart's description in 1802 fits well enough too: visiting the Opéra on 9 July he recorded that ‘The orchestra consists of ninety performers, a maître d'orchestre, with a small roll of wood in the middle of the orchestra, conducts.
He stands with the score before him…
Smart did not record the name of the conducteur on that occasion but two things are surely vital.
First, he uses the verb ‘conducts’ Second, he poured vitriolic criticism on soloists and wind players, but none whatever on the conducteur\conductor: not only was there no mention of tapping, but ‘the choruses go extremely well’.
Solo directing practice
We quoted earlier the words of Ginguené to the effect that the conducteur's arm was in motion during solo music at the mid-century.
Of Berton's own practice direct evidence is presently lacking, but in his chapter on Cephale et Procris (Versailles 1773; Opéra 1775) Gretry provided the following, often-cited dialogue, implying that Bertonor Francoeur sometimes had to direct the soloists, even in recitatives or arias.
The legacy here was the musical incompetence of some soloists.
It was reason enough for any maître to be vigilant and, indeed, active.
FEMALE SOLOIST: In tempo?
What stupidity is that?
Follow me, Sir, and remember that your music [votre symphonie]is the most humble servant of the actress who is reciting.
BATTEUR DE MESURE: When you sing in recitative, Mademoiselle, I follow you; but you are singing an air in regular rhythm, very regular.
FEMALE SOLOIST: Come come, enough of this madness, and follow me.
In a different context, writing of the 1780s, Grétry again implies that active direction was maintained in both solo and ballet music:
He [Rey]knows that a given singer will slow the tempo in a given place and that, a moment later, he must push the tempo forward in order to follow a different person.
The first rehearsals of an opéra would often be chaos if his talents, or activity, did not clarify the performance.
Ginguene, writing now of his own time (up to C.1790), confirms this tendency in a wonderfully detailed observation.
Rey's orchestral players only needed guidance ‘in quite rare cases’, whereas
The baton is frequently of use to soloists, who are not all musicians, and whose eye profitably follows the baton's movements, especially in slow tempos, which are always the hardest to follow: but then it is not heard.
It indicates the beats of the tempo in the air and returns, silently, to the desk.
I interpret this as meaning that Rey indicated any new tempo carefully enough if he needed to, but did not always beat throughout a given section.
A secure soloist, it is implied, might not be given much guidance.
If constant gesturing had been required in the Baroque repertory, it was perhaps no longer so.
Rey as a public personality
Of any conducteur before Habeneck, it was surely Jean-Baptiste Rey who received the most plaudits in print: after all, his career coincided with the maturity of the Classical orchestra and with the liberalization of the press after 1790.
He worked as director at all the main provincial opéra houses until the age of 41.
Rey's own music was first heard at the Concert Spirituel in 1773, and his compositional ability enabled Sacchini, before his death in 1786, to nominate Rey to complete Arvire et Evelina (1788), which was successful and durable.
So, like Berton, Rey was compositionally able, but preferred not to concentrate on composition.
After the disruptions of 1792-9 Rey presided over the artistic re-establishment of the Opéra.
That at the age of 60 he still commanded support from the government and public is shown by various events in 1800, linked with a competition for a second chef:(The finalists were required to rehearse a new work and direct a public performance: sufficient evidence, if needed, of the central responsibility of the post.)
The competition itself confirmed Rey's controlling position.
It went with the sacking of the first violin, Marie-Alexandre Guenin (1744–1835), who had led since 1783.
The following evidence was printed in summer 1800, and refers to a public  letter by Devismes which has not yet been traced:
Citizen Rey…directs [the Opéra]orchestra.
His employment, and the creation of a deputy batteur de musique [sic], permits us with difficulty to understand what M. Devismes meant to say when, in sacking Guenin, first violin, he claimed that extraordinary authority [une force extraordinaire]was necessary to direct [diriger]the orchestra.
we always thought that, like any other, the Opéra orchestra ought only to receive one impetus and obey one movement.
Whatever the truth behind Guénin's downfall, this report only increases one's sense of Rey's authority.
This is important to stress, in as much as Carse made a different judgement concerning the relative authority of first violin and conducteur at the Opéra (see the opening of this article, and n.3).
Carse did so partly as a result of George Smart's comment that the conducteur ‘answers the purpose of the prompter at our [London]opéra house, they have no other prompter,’ which Carse took to imply impotence in the post of maître and artistic power in the violin leader.
The reverse is true.
Rey was probably heir to a long tradition in the matter of prompting: no prompt-box can be seen in the illustrations from the 1747 Palais-Royal performance (illus.s) or the 1745 Versailles performance (illus.3).
After the Peace of Amiens in 1802 Rey was seen in action by a new generation of visitors to Paris, like Smart.
Napoleon aimed to reinstate the Opéra as a showpiece, and its ballets became very popular.
In the one shown in progress in illus.l, the dancers, at least, are actual persons: Auguste Vestris and his young rival Louis-Antoine Duport.
The ballet is known to be fictional.
We see the climactic moment of a mock-epic poem about these ‘stars’(1806) by Joseph de Berchoux (1760–1839).
Vestris dances the role of the King of Ithaca and Duport that of Ajax: the former makes an error and falls.
Berchoux was a very well known satirist and his illustrators were distinguished men.
The drawing was signed ‘Myris’, i.e. Sylvestre Mirys (1742–1810), painter and engraver, one-time artist to the duc d'Orleans, and exhibitor at the salons of 1795 and 1804.
The engraver was Pierre-Charles Baquoy (1759–1829), an even more eminent artist-engraver, professor of drawing, former employee of the Musée Royal, and illustrator of the Kehl edition of Voltaire.
In illus.1 a sophisticated Paris readership expected to see reality heightened, not burlesqued.
Although the positioning of players seems wrong and choice of instruments has presumably been dictated by the need for variety in a tiny space (the original is quite small) much remains plausible.
Above all, the conducteur is prominent; he is not telling the band to stop, since Duport is at this moment ‘dancing lightly around the hero laid low.’
Rey (or a substitute) is in normal, if excited, action.
And of course it is the whole modernity of the image which strikes us as revealing, and reflects the fluidity in Rey suggested above by ‘G…’ in the Courrier des spectacles (1800): he ‘hardly any longer lets us perceive that he holds a baton’.
Illus.1 conveys this well, not least by the way the baton is shown as held some way towards the middle.
Two further documents attest to public appreciation of Rey's modernity of approach.
Both use metaphors that confirm his central role in the proceedings.
Devismes's letter of 22 June 1800 (see above and n.20) included the sentence: ‘He is [to the Opéra]what the heart is at the centre of the human body’ This might be seen as hyperbole, taken in isolation, but it is wholly supported by a remarkable testimony written by the composer Jean-François Le Sueur (1760-1837).
Like Rey and others, he had been dismissed from the Paris Conservatoire in 1802 after various disagreements.
Le Sueur's tract in self-defence (which contains the following words) is lengthy; the eulogy of Rey is preceded by an exceedingly detailed account of the skills required in an ideal chef d'orchestre.
Think for a moment of that simultaneity of action very often met with between singers, chorus, dancers and orchestra…
How much this subtle tact, this genius of ensemble, must govern the talents of a chef d'orchestre!
He is the motor of the whole musical action; he must guide, hold back, or animate the GENERAL ENSEMBLE; his task is, by a certain skill in movement which strongly imprints both rhythm and character in every ear, to make it understood where the phrase begins, where it develops, and where it ends…it will be difficult, my friend, to replace that intelligent maître de musique, Rey…
The metaphor of a ‘motor’ is explicitly qualified, as is that of a ‘heart’in the earlier quotation from Devismes.
With a dominance and bodily expression also suggested in illus.1, Rey is thus known to have exercised, with lasting success, many musical functions of what we call a ‘conductor’
Not all was beyond reproach in allied areas.
When the Opéra revived Gluck's Armide on 31 December 1799, the composer C.H. Plantade ‘read and reread’ the score in preparation one thinks of the young Berlioz.
Armed with this knowledge, Plantade recognized in the performance that Rey had added certain trombone lines for the occasion.
Berlioz would have shouted a protest there and then, but Plantade registered his with the Courrier  des spectacles: ‘masterpieces should be left alone’.
Rey wrote to the same journal immediately, defending himself.
In fact, he had always enjoyed the full sound potential of his band.
A journalist attacked him in 1791 for the ‘permanent predominant prejudice, that the music is everything, and the words, nothing’ at the Opéra: ‘one is made aware of just one author, the author of the music.’
New evidence for the Comédie-Italienne
In 1762, when the fairground Opéra-Comique merged with the Comédie-ltalienne, there were ten violins and six wind players.
By the 1790s there were 18 or more violins, double woodwind and brass.
The repertory of the Comédie-ltalienne paradoxically included very little Italian opéra: it was the home of popular dialogue opera in French.
As regards orchestral direction, the troupe did not quite fit accepted categories; to begin with, there was no continuo player (spoken dialogue replaced recitative).
The maître was normally a violin-leader.
Although after 1762 the company, often known as the Opéra-Comique, became Paris's second official lyric stage (giving premières of works by Monsigny, Philidor, Grétry and others) the only iconographical evidence of a conducteur seems to be that in illus.4: a hitherto unnoticed detail from an exceptionally ornate full-score title-page.
It belongs to the one-act comédie ‘meslée d'ariettes, avec un divertissement’ entitled Le Guy de chesne.
Its music was by Jean-Louis Laruette (1731–92), a celebrated actor-singer.
His opera was to enjoy only 16 performances (January 1763 to January 1764), but attracted notice for its unusual quasi-legendary subject: the New Year's Eve ceremony performed by druids of old Gaul, in which mistletoe was cut from an oak tree as a token of good fortune to come.
The title-page is fascinating and problematic.
It seems to show the opéra's concluding divertissement enacting this annual ritual, led by Legrand Druide.
The artist was ‘N. Lancret, but no Lancret is known subsequently to the famous Nicolas Lancret, who died in 1743.
Blanked out from the copy of the score shown in illus.4 presumably in the 1790s was a fleur-de-lys held by the cupid.
But this royal emblem surely explains the reason why the publisher, La Chevardière, commissioned the engraving at all.
The Gallic subject matter obliquely celebrated national unity under Louis XV.
In 1763 France as a nation needed moral support, since she faced humiliation at the end of the Seven Years’ War.
La Chevardière himself was of noble extraction, and supplied scores to highly-placed aristocrats.
Centrally sited in the pit is a director prominently brandishing a scroll of paper.
At first this seems anomalous.
In 1763 the highest orchestral salary went to the premier violon, Le Bel.
Gretry's pen-portrait of Le Bel, recalled from 1768, shows him in command with violin in hand, and mentions no other director.
But if it was not mis-observation, there are indeed reasons why the artist and his engraver C.N. Cochin might have illustrated a scroll-waver.
First, Le Bel's predecessor up to Easter 1761, A.B.
Blaise, was not a violinist but a composer and bassoonist (taking the title maître de musique).
Lancret may have seen Blaise in action and reproduced his image retrospectively.
Second, Blaise continued as bassoonist in the orchestra up to 1766/7.
In divertissements he perhaps exercised the functions of a batteur, to co-ordinate the small chorus and dancers.
(The libretto of Le Guy de chesne specified groups of shepherds and shepherdesses in the final pages, then a druidic march, then the ceremony, and lastly ‘des danses vives et agreables’) Indeed, it might have been the composer, Laruette, who acted as conducteur from the singers' names in the libretto it appears that he did not sing a solo role in his own opéra.
Third, we know that from 1757 in Rome, the Teatro Argentina paid a particular violinist to take charge of the ballet music separately from the opéra repertory (a trend that was to catch on in Italy).
Fourth, the Roman choreographer Pietro Sodi had worked at the Comédie ltalienne from around 1746, where his brother Charles (C.1715–88) was violinist and composer.
Since they collaborated on ballets there in the 1750S it is possible that Roman performance ideas were incorporated in Paris.
The most likely choreographer for Le Guy de chesne was, however, Jean-Baptiste De Hesse, a highly important (if neglected) figure in the history of ballet.
His choreography tended to favour the ‘ennobling’ of rustic figures, and he was a personal favourite of the French royal family.
All these contributory factors lend support to the accuracy of the image in illus.4 as perhaps the only known representation of a conducteur in a smaller Parisian 18th-century theatre.
Rebecca Harris-Warrick From score into sound: questions of scoring in Lully's ballets
The process of preparing Jean-Baptiste Lully's ballets for the new edition of his complete works has brought out a number of notational and textual questions that have direct relevance for future performances.
One of the most fundamental concerns scoring: before a performance of one of these ballets can even be considered, it is obviously essential to know what kinds and numbers of musical forces are required.
Yet the surviving scores provide little help to a modern impresario trying to figure out whom to hire.
This investigation will focus on problems of vocal and instrumental scoring that arise in one representative work, Les nopces de village, and on ways to get closer to establishing the musical forces Lully called upon in 1663.
Lully composed the majority of his ballets between 1654 and 1671 for performances at the French court.
Starting in 1672, when he acquired the directorship of the Académie Royale de Musique, he turned most of his attention to opéra, composing approximately one a year until his death in 1687.
Even though Lully dominated French musical life for several decades and continued to exercise an influence even after his death, no autograph scores or parts survive for any of his works.
All of his opéras, starting with Bellerophon in 1679, were published in full score by Ballard in the years of their performance; the music for the ballets, on the other hand, survives only in manuscripts that were copied from sources of unestablished provenance 20 or more years after the works were composed.
The only sources contemporaneous with the production are the librettos (livrets), which were printed by Ballard for distribution to the spectators.
These contain brief descriptions of each entrée, the names of some of the performers, the texts of the vocal airs, and verses written in honour of some of the noble participants (see illus.1).
The manuscript scores of Lully's ballets provide almost no information regarding scoring.
Instrument names are never written next to the individual lines, as in modern orchestral scores.
Only occasionally do pieces bear a title such as‘Concert de flutes’ which provides even a hint of the instrumentation.
The livrets, on the other hand, show that various instruments were used in the ballets, including, among others, violons, violes, basses à cordes de boyau, hautbois, flutes, vielles, théorbes, clavecins, guitares, castanettes, tambours and petits tambours.
Since the livrets were published at the time of the performances, they presumably reflect what the audiences actually heard.
However, the scoring information they contain comes in the form of lists of performers in a given entrée that, although valuable, are subject to certain limitations.
First, the lists mention only those performers singers, dancers, or instrumentalists who appeared on stage, but not any musicians who may have been placed elsewhere.
(This means that questions of scoring become intertwined with those of staging.)
Second, these lists often provide the names of the performers, but only vague indications as to what instruments they are playing.
(This means that scoring questions become intertwined with archival ones.)
Thus, the primary musical materials represent only the starting point for an investigation into who actually played and sang what in these ballets.
Les nopces de village provides a typical example of the problems encountered.
This ballet was performed, probably only once, at the chateau of Vincennes in autumn 1663.
In this staged rustic wedding the arrival of the bride and groom is followed by a succession of wedding guests from the pastry chef to the village lord, the local schoolmaster and the midwife, each set of characters dancing its own entrée.
A troupe of gypsies crashes the party; the ensuing  fist-fight , during which the bride is kidnapped, brings the ballet to a rousing conclusion.
In case the entrées left any doubt as to the nature of this work, the ballet is subtitled ‘mascarade ridicule’.
As was always the case in the ballet de cour, the cast included both professional and aristocratic performers approximately 30 of each in 76 different roles.
Louis XIV, who was 25 at the time, danced two roles a village maiden and a gypsy.
If we were to mount a performance of this ballet, we would know, thanks to the livret, exactly how many dancers were needed and what roles they would play; the musical forces are, regrettably, another matter.
Exx.1-3 show the three different textures that appear in the scores for this ballet: ex.1 solo voice and bass line (this is the opening vocal air of the ballet, the full text of which  may be seen in illus.l); ex.2 an instrumental trio, with two treble instruments and bass (the ritournelle that follows the vocal air); ex.3 a five-part instrumental texture, each line notated in a different clef (the first entrée).
This last texture represents the clef arrangement of the typical French five-part string ensemble, although as is always the case in Lully's ballet scores, the parts are unlabelled.
The livret confirms that stringed instruments were used in this ballet: the description of the first entrée mentions that the bride and groom are led on stage by ‘violons’, the term that was used generically to indicate all members of the violin family.
Given that this same five-part texture is used for all the dances of this ballet, it seems reasonable to conclude that a string band must have formed the basis of the instrumental ensemble.
Given also that the Petits violons du roi seem to have performed for ballets even more than the Grands violons did, and because a relatively small ensemble seems more appropriate to a mascarade of this nature, the Petits violons may serve as our model.
In this case 18 string players would be required: seven violins and four basses de violon to play the outer parts, and seven violas, divided 2-3-2 to play the inner three parts.
Illus.1 shows that the mascarade opens with a récit sung by Hymen, the god of marriage, accompanied by a ‘harmonie rustique’ In the musical symbolism of the 17th century, terms such as‘harmonie rustique’, ‘concert champetre’, or ‘choeur d'instruments rustiques’signify the woodwind instruments that were the inevitable concomitants of bucolic subjects.
Indeed, court documents show that the eight performers named in the livret as making up the harmonie rustique were all wind players in the employ of the king.
S (The Optere family is undoubtedly more familiar under its more usual spelling of ‘Hotteterre’.)
Five of the eight appear on the royal books for 1661 as members of the ensemble known as the Hautbois et musettes de Poitou.
Judging from the ensembles in which their names appear, the instruments they are listed as playing in other ballet livrets, and the inventories of instruments that some of the royal wind players had in their possession at their deaths, they must all have been versatile performers on several instruments.
So this particular list of names reveals that eight woodwind players are called for, but not what instruments the eight held in their hands.
The first entrée, however, mentions ‘hautbois’ in addition to‘violons’.
Like ‘violons’, this is a term that in the 17th century was used more broadly than the single word  ‘oboe’ suggests.
It could encompass all members of the double-reed family, from treble to bass; in addition it was often used in a general sense, simply to indicate an ensemble of woodwind instruments, but not necessarily any specific ones.
The livret does not say whether the oboes in the first entrée are the same performers as the harmonie rustique that accompanies the récit, but for reasons having to do with economy of personnel and continuity in the staging, it seems likely that they were.
This mascarade, like so many others during the period, was almost certainly performed in a large room, not in a theatre.
The chateau of Vincennes had no theatre, thus it is very unlikely that there was any kind of a pit from which the musicians could have played.
The brief descriptions of the récit and the first entrée (shown in their entirety in illus.l) suggest that the opening numbers of the ballet served not only to introduce the subject of the work, but to set up a mechanism for getting the musicians on stage.
For other mascarades of a similar informal nature that were also performed in rooms, not theatres, most notably several composed by André Danican Philidor in 1688 and 1700, quite a lot of information about the staging survives.
These works make explicit what is only suggested in this livret the opening number of the work serves as a processional for the instrumentalists and some or all of the singers and dancers that brings them into the performing space.
In subsequent numbers the instrumentalists withdraw, clearing a space for the singers and dancers, but remaining within the view of the audience.
The opening descriptions in the livret of Les nopces de village appear to suggest a similar procession, which could have occurred during the overture, a binary movement in triple metre that precedes the reçit in the musical sources.
Furthermore, if the members of the harmonie rustique were moving around the stage as part of the spectacle, it seems much less likely that they would have been changing instruments picking up a flute for one number, a bassoon for another than they might have done had they been playing from a pit.
In the absence of another list of names in the first entrée, the harmonie rustique of the reçit and the hautbois of the first entrée may probably be construed as the same people.
So it now appears that in addition to the 18 strings, a performance of this ballets would require eight ‘oboes, but it is less clear how such a group fits into the two types of instrumental scoring evident in the ballet.
(For the purposes of this paper, the words ‘hautbois’, ‘oboe’, or ‘bassoon’ merely refer to double-reed instruments, without invoking the question of whether these were shawms, Baroque-style instruments, or something in between on the evolutionary scale.) 8 An examination of livrets for Lully's ballets shows that the use of woodwinds in a group, as they are found here, is typical.
Eight is a very common number for a wind ensemble, but there are occasionally as few as four or as many as 12.
What one does not find in the ballet livrets is anything suggesting a classical orchestral wind section, or even a soloistic role for wind instruments.
On the very exceptional occasions when only two instruments of a kind are mentioned in livrets, these turn out not to be part of a mixed ensemble, but some kind of special effect.
The score for the Ballet de la raillerie, for example, shows that the two violins, two flutes and two voices mentioned in the livret do not form a six-part ensemble, but echo each other in pairs.
The groupings of performers seen in the livrets suggest that wind ensembles functioned to provide blocks of sound that is, that they played as consorts of like instruments.
Such ensembles were not merely gathered together for the occasional ballet; there were, in fact, three standing oboe bands at court, or, more accurately, three ensembles whose members played the oboe much of the time.
The best known of the three bore the official name, dating from the 16th century, of Joueurs de violons, hautbois, saqueboutes et cornets, but was informally known as the 12 Grands hautbois du roi; also attached to the Ecurie (the king's stables) were the six Hautbois et musettes de Poitou, the ensemble that seems to have provided the winds for Les nopces de village.
Finally, there were the eight oboes attached to the musqueteers who, in addition to their military functions, played for court entertainments.
Administrative records describe the Grands hautbois as a four-part ensemble, and this scoring is confirmed in a volume of music for this group that belongs to the Philidor Collection in the Bibliothèque Nationale.
The four parts were called (from top to bottom) dessus de hautbois, haute-contre de hautbois, taille de hautbois and basse de hautbois.
These four parts correspond, in both nomenclature and clef usage, to four of the five parts of the Lullian string ensemble; the one string part for which there is no equivalent oboe is the quinte de violon, the one notated on the fourth staff from the top, in the alto clef (C3).
The four-part oboe band played both for outdoor ceremonies and for indoor entertainments.
The most notable example of the use of an oboe band on stage is a mascarade performed at Versailles in 1688 entitled Le mariage de la Grosse Cathos, for which Andre Danican Philidor composed the music.
An eight-member  oboe band provided all of the instrumental accompaniment for the mascarade: it played in four parts for the dance pieces and to accompany the choruses, was reduced to a trio texture to accompany the bass airs, and provided a bass line during the other vocal airs and recitatives.
In Lully's operas there are several explicit examples of four-part writing for oboes or flutes: in the Prologue to Atys, for example, the ‘Entrée des Zéphirs’ alternates phrases between a five-part string orchestra and a four-part oboe band.
In fact, it is possible that in 17th-century French theatrical music when the scoring is reduced from the typical five parts to four, one should consider the possibility that this signals a change in the orchestration from a string to a wind texture, especially if the dramatic situation a pastoral scene, most probably makes such a change plausible.
If the oboe band was a viable theatrical ensemble as late as 1688, then it must have been even more so in the 1660s, when the orchestra as we conceive of it was merely starting to come into being.
Concepts of instrumentation in this period appear still to be closely allied to Renaissance consort principles.
But in Les nopces de village we confront a problem, because none of the pieces in the ballet is scored in the expected four parts.
In the opening récit the oboes could only have played on the three-part ritournelle, presumably two treble oboes and a bassoon, as in the numerous wind trios in Lully's later works.
It is not inconceivable that the parts were doubled, thus involving six players, and perhaps a bassoon played the bass line while Hymen sang.
Still, it seems unlikely that all eight members of the harmonie rustique would have played for this number.
At the very least, the players assigned to the haute-contre and taille parts would have been silent.
For the five-part piece that follows, for which the livret suggests that both strings and winds played, the score does not reveal whether the oboe band would have played as a four-part ensemble or have expanded to five parts in order to double all the strings.
There are several considerations, however, which suggest that the oboe band would have conformed to its normal practice and played in only four parts, leaving the quinte part, the one just above the bass, unreinforced.
First, the ballet livrets of this period treat the instrumentalists as members of discrete groups.
Wind players are listed separately from string players, while those who play continuo instruments and accompany singers form yet another unit.
This compartmentalization on stage reflects the administrative separation between the different ensembles in the king's employ and further suggests that each ensemble had its own integrity and its own performing conventions that would have been respected in varying contexts.
Second, it is clear that the quinte part was the least important of the five.
When string ensembles played in four parts, as they sometimes did if circumstances limited the number of players available, they simply left out the quinte.
Moreover, when Lully's operas were revived in the 18th century, after the orchestral string body had been reduced from five parts-to four, the quinte part was, once again, simply omitted.
It appears that 17th- and 18th-century musicians did not consider that the integrity of the score was in jeopardy if the quinte part was lacking.
Third, and most important, the quinte part in the ballet is not playable by a late 17th-century oboe band: it lies too high for the bassoon and too low for the taille de hautbois, the tenor oboe that plays the third line.
The only alternative would be an instrument from another family, possibly a sackbut, which seems an unlikely alternative within a pastoral ensemble.
The oboe band used in the Philidor mascarade mentioned earlier, Le mariage de la Grosse Cathos, provides a possible model for how many players should perform each part.
In that band, which also had eight members, there were probably three oboes on the top line, three bassoons on the bottom, one haute-contre and one taille.
One must hesitate before projecting these figures 25 years back in time, but it is already clear that for Les nopces de village there had to be at least two treble oboes, since two are required by the ritournelle to the récit.
Also, the heavy reinforcement of the outer voices seems in keeping with what is known about the practices of the Grands and Petits violons.
So it would appear that two instrumental ensembles performed in Les nopces de villagea five-part string band and a four-part oboe band.
We are, regrettably, completely in the dark as to how they functioned in relation to each other.
The only bits of information about instrumentation in the entire livret are those shown in illus.l.
We can infer a little more from the key structure: all of the pieces in the ballet are in G, either major or minor, but the oboes, particularly the haute-contre de hautbois, function more happily in G major than G minor.
In those pieces that are workable for both groups, it seems perfectly plausible that the string and wind ensembles could have played simultaneously the statement in the first entrée that the bride and groom are led by the violins and oboes suggests as much or they may have played in alternation.
Perhaps the two ensembles, playing sometimes together, sometimes in alternation, were used to extend the very short dance pieces, which range in length from 10 to 26 bars (or double that number if each section is repeated once).
Certainly, numerous repetitions must have been essential in order to accommodate all the action described in the livret.
The most egregious case occurs in the last entrée, in which
A troupe of gypsies arrives, intending to profit from the opportunity provided by the wedding, and while some of them dance, others, mingling with the company under the pretext of telling fortunes, pick the pockets of one of the bourgeois.
The alert sergeant catches them in the act, and with the help of the vintners, tries to lead them to prison.
The other gypsies leave off dancing to come to the aid of their companions.
The rest of the assembly enters the fray on the side of the Law, and in the midst of this disorder, the young men kidnap the bride.
Meanwhile the quack doctor with his strap and the tricksters with their wooden swords randomly strike the gypsies, the judges, the bridegroom and finally themselves, thus emptying the stage.
The mere 19 bars Lully provided for all this would seem to need a lot of stretching, and a good raucous oboe band would certainly come in handy to help fill out the accompaniment to these shenanigans.
Let us now move from the instrumental scoring to the vocal, and to the récit by Hymen that opens the ballet.
(There is one additional vocal air in the ballet, a patter song in Italian that Lully composed for himself in his role as the village schoolmaster.
It is for a bass and contains brief interjections by a four-part chorus of schoolboys, who then dance a bourrée with their teacher.)
As illus.1 shows, the role of Hymen, the god of marriage, was sung by a certain Monsieur Blondel.
His part is notated in the soprano clef, and ranges from d' to e’.
Such a voice assignment for a man, a god no less, might raise some eyebrows today, but was it exceptional in France in 1663?
Lionel Sawkins has shown that men did, indeed, sing soprano parts at the French court, and Lois Rosow has pointed out the appearance of male sopranos in the chorus at the Paris Opéra.
There were, according to their research, three types of male soprano boys, castratos imported from Italy and falsettists.
In the case of Monsieur Blondel, the first two categories may safely be eliminated: had he been a boy, he would have been identified in the livret as a ‘page’, as were other boys who sang in the ballets.
As for the second, ‘Blondel’ is decidedly not an Italian name; moreover, castratos sang in the royal chapel, but rarely on the French stage.
Thus he must have been singing falsetto in this role.
So the question becomes one not so much of scoring as of affect: did Monseiur Blondel sing Hymen straight, or was the part conceived rather in a humorous vein?
It has already been pointed out that this ballet is styled a ‘mascarade ridicule’ on the title-page; perhaps the subtitle alone answers the question.
However, the fact that men did sing soprano seriously at this time, in combination with the text of this récit which on the surface is not ridiculous, although it certainly could be performed tongue-in-cheek opens the door to doubts about the style of performance the role demands.
It is possible to conceive of at least two different interpretations of this role, one in which Hymen's idealization of the pastoral world is undermined only by subsequent  events, the other in which the ridiculousness of his words becomes apparent immediately.
(It is worth noting in passing that a similar kind of question comes up for dancers as well as singers.
17th century male dancers were trained to dance female roles and were often called upon to do so in serious works, costumed in such a way as to disguise their gender.
But there are some works in a lighter vein this one being a prime example for which one wonders if the mere fact of having a man play a woman's role was intended to provoke laughter.
In Les nopces de village all of the danced parts, including female roles such as the bride and the midwife, were performed by men.)
One approach to investigating Hymen's characterization is to identify the other roles for male sopranos in Lully's ballets in order to establish what kind of affect they may have had.
A comparison of the names of singers found in the livrets with the music they sang shows that the vast majority of the many soprano role in Lully's ballets were performed by women.
(I have included in my survey most of Lully's ballets and comedy-ballets up to 1670; a soprano part is defined as one notated in either treble or soprano clef.)
Only six solo roles call for a male soprano, on the basis of which it is possible to make a few observations.
(1) Such roles occur only in works of a comic character, these being the Ballet des plaisirs (1655), Les nopces de village (1663), and two of the comedy-ballets Lully wrote with Molière, Monsieur de Pourceaugnac (1669) and Le bourgeois gentilhomme (1670).
(2) All of the roles are for male characters male sopranos never portray women.
(3) Although some of the sung texts could be interpreted in a serious way, the dramatic situation is such as to cast them in a comic, or even burlesque, light.
The classic case is the famous opening scene of Le bourgeois gentilhomme, in which a hopelessly inept student, singing soprano, attempts to perform a languorous love song.
Shortly after he finally bumbles his way through it, the song is performed properly by a female soprano.
(4) The three male singers who performed these six roles all normally sang something other than soprano parts.
Mr le Gros, who sang a serenade filled with double entendres to his fickle mistress in the Ballet des plaisirs, must have had quite a high voice since he was normally assigned parts notated in either alto clef (C3, the usual clef for the high tenor voice known as the haute-contre)
or mezzo-soprano clef (C2).
These generally ranged from a to c’, but in the serenade in the Ballet des plaisirs he was required to sing yet another fourth higher, in a part that covers the octave from f' to f’.
The remarkable Jean Gaye, who performed in many of the comedy-ballets, seems to have been capable of singing anything, although Prunieres calls him a baritone.
Parts are notated for him in five different clefs bass, tenor, alto, mezzo-soprano and soprano.
In two different places in Monsieur de Pourceaugnac he switches in the space of a breath from performing a solo for soprano to singing bass in a duet or trio.
As for Monsieur Blondel, from the eight solo or small ensemble parts he sang in Lully's ballets up to 1670, it is apparent that he was a tenor.
His parts are always notated in tenor clef and have a range of c to f'.
He was also a member of the royal chapel choir, where he was classified as a taille or tenor.
Les nopces de village is the only work in which he was assigned a soprano part.
The choice of Blondel, who here had to sing a full octave higher than he normally did, was undoubtedly intended to make the poor village Hymen sound utterly ridiculous as soon as he opened his mouth.
Although the gaps in the evidence surrounding Les nopces de village do not permit unambiguous conclusions regarding the musical forces Lully used in its performance or how they were deployed, it is at least possible to edge closer to answering questions about the scoring.
The ballet appears to call for eight double-reed players, 18 strings, a bass who can dance, and a tenor willing to sing soprano.
It also presumably requires chordal instruments to realize the continuo in the two vocal airs, although none is mentioned in the livret.
As more of Lully's ballets undergo individual scrutiny, it will become easier to achieve a broader view of his instrumental and vocal practices and to transform the notes on the page into sound.
Lionel Sawkins Doucement and légèrement: tempo in French Baroque music
Nowhere do most early music directors appear more unsure of themselves or unaware of available knowledge than when making decisions about tempo and tempo relationships in Baroque music.
It is an aspect of performance practice where several cogent arguments can always be trotted out to avoid considering the hard evidence.
‘It all depends on the size of the performing space and its acoustic.’
'Such-and-such a composer didn't follow his own metronome marks.’
'Large forces require slower tempos than chamber groups.’
(Do they really?)
And so on.
Some of these considerations are sometimes valid, and must be taken into account, but surely they should not excuse us from seeking out such evidence as does exist in relation to the period and style we are performing?
What evidence do we have relating to French music of the late 17th and early 18th centuries in respect of(1) the persistence of the mensural system, notably concerning tempo relationships,(2) the tempo connotations of ‘expressive’ verbal directions, the so-called ‘time-words’and (3) actual timings and metronome markings?
Mensural traditions
In a recent paper Roger Bowers has drawn attention to the persistence of mensural notation traditions in the music of Monteverdi, and their importance for modern performers.’
As he remarks, there has been a widely held view ‘that, in respect of early Baroque music generally…the proportional signatures…arose from within a system that had simply lapsed into ‘chaotic confusion’ so that they can be held to convey no precise or credible information.
Bowers then neatly and thoroughly discredits such a view by constructing a convincing case for the 1610 part books of these works of Monteverdi being entirely consistent with ‘the historic mensural system’ He also cites, in the same context, Eustache Du Caurroy's Fantasies a III, IIII, V et VI parties, published in Paris in the same year.
That such traditions continued in the early 17th century not only in Italy but also in France should hardly surprise us, but the possibility that they might have persisted even to the end of the century and beyond may seem sufficiently improbable not to merit further investigation.
But, in fact, we do not have far to look to discover some characteristics of the mensural system still occurring in later French music, in works by Du Mont, Charpentier, Lalande, Couperin and later composers.
For example, as late as Blanchard's autograph score of his Jubilate (1743) one finds a passage in 3/2 void (white) notation.
The text, ‘Omnis terra adoret te’(‘All the earth worships thee’), evokes a majestic tempo, emphasized by long notes and rests at the end of the movement, preceding the evidently joyful ‘Et psallat tibi, in duple time, marked légèrement (one of the ‘time-words’ discussed below).
Nor is this the only evidence for 3/2 in void notation indicating a slow tempo.
Borrel quotes an unidentified 18th-century theorist as explaining that such notation, with ‘des croches et des doubles croches blanches’(‘flagged' void semi-minims and fusas, as in illus.1 in modern notation, crotchets and quavers), ‘mark a much greater slowness in the tempo’.
As to Charpentier, what are we to make of his use of (3/2 (all with void notation) as well as 3/2 with modern notation?
It is difficult to see any chronological explanation for these different usages, since some of his earliest works, including Jesu, corona Virginum, H53, and Pange lingua, H58, employ 3/2 with modern notation, while a very late work, the Mass Assumpta est Maria, H ll, of 1699, has seven passages in 3/2 void notation.
Between these two extremes, Cahiers 59, 60 of Charpentier's autograph Meslanges (thought by Hitchcock to date from the early 1690s) include several works which employ both  3/2 and 3/2 in void notation (for example, Notus in Judaea, H206, Domine Deus salutis meae, H207, and the Messe…pour M. Mauroy, H6)(see illus.1).
It seems difficult to argue that these are insignificant remnants of a forgotten tradition for a composer who so meticulously marked his scores; surely these differences must imply either changes of tempo or a relationship with the previous and/or succeeding tempo?
In such works, 3/2 on its own frequently follows a passage in , which might be seen to imply that the change to 3/2 was indicating a sesquialtera relationship.
Charpentier's rubric, grave, for ‘Pleni sunt coeli’ in the Mass Assumpta  est Maria suggests an accord with the opinion, already quoted, that 3/2 void notation was a signal for a slow tempo, and the passages in the Te Deum, H146, in  3/2 (‘Venerandum tuum verum' and ‘Te ergo quaesumus’) imply a similar approach.
In Notus in Judaea, when ‘the earth trembled and was still’(‘Terra tremuit et quievit’), it is the last two words which are set in  3/2, and marked Très lent.
But in the Messe pour M. Mauroy, already cited, the passages for which the same signature is employed include ‘Et resurrexit’, as well as Benedictus and Agnus Dei.
For François Couperin, it seems that 3/2 in void notation also denoted a slow tempo.
La jalousie taciturne (Pieces de clavecin, book 3, 1722), in this notation, is unambiguously marked ‘Lentement et mesure’.
Similarly, the halt and lame, vividly portrayed in Les invalides in book 2 of the same collection (1716–17), are surely destined to proceed slowly rather than at the ‘fast triple time’ suggested by Geoffrey Chew in the article ‘Notation’(111, 4) in New Grove, where the opening bars of this piece are reproduced in facsimile (xiii, p.376).
In Couperin's Magnificat for two voices, it is ‘Et misericordia’ that is set in this notation, and a slow tempo would be well in accord with the usual Baroque Affekt for this passage.
But it is not just in the matter of white notation in 3/2 passages that we can discern the traditions of mensural notation.
In innumerable works one finds that for many movements the last bar of one movement changes to the time signature of the following movement.
This practice surely implies not only that the music moves on without rallentando or pause but also that there must be a relationship between the tempos of the two movements.
(This practice is by no means confined to French music of the period, as a glance at early sources of, say, Purcell's music will show.)
Similarly, such relationships are self evident between sections of the same movement where time-signatures change (or sometimes are reiterated).
Examples abound: in the grands motets of Lalande, even in the revised versions of the 1720s, there are commonly several such enchainements in each motet, such as that between movements 3 and 4 of Beati omnes, S51 (illus.2).
Here, it is evident that a sesquialtera relationship exists between the vivement 6/4 of ‘Uxor tua’ and the gracieusement  of ‘Filii tui’.
A better known work where such relationships are evident, and where they surely form part of any responsible  approach to performance, is the D major Te Deum of Charpentier (H146), already cited.
The radically different results obtained by considering and applying such relationships or by totally ignoring them are well illustrated in two of the currently available recordings of the work.
Louis Devos on Erato (CD 2292 452022) establishes a logical series of tempo relationships, with a tactus that hovers around 72–6, and, in ‘Te per orbem’ for example, with clear tripla and then sesquialtera relationships at the changes to  3/2 and 2 respectively.
Devos defends his action in the liner note, speaking of ‘the organic relationship between the tempos of the different changes of time-signature [mesure], separated in the manuscript by a double-bar.
This is not a conclusion, but calls for a well-defined transition.’
[Translation by the present author, not that on the liner.]
Devos might have added that Charpentier frequently reinforces his wishes at the ends of sections with verbal indications such as‘Passez sans interruption a la suite’(‘Continue without interruption to the next movement’), or ‘Suivez au Choeur sans interruption’(‘Continue with the chorus without interruption’).
When he does want a pause, Charpentier gives very specific instructions such as‘Suivez apres une petite pause’(‘Continue after a brief pause’).
Even if one may offer alternative solutions for some of the actual tempo relationships Devos establishes, he is surely on safer ground than is William Christie in his more recent recording (Harmonia Mundi HMC 901298), where not only are there no audible attempts to establish tempo relationships, except where the composer does not call for them (as we shall see), but the tactus lurches from 72 to 85 to 66 and then 96 in the first four tempos employed, and the tempo within sections is seriously disturbed on several occasions by extravagant rallentandos.
Further, individual phrases are isolated at half speed, in places where the composer gives no indications of any kind, either by change or reiteration of the time-signature or verbal instruction.
One of the most deliberate of these editorial tempo relationships occurs in ‘Pleni sunt coeli et terra majestatis gloriae tuae’ where the text at minim=60 is preceded and followed each time by the orchestral ‘fanfares’at double speed, and this breakneck tempo is then adopted for the remainder of the movement (for the unfortunate apostles, prophets and martyrs) until the inevitable rallentando at the end.
A similar distortion is imposed by Christie on the ‘Judex crederis’, where the vocal utterances are at half the tempo of the ‘fanfares’, the whole being preceded by another enormous rallentando for ‘Tu ad dexteram Dei sedes’.
Curiously enough, in the one movement, the concluding ‘In te Domine’, for which Charpentier employs , his accustomed time-signature for very fast movements, and where Christie could have justified doubling the speed, he adopts a more leisurely minim=g3.
This may be all good fun, but is it justified when it is at the composer's expense, and does not pay any regard to the evident persistence of the mensural tradition so obvious in the composer's manuscripts?
Time-words
Although terms such as lentement and vite are unambiguously indicative of tempo, many other expressions commonly found in French Baroque music which may appear at first sight to have no definite connotations of tempo were commonly understood as tempo indications at the time.
Among the most frequently misunderstood by modern performers are doucement and légèrement.
Although modern dictionary meanings suggest that both these words are almost synonymous with ‘gently’ 'lightly, ‘softly, even ‘carefully’, to a French Baroque musician, while evocative of style, they were principally indications of tempo at opposite ends of the time scale: doucement for a slow tempo corresponding to gravement or lentement, and légèrement for a swift, nimble tempo, only one stage below that of vivement or vite.
Two other time-words were almost as common as those already mentioned gracieux (or gracieusement) and rondement, both of which also have stylistic implications.
The first was the commonest means of indicating a moderate tempo (although modéré was also  used), the second denoted a moderate pace with some forward movement.
(In modern French, a discussion that proceeds at a businesslike pace, even briskly, may be said to do so rondement.)
The evidence for the use of these various terms as tempo indications within quite well defined limits is to be found in the many treatises of the period, notably those dealing with the metronome, but most persuasively in those scores that have survived with notated timings for each movement (see table 2).
Timings and metronome markings
Some of the evidence in this area has been discussed more than once in scholarly literature, yet it seems that little serious attention has been paid to it, certainly by those recently recording this repertory.
Because the early metronome and the 35 or so tempos of French Baroque works calculated from them by 18th-century French writers have already been well documented and discussed in recent studies, particularly in respect to dance tempos, they will not be discussed further here.
On the other hand, of the surviving scores of French Baroque works which include actual timings of individual movements, five motets by Lalande supply the most detailed information.
One of these, the composer's working score of a late version of his Te Deum, Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale (F-Pn), H400D(3) (illus.3), is all in his own hand except for a fair copy of a shortened version of the seventh movement, ‘Tu Rex gloriae’ which is in a second hand, and another inserted folio with an alternative version of ‘Dignare’and ‘Miserere’, in a third hand.
The second hand, evidently that of one of Lalande's assistants, appears also in unique copies of two motets, Veni Creator (revised version) and Cantate Domino (Psalm xcv)(part of the Lutz private collection in Strasbourg), suggesting that these copies are more closely  linked to the composer's workshop than has hitherto been suspected, despite the collection's late date (1739).
These also contain timings of all movements.
These three, of the five extant Lalande motet scores with timings, are thus the most significant and useful with respect to Lalande's performance practice in (1) calculating quite precise speeds for most movements,(2) establishing others by reference to traditional proportions, and (3) facilitating comparisons of speeds established by such timings with the verbal indications so often used to denote both tempo and other performance directions in this repertory.
Indeed, it is this last advantage which is most useful in giving guidance to performers of works other than these three, since if particular tempos can be found to be frequently associated with particular verbal instructions, these may acquire more precise meanings for other works, at least for those by the same composer (see table 2).
From the ascription on the first page of H400D, Te Deum Simple Le feu Roy ayant voulu qu'il ne dura guere plus que sa messe ordinaire (‘Simple Te Deum, the late King having wished that it will last little more than his usual mass’), we can deduce that this score, or at least this inscription, must be dated between the death of Louis XIV in September 1715, and that of the composer, in June 1726.
On the verso of the last folio we find that the overall timing of ‘35 minutes’ was crossed out in favour of‘une bonne demi-heure’(a good half-hour).
The score shows evidence of many cuts, restorations, reworkings and alternatives, with precise timings to the nearest quarter-minute (and sometimes even more exactly) given for all movements except one.
An analysis of these timings, given in full in table 1, shows the following:
1 In seven cases, indicated in the first column by [i]and [ii]after the movement number, there are alternative versions of movements, usually because of cuts or optional repeats (movements 5, 7, 9, 14), although in three cases (12,16,17) completely different versions exist.
2 For eight movements with a single time signature (nos. 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 [first version], 13) the tempo may be immediately established unambiguously.
3 For one movement (no.14) with two sections (vivace and doucement), there exist different-length versions of the vivace, which enable the tempos for the different sections to be established, showing a dupla relation.
4 For five movements with more than one section but   with only a single total timing (nos. 3, 4, 6,15,18), tempos of the different sections may be postulated by reference to tempo relationships in table 1, themselves established in most cases by reference to the time-words found in the sources (see also table 2).
5 A total timing is given for movements 16 and 17 together, but the same crotchet pulse appears to apply to both, enabling a tempo to be established.
6 One movement in a single section but in two different versions (no. 5) has a timing, but it is not clear to which version this timing relates; however, the composer's autograph direction, ‘Point viste, mais marque’ and those given in the Cauvin MS (Versailles, Bibl. mun., Ms mus 226) and the 1729 edition (‘Rondement  et marque’), together with the stated desire on the first folio to shorten the work, strongly suggest that it is the shorter version of 60 bars to which this timing applies.
7 Only n
7 Only no.7 (both versions), and the second versions of nos.12, 16 and 17 are without indicated timings.
However, correlation of the verbal instructions on no.7 with those of other movements enables a tempo to be estimated for that movement.
8 The total timing appears to reflect the use of the shorter versions of those movements where such exist, adding up to 30 ‘bonnes minutes’, i.e. it includes two timings of ‘bonnes minutes’ and one of ‘petites minutes, matching well the inscription ‘une bonne demi-heure’(See also note 12.)
Table 1 lists each movement of the Te Deum, together with the timings and time-words given in the autograph score, H400D, and where appropriate, further timings, derived as explained above.
The final two columns show the resulting metronome equivalents and the time-words given in the Cauvin MS (indicated ) and the 1729 edition (indicated ).
Omitted from the last column is the term fièrement (‘proudly’), found only in the Cauvin
MS and the 1729 edition, since it seems to imply a manner of performance rather than any specific tempo in fact it is associated here with two quite distinct tempos, first in the opening simphonie (minim=72) and then in the longer version of no.g, the bass rècit, ‘Tu devicto’(minim=41).
Even if we tabulate only those time-words and their associated tempos for the movements where there is unequivocal evidence for such tempos, in H400D and the two Strasbourg motets that is without relying on those movements calculated by reference to tempo relationships we see a remarkable degree of unanimity.
However, if we also add the timings of such movements from two more manuscripts of Lalande motets, F-Pn, H387, a reduced score of the Miserere a grand choeur (illus.4), and F-Pn, Rés. 1363, a reduced score of Dominus regnavit, both being copies apparently dating from the 1740s and probably prepared for the Concert Spirituel, we begin to notice the familiar syndrome of some slowing down in some tempos, compared with those of the earlier H400D.
All of these are shown in table 2.
Consideration of these tables, and the application of these tempos in rehearsal and performance by several ensembles, have produced at least two significant results.
The first is that while most of the fast movements are much as one might have surmised (although the vite sections of the last movement of the Te Deum are notably faster than often performed), some of the slow movements are considerably slower than one usually hears them, suggesting a rather wider range of tempos in use in the early 18th century in France than that to which we are accustomed today.
The most impressive example is the movement central to the structure and the meaning of the Te Deum, ‘Tu ad liberandum’(‘Thou didst not abhor the Virgin's womb’), in which the composer carefully marks the vocal part with many aspirations, accents, ports-de-voix and other ornaments, and the orchestral sound forms a halo around the soprano voice, which, if sustained at the indicated speed (minim=32) creates a remarkable atmosphere of awe and beauty.
Both singer and players have to envisage and sustain the long phrases called for, to avoid the very slow tempo from falling apart, but when achieved, the result is worth the effort.
It will be seen from tables 1 and 2 that such very slow movements were more frequent than one might expect.
The second consideration concerns that characteristic feature of French music of the period, notes inégales.
After many years when some ensembles seemed hesitant to apply them to appropriate passages of slow and moderate conjunct movement, thus depriving such movements of the vitality their composers surely intended, some performers seem now to apply inequality at all tempos, including the recklessly fast.
Surely there can be only one thing more tedious than slow equal notes calling for inequality, and that is unrelieved inégales producing the saccadé (‘jerky’) result that Thibault (op. cit.) warned against so long ago.
That Lalande and other French composers of his time, notably Charpentier, were often being deliberately Italian in style is so well documented that surely it is self-evident, especially in faster movements such as‘Et rege eos’, marked with the unambiguous Italian expression vivace by Lalande in his autograph score (Cauvin and the 1729 edition employ légèrement and tres légèrement respectively), and the final vite sections (‘Non confundar’), that equal fast notes are called for?
The difference between these two approaches is well demonstrated by comparing the performances of the final movement in the two recordings cited in note 13, one following the composer's tempo, with equal notes, the other with unrelieved inequality (even though, in the latter case, there is an inappropriate pre-echo of a later aspect of Italian style, the Rossini crescendo).
Although space forbids discussion of them here, other timed scores of works by some of Lalande's successors survive, such as Madin's Benedic anima mea (F-Pn, H443) and two by Blanchard, Beati omnes (F-Pn, H4g7) and Dominus illuminatio mea (F-Pn, Hsl3).
If we seek historically aware performances in this repertory, should we not be seeking to make informed decisions about tempos and their relationships (and consequent effects on inequality) by considering the available evidence of mensural traditions, time-words and notated timings, rather than ignoring it?
Tula Giannini Jacques Hotteterre le Romain and his father, Martin A re-examination based on recently found documents
Jacques Hotteterre le Romain has assumed an almost legendary place in the history of the flute.
The well known picture of the flautist that appears as the frontispiece of his Principes de la flûte traversière (Paris, 1707) is assumed to be a portrait of Jacques himself; the instrument he plays is the archetype of the early three-piece flute (illus.2).
Despite Jacques's importance, little documentation on his life has been available.
In fact, major documents on the Hotteterre family have not been found since the posthumous inventory of Nicolas Hotteterre which was brought to light by Marcelle Benoit in 1969.
Since published sources for instrument makers are extremely scarce the French archives provide the best (and perhaps the only) opportunity for new research on the Hotteterres.
This article presents some of the documents I have discovered at the Minutier Central, Archives Nationales de France.
These give us a better view of the musical lives of the Hotteterres in their historical and social contexts, reflecting the positions they held as musicians to the court of Louis XIV.
Of particular interest are the inventories of musical instruments, Martin Hotteterre's marriage contract and documents concerning the purchase of his house and shop in Paris.
These documents form a basis for the history of Jacques le Romain and his father, Martin; they make possible   the revision of the most recently published Hotteterre genealogical charts, especially as they document three Hotteterre makers previously unidentified, including one who lived in London in the service of the King; and they offer clarification of the Hotteterre makers' marks, and alter our view of how the three-piece flute of the early Baroque developed into the four-piece flute with corps de rechange.
Unless otherwise indicated, the documents discussed are from the Minutier Central, Archives Nationales de France.
An appendix reproduces transcriptions and translations of important portions of the documents.
A full discussion of their implications is not possible within the scope of an article, since many documents consist of over loo pages and cover many aspects of an individual's life.
Marriage contract of Martin Hotteterre, 1666
Martin Hotteterre, the son of Jean and Marguerite Delalande, married Marie Crespy on 2 September 1666.
The marriage contract reveals that Martin's father was living on the rue St Louis in the parish of St Barthélemy, and establishes his address and presence in Paris in 1666
(document 1).
In 1659 Martin received the survivance (legal succession to an office, nominated before the death of the existing holder) of his father's position at the court of Louis XIV of ‘hautbois et musette du roy dans sa grande Ecurie’.
It is significant that his brother, Jean fils aìné, a musician to the King (also ‘musette ordinaire et haubois de la Chambre du Roy’), and his wife, Marie Pellerin, were present at the marriage.
Their only child, Marie, was named in her mother's testament written on 31 May 1719.
By that date Jean had died and Marie Pellerin was married to Jean Louis Chaud.
Surprisingly, Jean's existence has not been known until now: Martin was thought to have been the only son of Jean and Marguerite Delalande to have held a court position.
(Jean had one other son, Hilaire (b 1648), who died very young.)
At the time of Jacques le Romain's birth on 29 September 1673 (his given name was Jacques Martinsee document 2) Martin and his father, Jean, were living at the Enclos du palais sur la petite porte at the sign of the musette.
(Martin had taken up residence there by 1667, following his marriage, and Jean by 1668, the year his eldest son died (Arch.
Nat., Maison du Roi, and document of ‘Transaction’, 1668).)
This indicates that they were working together in the musical instrument business.
These data allow us to clarify important observations on the Hotteterres made by their contemporary Borjon de Scellery in his Traité de la musette, in which he cites a father and two sons of the Hotteterre family as the ‘most esteemed’ makers of woodwind instruments and in particular of musettes and flutes.
These makers can now be identified as Jean and his two sons, Martin and Jean fils aîné.
Jacques Hotteterre (Martin's cousin), musician to the King of Great Britain, 1675
A contract of sale dated 27 May 1675 establishes that Jacques Hotteterre, the son of Louis and Marie Mauger, was living in London where he was employed as an ‘officier de la musique du Roy de La Grande Bretagne’.
In that year, represented in Paris by Francois Cothereau, ‘hautbois du Roy de France living on the rue St Marguerite, parish of St Sulpice’ he sold to his brother Jean (‘hautbois du Roy living in this city of Paris, rue des Fosses, St Germain des Pres, parish of St Sulpice’) land in La Couture which he had inherited on his mother's death in 1669 (document 3).
Years later (5 April 1710, described in a contract of ‘vente d'heritages’) Jean sold this property to Nicolas (dit Colin) Hotteterre.
He was then living on the rue de la Harpe, parish of St Severin (document 3).
It is somewhat surprising that Jacques's name has not  appeared on any known English documents, particularly in the light of extensive published research by David Lasocki on the introduction of the French oboe to England.
Significantly, the French oboists he cites as the first to have come to England find their earliest documentation in a list of musicians who participated in a performance in 1675 of John Crowne's masque Calisto, although Lasocki speculates that they arrived in 1673 by virtue of being in the company of Robert Cambert.
While these oboists were all young musicians, Jacques Hotteterre would in 1675 have been a well established artist, at the mid-point in his career, with a name carrying the renown of the Hotteterres as performers and instrument makers; he can now be identified as probably the first French oboist known to have held an official position at the English court.
We can assume that Jacques not only played the oboe but was also likely to have been a woodwind maker, as was his brother, Jean, who is noted in the Livre commode (1692) as being among the most highly regarded master makers of woodwinds.
From this it seems evident that Jacques brought to London examples of Hotteterre instruments.
Comparing them to the English Baroque woodwinds, it is clear that they became the prototype and standard for English makers well into the 18th century.
The outstanding examples are those by the Stanesbys and Bressan, whose instruments bear an unmistakable resemblance to those of the Hotteterres.
We can conclude that French woodwinds were being used in England from about 1675, when they were apparently introduced by the Hotteterres, and were still being played there by leading musicians through the first quarter of the 18th century.
Evidently Jacques returned to France by 1692.
In that year he succeeded Jean Ludet as ‘Basse de Hautbois et taille de violon’; Ludet had assumed that position on 10 April 1682 at the retirement of Michel Rousselet (Arch.
Nat. 01 26, f.122).
In about 1705 Jacques's position was assumed by his nephew, Jacques le Romain.
Martin purchases a house in Paris, 1678
On 19 March 1678 Martin purchased a large house on the rue de Harlay from Achille de Harlay for 17,000 livres (a large sum at that time).
It had four storeys above street level, where importantly there was a boutique (a shop for the sale of musical instruments) and atelier (workshop)(document 5).
His brother Jean died in 1668, leaving Martin as the sole heir to his father's estate.
Martin and Marie Crespy had six children, two sons (Jacques Martin and Jean) and four daughters (Marie Anne, Angelique, Louise Marie and Louise).
Sale of a house in La Couture, 1691
In 1691 Martin sold a house in La Couture, which he had inherited from his father in]689, to his brother-in-law Louis Hotteterre, ‘player of hautboys and other instruments living in the said city of Paris at the end of the Pont Marie Therese’(document 4).
(This could be Louis, son  of Louis and Marie Francard, baptized in La Couture on 29 October 1674 (Arch.
La Couture).
The relationship which identifies Louis as Martin's brother-in-law remains unclear.
Since Martin did not have a sister, it seems likely that Louis married a sister of Mme Crespy or Mme Pellerin).
Importantly, this document does not refer to Louis Hotteterre, the brother of Nicolas (dit Colin), who lived on the rue Marmousets in the parish of Ste Marie Magdelaine, but to the Louis whom I first identified in an earlier article: a letter written in 1712 by the French oboist Louis Rousselet mentions that he had left a musette for repair with Louis Hotteterre, who lived ‘proche le Pon [sic]Marie’.
We can thus identify this Louis as the master maker described in the Livre commode (1692)‘living near St Jacques de la Boucherie for all woodwind instruments, since St Jacques is located near the Pont Marie.
On the back of Rousselet's letter he adds: ‘I ask you please to give my regards to my sisters, to M. Colin, and to M. Louis Hotteterre at the Opera and to M. Louis Hotteterre at the Opera, my godfather, and to all my friends.’
This makes it clear that both Louis played at the Opéra.
Having now documented Louis's address and instrument business near the Pont Marie Therese for the years 1691,1692 and 1712, while the other Louis lived on the rue Marmousets and evidently worked in his brother Nicolas's atelier (according to common practice, he would have used his brother's stamp), we can conclude that the former made instruments stamped ‘L/Hotteterre’ with a fleur-de-lis above, whereas instruments by the latter would have been made in the workshop of Nicolas Hotteterre and stamped ‘N/Hotteterre’with a six-pointed star above.
Posthumous inventory of Marie Crespy, 1711
The inventory of Marie Crespy, made one year before the death of Martin, lists the communal property from her marriage, including the contents of the musical instrument shop.
Since an inventory was not taken after Martin's death this document is of central importance.
It states that in 1699 the succession of Martin's post went to Jean fils aîné, while he advanced Jacques 3,000 livres to acquire a charge of post.
The pension from his post also went to Jean, who was then living at home on the rue de Harlay and no doubt working with Martin in the instrument business (document 5).
Inventory of musical instruments
Besides the inventory of the shop, several stringed instruments and scores of operas by Lully were listed among the contents of Martin's bedroom.
In addition, Martin's library contained hundreds of volumes, including bibles, dictionaries and histories.
It is noteworthy that Martin is described in the inventory as a ‘Mâitre facteur d'instruments’, a designation rarely found for the Hotteterres; normally they are named in documents according to their official titles as musicians to the court.
The inventory of the shop shows that Martin made recorders (flutes), bassoons, musettes and transverse flutes, the flute-type instruments being by far the most numerous.
Of particular importance is the mention of transverse flutes: the inventories of the workshop of Nicolas Hotteterre, Martin's cousin (one in 1708 made after the death of his wife and the other in 1727 after his own death), do not specify them; the first reads ‘hautbois, flutes [recorders], and other imperfect instruments valued together for the sum of 88 livres’ and the second lists ‘two dozen of which are fluttes [sic]as well as hautbois priced 24 livres’.
In fact, the mention of transverse flutes in Martin's inventory seems to be the only such example for the Hotteterres.
This makes it clear that Martin specialized in flutes and, indeed, was a maker of transverse flutes.
Among the extant Hotteterre instruments there are only three transverse flutes, all of which are representative of the earliest three-piece model, and are stamped ‘Hotteterre’ with an anchor below.
It has long been speculated that the sign of the anchor was the mark Martin inherited from his father.
In the light of these new data, we can assume this to be correct; we may also assume that the extant Hotteterre flutes were made in Martin's workshop.
Although the inventory establishes that Martin made oboes, bassoons, musettes and piccolos, and Borjon included them among the woodwinds made by Jean and his sons, there are no known surviving examples.
Of the two known Hotteterre oboes, one bears the mark of ‘L/Hotteterre’ and the other ‘N/Hotteterre’
In summary, Martin emerges as a master maker renowned for flutes and musettes, who, after his marriage in 1666, established himself at the Enclos du palais (working with his father from at least 1668).
In 1678 he established a workshop on the rue de Harlay, where his two sons, Jean aîné and Jacques le Romain, joined him in instrument-making.
He remained at the rue de Harlay until his death in 1712.
The critical question as to whether Martin introduced the design of the three-piece Baroque flute may now be considered.
Present documentation suggests that this occurred in the 1670s, the time of Martin's period of activity.
The evidence given above indicates that Martin  could well have accomplished this, particularly in the context of the significant advances he brought to the design of the musette, which demonstrate his innovative abilities as a maker.
Furthermore, Jacques's keen interest in the transverse flute as a performer, teacher and composer was no doubt inspired by his father's example.
After Martin's death his son Jean continued to reside at the rue de Harlay, and presumably became the master maker of the workshop.
(Jacques had not been living at home at least from 1707, the year his Principes was published, which gives his address as rue Christine.)
Upon Jean's death in 1720 the shop was leased, ending the mark of ‘Hotteterre’ with an anchor below.
However, the Harlay residence remained in the family, and Martin's daughters still lived there; two bedrooms on the third floor and one on the fourth were rented.
The house was eventually inherited by Jacques le Romain as the last surviving heir of Martin, and then by Jacques's children.
Makers' marks
There has been considerable confusion surrounding the Hotteterre makers' marks.
In the light of this new documentation and the physical evidence of the instruments, in addition to other published sources on the Hotteterres, the following comprehensive scheme for the makers' marks is proposed.
The Hotteterre family of woodwind makers from the region of La Couture Boussey in Normandy can be traced back to Loys de Haulteterre (d C.1625), who married Jehanne Gabriel.
Of their six sons, only three Jean (married to Marguerite Delalande), Nicolas (married to Anne Mauger) and Louis (married to Marie Mauger) continued the Hotteterre line and had sons who worked as instrument makers in Paris.
Borjon's Traité de la musette establishes that a father and his two sons, whom I have shown to be Jean I and his sons, Martin and Jean fils aîń, worked together in instrument making.
A declaration of 19 September 1693 by Anne Mauger, wife of Nicolas, makes clear that her husband and three sons, Nicolas aîń, Nicolas (dit Colin) and Louis shared in the same instrument business.
Although we do not have such specific documentation for Louis I, married to Marie Mauger, and his sons Jacques (-Jean), Louis and Jean they too would have manufactured under a single family mark.
Thus, each of the three sons of Loys de Haulteterre can be identified with a maker's mark which was continued by his sons (and in some cases grandsons and great grandsons) as successors.
There are in fact three known marks for the Hotteterres, which we can associate with the three sons of Loys de Haulteterre as follows:
1 ‘N/Hotteterre’ with a six-pointed star above: the mark of Nicolas I and successors
2 ‘L/Hotteterre’ with a fleur-de-lis above: the mark of Louis I and successors
3 ‘Hotteterre’ with an anchor below: the mark of Jean I and successors
The line of Jean I ended with Jacques le Romain; that of Nicolas I had no successors beyond his three sons, and so ended with Nicolas (dit Colin) at his death in 1727.
The line of Louis I was continued in La Couture through the descendants of his son Louis (married to Marie Francard), until the death of his great grandson, Louis, who appears to be the last known descendant of the Hotteterre makers.
He was the son of Philippe and Anne Louise Narbonne and married Marie Anne Lot (great-aunt of Louis Lot, the illustrious 19th-century flute-maker) in La Couture on 5 November 1748 (Arch.
La Couture).
In a contract of sale dated 11 December 1750, in which he sold land in La Couture to Jean Plisson, he is described as a maker of musical instruments (Arch.
Departementale de Chartres).
An oboe dating from this  period of the mark ‘L/Hotteterre’ in the collection of the Tokyo School of Music is no doubt by this maker.
If Louis, Martin's brother-in-law, was in fact the son of Louis and Marie Francard, then he would have been the last Parisian descendant of the line of Louis I Marriage contract of Jacques le Romain, 1728
It is perhaps surprising to find that Jacques married for the first time on 31 March 1728 at the age of 55.
His wife, Marie Geneviève Charpentier, was the daughter of Nicolas Jean Charpentier ‘conseiller au Roy, ancien notaire a Paris’ and Marguerite Elizabeth Havire (document 6).
They were to have six children (five sons and a daughter): Jean Baptiste (b 1732), Antoine Jacques (b 1733), François (b 1735), Eugène Menin (b 1737), Jacques Louis (b 1740) and Marie Geneviève.
Sometime before Jacques married he had moved from the rue Dauphine St Andre des Arts, where he had lived from about 1714, to the rue de Seine, in the parish of St Sulpice, where he had a large five-storey house in which he lived for over 40 years until his death in 1763.
Because Jacques's parents were deceased, the marriage contract contains an inventory of his property; we thus know precisely what musical instruments were then in his possession.
Listed are strings, theorbos and musettes, but surprisingly there are no flutes (document 6).
Jacques le Romain and the music of Lully
Among Jacques's ‘Livres de Musique’(document 6) are found operas and ballets of Lully, some printed, some in manuscript, among which is Le triomphe de l'Amour, scored for transverse flutes and recorders; it was first performed in 1681, when Jacques was eight years old.
Music by other composers includes motets by Bernier and Campra, cantatas by Clerambault and Bourgeois, and instrumental works of Corelli, Senaille and Marais.
The ‘Livres de Literature’ include volumes by Moliere, Racine, La Bruyere, La Fontaine and Rousseau (probably Jean-Baptiste).
Jacques's library contained nearly all of Lully's operas.
The inventoried music falls within the period of Lully to Campra, and interestingly does not extend to Rameau.
It thus delineates a time when Martin and Jacques were active as court musicians.
The instrumental music includes works by Marais, Senaillé (violin sonatas) and Corelli (Sonatas, Opp.1-5, for one or two violins and bass).
Reference to the ‘pièces de Marais’ are probably the Pièces à une et à deux violes (1686) rather than the Pièces en trio pour les flûtes, violon & dessus de viole (1692), since the viol pieces (and not the ones for flute) are found in Jacques's posthumous inventory.
Surprisingly, his library did not contain works for flute.
Also inventoried was a portrait of Lully by Gestin.
Jacques's admiration for the composer is further expressed by the numerous musical examples drawn from the music of Lully in his  (Paris, 1719).
(In addition to Lully, Jacques drew on Clerambault, Bernier, Campra and Corelli for musical examples, which shows that his own music library was his source of reference.)
The dominance of Lully in Jacques's musical life might seem unusual since he was only 14 years old when Lully died, but it reflects the continued interest in Lully's music throughout Europe well into the 18th century.
Jacques was a contemporary of Lully's children.
Two documents written two days apart refer to actions of each family concerning the rights and inheritance of the heirs.
On 19 July 1714 Martin's children, by notarized document of ‘procuration’ gave their sister Marie Louise the right to act on their behalf regarding payments from interest accounts.
Two days earlier, acting on her own behalf and that of her children, the widow of Jean-Baptiste Lully, Madeleine Lambert, sold all the remaining books of Lully's music to Jean Baptiste Christophe Ballard in accordance with a sentence handed down by the courts of Châtelet de Paris the previous day (16 July 1714).
Ballard, music printer to the king, paid 5,154 livres for 2,821 volumes.
Half of the money from the sale went to Madame de Lully, and the other half to Lully's children.
On the same day she also sold to Ballard ‘all the librettos [livrets deparolles]of the operas of the said S. de Lully’ for 250 livres.
The substantial price paid by Ballard gives further indication that Lully's music was still in demand (document 7).
We may note with interest that this document, signed by Madame de Lully and Ballard, states that the opera Zéphire et Flore is the composition of Lully the father, whereas it has been attributed to his son Louis.
(The composer's name given on the title page of the original Ballard print is simply ‘Monsieur de Lully’)
Madame de Lully's principal residence continued to be the house on the rue St Anne, parish of St Roch, where she had resided with her husband, and where she died on 3 May 1720.
Her son, Jean Baptiste, who assumed his father's title of'Surintendent de la musique de Roy' also lived there.
Posthumous inventory of Jacques le Romain, 1763
A few months before Jacques died on 17 July 1673 he attended the marriage of his only daughter, Marie Geneviève, who married the famed organist Claude Balbastre on 2 January 1763.
Among the illustrious guests present were Rameau and his wife and daughter, Clerambault (presumably Evrard Dominique) and Mondonville, who signed as witnesses.’
Jacques's inventory after death, an extensive document of 69 pages, lists his musical instruments kept ‘in another cabinet right next to the alcove, which were essentially the ones inventoried among the contents of Martin's bedroom (‘a basse de viole, a viole, a pardessus de viole, a violon by Pierres in its case, a child's violin with a bow, a monocorus, a théorbe and a musette, priced at 100 livres’).
Jacques's scores, itemized with the library books, were clearly those he had inherited from his father (document 9).
We can note with interest that court records which list the instruments of the grand and petit choeur of the Opera orchestra (Acadèmie Royale de Musique), of which Jacques was a member, do not include a number of instruments (musettes and cromornes) inventoried above.
These, however, are indicated in scores and livrets and noted by contemporary writers on opera performance.
It has been proposed that these instruments were played by extra musicians.
But Martin's two posts (oboe and musette) and Jacques's (flute and oboe), in addition to the instruments they owned, suggest that each played more than one of the above named instruments during an opera performance (a common practice today for theatre orchestra musicians), and were in addition skilled players of stringed instruments.
Further evidence that court musicians played more than one instrument in the Opera is indicated by the posts of the grand hautbois de Roy, such as those of Jean Rousselet and Guillaume de Granville, which were generally given as ‘hautbois et violon de la chambre du Roy et sa grande Ecurie’
Jacques's two court posts went to his eldest son Jean Baptiste in 1747.
This is stated in the inventory and more fully explained in his son's marriage contract of 29 March 1760 (document 8).
Jean Baptiste, living at home on the rue de Seine, married Louise Marquin, daughter of Elizabeth Carré and the deceased Sieur Jean Marquin, ‘Intendant de maison et affaires de Seine, who was also living on the rue de Seine.
(Did they meet on the rue de Seine?)
It seems at first quite astonishing to learn that neither the inventory in Jacques's marriage contract nor that made after death provides any evidence that he was a flute-player or maker; they seem to contradict the generally held view that he was a maker -a view which is supported by an entry in von Uffenbach's diary which  records a visit he paid Jacques in 1715: ‘He [Jacques]led me into a tidy room and showed me there many beautiful transverse flutes that he himself makes and from which he wishes to gain special profit.’
The simple explanation would appear to be that Jacques worked in the family business on the rue du Harlay with his father and older brother Jean, Martin's successor in 1712, until Jean's death in 1720, when, as noted above, the workshop ceased, at which time the remaining stock would have been liquidated for reasons of inheritance.
By the year 1720 the three-piece flute was rapidly being replaced by the four-piece with corps de rechange, which was already being played by leading French flautists.
This change affected not only the instrument's sound but also the player's technique.
Furthermore, it coincided with a marked increase in both the technical demands of the music and the number of flute compositions being published.
(It is useful to note that Jacques's musical compositions belong to the pre-1720 period.)
These developments, which produced a new generation of flute soloists (Blavet, Lucas, Desjardins et al.), seem to explain his apparent loss of interest in the flute indicated by the inventories.
Jacques's famous Principes summed up an era of flute playing, presenting a retrospective view, in a way comparable to the methods of Corrette (c. 1734), the first method for the four-piece flute, and that of Devienne (1795), the last significant French method for the one-keyed flute.
Although Jacques retained his title of ‘flutte du Roi’ until his death (it appears on the first page of his inventory, 1763), this provides no clear indication of when he actually stopped performing, since musicians retained titles as property.
Judging from the evidence provided in these documents, it appears that Jacques had essentially retired by the time of his marriage in 1728.
The transverse flute was an instrument Jacques knew and heard performed from a young age by players such as Pierre Pièche, the first to hold the position of solo flute at the Academie Royale de Musique.
Jacques's flute method, compositions and instrument were not only characteristic of the early Baroque flute but elegantly expressed its aesthetic virtually to perfection.
Integral parts of a coherent musical expression, consistent with the time in which he flourished, they provide vivid illustration of the organic relationship between a musical repertory, the instrument for which it was written, and the performance practice.
Critical to an understanding of Jacques le Romain's music and pedagogical writings is that they were in essence an extension of the artistic milieu of his father's generation.
Greer Garden A link between opera and cantata in France: tonal design in the music of André Campra
Campra's cantatas have been shown to display the influence of the French lyric theatre more than those of any of his colleagues.
Although everyone drew liberally on Lully's dance rhythms and evocative movement-types, notably the sommeil (sleep scene) and the tempete (storm scene), a majority of composers focused on lyricism after the model of the Italian cantata, with its extended da capo airs.
Campra stands out for keeping his airs relatively short, and for the expressive weight and dramatic emphasis he placed on recitative.
If Campra's harmony contains Italian traits, their presence is discreet.
While chromatic notes more often than not make his harmony directional, they are never used to excess and always relate to the words.
When one turns to his large-scale tonal designs, unexplored until now, it becomes apparent that Lully's influence is as preponderant in Campra's cantatas as it had been in his stage music.
We shall see that, far from being an abstract feature of composition, Campra's key plans add another dimension to the ‘theatricality’ of his cantatas.
In his critique of Bononcini's cantata style (levelled at promoters of Italian music in France) Le Cerf de la Vieville singled out one work on account of its key sequence:
…can you excuse yourselves from comprehending matters which can be understood by plain common sense?
The famous cantata Quando ridi, in which a lover claims he is dying for the sake of a beautiful mouth?
Four pieces, four airs in four different keys; each air, moreover, is strewn with notes that go out of the key, and the so-called key of the work, the one in which it begins and ends, is the one that prevails least; the work goes directly from an air in E♭ major to another in E [minor], which is unheard of…
Le Cerf was rightly taken to task for his selective criticisms of Bononcini, 3 but the tonal oddness of Quando ridi is by no means exceptional in Italian music of the period.
Many Italian cantatas, notably those of Handel and of the mature Scarlatti, are prodigal in their use of different keys, and tonal unity is not a concern of Italian opera.
Even Bononcini provides a further example.
The arias of his serenata La nemica d'amorefatta amante (1693) are set in nine different keys which occur in apparently random succession; an aria in B minor precedes a duet in B♭ major.
Keys in arias are reached in ‘linear’ fashion via logically conducted but meandering modulations in the recitatives.
Variety was the composer's aim, for the initial key recurs only once.
No French cantatas are as tonally wayward, although the keys chosen for the principal movements in the first book (1706) of Jean-Baptiste Stuck, one of the pioneers of the genre, and who claimed in his preface simply to be joining French words to Italian music, hint at a similar  approach (table 1).
Instances where the first air is not in the principal key are frequent in Bononcini and Scarlatti but are infrequent in cantatas composed by Frenchmen.
The key schemes in Campra's first book (1708) display a very different aesthetic (table 2).
Contrasts of major and minor keys with the same root, found but once in Stuck's first book, are characteristic.
Secondary tonics are limited almost entirely to the relative and subdominant.
Campra, whose expressed aim was to combine French musical expression with Italian liveliness, was perhaps copying the acknowledged pioneer of the French cantata, Jean-Baptiste Morin: four of the 12 works in Morin's first two collections (1706,1707) introduce only a change of mode from air to air by way of contrast, and in the others the only secondary keys used in principal movements are the relative, IV and V. But as Morin was an otherwise obscure figure it is more likely that Campra was pursuing his own ideals, themselves anchored in Lullian tradition.
It was the economy of his tonal designs that convinced Le Cerf of Lully's ‘fertility, as opposed to the ‘sterility’ of Italian composers:
Italians cannot write two bars of song without changing key, yet Lully writes whole scenes without doing so.
When I see those beautiful scenes in Armide or Thésée roll on wonderfully with an air of fullness and ease in the same key, I cannot help exclaiming: how could that single key contain so many lovely things?
There goes a genius who works miracles; from a single key he'd extract enough to write the whole Opera.
His claim on Lully's behalf was not wholly exaggerated.
If one views modulations within movements as transitory, he did indeed write whole scenes in one key.
And, if one takes major and minor keys with the same root to be dual facets of a single tonality, this often extends to a series of adjacent scenes.
As Le Cerf's use of the terms ton and mode is somewhat confused this was perhaps exactly what he had in mind; certainly his contemporary Michel de Saint Lambert was employing ton in the sense  of a tonic upon which one could build a piece that was in either the major or minor mode.
Le Cerf's remarks are equally valid for Campra's theatrical music.
The following summary is based on a study of his original ballets and tragedies en musique written for the Académie Royale de Musique before he produced any cantatas.
The key plan of Campra's first tragédie, Hésione (1700), exemplifies his own typically economic tonal designs (table 3).
Each act or entrée is built upon four or five tonalities at the most, often fewer.
Keys cited are those of the principal movements (airs, dances, choruses) in each scene.
Recitatives merely reinforce the prevailing tonality since they almost always begin and end in its tonic.
(A few exceptions exist in soliloquies or in dramatic dialogue, but even these are conservative: an unusual ending comprises a close in the relative or dominant!)
Prologues and divertissements end in the initial key, but only in L'Europe galante, Aréthuse, and Tancrède does the final act end in the same tonality as the Prologue.
Given the closeness of the key relationships, changes of tonic are often scarcely perceptible.
François Raguenet's description of the way the typical French air modulated (which sparked Le Cerf's comments about Lully's tonal economy) applies equally well to many of the large-scale shifts of tonal centre in Campra's operas and ballets:
In the airs they compose the French always look for what is sweet, easy and flowing, and for what follows on readily; everything is in the same key, or if they change it sometimes, they do it with preparations and softenings which render the air as natural and as continuous as if there were no change at all…
Sudden shifts from a major to a minor key or vice versa, on the other hand, are readily apparent to the ear.
These are endemic within Campra's main tonalities (A, C, D, G, and to a lesser extent, E; with shifts to IV or V of the preceding key, major and minor modes are interchangeable).
In divertissements, although it is possible that they reflected the spectacle in some way when dances were characterized, large-scale key-changes seem to have been brought in mainly for the sake of musical variety.
In action scenes, on the other hand, they serve a dramatic
purpose by helping to emphasize the start of a new episode or a change in dramatic pace (for example when a recitative gives way to a brief air).
An important function of major-minor contrasts in particular is to underline that essential preoccupation of the lyric theatre, emotional conflict whether this is internal (as in the soliloquy) or taking place between two characters.
Ample precedent can be found in Lully.
The French theorists' suggestion that minor modes were apt to express sadness, and major, more positive emotions is by no means borne out simplistically.
This is inevitable in dialogue, when different emotions are encompassed rapidly.
Frequently it is the fact that the mode is abruptly changed, not its major or minor quality, which underscores the words.
For example in Alcine, Act 3, scenes 4–5, as Melanie pines for Astolphe, who has fallen victim to Alcine's desires (E minor), Alcine's spurned lover Athlant attempts to console Melanie by proposing vengeance (E major); as the scene continues E minor becomes ‘Athlant's key’ as he declares he loves Melanie and suggests that her ‘fickle lover’can be punished if she will love him in return.
As Melanie thinks sadly of her ‘fickle lover’ the music reverts to E major (ex.1).
The most unusual type of key change which is a regular ingredient of Campra's tonal architecture is to be found in one context only.
Meant to be striking, it is reserved to depict magic or the supernatural, both within the action when magic powers are exercised, and also between acts to help set such scenes.
Here Campra made a special feature of a formula Lully used on occasion: the magic/supernatural music is almost always set in the key of VI in relation to a preceding minor key.
It occurs in Hesione, Act 2, scene 3, Act 3, scene 4, and Act 4, scene 3, as Venus repeatedly tries to place Anchises, with whom she is unrequitedly in love, under her spell.
It serves in Alcine when the scene changes between Acts 3 and 4 to depict Alcine's magic cave (E minor-C major), and again in Act 4, scenes 4–5, as Alcine summons a troupe of wizards to kill Melanie (A minor-F major.)
However, in Alcine, Act 5, scenes 2–3, with the entry of Melissa, the deus ex machina whose magic power is greater than Alcina's, and who rescues the lovers Astophus and Melanie in the nick of time, an exceptional progression is used D major to F major.
No special tonal provision is made for the exit from scenes such as these.
Just as the Baroque composer relied on the opening phrase to establish the affect of a given movement, so it is only the start of the magic episode that receives special musical attention.
Tonal transitions employed in Campra's overall key designs are of course passing harmonies writ large.
Major-minor contrasts are a favourite resource for colouring individual words, especially in recitative.
In the musical discourse the ‘magic’ progression serves to symbolize portentous moments of various kinds.
At this level the first of the two chords is often chord V of a minor key, rather than chord I. The dénouement of Tancrè de contains three examples, each of which accompanies an allusion to Clorinda's fate.
In Act 5, scene 2, Tancred is recounting his victorious combat with a Saracen (whom we know to have been Clorinda).
At his words ‘In the horror of the night a fearsome warrior came forth, there is a transition from a chord of A to a chord of F, accompanied in the bass line by a characteristic flurry of upbeat semiquavers (ex.2).
The same progression recurs, undecorated, in Act 5, scene 4, as his enemy Argant tells Tancred that death has closed Clorinda's eyes (D minor-B♭ major),(ex.3).
Tancred's recitative ‘She is no more!’
(A major), which concludes the opera, portrays his devastation with the simplest of musical means.
Its most poignant moment is the reprise of the opening line, ‘She is no more!, effected, after a modulation to the relative, via chord V in F  minor to chord I in A major.
If in action scenes the surprise of key change often plays a greater role in underlining the words than the actual keys chosen, Campra nonetheless conformed to Lully's usage and the theorists’ recommendations in reserving keys with more than one accidental (other than D major and B♯ major) for moments of heightened emotion.
C minor usually served to depict grief and lamenting (but neither composer adhered strictly to this notion).
Much rarer are F minor and especially B♭ minor, deemed respectively to be ‘gloomy and plaintive’ and ‘gloomy and terrible’Campra uses each once only F minor in a scene describing death in ‘La tragédie’, Les Muses (1703) and B♯ minor in his ballet Aréthuse (1701) to evoke the Underworld.
They are not found in other contexts except in passing modulation.
Perhaps under Italian influence Campra lent other little used keys symbolic associations too: Charpentier's description of B minor and E major respectively as ‘lonely and melancholic’ and ‘quarrelsome and clamorous’comes close to their ethos in Campra's music.
With Campra B minor, serving only four times as a main key, always appears in a soliloquy, and in the context of unhappy love.
Beginning with ‘La Turquie’ in L'Europe galante, in which he set out to portray ‘as far as was possible on the stage…the passionate nature of Sultanas’, he associated E major with the emotion of jealousy on four of the six occasions he employed it.
Apart from the otherwise unknown ‘M. de Navarre’ who provided the text of Didon, the cantatas in Campra's first book were written by the best opera librettists of the day Antoine Danchet (nos. l-2) and Pierre-Charles Roy (nos. 4–6).
Although all are for solo voice we are drawn into a quasi-theatrical experience.
Narrative portions describe action, and evoke visual effects reminiscent of the theatre.
Direct speech has that personal quality Jean-Jacques Rousseau later recognized as being intrinsic to the best cantatas.
Every piece displays the classic phases of preparation, crisis and denouement; thanks to the skill of Campra's poets a final return to the original tonality (if not key) is dramatically plausible as well as musically satisfying.
In three works (nos. 3, 5, 6) their solution lay in finishing with recitative, rather than with the customary moralizing air.
Remote or unusual keys are still featured only at extraordinary moments, but, apart from B minor, not necessarily with the same associations as before.
L'heureux jaloux has a ‘jealousy’ air and lengthy recitative with modulations only to flat keys (movements 7–8) in F minor, which transforms a lover's tiff into a miniature tragedy.
Being aware of the operatic associations of F minor, the singer can dramatize the episode accordingly.
A novelty is F£ minor, rare enough to be absent from every theorist's list, and which Campra had used before only in passing modulations.
It is featured in a beautiful sommeil in Les femmes.
With the partial exception of Didon and Les femmes, which dwell on the protagonist's unstable emotions in the manner of a theatrical soliloquy, it is dramatic episodes rather than specific movements that are set in relief through well timed key changes, as in Campra's stage action scenes.
Bearing this in mind can help to bring cantata performances to life, for it liberates one from seeing a cantata as a mere succession of recitatives and airs.
Quite often the composer himself assists the process by separating movements with single, rather than double barlines.
Prompted no doubt by Danchet's keeping to a single mood in each episode, Campra's large-scale tonal contrasts are sharpest in Hébé.
A narrator/protagonist implores Wisdom to be less harsh on young people: is not ‘plucking the day’ itself wisdom?(movements 1–4: Récitatif mesuré, Air, Récitatif; Lentement).
The main key is G minor, and ancillary keys touched upon are without exception flat keys.
A divertissement-like section follows in which Hébé makes a cameo ‘appearance’ to offer advice in an attractive rondeau, ‘Give the Springtime of your life to pleasure and love’.
The narrator responds eagerly: ‘Let us crown our heads with these flowers’(movements 5–6: Air, Récitatif-[Récitatif mesuré]).
All the music in this portion of the cantata is set in G major.
Confirming the mood of gaiety, passing modulations are confined to sharp keys.
Then suddenly the scene vanishes in mid-recitative (movement 6) as if effected by stage machinery: ‘Heavens!
What fatal change is this!
In a flash all has disappeared’, as the narrator realizes it was only a vision of his youth, now past (ex.4).
The upset of the moment is aptly translated in the music by a sudden shift to A minor, leading through various keys to a final cadence on a G minor chord, which is also the tonic of the final movement, an ariette containing a moral that recaptures the nostalgia of the opening movements: ‘Love like a beautiful dream fades when youth is past’.
In L'heureux jaloux, Daphné and Arion each episode contains several emotional nuances.
The best of the three is Arion, composed for soprano, flute and continuo.
Roy sketches an idyllic portrait of the fabled singer's musical powers and triumphal return to his native land in movements l-3 ([Air]-Récitatif-Ariette), all of which is in E minor.
In movement 4 (Récitatif) a cross-play between chords of E major and E minor fosters an atmosphere of uncertainty as the narrator warns Arion that evil plans are afoot (ex.s).
The build-up to the crisis, comprising a description of Avarice (a kind of jealousy) as a metaphorical monster, Arion's acceptance that he is to die at the hands of sailors who covet his riches, and his swansong, is in E major (movements 5–7: Vivement-Récitatif-Air).
As the sailors cast Arion overboard the music reverts to E minor, again made piquant with major chords underlying emotive words, and there is a modulation to B minor.
When the narrator intimates that help is at hand, chord I in B minor mutates into 1 in G major (movements 8–9: Récitatif-Mesuré et Légèrement).
In condensed form this is the ‘magic’ progression   of Campra's stage music.
As the Dolphin approaches, summoned by Arion's song, the suspense is maintained almost to the last by means of secondary dominants.
Only in the final bar is there another cadence on to an E minor chord (ex.6).
Didon, written for soprano, flute, two violins and continuo, is the earliest of five settings of the legend in the French cantata repertory.
Combining narrative and soliloquy in its portrayal of a genuinely tragic character's inner turmoil, Didon comes closest of all Campra's cantatas to the emotional core of French opera.
The extreme economy of its overall key plan, echoed in the harmonies, strongly reinforces this impression.
Segments in D major and B minor accord with episodes of the drama as this unfolds, but two isolated D minor movements underscore Dido's anguish at being betrayed.
The narrator tells first of the uproar in Carthage at the news that Aeneas is preparing to depart, and deplores Dido's coming fate: why does a loved one so soon become fickle (movements 1–3: Récitatif-Air-Récitatif: D major)?
Dido is presented, distraught; her appeals to Aeneas swing from tearful reproach to despair, then fury: ‘Let the unchained winds, let the angry waves, whose fury heralds shipwreck, do to your heart what my love could not’(movements 4–6: A, D minor; Récitatif; ‘Fort vite’: D major).
B minor, Campra's key of unhappy love, serves for the quasi-dialogue in which Dido begs Aeneas to stay, his reluctant departure at the bidding of the gods, and her vain plea that he return to her (movements 7–9a).
The cantata ends with Dido still speaking in the first person.
She implores the gods for vengeance in an extended da capo air, with nine key-changes the work's musical and dramatic climax (movements 9b-10: Récitatif Air: D major).
In the final movement simple violin accompaniment, the minor mode and plain harmonies one key other than the tonic is once fleetingly touched upon provide a fitting musical parallel to Dido's end (Récitatif D minor).
Two features ancillary to his tonal architecture attest Campra's ability to reconcile musical unity with dramatic  purpose.
First, tonally matched movements are more often than not interlinked by their opening motifs, which are chordal or linear, following the nature of the affect and the rhythms of the text.
Of the 49 movements that make up the collection of 1708, 35 are connected by incipit to at least one other in the same tonality.
Characteristic in Campra's divertissements as well as those of Lully before him, they link dances to airs and even choruses.
He transferred the technique to his petits motets, and then to his cantatas.
Ex.7 shows that each episode of Didon is set in relief by virtue of its themes, and that Campra thought of the D minor movements as a pair.
Second, in Arion the three main movements (E minor-E minor-E major) are interconnected by means of similar figuration, as well as by tonality, instrumentation (all have flute obbligatos) and opening motives.
Precedent for this is to be found in Campra's petits motets rather than in his stage music.
All three airs in Psalm cxlviii, Laudate Dominum de caelis (book 2) enjoin the faithful to praise God.
Each one is in B♯, is in triple metre marked ‘Gay’ and has running quavers in the accompaniment.
Psalm xcii, Dominus regnavit (book 3: four movements in D major) is similarly conceived.
The musical coherence produced by the same techniques in Arion is rare in the cantata, for its composers generally yielded to Italian influence in seeking vivid contrasts between movements.
While the tale unfolds theatrically as we have seen, Roy also conceived Arion as a paean to the power of Music.
Movement 1 apostrophizes Music: ‘Lovely Enchantress, Cupid's daughter, sweet Mistress of our pastimes, what can your aid not accomplish?’
Movement  3 depicts Arion's ability to command Nature through his singing, and movement 7 portrays the effect his swansong has on the elements.
Of particular interest is the recurrence, amid abstract patterns, of an affective ornament known as the chute, which Campra had earlier associated with flute timbre and ornamented, French-style melody in Alcine to depict enchantment: it evokes the sighing of lovers whom the sorceress has turned into trees (Act 2, scene 1) and the music heard in Alcine's Labyrinth of Love (Act 3, scene 1).
As shown in ex. 6 and 8, in Arion it recurs like a tiny Leitmotif to suggest Nature moved by music, not only in each of the three main lyrical movements, but also in the concluding recitative as the Dolphin arrives at the bidding of Arion's song.
Clérambault's cantata La muse de l'Opèra (1716) is a charming anthology of scenic movement types.
Stylistic mannerisms imitated include a shift from E minor to C as a sommeil gives way to a ‘Prelude infernale’, and a change of mode as a recitative with the words ‘Let us fear nothing, a happy change comes with sweet portent’ succeeds a demonic dance.
However, it may be noted that overtly ‘theatrical’ pieces tend to have key schemes to match from the earliest French cantata collections onwards, copying now stage action scenes in helping to dramatize the text, now divertissements in functioning independently from it.
Little concerned to adopt the tonal idioms of opera for the sake of dramatic expression was Nicolas Bernier.
He eschewed modal contrasts before Jupiter et Europe (book 4, privilege 1703) and several times employed a tonic-submediant progression between movements without any textual justification.
As the title implies, his hybrid Cantates françoises en manière de divertissements, designed to celebrate the Duchesse du Maine's Nuits de Sceaux of 1714–15, borrow heavily from the divertissement in their form and style.
Apollon, la Nuit et Comus opens with ten movements which oscillate between G major and G minor for the sake of musical variety alone.
Most like Campra's are the key schemes of Elisabeth Claude Jacquet de la Guerre.
Although her melodic idioms, word-repetition in airs, and frequent modulations owe much to Italy, her plain key-schemes resemble those of her tragedie en musique, Céphale et Procris, written and performed when Lully was still alive (1685).
The tonal structuring of her cantatas invariably enhances the words.
Changes of affect always govern key changes, and as with Campra these also reflect dramatic episodes.
For example in Jonas (book 1) the story of Jonah and the whale the hero's disobedience to God is described in A minor, and its consequences are depicted in three consecutive movements in A major.
Semiquaver figuration as well as key links together five of its 11 movements.
There is a dramatically appropriate return to the initial key before the conclusion of Jonas, Jacob et Rachel and Adam, as in Campra's Didon.
Jepthe (book 2) is one of several works whose movements are united by their opening themes.
But if Jacquet de la Guerre was a mistress of the grand gesture, Campra's forte was delicate understatement.
Prominent French-style figuration and unity of mood, as seen in Arion, has no parallel in the cantatas of his contemporaries.
A composer who took after Campra in being able to dramatize recitatives without having to resort to highly coloured harmony was Michel Pignolet de Montéclair.
In the second recitative of La mort de Didon (book 1, C.1709) an unexpected F major chord following a D minor cadence and a dramatic pause underline Dido's exclamation ‘Perfidious lover!’ admirably, and the account of her final moments in the next recitative is several times articulated in the same sensitive manner.
In tonal terms Montéclair's setting of the legend is a mirror-image of Campra's, for in it Dido's anger is expressed in D minor and in F major, while her sadness at being betrayed takes the form of an imprecation against Venus's power in D major, remarkable for the increasingly elaborate ornamentation written in the score.
Stuck's first collection must have attracted some    adverse criticism, for his later collections (1708, 1711, 1714) take more account of the French language and are much more conservative in their key plans.
As for Morin, although modal shifts quite aptly underscore emotions in some pieces, Circe (book 1) contains two that are gratuitous, the violent passions expressed in Jean-Baptiste Rousseau's poem notwithstanding.
He was right to be prouder of his divertissement La chasse du cerf than of anything he had written previously, for he was somewhat out of his depth when it came to setting dramatic texts.
Idomenée (1712) shows that as time passed Campra was more prepared to feature remoter keys when expressing emotional tension: its chilling dénouement, in which Idomenée becomes aware that he has slain his own son, is in B♭ minor, with modulations to D♭ major, G♭ major and E♭ minor.
(Once again the denouement is in recitative.)
There is nothing as tonally adventurous in Campra's second and third books of cantatas (1714, 1728).
Apart from an air in E♭ major exclaiming against the tyranny of love in Les caprices de l'Amour (book 3) a ‘horrible, frightful’ key for Charpentier, and passed over altogether by the other theorists including Rameau the choice of keys in these collections bears a close family likeness to those of book 1.
Musical variety seems to have been Campra's principal aim in nearly half of his later cantatas.
For example in Les heureux époux and Silène (book 2), whose airs were lifted from Danchet and Campra's censored ballet Les amours de Venus (1712), the composer routinely set almost all the new recitatives Danchet wrote for them in the mode opposite to that of the air they precede, although there is no affective call for this.
A likely explanation is that, although in book 2 he again collaborated with Danchet (nos. 1–4), and worked with another eminent librettist, Fuselier (nos. 5–6), they provided him with poems whose dramatic interest is uneven.
This applies also to those of book 3, all of which are anonymous.
However, when he was stimulated to exercise it, Campra's dramatic flair is still very much in evidence.
It may be argued that Campra's recurring figuration as described earlier is essentially a decorative or unifying device.
This is certainly true of Le papillon (book 3), in which concerto-style semiquavers depicting the butterfly permeate all three ariettes (G minor-G major-G minor).
However, in two cantatas in book 3 allusive figuration recurs in a manner that indubitably aids the drama.
Like the reprise of La Discorde's music in the final scene of L'Europe galante and other innovations in Les Muses and Les fêtes vénitiennes, it denotes that Campra glimpsed the dramatic potential of thematic recall, in advance of his time.
In his third collection of cantatas it is bound up with a highly personal use of instrumental ritornellos in dramatic recitatives.
One of these cantatas is La colère d'Achille.
The scene is set with a ‘Bruit de guerre’ and an instrumental ‘Air de triomphe’illustrating the account of a battle which the Greeks lose because Achilles will not fight, angry at losing his beloved Briseis at the hand of a fellow Greek.
Martial motives from these movements recur to depict Achilles' unappeased wrath.
Ex.g shows the prelude to an arioso in G minor which portrays the arrival of the sea-goddess Thetis, Achilles' mother.
Exhorting him to forgive his personal wrongs for the sake of his own greater glory, she sings an ariette about the dangers of being inflexible.
An A major-F major chord progression is heard as the remorseful Achilles reflects on his men who died through his fault.
Spurred by a fleeting but unmistakable echo of Thetis's music, interpolated in its original key as if to remind him of his mother's counsel, and by the groaning shades of his dead countrymen, he sets forth to exact vengeance for the Trojan victory (ex.10).
The other cantata is Le jaloux.
This has the whimsical verve of Les femmes, and, likewise written for a bass, equally deserves to be revived in performance.
The choice of vocal register harks back, of course, to Lully's operas, where basses were assigned the roles of ‘second-ranking  and spurned lovers’.
Of the two cantatas, Le jaloux is psychologically truer to life, for its ‘hero’ runs through a wider gamut of emotions, spelt out in recitatives by unusually copious tempo and character directions.
A delightful touch is that in the opening movements the instrumental ensemble is cast as an independent personality.
A 38-bar French-style Symphonie in E minor (ex. 11) is dramatically foreshortened by the jealous lover's brusque command: ‘Be silent!
Vainly did I imagine that such sweet harmonies would calm my  violent grief.’
Ritornellos from the Symphonie and the singer's reiterated appeals for silence imaginatively depict his mood (movement 2: Récitatif).
A rhythmic motive from the Symphonie generates the next movement, an air still in the tonic in which word-stress and musical rhythm are (deliberately?) out of kilter (ex.12).
There follow a lament (E minor), thoughts of revenge (E major), self-reproach (B minor), and further attempts at distraction (E major).
The lover's eventual notion of seeking death at the hand of his lady (movement 9: E minor) is dispelled by a few bars for ‘Violons’ and continuo, reminiscent of the quiet opening movements, but in a slower tempo.
Being abstract in style and without words, this passage is pleasantly ambiguous.
Is it music for his imagined funeral, or does it remind the singer that although unhappy, he is in love?
It certainly puts  him in a different frame of mind, for on hearing it he resolves to beg forgiveness of his mistress for being jealous (ex.13).
Campra based his key plans on the Lullian model even when he assumed an Italian manner, as may be seen in ‘L'Italie, ‘Orfeo negli Inferni’ the ‘Motet a la maniere italienne’and the immensely popular Les fêtes vénitiennes (1710).
His pursuit of the same approach in his cantatas arose perhaps from a firm conviction of what would succeed in a genre so closely allied to opera, perhaps from innate conservatism.
Whatever the truth may be, placed at the service of his own dramatic imagination and superb craftsmanship the tonal idiom of the French lyric theatre and its symbolic associations helped Campra to write some of the most engaging cantatas in the repertory.
Graham Sadler Vincent d'Indy and the Rameau Oeuvres complètes: a case of forgery?
One encouraging feature of period-instrument performances in recent decades has been a growing concern with reliable and authoritative editions.
What point in cultivating a ‘historically aware’ performing style if the musical text is faulty?
Yet musicians have on occasion been deceived by editions that give an outward impression of scholarliness.
In this article I shall reveal how certain 20th-century re-orchestrations and other distortions have come to be played on 18th-century instruments.
And in considering how such things could have fooled some of our most eminent Baroque scholars and performers, I leave the reader to judge whether the question mark in my title deserves to be there.
In France the Rameau Oeuvres complètes are often referred to as the Saint-Säens edition.
In fact, although each volume was prepared under the ‘haute direction de M. Camille Saint-Säens, the great man himself edited only the first five volumes exclusively the keyboard and chamber music and motets.
All the opera s (volumes 6 to 18) were undertaken by others.
The list of editors makes interesting reading if only for the number of composers it contains: Saint-Säens was eventually joined by Vincent d'Indy, Paul Dukas, Auguste Chapuis, Reynaldo Hahn, Alexandre Guilmant, Henri Busser, Georges Marty and (surprisingly?)
Claude Debussy.
Most volumes appeared during the two decades leading up to World War 1.
The Oeuvres complètes is a wonderfully luxurious edition.
Each volume is beautifully produced, on thick paper with wide margins and a general air of elegance.
More over, each has a long and informative preface.
These prefaces, most of them written by Charles Malherbe, are seldom fewer than 70 pages long and often more than 140.
The prefaces to the operas are specially detailed, providing information on the work s’ genes is, on contemporary reception, on costumes and sets, revivals, box-office takings, cast changes, and much besides.
True, there is no formal Editorial Method, but many features contribute to an impression of scholarliness.
There are line-by-line comparisons of different editions of the librettos, and there are ‘notes critiques’ that include descriptions of surviving sources and lists of variant readings, while the more important variants are printed in appendices.
In volume 16, for example, these critical notes occupy almost 80 pages.
Yet nowhere do these prefaces warn us that certain editors have taken the most astonishing liberties with the music.
Not all the editors are guilty: the volumes prepared by Busser, Guilmant, Hahn, Marty and Debussy, for instance, may not measure up to today's scholarly standards, but in most respects they do not seriously misrepresent the composer's intentions.
By contrast, the volumes edited by Dukas, Chapuis and, above all, d'Indy are seriously flawed.
They are specially misleading in two respects: the orchestration has often been distorted and the part-writing ‘improved’ The volumes in question are those containing Les Indes galantes (Dukas), Castor et Pollux (Chapuis) and the three edited by d'Indy Hippolyte  et Aricie, Dardanus and Zaïs.
Among these, it will be noted, are many of Rameau's finest and best known operas.
Understandably, the Oeuvres complètes have deceived many people.
The edition is the source of most of the musical examples in the standard English biography of Rameau.
And in Gerald Abraham's Concise Oxford history of music (London, 1979), a passage liberally adapted by Vincent d'Indy is described as ‘the beginning of modern orchestration’(p.46).
Less excusably, there is a doctoral dissertation on Rameau's orchestration based almost exclusively on the Oeuvres complètes and thus largely invalid.
I first drew attention to the shortcomings of this edition in 1981 I was not the first to suspect it: as long ago as 1964 Sir Charles Mackerras, in preparing Castor et Pollux for a BBC broadcast, became suspicious of some of the scoring, went over to Paris to inspect the sources for himself, and made some extensive last-minute changes.
Nikolaus Harnoncourt was less fortunate: his recording of Castor, issued in 1972 and still available on CD, reproduces on period instruments Rameau's period, that is all the re-orchestrations and other changes Chapuis published in 1903.
True, there have been plenty of conductors more recently who have used new or revised editions.
Yet not all have been so fastidious: of the last eight Rameau recordings I have reviewed in Early music, four have been based on the Oeuvres complètes, three derived from the most unreliable volumes.
Ironically enough, Rameau was among the most resourceful and imaginative composers of his time in his treatment of the orchestra, and the least in need of what we might call d'Indification.
Unfortunately the Oeuvres complètes remains the most easily accessible full-score edition of most of his operas.
Having hinted at its defects on several occasions, I feel the time is now right for a more detailed examination of the various editorial ‘improvements’.
And since the central figure in all this was Vincent d'Indy, I shall go on to present evidence that appears to explain his motives both in ‘improving’ Rameau and in concealing what he had done.
For simplicity's sake, my examples are all taken from Hippolyte et Aricie (1733) and Dardanus (1739), d'Indy's editions of which appeared respectively in 1900 and 1905.
The passage in illus.2 comes from Act 2 of Hippolyte, at the entrance of the god Mercury.
In the engraved score, published under Rameau's supervision in 1733, it is marked ‘Prelude a l'unison’.
All other sources used by d'Indy show that it is intended for strings alone.
Yet in his edition (illus.3) the prelude has acquired independent wind parts.
The web of harmony added by the divided woodwind to the faster-moving octaves of the strings transforms the passage from a brusque late-Baroque flourish into something perhaps more appropriate to a Classical symphony.
D'Indy's editorial colleague, Charles Malherbe, the scholarly archivist and librarian at the Paris Opera who was in charge of collating the sources, would have left him in no doubt that the scoring here was complète.
(In fact, the edition is based on much the same materials as will be used for the Rameau Opera omnia now in progress.)
Yet here and elsewhere d'Indy adds parts silently, as we say, but only in the sense that he does not tell us what he has done.
This is no isolated example.
In Hippolyte, independent wind parts in the famous Tonnerre (Act I scene 4) and the enharmonic Trio des Parques (Act 2 scene 5) are wholly editorial; so are the added oboe lines not easily negotiated on Baroque instruments at the entry of Diana (Act 1 scene 5) and the woodwind in a number of the choruses (e.g. ‘Pluton commande’, Act 2 scene 3).
D'Indy even adds apparently obbligato lines to some of the vocal items.
At the point where Theseus finally accepts that he will never see his son again (‘Je ne te verrai plus! o juste châtiment!’,
Act 5 scene 2), the editor provides a second flute, making this moving arioso more Bach-like than ever.
And in the altercation between Theseus and the fury Tisiphone (‘Contente-toi d'une victime!’,
Act 2 scene 1) he adds a couple of'obbligato' bassoons.
Here he may have got the idea from a later, but heavily revised and largely independent, version of the duet, included in an appendix to the volume (pp 439–41).
D'Indy is also inclined to amplify Rameau's textures by supplying inner parts.
The viola parts of the airs de monologue that begin Acts 1 and 3 of Hippolyte (Aricie's ‘Temple sacré, séjour tranquille’ and Phèdre's ‘Cruelle mere des amours’) are wholly editorial, though there is no evidence that Rameau wished for fuller textures: d'Indy's viola supplies no essential harmony but largely doubles notes in other parts.
Likewise, all sources of the ‘Vol des Zephirs’(Act 5 scene 7) agree on a scoring of unison flutes and violins plus continuo; the piece is marked ‘tres vite’, and in its own terms is perfectly successful as a representation of the rapid entry of the Zephyrs.
For d'Indy, though, the two-part texture was evidently too thin: he adds second violins and violas, mainly on the off-beats, creating a jolly but anachronistic oom-pah effect.
A combination of added inner parts and rescoring may be seen in d'Indy's treatment of the ritournelle that    begins Act 4 of Dardanus.
Rameau laid this out as a simple trio for first and second violins and continuo, with flutes doubling the firsts in unison.
The notes, if not all the articulation, may be reconstructed from the Oeuvres complètes (illus.4) by taking the two violin parts and bass, and ignoring the rest ignoring, that is, the newly composed viola line, the first bassoon (much but not all of it derived from the viola), both the oboe parts and those passages where flutes double the violins at the octave.
The editorial additions sound gorgeous, of course, but that is hardly the point.
A last example, from Theseus's final prayer to Neptune, is concerned largely with harmony and part-writing.
The passage in ex.1 juxtaposes Rameau's original and the reworking in the Oeuvres complètes.
D'Indy may be excused for missing the point of Rameau's ‘tied’ and slurred crotchets: only in our own time has it been realised that these denote the kind of tremolo recently studied by Stewart Carter.
Nor, in an edition now over go years old, is it surprising that the editor omits ornaments and grace-notes (in bars 1 and 6) or assumes Rameau's string layout to involve divided violins rather than divided violas.
More worrying by far is d'Indy's adaptation in every bar of ex.1 of one or both inner parts.
In practice, Rameau's part-writing works perfectly well on period instruments, especially when we recall that at the Paris Opéra there were many more players on the outer than on the inner parts.
On paper, though, and when played on the piano, it can sometimes seem awkward.
D'Indy's desire to adapt the inner parts in order to present the work of his great predecessor in a better light is perhaps understandable; some might argue that his only sin was not to tell the user what he had done.
An innocent misjudgement, perhaps.
Yet there is reason to think that the cover-up was deliberated ‘Indy's Rameaugate.
A number of writers have drawn attention to the fact that although Rameau's name was never quite forgotten during the century after his death, the Rameau ‘revival’ came about as a consequence of the Franco-Prussian War.
As one of the composer's biographers has observed, ‘the German victory over France in 1870–71 was the grand occasion for the digging up of great heros of the French past.
Rameau, like so many others, was flung into the enemy's face to bolster our courage and our faith in the national destiny of France.’
One obvious symptom was the founding by Saint-Säens and others only months after the defeat by the Prussians of the Sociétè National de Musique.
This society, which had as its motto ‘Ars gallica, represented an attempt to stem the tide of foreign musical influence: among its aims were ‘the revival of pre-Revolutionary French music and the creation of new music steeped in the national tradition’.
One of the first to join the society was Vincent d'Indy, who became its secretary in 1876; indeed, for many years he was effectively its head.
The Société National de Musique was a failure.
Leadership of the French musical  renaissance soon passed to d'Indy's new creation, the Schola Cantorum, founded in 1894.
Whatever one's views on his editorial methods, one has to concede d'Indy's central role in the short-lived Rameau revival around the turn of this century.
Through the Schola Cantorum, d'Indy and his colleague Charles Bordes did more than anyone else to promote interest in Rameau.
While excerpts were performed sporadically in various Parisian concert series or at the Opera, it was only at the Schola Cantorum that whole acts or even complète operas were given notably, in the first decade of this century, Castor, Hippolyte, Dardanus and La guirlande.
It was after La guirlande, incidentally, that an enthusiastic if intemperate Debussy was heard to cry ‘Long live Rameau, down with Gluck’ sentiments very much in tune with the tendency then current to champion the French tradition and denigrate the foreign.
Such sentiments are indeed understandable in a country where for well over a century the operatic tradition had been dominated by foreigners.
It is important here to draw attention to d'Indy's political and religious beliefs -beliefs remarkably similar to those of the Action Française, an authoritarian, ultra-nationalistic and counter-revolutionary movement formed soon after the Franco-Prussian War.D'Indy came from an aristocratic family and, apart from an early flirtation with Bonapartism, he remained throughout his life an ardent Royalist.
He even paid a visit, in 1873, to the Bourbon pretender to the French throne.
There is no need to dwell on d'Indy's harshly anti-semitic beliefs, though these are expressed openly in his writings and even in such works as the ‘sacred history’ La legende de Saint Christophe (1908–15).
More to the point is his strict and intolerant Catholicism.
His writings and public orations constantly attack Protestantism and blame the Reformation for many ills.
In his Cours de composition musicale, for example, the Reformation is made a culprit for the extremes of Individualism: ‘Subdued by the Christian faith, Pride that formidable enemy of man rarely showed itself in the soul of the artist in the Middle Ages.
But with the spirit of the Reformation applying itself almost simultaneously to every branch of human learning, we see Pride reappear, and watch its veritable renaissance.’
He was convinced that it was only to the true Catholic that God gave the power to write ‘authentic and inspiring music’.
There were inconsistencies here, though: despite himself, d'Indy could not help admiring the Lutheran J. S. Bach.
He justifies this as follows: ‘If [Bach]is great, that is not because of, but in spite of the dogmatic and parching spirit of the Reformation.’
Such inconsistencies between d'Indy's musical instincts and his strongly held right-wing views are so common, indeed, that Romain Rolland asks bluntly: ‘Is his reason in agreement with his heart?’
These factors the patriotism edging ever closer to chauvinism, the conviction that a Catholic composer must be inherently superior to a non-Catholic, the tendency to let emotion blind the reason are surely relevant when we consider d'Indy's attitude towards Rameau.
Could it be that, in preparing these editions, d'Indy was looking over his shoulder at Rameau's great contemporaries Bach and Handel, both of whom were not only foreign but, worse, Protestant?
The BachGesellschaft and Handelgesellschaft editions were, after all, virtually complète by the time d'Indy published his first Rameau volume.
Did he wish to forestall any suggestion that a French Catholic might not seem the equal of, let alone superior to, those mighty Lutherans?
And did this tempt him to doctor the evidence in the ways shown above?
The circumstantial evidence is strong.
From the outset d'Indy's editorial colleague Charles Malherbe, in his collation of sources, had ensured that, whatever might have appeared in the main texts, the appendices to each volume contained nothing untoward.
Malherbe may well have been responsible for a new approach apparent in vol.9 and in most of those from vol.1 onwards, which contain none of the serious distortions outlined above.
But whereas Paul Dukas seems to have seen the error of his ways when he edited a second volume (vol.1), d'Indy persisted with his ‘improvements’: his Dardanus (vol.10) and Zaïs (vol.16) are every bit as misleading as Hippolyte.
The only concession he made in Zaïs was to let Malherbe include in the preface the following statement: ‘In the course of the work, M. Vincent d'Indy has thought it necessary to add certain viola parts, which are sometimes lacking in the original score, and to modify or complète wind parts that are too sketchily indicated’(vol.16, p.lviii).
Yet nowhere in the 80 pages of ‘notes critiques’ or, for that matter, in the entire Oeuvres complètes is there any indication as to where such additions or modifications have been made.
Forgery is a harsh word to use.
But is it  not the only fair way to describe a policy that deceived so many people for so long?
David Fuller A new French harpsichord source of the mid-18th century with an Eckard connection
There is a law of scholarship which stipulates that at the precise moment when the production of a book has reached the stage where no changes are possible, new source material appears.
Such was the case with a catalogue of French harpsichord music that Bruce Gustafson and I brought out in 1990.
In our case there were two new sources.
Both are in private hands, and it is owing to the generosity of the owner of one of them, the French harpsichordist Christophe Rousset, that I am able to report on it.
The source in question, acquired from a Parisian dealer who knew nothing of its history, appears to belong to a large class of mid-18th-century French manuscript anthologies of favourite pieces copied, usually from printed music, for the use of amateur players, generally women or girls.
In this case, it seems to have been someone other than the person who was to use the manuscript who ordered it to be copied.
Whatever reading one gives to the three proper names, the inscription suggests that the collection was a gift.
The donor could have been ‘P.’ or it could have been the two last-mentioned ladies or ‘P.’could be the first-name initial of Madame Vidal.
‘En souvenir de’(‘in memory of’) might seem to imply that Jenny and Mme Vidal were dead, but a collection of jolly harpsichord pieces would have been an odd way to memorialize them.
The hand that copied the music was certainly of thoroughly professional quality, but it is not impossible that any of the named persons could have acquired such a hand, or, indeed, been a professional copyist.
The contents also are not typical of the usual manuscript anthology of the period, since they include a complete set (the keyboard part of Rameau's Pièces de clavecin en concerts), and in addition the greater part of Rameau's solo harpsichord pieces.
Such a comprehensive representation of the works of one composer, occupying half the book, was, if not unique, at least rare.
Although half the contents are by Rameau, this does not qualify as a Rameau source, since all the Rameau pieces were copied from engraved editions.
There are two possible explanations for reproducing the harpsichord part of the Concerts without the two parts for accompanying instruments (in the original they were engraved in score).
One is the practical one of providing a separate part for the harpsichordist so that the two instrumentalists would not have to look over her shoulder.
To buy a second engraved copy at 24 livres, which was about 5 per cent of the cost of a good harpsichord, would have been extravagant at a time when copying was cheap.
The second could have been that whoever ordered the manuscript took seriously Rameau's silly claim that the keyboard part was self-sufficient and that no one hearing a solo performance of this music would guess that anything was missing.
The real interest of the Rousset manuscript lies in the ten unknown pieces unknown, at least, to me.
See ex.1 for their incipits.
(They begin on pp.68, 70, 72, 88, 89, 90, 92, 96, 97 and 102, and will be referred to hereafter by those numbers.)
My failure to identify them is doubly frustrating because of the likelihood that most of them were copied from published anthologies.
If the attributions are correct, then pieces by Alberti, Domenico Scarlatti, Eckard and Wagenseil will have to be added to those listed in the standard catalogues.
It is, however, very unlikely that the feeble music under the first two of those names is genuine.
Whoever wrote the two ‘Scarlatti’ sonatas (pp.70, 72) certainly knew the composer's style, since they are full of familiar tricks, but the thematic ideas are few and stale, while their handling is either routine or inept.
Moreover, they are far too easy to play.
And although the famous ‘bass’ never falters from the beginning to the end of each strain, the allegro attributed to Alberti (p.68) is even barer of thematic ideas; a glance at the lively and imaginative genuine pieces is enough to convince one that this is spurious.
The piece attributed to Eckard (p.88) is better, partly owing to the complexity of the ‘galant’ melodic style characteristic of that composer, which guarantees a certain minimum of interest (illusn).
It differs sharply from any of the published movements by this composer, however, in its brevity and in the sketchiness of the left-hand part, in which chords are indicated by figures rather than being written out.
Similar Trommelbass accompaniments but filled out and not figured are rare in the published works of Eckard, whose left-hand parts, except for some long stretches of Alberti bass and other broken-chord patterns, are notable for their variety of texture.
The Allegro assai that follows this piece probably belongs with it as the second movement of a two movement sonata.
Here the left-hand part consists almost entirely of Trommelbass (in octaves, unfigured) or Alberti bass.
There is nothing in these two pieces that Eckard could not have written, but the sketchiness and even abruptness of their construction, the unenterprising harmony, and the lack of textural variety suggest that, if he did compose them, he dashed them off as fast as he could write for a pupil of little talent and not much discrimination.
Like the piece by ‘Eckard’ on p.88, the one on p.96 is attributed to a known composer Wagenseil but absent from the standard catalogue of his works; this, too, seems to be the first movement of a two-movement sonata.
Written entirely in two parts, the lower of which is made of standard accompanimental figures (mostly Alberti bass), it is nevertheless somewhat more expansive and faintly more interesting than the ‘Eckard’ The following Corrente (which demands a keyboard compass of F' to d''), while made exclusively out of the rather mechanical formulas of the first few bars, at least generates plenty of energy with its leaps and crashing octaves.
If the foregoing pieces represent the vast underclass of mid-18th century music, the unascribed pair in G major on pp.go and 92, also very likely a sonata, belong to the solid bourgeoisie.
Indeed, if guesses as to a composer are in order in such a cliche-ridden style, Eckard would be more likely for these pieces than for the one on p.88.
It is true that the first of the pair begins like the piece on p.88, with a figured Trommelbass accompaniment, but this soon gives way to a rising broken triad in semiquaver triplets which dominates from then on.
Although the   result lacks the variety of texture claimed above for genuine Eckard, it happens to resemble closely the somewhat exceptional authentic but unascribed piece by that composer on p.100, in which the same accompanimental figure runs almost uninterruptedly from beginning to end.
Moreover, the opening motive of this piece is duplicated in an episode of the Rousset piece (ex.2), and the two pieces are of roughly the same length and make similar technical demands.
The minuet that follows is full of textural and rhythmic contrast and quite good enough to be by Eckard.
What makes the Eckard connection especially interesting is that his Op.1, containing the piece on p.100, was not published until 1763, four years after the date on this manuscript.
It is true that 1759 could represent the beginning of a copying effort that extended over several years, but the appearance neat, professional and all of a piece does not support such a hypothesis.
There are plenty of other collections with which to compare this one that do seem to have been written over a long period, and, indeed, the possible Eckard autograph F-Pn D 14218 (see n.5), with its much more disparate contents, its fragments, and its changes of hand toward the end, is such a source.
The Rousset text of Op.1 no.4 is not quite the same as that of the engraved edition and probably represents an earlier form of the piece.
The fact that the Rousset copyist must have had access to some manuscript source for Eckard now lost lends a certain credence to the hypothesis that the pieces on pp.go and 92 may be by him.
Certainly the Rousset manuscript, along with D 14218, must be taken into account by anyone preparing a new Eckard edition.
Frederick Neumann Dots and strokes in Mozart
Mozart's use of dots and strokes in his notation has given rise to much debate.
The old Gesamtausgabe (1877–1910) used with few exceptions only dots, and so did all the numerous editions derived from it.
A number of scholars up to the present have held that Mozart intended no difference in meaning between the two symbols.
The most distinguished among them was Alfred Einstein, editor of the third edition of the Kochel catalogue, who believed that the dots were simply strokes shrunken due to haste.
Paul Mies, in an article of 1958, similarly ascribed the differences between the two signs to the Schreibfaktor (‘writing factor’).
He argued that either symbol was used whenever it fell more easily to the hand.
Thus, for instance, for single notes or chords the stroke was simpler to write; for a series of notes in a row, the dots were easier.
Mies saw no intended musical difference and therefore suggested that editors should use only dots.
The latest follower of this school of thought is Robert D. Riggs, who, in a Harvard dissertation of 1987, tried to dispose once and for all of what he calls the ‘dualism’(a term he adopted from Mies), i.e. the belief in an intended difference between the two signs.
In 1954 the Gesellschaft fur Musikforschung invited a competition on the question: ‘What is the meaning of the signs wedge, stroke and dot in Mozart's autographs and first editions; did Mozart intend a differentiation, and how should the signs be reproduced in new editions?’
Of the five answers published by Bärenreiter in 1957, four scholars Hermann Keller, Hubert Unverricht, Oswald Jonas and Alfred Kreutz pointed up distinct differences between stroke and dot (all were agreed that the wedge is simply a printer's equivalent for the stroke).
Only one, Ewald Zimmermann, saw no intended difference between the two signs.
The Neue Mozart Ausgabe (hereafter NMA)(Kassel, 1955-) came out on the side of ‘dualism’ and has systematically tried to reproduce as faithfully as possible the two distinct signs while various of its editors explained the rationale for this editorial policy.
But since the controversy is still very much alive, it seems advisable to take a new look at this issue.
Mozart's autographs reveal his use of clear strokes and clear dots.
Einstein, Mies and Riggs all acknowledged this fact; these scholars simply denied any musical significance to the graphic difference.
It is, however, not possible to accept this judgement in view of the consistency with which either sign appears in very specific musical contexts.
The true facts of the matter have been clouded by many cases where the exact nature of the staccato did not greatly matter and where consequently Mozart made no deliberate effort to distinguish the two types.
The result of this casual attitude is a grey area where the two signs are not clearly differentiated graphically and can in fact become synonymous.
But outside that grey area Mozart used strokes and dots deliberately for different purposes.
We can group those different purposes into several categories: three for the stroke, two for the dot.
In between these two groups lies the ‘grey area’ of casualness.
For the discussion of these categories it will be helpful to borrow the very clever metaphors with which Joseph Joachim, the famous 19th-century violinist, characterized the types of staccato as ‘snow, ‘rain’ and ‘hail’.
Though focused on the bouncing bow of the violin, with a few grains of salt, these types can be transferred to other media as well.
Turning first to the stroke, Mozart used it deliberately in the following three ways:(1) to indicate an accent without a staccato;(1) to indicate a staccato with special emphasis of either accent or sharpness, ranging from hail to heavy rain;(3) to mark a staccato, usually without special emphasis, that serves to separate clearly a single note from a group of slurred notes.
As to the first category, the accent without staccato, the modern accentual sign was not available to Mozart.
But the stroke as accentual sign had already been used by older composers, among them Bach, Handel and Telemann.
Ex.1a from the ‘Haffner’ Symphony shows two emphasized heavy-raindrop staccato notes followed by a third, tied to its neighbour, where the stroke can only have accentual meaning.
The same is true of exx.1b and 1c from the ‘Jupiter’ Symphony, since a note has to be reasonably short for the stroke to be perceived as staccato sign, shorter certainly than a dotted minim in allegretto or tied semibreves in any tempo.
As to the second category, a staccato with emphasis, exx.2a and b from the minuet of the String Quartet in D, That the dots were purposeful, not due to Mies's ‘writing K575, show an interesting juxtaposition of dots and factor’ becomes clear at the start of the second section strokes.
First we see, in piano, unmistakable dots over (ex.2b), where the theme returns in forte: here we see the crotchets in all instruments, followed by dots over a clear strokes to indicate emphatic forcefulness. similarly gentle descending passage of the first violins.
In ex.2c, from Don Giovanni's duel with the Commendatore, the strokes call for power and sharpness to evoke the violence of sword thrusts.
We find the same clear strokes in the imitative response of the basses.
It is unthinkable that in this passage Mozart would have written dots inst.
Ex.2d (like ex.2g below) was copied from the autograph, which was not accessible for reproduction.
It is from the third movement of the ‘Lützow’ Piano Concerto, k242, and shows accentual emphasis put into sharp focus in a pattern of clear stroke over the first, dots over the following quavers — a pattern repeated a number of times in exactly the same manner.
Often word meaning calls for more emphatic articulation which is evoked in notation by clear strokes.
See for instance ex.2e from the first quintet of Die Zauberflöte, where the forceful words ‘Hass, Verleumdung, schwarzer Galle’(‘hatred, calumny, black gall’) are reflected by a similarly forceful hail-type articulation that is indicated by clear strokes for the violins.
In this sequence of quavers the ‘writing factor’ would have called for dots!
Related is the case with Sarastro's stern announcement ‘wenn ich dich ihren Händen liesse’(‘[you would be deprived of happiness]were I to leave you in her hands’): here, as shown in ex.2f, Mozart underlines an emphatic crescendo to the climax of the phrase with the word ‘staccato’(in the left upper corner) and decisive strokes in violins and basses.
Ex.2g shows a similar case where Mozart combines the spelled-out ‘staccato’ with clear strokes.
It is a passage in Così fan tutte set to Dorabella's words: ‘See the fire in his eyes that seem to shoot off flames and darts.’
The strokes are also consistent throughout two bars of accompanying semiquavers in the violas and basses.
The staccato should be of the ‘hail’ type.
Turning to the third category, of strokes that serve to separate clearly a single note from a group of slurred notes that either precede or follow, we could call them ‘separation strokes’ We find strokes in such patterns as shown in ex.3a so overwhelmingly, that we can identify sporadic dots as shrunken strokes.
Illustrations are given in ex.3b from the D minor String Quartet for an upbeat, and ex.3c from Die Zäuberflote for a downbeat.
Though once in a while such separation strokes may have a slight accentual implication as perhaps in ex.3c in the majority of cases they do not.
Their purpose seems to be simply that of differentiating a clear staccato separation from the very mild non-legato separation in such places as those of ex.3d from the start of the ‘Hunt’ Quartet, K458, or ex.3e from the start of the A major Quartet, K464.
In the ‘Hunt’ Quartet the single note, on the many appearances of the theme throughout the movement, never has a dot or a stroke.
In the A major Quartet, among 20-odd entrances of the complete theme (with the upbeat), twice Mozart wrote a stroke: at the start of the development for the first violin, four bars later for the imitative entrance of the cello, but not for the similar entrance in between, of the middle strings.
On the basis of these two instances, the NMA placed editorial strokes over every single upbeat.
I believe this to be a mistake: in view of the gross statistical disparity the two instances are more likely to be an oversight, or an isolated directive, rather than an indication of an articulatory intention  that is to be spread over the whole movement.
Adjoining the third category of purposeful strokes, the ‘grey area’ follows as fourth category.
This is the ordinary, all-purpose staccato with no implication of either accent, emphasis or special sharpness.
Here the staccato ranges presumably from ‘snow’ to ‘rain’but hardly to ‘hail’It is here where, given the speed of Mozart's writing, the exact character of the staccato was not important enough for him to make a conscious effort at graphic differentiation, and where, as a consequence, dots and strokes have the same meaning.
For two illustrations see ex.4a from the Overture to Don Giovanni, where the two violins have a mixture of strokes, dots and no marks, without any apparent rationale; and ex.4b from the Violin Sonata in B♭ K454, where in the violin part (above) and the right hand of the piano, dots and strokes are haphazardly mixed.
It is this grey area that has engendered much of the confusion that beclouds the issue.
The confusion yields when we realize that we have to do with a limited area, however large, and that the ‘unionists’, if I may use this term, made the mistake of extrapolating the ambiguity and interchangeability within this limited area to the whole scope of Mozart's staccato notation.
Category 5 is the purposeful use of the dot.
In view of the ‘grey area’ it is not always easy to identify dots as being purposeful.
We can do so confidently in cases like the one of exx.2a or 3c above, where the dots are written in clear contrast to strokes.
We find similar striking juxtapositions in the finale of the ‘Jupiter  Symphony, where the contrast between the signs helps set off two of the five main motives of the movement: the angular four-note motive with its downward leaps of a 5th and a 7th is marked throughout the movement by strokes, and the linear, stepwise ascending six-note motive is marked throughout by dots.
On five occasions, where the two themes happen to be joined, the consistently repeated pattern of strokes for the four-note, dots for the six-note theme, prove a purposeful differentiation (the NMA missed this differentiation in all five cases).
We see: in ex.5a the first violins with this theme combination; in ex.5b the first oboe in a parallel spot; in ex.5c on the upper stave the cellos (in the tenor clef) first with the twice-repeated dotted linear theme, then the angular four-note theme, marked with strokes, joining (now in the bass clef) in bar 401 the basses in a third of the five themes; on the lower stave the basses announcing the angular theme, with strokes, followed by a dotted fragment of the linear theme (in support of the cellos) leading into the third theme with its signal-like  opening and descending quaver passagework.
In a fifth instance, given in ex.5d, the cellos, again in the tenor clef, have the combined angular and linear theme the first with strokes, the second with dots while the basses, in bar 383, give out the fourth of the five themes, with strokes in pure accentual meaning, as proved by the third minim that is tied to its neighbour.
I believe these examples offer eloquent testimony against the unionists’ theories.
At the same time this differentiation acts as agent of effective phrasing by tellingly setting off the two heterogeneous themes from one another provided the director is aware of Mozart's signs and interprets them correctly with greater sharpness for the strokes.
Other than in such cases of clear juxtaposition, dots can be assumed to be purposeful when there is graphic consistency, and especially when such consistency is combined with gentle expression.
For an illustration see ex.5e from Zerlina's Act 2 aria, where she caressingly comforts the battered Masetto.
Passages with presumably purposeful dots should be rendered gracefully, without sharpness, from ‘snow’ to light ‘rain’
The sixth category is the very frequent combination of slurs and dots — dots, never strokes.
It indicates the gentlest form of detachment.
See for an illustration ex.6 from Donna Anna's first accompanied recitative.
This use of dots with slurs is so consistent that I have not found a single instance where in this combination the dots were not clearly identifiable as such.
Even Riggs confirms the total consistency of this usage.
In accord with its graphic image, the desired detachment stands half-way between a mild staccato and a legato.
The effect is more a portato than a staccato.
In modern notation it would be marked with horizontal dashes under a slur.
Further evidence about the intended difference between the two signs is shown in ex.7.
In the first finale of Die Zauberflöte Mozart revised the staccato signs.
What happened here was apparently an attempt to change strokes into dots; and it is dots he wrote for the immediate repeat of the theme.
Although later in the scene Mozart made no determined effort to use clear  dots for parallel spots, the fact of an intended correction is significant in itself.
Briefly summing up, there seems to be little doubt that Mozart distinguished dots and strokes, and while he was nonchalant about the graphic shapes where it mattered little, he distinguished the signs with deliberation where it did matter.
By so doing he gave us priceless clues for a richer, more colourful, and sometimes more dramatic, range of expression than the score could suggest without the eloquence of the two signs.
William Malloch The minuets of Haydn and Mozart: goblins or elephants?
In the spring 1991 issue of Historical performance, Frederick Neumann tells us that:
William Malloch tries to prove that Haydn's and Mozart's minuets are being played much too slowly and ought to be rendered at considerably faster speeds.
This is a great oversimplification of what I said.
Neumann, conveniently, attributes to me a generalization I did not make then proceeds to refute it.
What I did say was:
Modern performers, failing to appreciate the tremendous range of tempos covered by these dances [minuets], are giving us the bottom half only.
The pedestal is there, but the statue is missing.
We have been denied the exhilarating late ‘minuet’ tempos of Haydn and Mozart…
I made it clear in my 1985 Opus article and in my 1988 Early music article 3 that ‘Metronome marks for the slower minuets also appear in the twelve earlier Mozart symphonies Czerny edited.’
The additional list of tempos by Czerny for Mozart quartets and quintets in table 1, which appears here for the first time, also shows a similarly wide range of minuet tempos, from slow to fast (for quartets and quintets, dotted minim = 44–84; together with the list of tempos by Czerny and Hummel for the Mozart symphonies, dotted minim = 42–88 see table 2 of my 1988 Early music article).
It is important to emphasize, however, that Czerny and Hummel give us no clearly determinable pattern of tempo differentiations as they relate to such tempo words as Allegro, Allegretto and Moderato.
Neumann goes on to say:
Malloch bases his case mainly on three pieces of evidence: 1) metronome markings by Carl Czerny for Haydn's Salomon Symphonies as arranged for piano (ca. 1845), and for twelve of Mozart's early symphonies (1847) and his last six symphonies arranged for four-hand piano (1835);[2)]metronome markings by Hummel for Mozart's last six symphonies in arrangements for flute, violin, cello and piano (1823–24) and for piano solo (n.d.); and 3) mechanical clocks built by Joseph Niemecz, for which Haydn wrote a number of pieces, among them several minuet-like movements.
No mention is made here of another category of evidence I touched upon: tempos derived from timings, namely those by J. C. Smith for the Earl of Bute's mechanical organ of 1762.
These also lay out the range of tempos for minuets popular at the time, ones by Handel (slow, 3/4, dotted minim = 46; fast, 6/8, dotted crotchet = 68) and Geminiani (fast, 3/8, dotted crotchet = 59).
Neumann tells us that ‘the French minuet…by mid-century…seems to have slowed considerably’ and that ‘we can find scant references to fast minuets’, but here is significant evidence that minuets both slow and fast were played in mid-18th-century England.
Since there is also other well known evidence collected by Sachs, Kirkpatrick, Zaslaw and others from L'Affilard, Pajot, la Chapelle, Marguet, Quantz, Pasquali, Choquel, Engramelle et al., indicating that from 1717 to 1775 minuets were danced both fast and slow, anywhere between MM 53 and 80 per bar, is it really likely that it was only during the 1780s that musicians of the time just happened to slow down the minuet, playing only the bottom side of minuet tempos and not the top side then to speed up again afterwards by the 1790s and 1800s?
Is it not more plausible that the minuet was all along danced both fast and slow and everywhere in between, that it was played ‘faster or slower, according to the tune that is played, which the dancer is obliged to follow’?
Neumann again oversimplifies matters when he uniformly equates Tempo di Menuetto with Allegretto, or his conception of it, which he claims to mean ‘relaxed ease’ and to have been ‘anything but fast’.
Allegretto for Czerny (and, arguably, Haydn) seems subject to no such restrictions.
Its actual pace often seems to him interchangeable with Allegro, both words indicating more about character than speed.
Neumann's hanging on to a limited and personalized notion of what constitutes an Allegretto leads him to assume many things for which there is little foundation.
With respect to Beethoven, Neumann points out that the two metronomized instances of a Tempo di Menuetto by Beethoven are crotchet = 116 (Septet) and 126 (Symphony no. 8), calling these tempos ‘an ideal realization of the ‘Allegretto’ idea' He forgets that Beethoven's  Allegretto finale to the Pastoral Symphony (3/4, arguably a one-in-a-bar minuet) is marked dotted minim = 60 (crotchet = 180) and that the Menuetto allegretto of his String Quartet, Op.18 no.4, is marked dotted minim = 84 (crotchet = 252)!
These too help us to understand the true Allegretto ideal.
Neumann's ‘relaxed ease?’
Perhaps, but these tempos are anything but slow.
Other statements of Neumann puzzle me.
He says that ‘The minuet of Mozart's G major Quartet, K387…has little affinity to a dance…
’ Why?
As tables I and 2 demonstrate, Czerny marks it dotted minim = 60.
It is true that it is usually played more slowly, c.s2, but certainly, at Czerny's tempo, the music dances.
Moreover, Neumann fails to mention that Mozart marks this movement Allegro (Allegretto in the first draft).
A relatively rapid dance-like tempo is essential here, for otherwise we will not sense the offbeat hemiolas (outlined by forte accents) in bars 3–6 and following.
Czerny also calls for this tempo in the Menuetto in Canone of Mozart's String Quintet in C minor, KS16b/406 (after the Wind Serenade, K384a/388), and for the same reason, so that we can feel the hemiola crosswinds blowing from its first bars onward.
Hummel and Czerny also ask for the Menuetto Allegretto of the Symphony no. 40 to go quite fast, again for the same reason (Hummel, dotted minim = 76; Czerny, dotted minim = 72).
Neumann also refers to the Ländler's being ‘in three slow beats, reminding us that many Haydn minuets are rooted in folksong, ‘which itself is unhurried’.
Why make this latter statement?
Folk music can be in any tempo, hurried or not.
Regarding the ‘three slow beats, it is likely that Ländler, like minuets, also had a much wider tempo range than we suppose (the range is still quite wide as they are danced today).
Surely there were many which went at a slow tempo, such as the first Beethoven Modlinger Dance I mentioned in my original article, the rapid-fire tattoos of its French horns ensuring a slow pace.
And certainly, as Neumann mentions, the Ländlerische, K606, of Mozart may be ‘hard to distinguish from the leisurely minuet’ But how leisurely is that?
A Ländler on a Swiss musical clock dating from the late 18th or early 19th century (Claude Marchal collection, Switzerland) goes at c.66 per bar, and a Ländlerische on one of Strand's mechanical organs of 1790 goes at c.70.
Neumann's assumptions about tempo are just that.
They seem based on what is essentially a largely Viennese-inspired ‘received tradition ‘tempo assumptions which go back only to the later 19th century at the earliest.
Neumann also cites Jean-Pierre Marty's deductions about Mozart tempos.
But these, too, though usually carefully reasoned, can only be assumptions.
One can argue with Czerny's and Hummel's metronome markings, but on no grounds can they be dismissed as irrational.
As I mentioned in my Opus article, Czerny had an astute tempo memory and was in effect one of the most diligent and perceptive of early musicologists.
Hummel was so concerned with tempo that he had it written into his contract that he was to have control over all tempos during his 18-year tenure at Weimar.
Much of the history of music consists of often hotly argued opinions about what music actually consists of, arguments sometimes never to be resolved.
Surely in this sense, though, as long as everybody is guessing, guesses closer to the time of a music's currency are at least as valid as those of any late 20th-century musicologist.
It must be emphasized that, like them or not, metronome marks and associated forms of measurement, including the perspective gained from automatic mechanical instruments, are all the hard evidence we have about actual tempos of the past.
Neumann and other musicologists can, of course, build fanciful hierarchical tables associating tempos and tempo words.
The problem comes when one tries to link such words with actual available historical tempo measurements, for the results are often quite obviously and inconveniently in conflict with each other and with many present-day assumptions.
The material means of music are rationally quantifiable but not the mysteries of their application.
As far as historical evidence is concerned, words about musical complexes can only reasonably be understood in their confluence with tempos we can actually measure.
Alone, words are subject to a too great variety of interpretation.
The available body of existing tempo evidence may appear to Neumann to be slim, but this does not mean that it is insignificant.
As regards the Niemecz mechanical organs bearing Haydn compositions: Neumann criticizes me for saying that the machines play ‘within a narrow range, stating that the machines’ air brakes can be set in such a way ‘that the speed is either halved or doubled’, and that therefore ‘the question of an absolute original tempo becomes pointless.’
Well, of course the question of an ‘absolute original tempo’ is always pointless.
Everyone knows that not even two metronomes can stay in synchrony, and certainly all human tempos, even when they might appear close to absolute, continually vary.
But the question of finding a valid tempo area is not pointless.
Neumann's statement about the air brakes is anyway very misleading, for they in fact can be set on a sliding scale, so that the speed of the machines can be gradually modified either up or down.
The slowest speeds, however, are already quite fast and there is little practical room for manipulation beyond them.
The most musically sensible choice is to record the machines at their slowest, for soon enough any significant increase beyond this makes the notes begin to jumble together unintelligibly.
This is the ‘narrow range’ I was talking about.
As I related in my Opus article, in 1979 1 indeed recorded two of those three mechanical organs, the undated organ (Teubner) and that of 1793 (Veyder-Malberg), at their slowest speeds.
It is possible that due to replacement of ageing springs and ropes the organs originally went somewhat slower, but they could not have gone slower by much because the bellows are linked with the barrels' rotation too slow a pace means that insufficient air circulates for the pipes to speak.
As regards finding more ‘absolute’ tempo area indications for automatic mechanical instruments: there are mechanical noises on the recordings I made of the 1793 and undated Niemecz mechanical organs associated with the turning of these instruments' flywheels.
The flywheel of the 1793 instrument appears to rotate at c.63 turns per minute.
As Arthur Ord-Hume has pointed out, organ makers would rather avoid fractions when laying out their calculations.
One can postulate that Niemecz calculated the flywheel of the 1793 instrument to go at c.60 revolutions per minute (a good and traditional clockish pace).
But whether or not I am right about a Niemecz on paper 60 rpm for the machine's flywheels, the tempo relationships of the pieces on all three machines' barrels are a constant and it is interesting to see that the tempo range for pieces either minuet-like in character or specifically called minuets (in available manuscripts or because of the music's original sources) roughly corresponds to the ranges of minuet tempos metronomized by Hummel and Czerny for Mozart and by Czerny for Haydn.
For example, if we go from the 1792 clock's slow (perhaps spurious)‘Quail’ 'minuet' (a ‘traditional’title, no manuscript source is available) to the 1793 clock's fast Minuetto allegretto from Haydn's ‘Clock’symphony, the ranges on the Niemecz mechanical organs, flywheel going at 60, go from dotted minim = 36 to 72.
The metronome marks of Czerny and Hummel for Mozart minuets go from dotted minim = 42 (Symphony no.2g) to 88 (Symphony no.41).
The proportions remain the same both Haydn-Niemecz and Mozart-Czerny increase from slowest to fastest by a factor of two, and there is no getting around the fact that both pieces of information describe a considerable range for minuet tempos including quite fast Allegrettos.
It is surely significant that at c.60 rpm for the 1793 machine's flywheel, the tempo of the Haydn ‘Clock’ Symphony's Menuetto Allegretto (Czerny marks it Allegro) is dotted minim = c.72, certainly reasonably close to Czerny's 76 for the same music.
Even at 63 rpm the MM still comes out only to be 78, quite close to Czerny.
In his article Neumann cannot avoid having to deal with the Menuetto from Beethoven's Symphony no.1, which goes at a lively dotted minim = 108.
He excuses it by calling it ‘a scherzo in minuet clothing’ Why not call it a minuet in minuet clothing?
Neumann further excuses this fast Beethoven minuet tempo, referring to the fast verbal tempo indications by Haydn for the minuets of his last eight quartets, by calling attention among other things to Beethoven's accompanying words to this Menuetto, ‘Allegro molto e vivace’, saying that ‘when Haydn [and, we presume, Beethoven]wanted a minuet to be played faster than the unhurried Allegretto, he unfailingly indicated his intentions with eloquent tempo words.’
But how do we know this to be so?
(What about the ‘hurried Allegretto’?)
We have no way of telling whether a simple Menuetto marking by Haydn or anyone else indicates that a movement is to go slow, fast or somewhere in between.
There is no substance to Neumann's remark that the ‘many minuets [of the classical masters]without tempo indications were understood to be in Tempo di menuetto or in Allegretto and that, we have seen, was anything but fast’.
His statement is misleading: ‘Tempo di menuetto’ may have been anything but fast, but as we have seen, Allegretto tempos are a different matter.
Beyond the Czerny and Beethoven examples for quick Allegrettos I have cited above, Beethoven further gives us, in the 6/8 Allegretto agitato fourth movement of his F minor String Quartet, op.95, a tempo of dotted crotchet = 92, surely rather close to the dotted minim = 108 of the Menuetto of his Symphony no.1.
However peculiarly Beethoven's seemingly contradictory words may strike us now, the tempos are nevertheless his and are, again, anything but slow!
Rejecting what he considers to be the uncomfortably fast Czerny metronome mark of 96 per bar for Haydn's Symphony no.99, Neumann states that ‘this is certainly a fast minuet, beaten in one[; but]it seems [only]to call     for a tempo of ca.66 for the dotted half-note to convey its commodious gemütlich spirit.’
The fact is, though, that no one at present performs this minuet anywhere near 66.
The common way with it is C.52 or slower, three-in-a-bar, as demonstrated on many commercial recordings.
It appears that Neumann's conversion is taking place incrementally: he quietly begins to accept the concept of a one-in-a-bar tempo for a Haydn minuet marked Allegretto, and here he steps ten significant MM degrees ahead of Marty, whose fastest-ever tempo for a Menuetto Allegro is 56.
Neumann says that Czerny ‘obviously’ wanted to ‘Beethovenize’Haydn's minuet.
Why?
Looking at the proportional evidence from the Niemecz organs, one might just as well say that Beethoven's Symphony no.1 Menuetto had been ‘Haydnized’ and one could say so the more properly chronologically, since Haydn was the earlier of the two composers to start describing quick tempos for his minuets.
But as long as Neumann has started his way upwards, why not climb all the way to 96?
How is he ever otherwise to be able to contemplate what Haydn's piece might sound like how gemütlich the piece might or might not beat Czerny's pace?
And must it be gemütlich?
Is it ‘obvious’ that it must be so?
It was ‘obvious’ to the speaker in the film version of Howard's End (who was talking about ‘Meaning in Music’) that Beethoven was depicting Goblins in the third movement of his Fifth Symphony.
But perhaps Beethoven wasn't.
Perhaps Haydn's Menuetto Allegretto isn't gemütlich after all just diabolically spicy.
We'll never know if we don't try it at Czerny's tempo which  also happens to be Beethoven's for his Scherzo.
Throughout history, otherwise unmarked minuets have been written in a number of time signatures, including 3/4, 6/8 and 3/8.
Bach wrote all his in 3/4, though they are by no means all meant to go at one tempo.
The same is true for the 3/4 minuets of Haydn and Mozart.
Contrary wise, Beethoven and other composers wrote music both in 3/4 and 6/8 meant to go at very similar tempos.
Beyond the similar tempos for the 3/4 Menuetto of his Symphony no.1 and the 6/8 op.95 mentioned above, Beethoven has the Scherzo and Trio of his Op.18 non, in 3/4, dotted minim = 112, go at the same tempo as the final 6/8 Prestissimo of Op.18 no.6, dotted crotchet =  112.
The rapid bowed quavers of the former become the rapid staccato semiquavers of the latter.
I mentioned in my original article that at its upper end the Minuet spills over into the very fast dance the Viennese called a ‘Deutsche’ or ‘Teutch’(Mozart: ‘Teitsch’).
Gradually, not chronologically but simply musically, there is a point at which 3/8 and 3/4 draw close together.
Why not then call the late Haydn and Mozart symphonic minuets and the fast minuets in the Mozart Quartets and Quintets, as metronomized by Czerny and Hummel, ‘Teutches in minuet clothing’ if the word ‘minuet’alone is felt insufficient to stretch over the tempo area it covers?
Overall, my object is not to build a system fully linking up tempos and tempo words.
I simply wish to testify for the legitimacy of the kind of hard tempo evidence I have brought forward and to put it into practice, so that we can begin to renew a sensitivity to areas of stylized feeling from the past which have gradually dropped from view.
My essential points are that (1) to judge from a variety of sources including pendulum marks, timings, metronome marks and evidence from automatic mechanical instruments, the minuet, like the waltz and many other dances, has gone through history at a variety of simultaneous paces, some of which have been indeed quite fast.
The point at which a minuet is no longer a minuet, but becomes a waltz or scherzo, is ultimately indefinable.
Such words cover a wide tempo area, and pace Neumann, minuets have the right to express themselves as they see fit!, especially since (2) actual speeds associated with any given set of tempo words also cover a large tempo area.
Words such as Menuetto and Allegretto can mean a variety of things; it is often up to context alone to let us know what a specific set of words is telling us.
But a key part in the telling should be the small but significant number of actual past tempo measurements which have come down to us.
We should put these marks
to use, at least experimentally, as keys to a composer's, and a time's, expressive intentions.
For otherwise how can we ever be sure whether Beethoven intends for us to see a horde of goblins or a host of elephants?’
John Milsom Byrd on record: an anniversary survey
There are two Byrd anniversaries for us to celebrate in 1993.
One is of Byrd's birth 450 years ago.
The other, on the face of it, gives less cause for revelling, since it takes us back a mere 70 years and is effectively an anniversary of an anniversary.
But of the two jubilees it is the one that gives us more to ponder.
It marks a turning-point in the modern revival of Byrd's music.
In 1993 we take Byrd for granted; English culture is unthinkable without him.
In 1923, the tercentenary year of his death, matters were different.
Much of Byrd's music was inadequately edited, if published at all, and beyond a limited circle of enthusiasts little of it was performed.
A spate of concerts and special church services in 1923 set out to bring Byrd more securely back into the public gaze, but arguably the most influential and enduring achievements of the tercentenary were four recordings of Byrd's vocal music sung by the English Singers and issued in the HMV label.
To judge from Timothy Day's useful Discography of Tudor church music (London, 1989), they mark the first serious attempt to capture on record a representative sample of Byrd's music.
For those listeners who missed the centenary concerts themselves, the records ‘enabled us to keep the feast at home’(to quote the critic of The musical times).
‘And we can go on keeping it ad lib. whereas Byrd concerts will necessarily be few and far between.’
More Byrd recordings quickly followed.
A reviewer in a 1928 issue of Gramophone was insatiable.
‘Whoever records’, he pleaded, ‘let us have Byrd’.
1993 is in effect the 70th anniversary of Byrd on record.
What have those 70 years achieved?
Even a glance at Timothy Day's book (which includes only the sacred vocal music) will show that the Byrd discography is a distinguished one.
In terms both of quantity and quality, few composers before 1600 have been better served by the record industry.
But it is in many ways an odd, unbalanced discography, one that would have puzzled Byrd himself, and which puzzles those who know the true length and breadth of Byrd's achievement.
In what follows I hope to lay a finger on some of that discography's oddities, and suggest ways in which it might be enriched and enlarged during the next 70 years.
In 1965 the Choir of King's College, Cambridge, directed by David Willcocks, produced one of the most curious and thought-provoking Byrd recordings of all time.
Issued under the title of ‘Byrd and his contemporaries’, it juxtaposed motets by Byrd with settings of the same texts by Giovanni Gabrieli, Lassus, Palestrina, Peter Philips and Victoria (Classics for Pleasure CD-CFP4481).
As an object-lesson in how to reveal the personality and qualities of one composer by setting him against opposites, this record has few peers.
Telling though they are, the contrasts on this record could hardly be more extreme.
There are subtler ways of showing what Byrd is not, above all by drawing distinctions between Byrd and the music we know he knew.
One thinks immediately of Joseph Kerman's findings about the ‘friendly emulation’ that existed between Byrd and Alfonso Ferrabosco, an exchange in which the character of each correspondent is clearly defined.
Now that Philip van Wilder's collected works have at last appeared in print, it is clear that this too is a distinctive body of music that Byrd absorbed without actually committing plagiarism; only play van Wilder's ‘O dulks regard’ beside Byrd's ‘Ne irascaris’and you will hear what I mean.
Byrd and Philippe de Monte; Byrd and Taverner; Byrd and keyboard composers of Redford's generation; Byrd and Tallis; Byrd and Parsons: Byrd research has brought these and many other connections to light, and they cry out to be the stuff of records called ‘Byrd and his contemporaries’.
Few recordings have taken advantage of those discoveries.
In a delightful 1987 anthology of Tudor consort music called ‘In nomine’(Amon Ra CD-SAR 29), Fretwork placed early Byrd in the context of older repertory, but there were several obvious tricks they chose not to play.
For example, they selected only the second of Byrd's two four-part In Nomines, and neither of the models (by Tye and Parsons) that were evidently in Byrd's mind when he composed his own pair.
Oliver Neighbour's characteristically incisive comments on the relationship between those pieces can be found on the shelves of every good library, but no recording has yet converted them into sound.
There is no shortage of similar points of contact.
Taverner's ‘Meane’ Mass and Byrd's Mass for Four Voices; Ferrabosco's ‘Qui fundasti terram’and Byrd's ‘Emendemus in melius’; Clemens  non Papa's ‘Vox in Rama’and Byrd's ‘Haec dicit Dominus’: when can we hope to hear these and dozens of other telling conjunctions?
As for the anthologies in which Byrd's music appeared in his lifetime, several were explored on record years ago but are now forgotten.
In 1969 Michael Howard's Cantores in Ecclesia did us a service by recording complete the Tallis-Byrd Cantiones sacrae published in 1575 (L'Oiseau-Lyre SOL 311–13 [3 LPs]).
The performances have not stood the test of time; a successor would be very welcome.
Parthenia has been recorded complete, but there is no version currently in the catalogue.
Musica Transalpina is still virtually untouched, and there are some marvellous recitals to be had from Sir William Leighton's The Tears and Lamentations of a Sorrowful Soul of 1614, which includes Byrd's four last vocal works.
Seventy years of Byrd on record must have given us a good 50 versions of ‘Ave verum corpus’ but not a single one of ‘Deus venerunt gentes’The reasons for this are not hard to find.
‘Ave verum’ is short; it can be sung by a standard SATB choir of limited technical ability; its text is judged appropriate for liturgical performance; modern editions are widely available; a decent interpretation is easily achieved; and its familiarity helps perpetuate its popularity.
‘Deus venerunt gentes’ is long a good ten minutes if you sing all four sections; the ranges of its five-part scoring lie less comfortably for modern choirs, and its vocal lines are technically demanding; the harrowing text makes it an unlikely choice for church use; the piece has never been published except as part of a library edition; it takes stamina and capable direction to make a convincing interpretation out of it; and since it hardly ever gets a hearing, only the adventurous know of its existence.
Compare this with the situation in Byrd's lifetime.
Although ‘Ave verum corpus’ was evidently composed well before its publication in the first book of Gradualia (1605), it barely circulated in manuscript (there are only two handwritten sources), and there is no evidence to show that it was singled out for special attention in Catholic households.
Certainly it was untouched by the Anglican church, which had no truck with the feast of Corpus Christi (from which its words come) or the doctrine of transubstantiation, and in any case sanctioned only English-texted music.
‘Deus venerunt gentes’, the elder piece perhaps by two decades, was one of Byrd's most respected works.
Most of the Elizabethan and Jacobean amateurs who collected his music made copies of parts or all of it, and Byrd himself selected it for his first (1589) book of cantiones sacrae, along with pieces of the stature of ‘Ne irascaris’, ‘Tristitia et anxietas’, ‘O quam gloriosum’ and ‘Vigilate’.
To Catholics of the time its text was especially relevant and poignant; Byrd's choice of those first four verses of Psalm Ixxviii (Ixix in English translations) allude to the martyrdom of Edmund Campion and his companions in 1581.
Knowing the circumstances under which it was written, it is hard not to be moved by the urgency, intricacy, skill and spacious breadth of this extraordinary work.
Like so many of Byrd's cantiones sacrae, ‘Deus venerunt gentes’ was not composed for church choirs to sing, and it will be no loss if 20th-century church choirs continue to ignore it.
But no one else should.
All it takes to give this work a decent hearing is five intelligent and compatible singers, a good deal of rehearsal time, sensitive discussion about the best way of tackling the considerable demands both of the words and the huge span of music, and some recording equipment.
This last requirement is indispensable.
Concert halls, unknown to Byrd, are alien to the scale and nature of such works, which correctly belong to small rooms and small audiences.
The microphone, on the other hand, is their best friend.
It can capture the nuances of soft and sensitive voices; it alone can convey the rapport five singers achieve in the bonded intimacy of chamber music-making.
It can be done.
But who does it?
Almost nobody.
On record at least, it is largely choirs that have waved the flag on behalf of Byrd's forgotten motets, none more valiantly than the Choir of New College, Oxford, directed by Edward Higginbottom.
Two albums of cantiones sacrae have already been issued by them (CRD CRD 3420, 3439), and a third is on its way.
Those who recognize the imbalances in the Byrd discography can only applaud their continued advocacy of these profound and arresting works some of Byrd's best music, and therefore among the finest English works of all time.
But who has followed their lead?
Above all, what performers sensitive to the original performing context of this music have dug deep into this seam of riches?
Tallis has been reasonably well served by chamber-scale performances, but Byrd has fared less well.
One longs for more choice, for interpretations that are truly ‘framed to the life of the words’(to use Byrd's phrase) and not bland rehearsals of the notes, for performances that seek to move the listener rather than explore only the music's sonorous surface.
Like all great chamber music, Byrd's cantiones sacrae contain enough substance to keep performers in clover until the end of time.
For all the size of the Byrd discography, we have  barely started to discover them.
A searching question: which comes first, the music or the performing resources?
In the case of Byrd it has almost always been the latter; and this is one reason why the performance practice of Byrd's music is sorely in need of revolution.
In an ideal world one would take a work and ask, ‘What does this music require?’
Instead and this is true of so much performance of pre-Baroque music we start with a ready-made ensemble or choir and ask, ‘What will we sing or record next?’
When there is little room for flexibility, there is always the possibility of compromise.
This cannot be the way forward.
The most imaginative records ever made of English motets from the age of Byrd are the work of Andrew Parrott's Taverner Consort, a group fixed in name but always differently constituted in personnel, the number of singers chosen according to the specific task in hand.
These are records of Tallis (EMI CDC 7 49555 2, CDC 7 49563 2).
When can we hope for Byrd as well?
If the golden age for Byrd's motets has only just begun to dawn, then Byrd's songs are still in their dark ages.
Many have never been recorded, and the only occasion on which you are likely to hear them is when you sing them yourself.
To perform these pieces in the same circumstances as Byrd would have done round a table with friends is to take the quest for authenticity to its logical conclusion.
But not everyone can do this, and it is recordings, not concerts, that best allow others to eavesdrop on this delightful way of making music.
Dark ages; but there are a few performers who take these pieces seriously, and their beacons light the path for others to follow.
Michael Chance and members of Fretwork give highly refined performances of three Byrd consort songs in the course of their 1988 ‘Armada’ programme (Virgin vc 7 90722–2).
A striking record of Elizabethan Christmas anthems by Red Byrd and the Rose Consort of Viols explores what may well have been the raw sonorities of Tudor vocal timbre (Amon Ra CD-SAR 46).
And the Hilliard Ensemble with London Baroque have produced Songs of Sundrie Natures, a whole record of Byrd's English-texted domestic music, sacred as well as secular, using period pronunciation (EMI CDC 7 47961 2).
If some of these performances leave a little to be desired, it is largely on account of the issue that dogs all solo-voice performances of Byrd's vocal music, Latin-texted or English: his music is too difficult to sing well on only limited familiarity, even by the best of musicians.
That comment needs some amplification.
First, the poetry of Byrd's songs cannot be taken lightly.
It is far easier to characterize a madrigal by Morley than it is to sing a song by Byrd, partly because singers respond more intuitively and quickly to Morley's text-illustrative music than to Byrd's learned (but still rhetorical) polyphonic word-setting, partly because a Morley text will often be a chain of discrete moments where a Byrd text is more complex in syntax and in the connection of its ideas.
Second, Byrd's wide-ranging and extended melodic lines are hard to sing, and harder still for a consort of solo voices to keep constantly in tune, above all when using the vowel-sounds of the past.
Third -and this is true of any chamber music it takes only one indifferent member of an ensemble to weaken the effect of a whole performance.
To do justice to Byrd's songs an ensemble needs technique, stamina, teamwork, an intelligent understanding of the words and of the goal of the piece.
This is asking a great deal.
Small wonder that choral performances, firmly shaped by a conductor, are the prevailing image of Byrd's sacred music, and that few solo-voice groups have tackled the secular repertory, let alone the motets.
Congratulations, then, to the Hilliard Ensemble for attempting Songs of Sundrie Natures.
I sympathize with the problems they encounter: the technical and artistic demands of works as long, concentrated and exposed as ‘Turn our captivity’, sung in unfamiliar pronunciation by solo voices in a dry acoustic, no doubt on limited rehearsal within a busy and varied professional schedule, and with the producer's red light flashing.
I have been in the same circumstances myself, and it is no fun.
But it is what we owe to Byrd, and it can only get easier the longer we spend with this daunting but rewarding music.
When Byrd's songs have finally been recognized for what they are, there will at last be a recording of ‘O dear life, when may be it be, sung to its complete text all eight stanzas of Sir Philip Sidney's agonizingly erotic poem by five brave and talented singers who know exactly what they are doing.
For 20 minutes the air will gradually charge, as Sidney's fantastical imaginary seduction acts itself out through the medium of Byrd's music, so neutral on the surface but so supremely calculated to carry such a sensual text.
No instruments, no ornaments, the dynamics never rising above the level of quiet conversation; everything done through the musical enunciation of the words, the five singers working in closest accord.
I once tried to convince producers that it would work, but they all declared it too long, too repetitive, too esoteric.
Some day they will eat their words.
It is easy to forget that Byrd's music possesses a chronology no less than Bach's or Beethoven's, and that chronology makes a solid basis for good programming.
Wittingly or unwittingly, some records have explored segments of Byrd's career, but there are many possibilities for going further.
Pre-1575 Byrd is unevenly represented on record, and to experience its various facets you will have to assemble many scattered performances.
A collaborative venture between a choir, a keyboard player and a consort each of viols and solo voices would do this neglected area a great service.
(Roll on the day when more performers join forces to make mixed recitals of Byrd's music.)
A larger proportion of middle-period Byrd has seen the light of day the songs always excepted but never in recitals that attempt to plot stylistic progress.
With Joseph Kerman's The masses and motets of William Byrd (London, 1981) in one hand and New College's two records of cantiones sacrae in the other you can plan a strategy for listening in which the chronology gradually unfolds.
You can do the same using Oliver Neighbour's The consort and keyboard music of William Byrd (London, 1978) and the various records many now sadly deleted that together achieve a more nearly comprehensive coverage of those two repertories.
But you will not find any record that sets out to tell the chronological story to you.
With later Byrd things are different.
The three Masses and the Gradualia have been championed a great deal in recent years, sometimes meshed with one another in the ‘liturgical reconstruction’ manner, although there are reasons for believing that Byrd did not have that in mind.
In particular I value the record by the Dutch ensemble Quink (Etcetera KTC 1031), which starts with the Mass for Four Voices, ends with four pieces from Gradualia, and in a miscellaneous central group finds space for one of Byrd's contributions to Sir William Leighton's Tears of 1614, the delightful ‘Come, help, O God’.
Three much earlier pieces, two songs and an anthem, make up the rest of the programme; a selection from the 1611 Psalmes, Songs and Sonnets would have made more thematic sense.
As solo-voice performances they leave room for refinement, but for intimacy of performance style and chronological near-integrity, this record gives other would-be Byrd performers something to ponder.
What Byrd needs, of course, is a co-ordinated complete edition on record.
No other prolific composer before Monteverdi could bear such intense, all-embracing scrutiny; but then, who before Byrd single-handedly achieved such variety coupled with such consistently high quality? 1993 is past, but there is always 2023.
It is not too early to be planning a project as complex and elaborate as this one.
Perhaps the year in which the Byrd discography reaches its centenary should also be the year in which the record-collector, no less than subscribers to The Byrd Edition, can proudly survey a well-filled shelf and say, ‘This is the full measure of William Byrd.’
PERFORMING MATTERS Christopher Page The English a cappella renaissance
In memory of Professor Howard Mayer Brown
Most writers of whatever kind know what it is to write and to discover in the process that someone else seems to be standing by.
It may be a willing ally, or a reluctant opponent, from the past.
It may be someone who is a little of both.
As a result, the article turns into a conversation with him or her.
Even in happier circumstances than these, such writing is a tribute to the enduring influence of the silent partner in the dialogue.
During the preparation of this article Professor Howard Mayer Brown was constantly in my mind; indeed, its title alludes to a phrase coined by him ‘The English a cappella heresy’ The news of his death came only days after the final typescript had been submitted to Early music.
In 1979 a French guidebook described Great Britain as ‘the only place in the world which allows you to depart from this planet without really leaving it.’
In 1993, the year that brings an open market to Europe, the European nations seem to take a similar view of Britain, regarding it as a strange and ultimately negligible country.
Consider, as an illustration, a map recently produced by the Centre de Musique Medievale in Paris (illus.1).
Drawn with the ‘open’ Europe of 1993 in mind, it shows how some major cities of medieval Europe were bound together in a network of trade and travel.
Nobody came to Britain, it would seem, whose only important town in the Middle Ages appears to have been the seaside resort of Brighton.
How strange, then, that England has become a world power in the performance of medieval and Renaissance music (to speak of no other) during the last 25 years.
There may be more early-music ensembles of international repute based in Southern England than anywhere else in the world.
Although these ensembles are undoubtedly very varied, it is perhaps the professional mixed choirs and the vocal consorts, usually performing a cappella, who dominate the Europeans' sense that there is a distinctively English force at work in the early music revival.
There are certainly some distinguished vocal groups in Europe and America, including the Ensemble Clement Janequin and the Ensemble Organum (in France; the French have also just announced the formation of ‘le choeur medieval’ at the Centre de Musique Medievale in Paris), together with the Huelgas Ensemble (Netherlands) and Anonymous 4 (America, among other groups).
However, the critics who review recordings of early music in Europe find, time and time again, that there is a distinctive tradition anglaise or a tradición británica behind a cappella recordings by English singers, and they are well aware how valuable this tradition is and how it is sustained:
Perhaps the English do not know what an immense treasure  they possess in having maintained the choral tradition in colleges and churches, since it provides an unsurpassable musical training, an important number of truly fine choirs, and, finally, the possibility to experience (and for the listener, to enjoy) repertories that the long-suffering Spanish enthusiast scarcely knows since they are not performed [in Spain].
This critic apparently knows that it is a birthright of every English person to enter a cathedral in winter and hear the sound of voices, rendered seraphic by the spacious acoustic, singing to almost nobody.
Indeed, it has already been said in the pages of Early music that ‘few [English]people realize that on almost every day of the school term 35 professional and semi-professional choirs sing for at least 45 minutes in our cathedrals and chapels in the very tightest form of musical discipline’.
Among lovers of early music, however, it is recognized throughout the world that there is not just a choral tradition in England but also (to quote a French reviewer) a nouvelle école anglaise de chant.
I would paraphrase this as ‘an English a cappella renaissance’
This a cappella tradition of singing is flourishing.
Choirs and vocal consorts which have achieved international recognition include the choirs of Westminster, Winchester and Worcester cathedrals, the choirs of King's College, Clare College, Trinity College and St John's College, Cambridge, the choirs of New College and Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, as well as The Tallis Scholars, The Sixteen, The Taverner Choir, The Consort of Musicke Madrigal Ensemble, The Hilliard Ensemble, The Orlando Consort and Gothic Voices.
During the last 30 years the rise of an international market for recordings and the renewed interest in earlier repertory have done much to enhance the English drive towards higher choral standards which began (it might be claimed) at King's College, Cambridge, in the 1920's.
In recent years the range of early music drawn into this a cappella renaissance has broadened.
Research by distinguished musicologists in Britain and America has demonstrated the predominantly (but by no means exclusively) a cappella tradition of liturgical polyphonic singing during the later Middle Ages and the early Renaissance; English choirs have accordingly begun to record 15th- and 16th-century Masses.
This was repertory that, as recently as the 1970s, was recorded by some Continental ensembles with voices doubled or sometimes even replaced by lutes, trumpets, fiddles and other instruments.
During the last decade even the repertory of medieval polyphonic song has been absorbed into the a cappella tradition.
This development, in which my own ensemble Gothic Voices has been involved, and which has resulted in all-vocal recordings of songs by Guillaume de Machaut and Guillaume Dufay, for example, is one of the more obvious signs of the strength and voracity of the choral tradition.
I now wish to propose a theory about the performance of medieval and Renaissance music.
Some (especially readers in Europe and America) will find it idiosyncratic and perhaps even objectionable, but I believe that it is consistent with the work of a small forum of English reviewers, scholars and performers whose work will be discussed in due course below.
As far as I am aware, this theory has found very little formal or scholarly expression, although it lies below the surface of much that has been informally expressed by directors of English ensembles and by others, both in conversation and in the various kinds of writing generated by the commercial music business.
The purpose of this article is to examine the things which variously weaken and strengthen that theory's claim to truth.
Let us call it the ‘English discovery’ theory.
It begins from the premiss that English singers performing a cappella are currently able to give exceptional performances of medieval and Renaissance polyphony from England and the Franco-Flemish area because the ability of the best English singers to achieve a purity and precision instilled by the discipline of repeated a cappella singing in the choral institutions is singularly appropriate to the transparency and intricate counterpoint of the music.
From that premiss we proceed to the theory that, in certain respects, and especially in matters relating to accuracy of tuning and ensemble, these performances represent a particularly convincing postulate about the performing priorities of the original singers.
I recognize that this theory is a quintessentially Protestant one.
To claim that Britain has nurtured something in a matter ultimately pertaining to worship (the choral singing of cathedral and chapel) which is purified and controlled beyond anything possessed by Catholic Europe, which is purged of excessive artifice and rhetoric (Continental reviewers consistently find English a cappella performances impassive) and whose excellence gives Britain a mission these are among the ideas that have been the principal source of British national identity since the Act of Union in 1707 and were a foundation stone of English identity long before.
Something ancient is surfacing here, in other words, and it is tempting to believe that some French critics, especially those who are hostile to the English a cappella tradition (to    whom we shall return), can hear in English choral recordings the voice of their ancient Protestant adversary all too clearly.
(It is striking that the one major Catholic foundation in this field, Westminster Cathedral, has already been dubbed ‘le plus latin des choeurs anglais’ by a French reviewer.
It would be fascinating to know exactly what that phrase really means to the French.)
I have referred several times to the relatively small number of performers, critics and scholars who have nurtured the a cappella renaissance.
Indeed, the a cappella early-music scene in England might be compared to the Whitehall Civil Service, being sustained almost entirely by graduates from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
Some years ago Ronald Woodley remarked on BBC Radio 3 that the sound of some consort singing in Britain is ‘the musical equivalent of Oxford English’(the required dialect for all Whitehall bureaucrats).
He might have expanded the scope of this intriguing remark.
Consider the journal Early music.
Although founded by a New Zealander, it subsequently passed to the editorship of Nicholas Kenyon, a history graduate from Balliol College, Oxford, and a distinguished music critic with trans-Atlantic experience.
In 1992 Kenyon left the journal to become Controller of BBC Radio 3 (more Oxford English); the delegates of Oxford University Press (note the publisher) then appointed as his successor Tess Knighton, who is a graduate in music from Clare College, Cambridge, was subsequently a research fellow of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, and is currently a lecturer at King's College, Cambridge.
Among the most influential scholars and reviewers who have assisted the a cappella renaissance in recent years are, in addition to Tess Knighton, Daniel Leech-Wilkinson (sometime graduate at Clare College, Cambridge, and research fellow of Churchill College) and John Milsom (who has held lectureships at New College and Christ Church, both in Oxford and both choral foundations).
At the time when Ronald Woodley described an English a cappella recording as ‘the musical equivalent of Oxford English’ he was a lecturer at Christ Church, Oxford.
We turn to the performers and find that the situation is much the same.
The reputation of British singers in the field of early music is maintained by about 20 principal musicians, most of whom have some Oxbridge connection.
It would be tiresome (and perhaps invidious) to list them.
It would include, for example, virtually all the English countertenors who have enjoyed successful professional careers since the time of Alfred Deller.
The same Oxbridge colleges figure over and over again in the biographies of these and many other singers.
As for the directors of early-music ensembles, it is well known that David Munrow and Christopher Hogwood first met in Cambridge.
(All Munrow's singers in the early years had experience in cathedrals or Oxbridge chapels.)
We might add Peter Phillips (St John's College, Oxford), Andrew Parrott (Merton College, Oxford) and Harry Christophers (Magdalen College, Oxford), to name no others.
Virtually all the cathedral choirs whose recordings are known abroad are directed by former Oxbridge students of one kind or another, most of them former organ scholars.
Outstanding among these at present are David Hill (St John's College, Cambridge) and James O'Donnell (Jesus College, Cambridge).
Here we have an extraordinary influence wielded by two similarly structured and (as it must seem to many) identical educational institutions, neither of which offers anything close to a Continental conservatory.
Although there are university choirs in France and (particularly) in Spain, this situation is not paralleled in any other country.
To the extent that Europeans know of this Oxbridge dominance, my experience is that they regard it with some satisfaction (they have generally heard of Oxford and Cambridge), but that their satisfaction changes to complacency when they reflect upon what they believe to be the uniquely class-ridden structure of English society.
Indeed, it is tempting to suppose that the appeal of English a cappella groups in Europe (not to mention in America) is that the sound of Oxbridge chapel voices is so very ‘classy’ in every sense of the word.
Anyone who doubts this need only glance at a profile of Peter Phillips, director of The Tallis Scholars, published in The New Yorker:
Peter Phillips is English.
He attended Winchester College, and went on to St John's College, Oxford.
He wears blue fawn vests, with striped shirts and club ties and gray flannels, and he is the possessor of the single most beautiful pair of handmade shoes and complementary silk-and-cashmere socks in the history of the early-music revival…
Peter Phillips began this year to write a shrewd and passionate column on cricket for the London Spectator…settling into a back pew,[he]said, ‘Oh, my word, England played so badly this year…’
I do not know whether the director of The Tallis Scholars was gratified to find himself presented in The New Yorker as an American stereotype of the classy Englishman with a dandyish dress sense, a love of cricket, a public school education leading to Oxford, and a colloquial idiom with a touch of P. G. Wodehouse.
What is certain is that there is some truth in the portrait: the director of this rapturously successful English a cappella ensemble did  go to Winchester and St John's, Oxford, and does write a column about cricket.
And let no one imagine that only ‘foreigners’ are aware of the inherent classiness of the English cathedral and chapel choirs.
Consider, for example, the cover-picture of a recording by the choir of Trinity College, Cambridge; bearing the title ‘Glorious Trinity’ the photograph shows one of the college gate-houses and the chapel (illus.2).
As artfully devised as any 19th-century print to convey an impression of grand scale, the photograph and title together imply that the voices of the choir are a sound-portrait of the wealthiest college in Cambridge: a realm of gilded statuary, lofty pinnacles and heraldic shields.
Whatever their original backgrounds may be, many of the critics, directors and performers of medieval and Renaissance music in Britain form a class.
They have been encouraged to be suspicious of whatever may be ‘unsound’(a favourite Oxbridge concept); they owe a sentimental and intellectual allegiance to the same few places; barely one of them has a ‘regional’ accent.
I am not attacking the intellectual and musical meritocracy of Oxford and Cambridge for I do not wish to become embroiled in a political argument.
Readers will come to their own conclusions on that count.
My purpose here is merely to suggest that the English choral tradition, with its reliance upon young voices' and its tinge of Protestant Englishness, turns the memories and dreams of a social class into sound.
During the 1970s a forum of scholar-critics gradually became established in England.
These scholars continue to review recordings in a highly influential way and every professional early-music ensemble knows that its work will eventually be referred to their public judgement.
The influence of this critical forum has been exerted, above all, in the pages of Early music, a journal which was founded in London in 1973 to build a bridge between performers and scholars and which has been uniquely successful in doing so.
The review section devoted to recordings guarantees that Early music is consulted by many professional performers, including the directors of ensembles who may not have the time or inclination to read such journals as the Bäsler Jahrbuch fur historische Musikpraxis or Performance practice review.
The reviews published in Gramophone, a British publication with a vast and international readership, have also been influential; in the field of medieval and Renaissance music its regular reviewers are much the same as those in Early music.
All have doctorates in musicology from either Cambridge or Oxford; two are currently associated with King's College, Cambridge (where the wellsprings of the English a cappella renaissance are to be found), and one has taught for several Oxford colleges that are also medieval choral foundations.
It might be argued that the scholar-CD reviewer is a creature distinctive to the English publications Early music and Gramophone, at least when viewed in terms of the European scene.
Consider, for example, some of the major CD magazines currently published in Europe, including Répertoire, Diapason and Le monde de la musique in France, and CD Compact, Scherzo and Ritmo in Spain.
These journals contain some incisive reviews, notably by Philippe Demeure, Olivier Opdebeeck, Francis Albou and José Carlos Cabello; however, hardly any of their reviews are by university-based musicologists.
(It might be argued, of course, that Spain did not have any ‘university-based musicologists’ before the late 1970s; until that time many of the investigators in this field were trained as Jesuits.)
In France and Spain, therefore, notices of medieval and Renaissance music on record are usually written by critics who may have studied the historical performance of the repertory in question less than the performers whose work is being reviewed.
This is rarely the case with the reviews published in Early music or Gramophone, some of whose reviewers have served as musicological advisers for prominent recording projects both in Europe and in England.
The French and Spanish critics rarely seem to have firm convictions about matters of performance practice (although they usually feel strongly about the character  and quality of the performance), and we may suppose that they would regard such convictions as an impediment to the essentially journalistic nature of their enterprise.
It is particularly striking that some of these reviewers, when discussing recordings by English ensembles, praise what they assume to be the impeccable musicological credentials of what they are hearing, so clear does it seem to European eyes that early-music performance in England is conducted under the vigilant eyes of scholars.
Through a series of reviews reaching back more than a decade, British scholar-critics have encouraged an approach to early-music performance that reflects the priorities of their academic training.
This approach gives primacy to facts, to evidence and to sources, so that the line between knowledge and speculation remains clear: it values imagination but tends to marginalize whatever seems fanciful or eccentric; it is deeply wary of any popularizing impulse while remaining committed to the broadest possible dissemination of its characteristic ideas and enthusiasms.
These reviews have produced several long-term effects.
A number of them have insistently expressed concern about the improvisatory material that many performers (usually instrumentalists) have interwoven with the music notated in the sources of medieval monophonic song.
The logical extension of this approach is to propose (as I did in 1987) that medieval singers regarded an a cappella performance as ideal for their most serious and worthwhile songs the High Style lyrics of the troubadours and trouvères.
In part, no doubt , this resistance to improvisation may reflect the essentially literate and punctilious nature of trained musicianship in Britain.
(Notice how, in a publicity photograph issued by the Tallis Scholars, most of the singers have their eyes cast down to their copies — see illus.3.)
That resistance may also derive strength from a suspicion that improvisation in this context merely  exploits our limited knowledge of medieval musical practices in order to establish a creative freedom for modern performers who are denied it in virtually every other kind of ‘serious’ music in the Western tradition.
(This suspicion is very characteristic of British scholars and critics trained in the literate and punctilious tradition mentioned above.)
It may also be proposed, however, that some influential critics writing in England since 1980 have been particularly swift to recognize how the modern concert situation and the CD recital can draw performers of medieval and Renaissance music into realms of fantasy and gimmickry.
Here is John Milsom reviewing some recordings of medieval monophonic song:
Insecurity must have something to do with it an insecurity about the musical self-sufficiency of absolute melody, so foreign to our modern western way of musical thinking, compounded by the performer's fear of standing before an audience with no instrument and no accompaniment to hide behind or use as a prop…
Listen to almost any modern performance of troubadour or trouvère song…and you will find yourself in a sound-world of instrumental accompaniment that is more or less make-believe.
You will find, too, that much of the invented music which is wrapped around the perceived nakedness of those song-melodies uses textures and harmonic colours that have little or nothing to do with real medieval polyphony.
There are surprisingly few recordings from Europe or America to suggest that this important issue has been raised and discussed.
The modern performers' impulse to ‘orchestrate’ medieval and Renaissance music is also revealed in the various instrumentations used to perform the lines of medieval secular chansons.
Since at least the later 1970s, perhaps in reaction to the flamboyant (and highly successful) practices of the Munrow era, many critics writing in England have suspected that conspicuous and varied orchestrations of medieval and Renaissance music reflect performers' failure of confidence in the variety and quality of the music they are performing.
Here, for example, is John Milsom again, this time reviewing a Spanish recording of villancicos:
Some of the arrangements are pure Walt Disney: Riu riu chiu opens with a wonderful thwanging of superimposed 4ths on massed psalteries, followed by a relatively straightforward rendition of the song itself on panpipes and recorders, variously punctuated by the sound of castanets, triangles and whistles.
All in all, not everyone's idea of authenticity; nonetheless, the record might make a jolly Christmas present for children.
This is a severe example of a kind of reviewing that has consistently created a line of demarcation between British and European (or American) taste.
Two contrasting assessments of Jordi Savall's work with the Spanish ensemble Hespèrion XX, recently published in the November 1992 issue of Early music, are instructive in this respect.
Savall favours variegated instrumental colours used in a flexible, sometimes improvisatory manner, and the first reviewer declares that he has ‘substantial’ reservations about this approach (p.657).
The second reviewer, however, finds that ‘what is really impressive about Hespèrion XX's performances…is the vigour of the instrumental contribution’(p.687).
One of the critics concerned is the director of a choir in the best Oxbridge tradition; the other is a British composer who finds the Iberian peninsula so attractive that he has gone to live there.
Nobody, I imagine, will have any difficulty placing each opinion with the appropriate critic.
Another Early music reviewer has criticized an Austrian performer (much admired in France) for draping a ‘vast and horrid panoply of obtrusive instrumental noises’ over the music of Johannes Ciconia.
(The reviewer adds that it is ‘high time’ the director of the ensemble in question ‘took some notice’of such criticisms a clear indication, if any were needed, of the Early music reviewers' sense that reviews address performers directly and can even be used to call them to account.)
Once again, an initially English impulse of research has proposed and substantially validated an a cappella approach which seems to offer one kind of solution to this problem, but while the evidence for such an approach now seems to be strong it is important to clarify what has taken place, at least as far as the secular polyphonic song repertories of the Middle Ages are concerned.
It is a theory whose plausibility and aesthetic attractiveness in England was considerable at a time (the later 1970s) when the English choral tradition was flourishing and when many sensed the need for a change of direction after the loss of David Munrow; by a kind of happy accident it has proved to be consistent with a much wider range of evidence than was initially suspected.
It is another sign of the long-term influence wielded by English scholar-reviewers that England has been swifter than some European countries to evolve away from the multiculturalism of the 1960s.
That was a time when many popular musicians, and some ‘early’ musicians, regarded the instruments of the entire world as their province.
(Attempts by the Arts Council of Great Britain to ensure that a percentage of certain grants are spent on ‘ethnic’ projects have produced little result in this field.)
Some recent recordings by European ensembles use non-Western instruments, especially various forms of percussion, and draw inspiration from non-Western practices.
This was once the case in Britain.
Musica Reservata, perhaps the most influential (and certainly the most controversial) ensemble that Britain has ever produced in this field, began in London's Hampstead during the 1960s, when record shops were stocked with ‘folk’ and ‘ethnic’music; today the heady perfume of those years can still be caught in Tony Bingham's emporium of rare and unusual musical instruments in that quarter of the city (illus.4).
Jeremy Montagu, an early member of Musica Reservata, is a leading authority on ‘world’ instruments; David Munrow collected them avidly; John Sothcott, a founder member of Musica Reservata, always wanted to play in a Bulgarian folk ensemble and his contribution to one of Reservata's most notorious recordings was inspired by a chance encounter with a record of Romanian music in a Hampstead shop.
In recent years several British ensembles have begun to draw upon an ‘exotic’ instrumentarium of this kind once again, but they have been marginalized to some degree.
One of the ensembles in question has ebulliently mocked this process of marginalization in a highly original publicity photograph (illus.6).
Compare the much more formal and conventional pose of The Tallis Scholars (illus.3).
It is well known that many of the professional singers of early music in Britain were trained in cathedral choir and in Oxbridge chapels.
Their work receives a mixed reception in Europe.
As we have seen, the Spanish often speak of the English choral tradition with admiration and have received with generosity and warmth English recordings of music by Iberian masters such as Victoria and Guerrero.
Many French critics admire British choirs in general, and have identified the English a cappella renaissance themselves (the école nouvelle anglais, de chant).
To read further in the French and Spanish CD magazines, however, is to discover that there is some considerable dissatisfaction with this nouvelle école.
The critics who write for these magazines often contrast the supposedly phlegmatic temperament of the Anglo Saxon with the more ‘passionate’ Mediterranean one.
Spanish reviewer writing for El farmaceutico, for example, finds that a recording of Iberian music by an English cathedral choir is somewhat lacking in ‘temper amento mediterráneo, de color, de entusiasmo’.
Gallic reviewers find this British manque de passion   and froideur to be manifest in a sound and a set of stylistic choices.
First, they evoke the quest for a pure timbre without vibrato, a uniformly sustained sound with a constricting effect upon the ability to phrase, and a predilection for uniformly slow tempos.
(This last observation unwittingly evokes the constraints imposed by Oxbridge chapels and by cathedrals whose spacious acoustics may sometimes invite slower speeds and may discourage some kinds of dynamic variation.)
Second, the French critics comment, not always admiringly, upon the general accuracy associated with la pure tradition anglaise.
Since the French have long tended to regard the British as a doggedly upright people rather than an artistically discerning one, a critic in Diapason describes this accuracy in terms of probity (‘voix droites comme la justice’); another, writing in Compact, speaks of performances that are millimetrées, as if they were mathematical exercises.
(The Spanish have also noticed this extremado rigor estilístico.)
One French critic, with a felicitous turn of phrase, has called the result in performance an ‘overwhelming grisaille’.
Perhaps he does not realize that this is exactly the kind of decoration to be found in Eton chapel where the music of the Eton Choirbook was performed (illus.5).
Regardless of whether this critic has inadvertently recommended some English a cappella recordings in the very act of eloquently disparaging them, every listener, both in England and abroad, will know what the phrase ‘overwhelming grisaille’ is intended to convey.
Here is Olivier Opdebeeck writing for Diapason:
one's critical judgement is in despair in the face of the uniformity of these interpretations based entirely upon beauty of sound, whatever the repertory, the composer or the genre of piece might be.
Is it that they do not exert themselves enough (we know that the English work as quickly as they work well)?
A lack of personality on the part of the conductor?
Does it reek of a principle in the general and musical education of the English that any expression of personal feeling touches upon bad taste?
This is very astute.
Before examining it, however, let us agree that it is above all an expression of taste.
National styles in music can be powerful, especially when the listeners of one nation are presented with music so powerfully impressed with what they perceive as the style of another.
Be that as it may, however, there is certainly substance in Opdebeeck's suggestion that les anglais rehearse too quickly.
Many early-music groups in England are required to work in a rapid manner because they do not enjoy the governmental or industrial sponsorship that allows some Continental ensembles to rehearse in a more leisurely (and in a more experimental) fashion.
The situation is not desperate although it should be remedied because many Insular   musicians, judged in relation to their European counterparts, possess a remarkable ability to produce an accurate performance virtually at sight, a skill acquired by many singers during years of preparing services under pressure in cathedrals and Oxbridge chapels.
This kind of ability is both envied and disparaged by many Continental musicians, and it cannot be doubted that professional English singers often perform music which they have not had time to ‘learn’ in any sense of the term that a European singer would accept.
The question of the role of the director, le chef; is a more complex one.
In a recent article Poppy Holden has reflected upon the work of several major English choirs specializing in early music and suggests that some of their directors would regard this as the ideal way to work:
get the best, most intelligent and well educated singers available, with the cleanest vocal style, tell them nothing about how you want the performance to go, start them off and lo! the composer speaks through their innocent mouths.
This is remarkably close to the situation envisaged by Opdebeeck for the English a cappella scene, one in which directors do not (or cannot) impose their own musical personality, leading to performances which sound beautiful because the members of the choir have been excellently prepared by their training in the choral tradition but which all sound the same.
However, I must confess that I do not find this to be a serious problem at least, not yet.
These are still early days in which, it might be argued, the professional choirs and vocal consorts in England are engaged in a quest to discover how much ‘interpretation’ the various early-music repertories actually require when a high level of accuracy in tuning and ensemble is guaranteed them.
So far they have achieved by international consent beauty of sound; that is already a notable accomplishment.
Much of their repertory is being recorded for the first time (or very nearly so), and it may be that some current recordings will sound exploratory, even tentative, to future generations who will have the privilege to take things further.
Until very recently, the English a cappella ensembles involved in this work have had almost no competition and they are therefore ready to benefit from any new sounds or new musical ideas that choirs and vocal consorts in other countries can produce for them to hear and admire.
We might also add that critics whose judgement is no less to be respected than Olivier Opdebeeck's are able to discern a contrasting ‘personality’ in different performances of the same piece by different English choirs, even when a high percentage of the singers is the same in each case.
The differences are there for an experienced ear to find, as many reviewers of recordings by the institutional choirs of cathedrals and Oxbridge chapels will surely admit with particular alacrity.
In an essay on the early-music revival in Europe and America, Howard Mayer Brown noted that ‘many English musicians…even today react strongly against what they see as the serious limitations of the English church music tradition…
’ That is true, and throughout the years of the a cappella renaissance there has been an undercurrent of critical dissatisfaction, stirred into existence by critics wary of complacency.
Here, for example, is Daniel Leech-Wilkinson reviewing in Early music an a cappella recording of chansons by Guillaume de Machaut (a recording in which I can declare a special interest):
the sound of Gothic Voices is altogether more familiar than  that of the Taverner Consort, so much so that at times the listener can forget that this extraordinary music originated in 14th-century France, worlds away from the Oxbridge tradition.
In the same issue, reviewing a recording of medieval English music by the Hilliard Ensemble, Leech-Wilkinson remarks:
As to the performance, the increasing quantity of ‘voices only’ work by the Hilliard Ensemble and others gives rise to several questions about the performance style and vocal colour which these groups consciously or not have adopted.
Did the best medieval singers sound at all like modern lay-clerks, for example?
The question in the last sentence cannot be answered, of course; it is imponderable and we can go no further with it than to agree that it is useful to expose such uncertainties now and then.
We seem to be on firmer ground, however, if we suggest that a singer who draws upon a training in the English choral tradition will not readily perform in a way that is bogus, trivial or solipsistic, for the choral tradition is none of those things; it embodies the results of countless individual strivings for the best results in conformity to a communal discipline.
Until quite recently the outstanding problem with many recordings of music before 1600 has been that they reveal the lack of tradition behind their vocal and instrumental practice and therefore suffer from an inevitable slide towards solipsism.
A modern lay-clerk, providing he is a sensitive and thoughtful musician, should sing Pérotin, Machaut, Tallis or Monteverdi like a lay-clerk.
This is a question of authenticity in a certain sense of the word; let us pursue it a little further, keeping Leech Wilkinson's comments in mind.
Can we agree with him that the music of Guillaume de Machaut (or of any other medieval composer for that matter) originated ‘worlds away from the Oxbridge tradition’(my italics)?
Not quite, I suggest.
The collegiate and cathedral tradition in which many English singers received their training is comparable in some respects to the context in which medieval (and Renaissance) singers received theirs.
It is one in which a repertory with a large a cappella element is cultivated on a daily basis by men and (usually) boys, all of them relatively young, who hold positions in a cathedral or chapel (often for a relatively short time) for which there is much competition.
They are singers for whom singing and rehearsal are constant duties that are not always (to say the least) touched by concerns of high art.
The prevailing notion among them is one of a versatile, professional competence, constantly kept in trim by a cappella performance, that can readily be turned to music more ambitious and enjoyable when liturgical duties are over.
The process of rehearsal draws upon a training which often reaches back into the singer's boyhood, which provides him with the directed quickness of mind and the vocal stamina he requires, and which ensures that the choral results are generally quite passable and are sometimes excellent despite the constant absences, deputizations, hirings and firings that always threaten the homogeneity of what can be achieved.
It is a tradition where instrumentalists apart from organists are apt to seem like a different breed of musician altogether.
I tentatively suggest that this is, in some measure, the world of the medieval and early Renaissance singer of polyphony, and the implications of this resemblance, whatever they may be, deserve a reflective study to themselves.
For one distinguished American musicologist, the decision of some English scholars and musicians to draw the secular polyphony of Machaut and Dufay into the English a cappella tradition constitutes an ‘English a cappella heresy’, but that phrase may sound rather strangely in a British ear; it appears to imply that songs by Machaut and Dufay, for example, are best performed within the tradition of the ‘early-music group, employing instruments reconstructed on the basis of meagre evidence while using musical techniques which draw upon no established tradition of pedagogy and which retain a tinge of 19605 experimentalism and superficial multiculturalism.
That will not always seem a preferable alternative to the a cappella practice of English cathedrals and Oxbridge chapels, nurtured in a context (the daily preparation of liturgical services) requiring certain skills that we may imagine any medieval chapel singer would recognize as his own, whatever the damage that the 19th century may have done to ‘the English cathedral style’ and its historical continuity.
Earlier in this article I referred to the ‘English discovery’ theory which underlies the a cappella renaissance, and I briefly defined the musical and stylistic qualities which, in the judgement of some, give English singers their eminence in this field.
I wish to return to those qualities and define them in a more personal way, and with the help of a fine Middle English word: clanness, or ‘cleanness’.
As used in the 14th century by the English poet of Sir Gawayn and the Green Knight (a man who knew the world of courts and chapels well), clanness is the quality of something that is pure (like a pearl) or of fine and precise workmanship (like an elaborate goblet).
Clanness can characterize the vessels used in the Eucharist or the goblets which serve men and women of exalted dignity in their banquets; it blurs the edges of   earthly things with a nimbus of heaven, in other words, and yet it can make what is celestial seem clearer to human sense.
This ‘cleanness’ was not an exclusively English taste (even if it is elaborated for us in the poems of an exceptional writer), for Sir Gawayn and the Green Knight is outstandingly ‘French’among the English romances and gives a superbly articulate voice to international courtly values at a time when art-historians begin to speak of an International Style in the visual arts.
I believe that many English singers of the a cappella renaissance have captured this quality.
Let us sum up.
I have suggested in this article that an influential forum of scholars, critics and performers in England has felt a pervasive desire to direct a good deal of medieval and Renaissance music away from the ‘medieval/Renaissance group’(a tradition which has come to seem increasingly hollow, even bogus, to members of the forum) and towards the best voices to emerge from the chapels attached to the Oxbridge colleges where, almost without exception, the members of the forum received their higher education.
This ‘pervasive desire, which has not been consistently felt (and which certainly has not been enough to guarantee that every professional a cappella ensemble is equally admired by every scholar-critic in England) can be interpreted in various ways.
In part, no doubt , it has been instilled by the critics’ informed taste for early music and their sense that many performers have trivialized it while ignoring, in the process, a growing body of evidence for the a cappella performance of medieval and of (much) Renaissance Mass music, of late-medieval polyphonic songs from France and Spain, and of medieval monophonic lyrics of the most serious and ambitious kind.
There are other forces at work, however.
The ‘pervasive desire’ for a cappella solutions has been impelled by the musical excellences made possible by the choral institutions (all tinged with a Protestant Englishness that most members of the forum probably imagine that they have never espoused).
Richard Taruskin has suggested that some initial American resistance to the a cappella theory of chanson performance in the Middle Ages was inevitable because American ensembles of the 1970s possessed very few singers who could be imagined giving a satisfactory demonstration of such a performing technique.
The situation in England was quite different at this time, and illustrates the principle that the horizons of what scholars are prepared to believe about musical performance in the past can be set by what their contemporaries among performers are able to provide.
The drift to a cappella solutions might also be interpreted as a reaction to the individualism and subjectivism of the 1960s, both of which have lingered so long in the performance of medieval and (some) Renaissance music.
Time and time again the reviewers in Early music have attacked ideas and suppositions of a kind that characterize much modern culture but which were strengthened in the 1960s: that one should be allowed to do what one wishes without the interference of authority; that every kind of self-expression is equally valid because it is self-expression, and so on.
The list might easily be extended.
Almost alone in Europe, the Early music critics have scorned the triviality and self-indulgence that can so easily spring from this subjectivism; perhaps without realizing it, they have correspondingly sought to direct the music they love towards the musical tradition of cathedrals and chapels.
Certain musical ideals are often associated with the early music revival, especially a ‘clean, light sound without vibrato, purged of 19th-century romantic gestures.
What makes the study of the English choral renaissance so fascinating is that these ideals have arisen there in ways that complicate (but in no way confute) the argument of Richard Taruskin and others who regard them as a projection of certain 20th-century musical ideas and tastes.
The increasing prominence of a cappella repertory in the choral institutions and the punctilious singing it requires, the marked prominence of younger singers with clearer, straighter voices (principally men of pre-marital age, able to accept the low salaries offered to lay-clerks, albeit for brief periods only), the choirmasters’ determination to raise standards by producing clearer textures in resonant buildings, the pervasive influence of boy trebles singing in high registers upon the whole choral sound these are factors that may all have their place in Taruskin's stimulating argument but might also be regarded as vigorously independent of it.