

NEWS…
NEWS…
Picking up the pieces
IT WAS NOT an ordinary aircraft collection.
It was the ‘rarest of the rare’ combining aircraft with the aviation history of both World Wars.
Aircraft which were collected with such discrimination and taste, which were restored using the most scrupulous of standards and which were displayed for us and our children to enjoy at the Tamiami Airport near Miami, Florida.
The collection now lies in a mush of tangled, twisted, torn and tattered wreckage, a victim of Hurricane Andrew .
The pictures look like war photos and the costs will not easily be assessed but the first estimates to repair the damages run between $2.5 and $4 million.
This is solely the monetary aspect of the problem, in terms of time, the damages are projected to take more than 150,000 man hours to repair.
The collection was the life's work of Kermit Weeks, an unassuming, astute, private man who wanted to share his love of aviation and his appreciation for fine aircraft with the world and who did so through his Museum.
Kermit's vision and his sense of what to collect and which project to complete first were impeccable.
I admired what he was doing with his life from afar and I put the museum on my list of places to experience the next time I was in the Miami area.
I am kicking myself that I didn't get there sooner.
Kermit Weeks and Linda Meyers had just returned to Florida from France where Kermit had flown the Week's Solution (an aerobatic type which he had designed) in a competition.
Linda, a very proficient pilot herself, was preparing to enter the Women's Aerobatic Competition in the Solution when the National Championships were to be held in the USA later this month.
In one night, their orderly life was incredibly changed.
Kermit and his staff had been watching Hurricane Andrew as it tore through the Bahamas.
They live in an area of Florida where hurricane watches frequently occur.
Most watches become false alarms; nevertheless, they were buttoning up the collection and making sure that every completed aircraft was hangared.
Their main building was a substantial hangar which was guaranteed to withstand sustained winds of 120mph.
The edifice cannot house the entire collection (about 60 aircraft) any longer and rare treasures, like the recently-purchased Ford Tri-Motor (one of only three flying in the world today) was placed at Homestead Air Force Base (AFB) to be sheltered inside a USAF hangar.
General view of the carnage at the Weeks Air Museum, Tamiami Airport.
The famous storage facility ‘Platinum Hill’ also received damage and can be seen in the background.
The winds in the Bahamas were being reported by the weather service to be at 80mph with gusts to 100mph.
Kermit and his staff watched and waited — they were expecting a blow but they did not or could not comprehend how severe it was to be.
Actually, they were feeling quite secure at the time for the Museum building was hurricane proof, one of the strongest around.
Faith in the building was one of the reasons that seven members of the museum staff chose to weather out the storm there instead of at home.
The staff relaxed, until the building started expanding and contracting — an effect they described as akin to heavy breathing.
They were taken aback as the huge hangar doors blew in and fortunately they made a move to an interior fortified wall just as the roof was torn off and the building collapsed.
They survived the storm unharmed; sadly, the aircraft did not.
A hurricane is a storm of strong circular wind flow which rotates in a counter-clockwise direction.
The winds that were being reported for the hurricane did not include the ground speed that the storm was tracking.
The reported wind speeds gave everyone a false sense of security.
What actually happened is best described by Kermit himself ‘The centre spot is the eye of the hurricane and the winds there are calm.
Other winds rotate around the eye while the storm tracks across the ground.
On the top of the wind circle, the speed of the wind increases to include the tracking speed of the storm.
Likewise, on the bottom of the wind circle, the winds decrease in speed because they are blowing against the flow of the storm's tracking momentum.
For example, if the winds for the storm were given at 100mph and the storm was tracking across the ground at 30mph, the winds at the top of the circle would accelerate to 130mph, while the winds at the bottom of the storm circle would decrease to 70mph because they were blowing against the storm's momentum across the terrain.
It makes perfect sense, simple addition and subtraction, but no one figured the tracking speed into the equation.
The top portion of the storm moved on a track which went directly over Homestead AFB and the Tamiami Airport (the site of the Weeks Museum's fortified hangar).
At the Airport, the gusts were being clocked by the 
tower crew at speeds which exceeded 180mph.
The wind speed probably went higher (unofficially, winds were clocked in excess of 210mph) but when the tower operators clocked a gust at 185mph, they felt it was prudent to descend the steps to ground level and abandon their post and their instruments.
Power and telephone failures occurred between 4 and 5am cutting off communications.
Kermit had watched some of the storm from his patio, only moving inside when debris started flying.
His home sustained some damage, but mostly remained intact.
When daylight dawned, Kermit drove off to the hangar expecting to find it standing.
‘I fully expected to see a hangar out there and there wasn't one’, lamented Kermit as we looked through the many pictures he had brought with him to the Reno Air Races.
He had been immersed in the clean up work for nearly a month and he wanted to be with friends who restore and collect aircraft and who could empathise more fully than most with him about the size of the task and who also might offer some constructive ideas ‘At first I was in shock, it was too much to comprehend’, shared Kermit.
‘Now it is nearly a month later and we are formulating our plan’.
It is apparent that the solution will be a tediously slow one to implement.
First, there isn't much left of the building and second, some of the aircraft pieces were lost or had blown more than a mile away.
(A newly restored B-17 fuselage, which was waiting to be mated to its wings for painting b 
Douglas B-23 Dragon N4000B was stored outside the Museum building (inset 1990), it was blown a considerable distance.
‘We tried to recover all the pieces that we could and still hope to recover more parts,’ Kermit said.
The rarest plane damaged, and the one that meant the most to Kermit, was the Boeing 100 N873H.
It was the oldest Boeing remaining in existence which made it an historical treasure, and it was an interesting aircraft beyond that because it flew in so many of the old Hollywood movies.
While Kermit and I talked we were joined by Bill Ross, warbird owner and a past President of the Warbirds of America organisation.
Bill has owned and restored almost every World War Two fighter from P-38s to Spitfires.
He expressed his condolences to Kermit and offered to contribute the labour on a project.
If they could ship the aircraft or individual parts to Carson City, Nevada, Bill would have his staff do the work necessary.
Kermit was touched by Bill's suggestion and told Bill that he would seriously consider his offer.
Because of the slow economy, many US restoration shops need work.
A free or reduced rate offer on their part could be one solution that would help complete this huge task in less time.
That is one of the options being considered, but presently they are not at the point where they can delegate projects.
The business of today must be; clean up the mess, stop any further deterioration, consider that options and make a plan by which to proceed with the reconstruction.
To give you some idea of the scope of the problem and how multi-faceted it is; Kermit Weeks, his staff and volunteers are finding and sorting the aircraft pieces, drying out books, covering aircraft and items of every other sort with plastic to protect them from the weather and they are also spraying the collection of spare aircraft parts which filled a 50,000sq ft building.
Each part must be individually dried off and sprayed with oil to prevent corrosion and then put back in place.
Roofs are missing everywhere and that increases the difficulty factor.
Although the Museum's buildings were insured, it will be months, perhaps a year before they might be replaced.
One has to consider that an entire area has been hit and thousands of people are homeless.
That was the point that Kermit reiterated throughout our conversation.
‘People and their problems are more important than the airplanes’.
Close-up of a portion of the former display building, with Kermit's beloved Boeing 100 in the foreground.
(Inset shows the aircraft and hangar in 1900.)
The aircraft were not insured, so the bill to repair them will be staggering and I'm sure it is frustrating that the Museum's project cannot take top priority at the moment.
However work is being done and volunteers are appreciated for their help with the clean-up, stock-taking and the reorganisation.
‘Every plane was damaged.
The least so was the Wildcat, next the T-6, the easiest to restore’, said .
‘The Corsair was probably the third least damaged.
Its wings were folded when the building collapsed and so the damage is mostly to the wing tips.
The wood of the World War One aircraft is thrashed but the fittings are not and they can be rebuilt.
The P-40 was probably the fighter worst hit.
Of the 13 other aircraft or projects that were kept in hangars in the Miami area, ten were hit.
The Museum also owns the only flying DH Mosquito in North America.
Luckily, this was not damaged by the hurricane because it was kept at the EAA Museum in Oshkosh.
The Week's Foundation was in the process of developing a second museum site in the Orlando area — this plan is still on the drawing boards.
Perhaps constructing this site sooner rather than later will take some pressure off the facilities at Tamiami.
‘As you can see, there are many things to consider at this point and we are doing that now’, said .
‘We want to everyone informed and expect to publish our plan as soon as possible’.
Leslie Hicks 
editorial
THE HORRORS of Hurricane Andrew , so graphically illustrated in the tragic views on these pages, serve as reminder to all of the frailty of the term ‘preservation’ and, indeed, of life in general.
Two things spring to mind as  and friends start to pick up the pieces and reorientate themselves.
has never hidden the fact that he is a rich man — his collection of aircraft is of a calibre that requires a hanger-full of money as well as vision and skill.
The temptation is there to say, ‘Tough, but he can afford it.’
He is the sort of person who can, or will find a way of doing it all if push comes to shove.
To County, State, Federal and Military agencies I would venture the time will come soon to lend him whatever help can ge given: facilities, hangarage,anything , to get the job done.
The Weeks Air Museum is a regional, national and indeed global asset, irrespective of the potential of its custodian.
and team should also enjoy support for the second of my points.
Despite the shock that he must have felt as he drove to what he expected to be his hangar on the morning after, he has shown himself to a man of warm priorities: ‘People and their problems are more important than airplanes,’ he has commented.
And he is quite right.
Let the relief workers get to real human needs, but let the wider governmental administrations not forget that aviation heritage at large is deserving of some help and understanding amid the ruins of Tamiami.
Ken Ellis 
More from Miami
STOP PRESS 
FROM Graham White come more photographs of Tamiami Airport, taken during the expensive mopping up operation after the terrible night of August 24.
The winds (see pages 8/9 for greater detail) were of such force to blow a Douglas DC-6 and incredible 1.5 miles away from where it had been tied down.
Hurricane Andrew 's sheer power was demonstrated in many ways, perhaps one of the most graphic being the gash a 4' x 8' sheet of plywood made in the wall of a steel hangar.
By the time that Graham got to Tamiami, work was in hand on the careful dismantling of the remains of the Weeks hangar.
Two C-46 Commandos were totalled by the storm.
One aircraft, thought to be N67977 seen here in 1989, Duncan Cubitt, landed inverted half a mile from its tie-downs.
The carnage in the extensive light aircraft population at the Airport can be seen in the background.
To clear
WARBIRDS, helicopters, inventories and equipment belonging to the late Harry Doan, killed whilst landing in his Douglas Skyraider at the Tico Airshow earlier this year (FP June, p6) were to be auctioned by Starman Brothers on October 30–November 1, at Doan's Daytona Beach, Florida, facility.
Reported to include a pair of airworthy Skyraiders, along with a collection of 26 restorable aircraft, plus a large aero engine collection, spares holdings, automobiles, tools and equipment, this must be one of the largest ‘one man’ collections to come under the hammer in recent years.
Mosquito collision
‘UNBELIEVABLY LUCKY,’ was how British Aerospace test pilot Peter Henley described the collision between Mosquito T.3 RR299/G-ASKH and a Belgian glider in Dutch airspace on September 20.
Peter and the Mossie were en route from BAe Hawarden (Chester) to Antwerp, Belgium, transitting through Dutch airspace at 2,500ft under VFR conditions.
Visibility was about 7km, it was rather hazy with some cloud, but it was possible to maintain VMC, although as Peter said, ‘it was not a day with endless visibility.’
Then he saw the glider looming up ahead, but slightly below.
Peter pulled up, but to his horror the glider chose to pull up as its method of collision avoidance.
Thinking his number was up, Peter pushed down hard and went underneath the glider.
Upon landing, he filed an airmiss report only to be told that the glider had landed successfully with part of its wingtip missing near Axel.
Examination of the Mossie revealed a mark on a propeller blade that looked like a bird strike.
The airframe was given a thorough check over and RR299 was cleared for a ferry flight back to Hawarden.
Dutch authorities are looking in to the incident.
Thankfully both pilots came out of their fleeting meeting physically unscathed but both will remember the event forever more.
Close-up on Peter Henley and the Mosquito.
A Belgian glider pilot got much closer.
A Manchester Lad
John Alcock (Jack to his friends) rose to fame as the pilot of the 1919 trans-Atlantic Vimy.
In a two-part feature, the life and times of this son of Manchester are given new depth, using many family sources.
Here his early days and stunning war years are chronicled.
JOHN ALCOCK, or Jack ; as he preferred to be called, was born in the early hours of November 5, 1892 at .
His formative years were spent living at a small terraced house in , a house which still remains in use today.
Captain John Alcock
At 15, he left Manchester Central High School determined to become an engineer.
He began a technical apprenticeship at the Empress Engineering Works.
This local firm built and repaired motor cars and motor bicycles; and it was not long before this stocky, young man with an engaging smile and tousled, fair, ginger hair that was forever falling into his eyes was completely at home in the workshops.
He quickly made a name for himself when he reversed the works lorry into a workshop wall and was banned from driving the Company vehicles until after he could drive properly.
During 1909–1910, Charles Fletcher, Works manager, designed and built a monoplane and a biplane.
Alcock assisted in the trials of these aeroplanes by swinging the propeller.
Shortly after joining the company a local business man asked Charles Fletcher to build him one of the new flying machines.
With the help of another local engineer, Norman Crossland, he set about making this flying machine.
The ‘Flying Machine’ was tested in March 1910 at the Manchester racecourse.
With its varnished mahogany and gleaming brasswork fuselage it managed a few erratic hops but never got off the ground!
The true depth of Jack 's growing interest in aviation came a month after the hopping fiasco.
He was amongst the thousands who streamed into a clover field at Fog Lane, Didsbury, and waited all night to witness the finish of the first London-Manchester Flight.
At 5am, a Farman Biplane was sighted, flying high over the houses surrounding Fog Lane.
As the eager spectators applauded, and their cheers echoed around the field at Louis Paulhan's success, how could anyone imagine that in just nine years time the Atlantic Ocean would be conquered by a young man in the crowd.
He left the Empress Works in 1911 and went to work for Norman Crossland, as mechanic in charge.
Norman Crossland was the owner of the Crossland Motor Company, founder of Manchester Aero Club and good friend of a certain Arthur Whitten-Brown.
He was very aware of Jack 's interest in aviation, and offered him support with this.
Jack was determined to make flying his life, and thought of no more than achieving his wish to fly.
For the moment though, he had to be content with speed on the ground as he drove Crossland Motor Company cars on cross-country reliability trials.
Jack sitting on the flying seat of an early Maurice Farman ‘pusher’ biplane.
Circa –1912.
The following year was to prove a turning point in Jack 's life.
One of Fletcher's rotary engines was sent up to the Empress Works for repair.
Few of the mechanics know much about aeroplane engines, so Jack was asked by Fletcher to work on the engine.
He successfully repaired the engine and could not resist the chance of seeing Brooklands, the centre of British Aviation.
So he accompanied the engine to Brooklands and  installed it in the owner's aeroplane.
The owner was Frenchman and pioneer aviator, Maurice Ducrocq.
Jack persuaded Ducrocq to take him up for his first real flight, from that moment Jack knew that speed on the ground was no longer enough.
Ducrocq, recognising perhaps Jack 's engineering ability and flying enthusiasm, took him on as his full time mechanic and at the same time began teaching Jack to fly.
It wasn't all fly, fly, fly!
Jack relaxing with some friends at Brooklands (right centre, sitting between two young ladies!),circa 1913.
Brooklands was like paradise to 19 year old Jack .
Everyone there was an aviation enthusiast — they either flew or wanted to fly.
Here were to be found the flying schools, the workshops and the hangars of Bristol, Deperdussin, A V Roe, Sopwith, Martinsyde and Vickers.
Here were the aviators of the day, Tom Sopwith, Freddie Raynham, Gustav Hamel, Hucks, Howard Pixton, A V Roe and Ducrocq.
Flying a Maurice Farman Biplane, an aeroplane with which Jack had an immediate affinity, he went solo after only two hour's instruction.
He was too young to be awarded a pilot's certificate, but on November 16 he flew the Farman under the watchful eyes of Royal Aero Club observers and was granted pilot's certificate No 368.
The first organised air race of November 24, 1912 was entered and won by Jack flying his beloved Farman, and gave him a taste of flying success.
Fitted with a 100hp Sunbeam engine and averaging a speed of 90 mph, he out paced all the other competitors and won the race in what was to become true Alcock style!
Early example of nose-art displayed on a Maurice Farman Shorthorn of No 2 Wing, Royal Naval Air Service, based at Mudros in the Eastern Mediterranean.
Throughout 1912 he test flew aeroplanes for Ducrocq and also instructed novice pilots at the Ducrocq-Lawford Flying School.
He did some work for A V Roe, erecting aeroplanes and preparing them for test and delivery flights.
He carried out exhaustive tests on the Sunbeam aero-engine, one of the first truly British engines.
He entered the London-Manchester-London Air Race, his first long distance race.
Engine trouble on the first leg didn't manage to stop him coming in a creditable second.
All this by his 20th birthday!
Jack with Bristol Scout ‘D’ No. 8977, Eastchurch,circa 1915.
On May 28, 1913,Jack flew with Freddie Raynham in the trials of a new Avro seaplane, they took-off from the River Adur with two hours fuel.
Designed for the German Government, the Avro 503 which with a wingspan of 50ft, was the largest aeroplane built by A V Roe at that time.
Only one was ever built, it was flown by Raynham with Jack assisting and was beached at Shoreham.
It is not clear whether the trials were successful, but the events of the coming year would stop any further work on the ‘03.
Meanwhile back at Brooklands, he test flew the new Parsons biplane, and one of the first flying test-beds — a Maurice Farman ‘Pusher’ aeroplane in which the new Sunbeam engine was installed.
The Easter Handicap Race of 1913 once again saw Jack winning over a 10 mile cross country course, once again flying his beloved Farman.
Throughout 1913 he put in more flying hours than anyone else, he flew in all kinds of weather and he showed great aptitude for flying any aeroplane.
One of the finest Brooklands races, the June 1914 Aeroplane Handicap, was held over a nine mile course.
Victory was taken by Victor Mahl, flying an 80hp Sopwith two-seater with Jack , very close behind in his Farman.
The London-Manchester air race saw him coming in third, a position to which he was not accustomed
His reputation as an ace aerobatic performer, air racer, instructor and test pilot coupled with his natural flying ability made his future in aviation extremely promising.
However, world troubles halted his immediate progress, and at the outbreak of war he enlisted in the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS), beginning training on November 19, 1914.
His experience as a pilot was considered too valuable to the training of other pilots and, together with his Maurice Farman, he was posted as a Warrant Officer Instructor to the RNAS training squadron at Eastchurch aerodrome.
His duties were to test aircraft and to instruct cadet pilots.
Using his Farman, which he had flown with such excellent results for the past few years,Jack instructed pupils with equally good results.
Indeed it was used to teach such pilots as Flt Sub-Lt Warneford who was awarded a Victoria Cross for shooting down the first Zeppelin.
Jack enjoyed this work, but with so many less experienced pilots going to fight and not returning he wanted to do more than circuits and bumps!
In December 1915, he was commissioned as a Flight Sub-Lieutenant and was made head of the School of Aerobatics.
He enjoyed the chance of teaching aerobatic manoeuvres, but he still wished to be put on active service.
After many repeated and denied requests he was eventually posted t No 2 Wing RNAS at Mudros on the Island of Lemnos in the Aegean Sea.
Mudros was the main base for Allied operations in the eastern Mediterranean.
The aerodrome was well established, with the headquarters on board the seaplane tender Ark Royal which was anchored in the bay.
During the next ten months Jack would fly on fighter patrols, reconnaissance flights, anti-U-Boat patrols, harassing sorties over Macedonia and long distance bombing raids.
Aeroplanes were in short supply, and Jack flew anything that was available, fighter or bomber.
He became the first pilot to aerial  bomb Istanbul, and held the record for long distance bombing raids, many of which were in a Handley Page 0/400.
This machine was the second of its type to by built, it established a record for long distance flight when it flew from Hendon to Mudros in 55 hours, over a 10 day period.
Jack and his crew, F/Ls Wise and Gaskell executed many daring raids in this aeroplane, bombing Constantinople, attacking Turkish bases at Adrianople, Panderman and on the Dardanelles.
They often flew through the night without the benefit of fighter escort.
There was always more daring flying to be done.
No 2 Wing Royal Naval Air Service members, including Jack (centre), taken on active service in the Eastern Mediterranean,circa 1916.
When he was not flying he kept himself busy by designing and building his own fighter with parts ‘cannibalised’ from scrapped and battle damaged aircraft.
He used a German Benz engine taken from an aircraft shot down by his friend Bradley.
The hybrid biplane proved at least 20 mph faster than any aeroplane they had at Mudros.
After a short successful test flight it was wrecked when a pilot in a Bristol Fighter landed on top of it, and rebuilding had to begin.
On September 30, a German reconnaissance aircraft appeared over Mudros,Jack , wearing his pyjamas, dashed to his Sopwith Camel and took-off in pursuit.
The reconnaissance machine escaped, but Jack shot down two German fighters escorting it.
He was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for this exploit.
His operational flying looked as promising as his civilian flying had, until he went on a night bombing raid over Constantinople.
Their target was the railway station at Hayda Pasha, on the Asiatic shore of the Bosphorus.
As they reached the enemy coastline they came under heavy fire from the Turkish batteries.
Suddenly the port propeller flew off.
They rapidly lost height and to save his crew he was forced to crush-land in the Sea of Marmara, within reach of the enemy.
Jack and Wise were thrown into the water, but scrambled back onto the aircraft, which remained afloat.
Aird, was caught in the rigging wires and was nearly drowned until Jack managed to free him.
Unfortunately, the Turks had seen the crash and opened fire with rifles.
As it was dark by now, no bullets hit them, and they began to swim ashore.
They scrambled onto a rocky beach and lay hidden.
It was only when daylight came, overcome by exhaustion, hunger and the cold they gave themselves up.
They were to suffer still further as their captors immediately stripped them of everything, even their boots, and forced them to march to the Turkish camp.
As the camp they were given some Turkish slippers and ragged pieces of uniform to wear.
They were put into an ox cart and taken to the main Turkish base at Chanak.
Jack was feeling sick and miserable, he had sandfly fever and a bad cold.
He kept complaining in his broad Lancashire accent that he needed a good dose of his mother's ‘Lancashire remedy’— a mixture of ipecacuanha and liquorice to which he was addicted.
At Chanak they were made welcome and given cigarettes and coffee.
A German Air Force squadron was based close by, and they did everything possible to make the airmen comfortable.
They tried in vain to get the men transferred to a German Prisoner of War camp, where they would have been well treated.
One of the German pilots saw the state of their clothes and offered to fly over to Mudros with a message for the British to bring some of their personal belongings over to the camp.
On October 2, the Mudros staff were amazed to see a solitary German aeroplane flying towards them.
It dropped a message from Jack ‘All in good health — J Alcock, H Aird, S J Wise’, and also a message from the Germans ‘The three British Naval officers are prisoners, uninjured, but should you have any clothes, tobacco, soap, and any gear of theirs, if you wish to fly over Chanak aerodrome at 10am on October 1917 we promise not to molest you.
Signal — two red Very lights’.
The parcel was duly delivered safely to Chanak by Smyth-Piggott flying a Sopwith Camel.
The three men were then transferred to Constantinople.
They were to stay in the worst conditions imaginable for a month, before they were all sent to a detention camp at Kedos, in the mountains of Anatolia.
Alcock was cheered up by a letter from his CO at Mudros telling him the ‘Your baby has just been given a new suit of clothes and is learning to walk.
It is the best infant in the school.’
Alcock knew this meant hi 
One of Jack 's opponents on the Turkish Front,circa 1916.
The camp at Kedos was some 300 miles away, but it was a pleasant change from the squalor of the previous month.
The prisoners were billeted in houses in the small town, and were left to their own affairs.
There was plenty of food, fresh water and as much freedom of movement as was possible in such circumstances.
Jack made the best of his bad luck at being captured and found plenty to occupy his time.
He helped design and build a new bandstand, an open-air bathroom, a sunbathing shelter and a stage for the plays which the prisoners took part in.
He played baseball and hockey, attempted to play the flute — without success!
All seemed well until during a performance on stage, there were cries of ‘Fire!
Fire!’,
Kedos was on fire.
The Turks did nothing to stop the fire, and by morning the town was in cinders.
This was late September, and from then until the end of the War, they all lived outside under constant assault from hungry packs of dogs.
On November 18, 1918,Jack left Turkey for good, after spending 13 months in captivity, the War was finally over.
It took until December 16 for Jack to reach home, just in time for Christmas with his family in Manchester, his last as it turned out.
Concluded in the December issue — on sale November 19.
The Alcock A.1 Scout.
An example of the talent later lost to British aviation.
This single seat fighter embodied several Sopwith components.
Back to the Garage
Vintage & Rotary Wing Collection are recreating a Flying Flea with a view to arousing local interest in aviation as they seek a permanent home for their exhibits.
IT BECAME OBVIOUS last year that there was a general lack of interest in aviation in the Staffordshire/south Cheshire area, highlighted by the huge outcry when the local planning authority granted temporary permission for a microlight flying site.
Efforts to find a suitable site for the Vintage & Rotary Wing Collection, with workshops in Stoke-on-Trent, have been going on for quite a while, but the reaction has always been negative — we even had the comment that ‘We don't want an aircraft scrapyard here!’
To try and generate some more interest in aviation we looked into starting a project that was relevant to the area and after a lot of research we came up with a Flying Flea.
During the mid-1930s Mr Harold Burns, owner of a garage in Congleton, Cheshire, was very well known and later became Mayor, built and flew a Mignet HM.14 Flying Flea.
It was only natural that anyone with a garage and mechanical knowhow would be tempted during the heady days of the Flea ‘craze’ to ‘have a go’.
Burns elected to convert a steadfast Douglas motorcycle engine, first at 500cc and later rebored to 750cc.
He experimented with chain drive and finally selected direct drive to run the propeller.
(He started work on modifying an Austin 7 engine, but this was never installed.)
Fuselage of the modern recreation, BAPC.211, underway in the workshop.
The simplicity of construction — part of Mignet's creed — is evident.
Piloted by its builder, the Flea flew successfully and featured a cowling underneath the engine — perhaps a unique modification.
Its first flights were from Buglawton, then Somerford Park and finally from Stoke-on-Trent's airfield at Meir.
It suffered a collision with a tree at some stage (perhaps in April 1936) was stored following the so-called ‘ban’ on the flying of Fleas and post–1945 was dismantled and burnt.
There was a lot of interest in Harold Burns' activities at the time and many of the older people remember him and his Flea.
Contact was made with his son, Ian, who still runs the same garage and he was very interested in the ideas put forward, so much so that he agreed to be the main sponsor for the project.
The proposal was to build a new Flying Flea from scratch.
On completion the project would go on display at Burns garage for a while and then be used to try and generate more interest in aviation in the area.
Early local press coverage brought forward more local people who either knew Mr Burns and saw the original or were involved in the building of other examples and wanted to see the recreation.
The original Burns Flea in the air, circa 1936.
Photos of British-built HM.14s actually with air under their wheels are very rare!
(Editor's collection)
North Rode Timber, the largest timber merchants in Congleton have also shown an interest and have supplied the wood planed to the correct sizes, in all cases to a very high quality.
Construction started with the fuselage, working from a copy of the original book by Henri Mignet.
The instructions therein were religiously followed and within a few weeks a recognisable fuselage could be sat in for some ‘hangar flying’.
To date, the fuselage, rudder and rear wing are complete with the front wing well underway.
Completion date is planned for the autumn when it will be painted in the colours of the 1936 Burns Flea.
Mr Burns has promised the original instrument panel and propeller for the project.
The team look upon this Flea not as a replica but a newly-built example of the type.
With the rear wing and rudder rigged.
Plans for the completed Flea are to use it to generate as much interest as possible, through the local papers and when it is first on display at the Burns garage.
It is intended to take the Flea to local fetes, etc and to do this a custom-built trailer to ease moving it around will be built.
Beyond the Flea, V&RWC have another replica in the pipeline.
They have taken over the unfinished Bristol Babe project (BAPC.87) held by the Hemswell Aviation Society.
This project was started in York in the early 1970s and V&RWC would like to contact anyone who was involved with it with a view to helping to complete another otherwise ‘extinct’ type.
Example of the craftsmanship of the Vintage & and; Rotary Wing Collection, their last project was a replica of Austin Whippet K-158 (BAPC.207) seen here shortly after completion earlier this year.
‘Stringbag’ No 2
Thanks to the determination and vision of Canadian Bob Spence and friends, the world has a second airworthy Fairey Swordfish.
It arrived on August 21, 1992.
It was the final piece in a jigsaw that started at an auction at a rundown farm in 1970.
On the earlier date, Bob Spence bought much-neglected Swordfish HS554 that had been standing outside for 22 years.
On the later date, he received the Certificate of Airworthiness for the newly-flown C-GEVS.
The transformation from HS554 to C-GEVS has doubled the world's stock of flying Swordfish — the UK's Royal Navy Historic Flight operates the well-known LS326 from Yeovilton.
Built as a Mk II by Blackburn, HS554 was one of 99 (plus an additional six Mk IIIs) that were assigned to the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN).
The majority were used as gunnery trainers at 1 Naval Air Gunners' School at Yarmouth, Nova Scotia.
A few were converted to target tugs at the same base.
The remaining aircraft flew from Dartmouth, also Nova Scotia.
After the war, many of the type served for a brief period with RCN reservist units until they were all struck off charge in 1947.
It is believed that HS554 served with the reserve unit at Kingston, Ontario, during that period.
Ernie Simmons, of Tillsonburg, Ontario, acquired seven Swordfish from a base (believed to be the former 16 Service Flying Training School at Hagersville) in southern Ontario, shortly after they were removed from RCN strength.
He towed them, either by horse or tractor, to his farm some 50 miles west.
(Simmons also acquired and towed 37 NA-64 Yales to his farm!)
Following his death in January 1970, an estate auction was held over a three day period the following September.
The horde of all manner of machinery that Ernie had collected was beyond belief, including more than 250 antique cars, plus many military vehicles and farm tractors!
On the day before the auction, Bob Spence inspected the Swordfish and his friend Claude Johnson helped to point out HS554 as the best one of the bunch — it was the only one of the seven that had an engine that could still be turned over.
Bob's bid of $1,630 was the highest paid for any of the 44 aircraft auctioned.
Within two years Bob had acquired three additional Stringbags to help in his restoration project.
Despite this, Bob advises that about 60% of the airframe is composed of new parts — all fashioned from specs and materials as quoted in 1934 Fairey Aviation manuals.
The majority of the steel components, including the fuselage tubing and wing grid girders, were beyond saving and, of course, all wood components and fabric were replaced.
Aluminium parts, in the main, were all recoverable, requiring only cleaning and minor repairs.
The Bristol Pegasus XXX, rebuilt by Mike Connor at Leesburg, Florida, was found to be in surprisingly good condition during disassembly.
Upon completion of the fabric work and assembly, Bob chose a temperate sea scheme to adorn his masterpiece.
In appreciation of the eccentric's efforts (regardless of intent) in saving 44 World War Two aircraft from the scrap pile, Bob requested and was granted the Canadian civil registration C-Gevs in memory of the late Ernest Van Simmons.
Interim Flight Authority arrived on August 11, 1992 and the 17th was set aside for the great day.
Taxi trials resulted in a flat tail wheel tyre and a hasty change was undertaken.
Then a leaking gasket on the fuel header tank showed itself graphically as fuel was blown back into Bob's face from the filler cap in front of the windscreen.
First take-off was made at 8.02pm and was followed by a faultless landing ten minutes later.
Another flight, this time of one hour, was made the following morning and another two, to complete the necessary four test flights, were made within the space of two days.
During the flying, Bob's wife, Marie, flew on one sortie as observer.
Claude Johnson, who helped Bob pick out HS554 all
Stars ‘n’ Bars the americans in europe 1942–1945
A Kick in the Ass
The head-on vulnerability of the B-17F frightened aircrew.
An impromptu mod of 1943 was intended to hit back.
WINTER, 1942/1943 saw USAAF commanders increasingly concerned about the ferocity and effectiveness of frontal attacks on the B-17F.
Clearly, there was a need for improving its forward-firing weaponry.
Several independent initiatives resulted and one of these was the adaptation of a 385th BG Fortress to take a no-less-a-weapon than a 20mm cannon!
A formidable frontage — the 20mm protruding from Roundtrip Jack is believed to be a unique installation.
B-17F-30-VE 42 — 5897 had been christened Roundtrip Jack and wore an appropriate Jackass caricature with a golden tooth.
This was based on the antics of a crew chief John C Ford —Jack to his friends — who had some knuckled dentistry and lost a tooth during a bar-room brawl en route to England.
Roundtrip Jack was one of the 550th BSs original ships flown by Lt Gerald D Binks and his lead crew.
Commanding the 550th was Captain Bill Tesla and it was his mission-critiques with pilots and 385th armament personnel that inspired W/O Tommie Thompson, the 550th Armament Officer, into action.
Chief Warrant Office Nugent Thompson
Tommie listened in awe and shared their fear as aircrew described vicious head-on assaults by enemy fighters.
Hearing how the B-17F's weak forward armament failed to deter the enemy,Tommie conjectured that a 20mm cannon would have more dissuasive charm — but how to get one and try out his theory?
USAAF red-tape would be insurmountable but then providence provided the solution when Tommie had the opportunity of liberating one by ‘midnight requisition’ from a damaged P-38.
Having obtained the weaponry,Tommie approached Bill Tesla who balanced the time bureaucracy would take to approve the trial installation, with the needs of his combat crews and sanctioned the work on his initiative.
In June/July 1943,Tommie chose Technical Sergeant Elmer Bland and a small team of specialists to modify Roundtrip Jack .
Installation was achieved by welding a new frame to accommodate the cannon in a cone of converging steel tubes through a modified and toughened Plexiglas pivot-hole.
Heavier plate ensured attachment to the fuselage and the team created a crude cradle for their baby.
Handgrips were provided, between which was a hinged metal plate responding to thumb pressure to actuate a microswitch circuit for the firing solenoid below the cannon.
Ammunition was fed from the right with clips and casings ejecting noisily onto the floor.
Early in August,Roundtrip Jack trundled to the firing butts and completed some ground-firing tests.
Following modifications, a flight test was planned over the Wash for the 13th.
On board the B-17 as it climbed eastwards from Great Ashfield were the men responsible with Tommie taking the firing honours.
Releasing the cannon from stowage and moving it forward was reminiscent of preparing a man o'war with the weapon's black length extending well aft and Tommie bracing himself against the instrument bulkhead.
Apprehensively, he pressed the firing-plate and a short burst boomed from the B-17.
The effect was startling.
Recoil punched hard and ejected shell casings angrily around the nose compartment, some clattered into the rear of the instrument panel and blew its circuits.
An alarming crack also appeared in the nose Plexiglas but nothing vital fell off, no serious damage resulted and the idea's feasibility was proven with the expenditure of more rounds.
However, the recoil needed dampening; sighting was crude and they needed to overcome the risk of self-inflicted damage from ejected casings.
Modifications made, the cannon was pronounced ready for a mission on August 15 to Vitry en Artois.
Tommie flew as cannoneer but not one German fighter came out to play and Roundtrip Jack landed with a disappointed crew only to learn from the Group Armament Officer that the new B-17G with a chin turret would soon be arriving and further plans for their 20mm conversion had been scrapped.
Tommie 's footnote in Eighth Air Force history typified its spirit.
Later, he fought rheumatoid arthritis with similar determination until his death in the early 1970s.
This year saw more fortunate veterans return to England — many for the last time.
As a nation, we should remember how individual contributions of courage, energy and enthusiasm created a powerful force fighting for the freedom we have since enjoyed.
Roundtrip Jack survived the war and was salvaged in May 1945.
FAREWELL?
WHAT CONVERSATION there was took the form of reading out check-lists.
The arrival, at 11.25am, was a smooth landing, with the classic keep-the-nosewheel-up run to the end, followed by a taxi round to the dispersal.
Groundcrew were emotional and applied themselves with vigour to their checks, to keep their minds off the subject in hand — just as the aircrew had done in the cockpit on the flight from Cranfield to Waddington.
After slipping down the exit ladder, the aircrew showed a mixture of feelings.
Some saw the previous day as the most moving, others thought the silence after shut-down back at base to be terminal.
Vulcan B.2 XH558 was back home after her last-ever show and might have made her last ever flight.
This was a misty Monday September 21 at Waddington.
Alongside the base, on every possibly vantage point the A15 could offer, thousands of enthusiasts paid homage.
Press and television thronged to get words from the aircrew, S/L Dave Thomas said it was the ‘passing of a great era’ and of the campaign to keep XH558 flying that ‘it reflects the affection in which the aircraft is held.’
S/L Paul Millikin was pressed for what the future held for the aircraft, to one question he replied ‘I don't know if there is talk from Whitehall…nobody tells me anything!’
After much trying,FlyPast succeeded in getting the Ministry of Defence in Whitehall to talk about the future.
A spokesman explained that two possibilities relating to the disposal of the aircraft were being investigated.
All current applications relating to XH558 (they closed on July 31) were treated as ‘expressions of interest’ and that the ‘most suitable’of these would then be invited to tender for the aircraft in a two-stage operation.
The other possibility explained in our conversation of September 29 was an ‘alternative choice to place it into a vintage aircraft auction.’
When asked about a timeframe for these auctions, the spokesman said that there was ‘no hurry’ but that he expected the aircraft to have gone to its new home by Christmas.
Explaining that the Ministry was looking for a ‘suitable’ home for the aircraft the spokesman underlined that the MoD ‘must dispose of the aircraft in the best interests of the taxpayer.’
When asked if it was the Ministry's intention to sell the aircraft in an airworthy condition, the spokesman explained that the aircraft was airworthy, but felt there was a good chance it may well go to a museum who would want to road the airframe away.
For a flying delivery to be effected the Vulcan Display Team crew could need to be kept would need to be kept current on XH558 (they must at least fly every 28 days under current procedures) which would necessitate check-flights until a buyer is established.
On this the spokesman said, ‘the Vulcan will no be flown any more’ adding, ‘it would be down to an acceptable purchaser to arrange for any ferrying.’
The famous disposal of Vulcans in 1984 included a ferry flight to a suitable airfield, this no longer seems the case.
A crew acceptable to the MoD to ferry XH558 anywhere would seem unlikely, particularly if the current crew are allowed to lapse from currency.
RAF teams from Abingdon had the unenviable task of moving the RAF Museum's XL318 by road to Hendon, the real cost of which must have been mind-boggling.
All of this does not mitigate well for a prospective owner to take on the airframe in an easily-delivered and/or operational manner.
It is clear that pressure from the interested public is getting through, but that more of it is needed.
The odds seem stacked against XH558, but odds can be turned around.
Our guidelines on how to effectively lobby your MP, be it about the Vulcan or the falling pound, are available on receipt of a stamped addressed envelope at the address below.
For overseas readers who did not receive our Classic Aircraft supplement on the Vulcan issued to the UK readers   
The mighty delta poses for photographers, thronged in the back of a Hercules, for the last time — September 7.
Air and ground crew after the ‘final’ flight: left to right: C/T Dave Thorpe — Crew Chief; F/L Dave Bradford — Nav; F/L Al Slack — Nav; S/L Paul Millikin — Captain; S/L Dave Thomas — Captain; F/L Graham O'Connor — Nav; F/L Pat McGeough — Engineering Officer; S/L Barry Masefield — AEO.
(Duncan Cubitt)
MEMORIALS
Strike Wing remembered
ON JULY 30, at the former RAF Dallachy (Spey Bay) airfield, retired Beaufighter pilot G/C Peter Ilbery unveiled a magnificent new memorial which commemorates those who served and died whilst part of the Beaufighter-equipped Dallachy Strike Wing (FP July, p61).
G/C Ilbery, now a doctor living in Australia, was the last man to fly an operational sortie from the now-abandoned airfield in the spring of 1945, at the end of a bloody period in the anti-shipping strikes from Dallachy and nearby RAF Banff.
Using local stone and featuring impressed illuminated granite tablets with an engraving of a Beaufighter attacking a German ship, the memorial stands on the edge of the airfield near the original main gate, overlooking the empty and abandoned airfield control tower.
ATC Anson
SCOTTISH Air Training Corps (ATC) cadets helped to raise a memorial cairn to mark a wartime air crash tragedy which claimed the life of the ATC's first Scottish Commandant, G/C Edward Tennant, and seven colleagues.
Cadets from 446 (Forres) Squadron joined others from the Highland Wing and Aberdeen Wing to research and build a cairn on the exact spot where the men lost their lives when Anson R9854 in which they were flying crashed into a ridge 2,300ft up Glan Lion in the Cairngorms on August 7, 1941.
Cadets from Forres, Lossiemouth and Aberdeen Airport decided to research the accident and erect a cairn and plaque commemorating the crash exactly 50 years to the day after the accident.
For three days before the unveiling ceremony, the cadets were on the site collecting stones from the hillside and cementing them into the cairn.
A Sea King helicopter from 202 Squadron at Lossiemouth airlifted sand and cement, enabling the cairn to be built in situ.
Attending the unveiling ceremony was Sir Iain Tennant, Moray's Lord Lieutenant and the son of G/C Tennant and the son of crew member P/O Alex Gill, who was also killed in the crash.
RAF Kinloss provided Land Rovers to transport cadets and guests to the remote site and RAF Lossiemouth's station workshop machined the commemorative plaque.
Sir  Iain Tennant (left) and the son of crew member P/O Alex Gill, who was also killed, pictured alongside the impressive memorial in the Cairngorms.
Figure of an airman
SOME FOUR MILES south of Darlington, the A167 road skirts the small community of Dalton-on-Tees.
On a small parch of green at the south end of the village, the small figure of an airman stands atop a plinth of Cornish granite.
Appropriately the figure looks towards the approach of what was the Croft airfield's main runway.
Dressed in full flying kit and with a parachute pack at his feet, the airman casts an eye skywards, his left arm raised to obstruct the sun's glare (left).
This monument is a worthy testament to the men of the RCAF, who flew from Croft.
As will all reminders of the penalties of war, the true cost of this memorial was met in another time and place, but the financial charge was paid in Canada by ex-members of 431 (Iroquois ) and 434 (Bluenose ) Squadrons RCAF, who flew from the airfield from December 1943 until June 1945.
During World War Two, the fortunes of those two bomber squadrons bore striking similarities, they arrived together in 1943 and left together in 1945, they flew the same type of aircraft, Halifax and Lancaster, and shared the same operations.
They flew almost the same number of sorties (some 2,600 each) and lost nearly the same number of aircraft (72 with 431 and 74 with 434), suffering virtually identical casualties.
In 18 months of operations they lost a total of 983 aircrew, 725 of whom were killed or presumed dead.
The RCAF Croft Reunion Association of Canada wanted a worthy monument to such sacrifice to be erected on site.
They approached Peter Simpson, then Chairman of Dalton-on-Tees Parish council, who enlisted the support of local plumber Alec Clacher, in collaboration with Tholthorpe farmer Geoff Wood and York-based S/L Jim Cable and his wife.
This quartet became the driving force at the British end of the project.
Their efforts came to fruition in September 1987, when the monument was unveiled in a ceremony presided over RCAF Brigadier General Bill Newson, DSO, DFC.
The Croft monument has been described as ‘possibly the finest memorial to the RCAF that there is in Great Britain’.
As the accompanying photo shows, the imposing yet touching memorial is certainly worth a look if passing.
Bill Norman 
UNDER THE HAMMER
Rendcomb
TAKING PLACE on the morning of the Rendcomb Aerial Derby (September 13) in one of the ‘new’ airfield's hangars was Onslow's Auction of Aeronautical Collectors Items and Selected Vintage Aircraft.
(See also page 47 for a report of the airshow.)
Out of 467 lots offered, few reached the estimates given in the catalogue.
Of seven highly-detailed scale aircraft models: Gotha Go.IV, Sopwith Pup, Nieuport N. 17, Sopwith Snipe etc, none realised the catalogue estimated prices.
Posters and prints fared slightly better with a Twentieth Century Fox film poster of The Blue Max movie reaching £50, although an original of the famous Winston Churchill Let Us Go Forward Together poster only fetched £45, instead of the £100–200 estimated.
Flying clothing, propellers and instruments attracted some interest — these items traditionally remaining buoyant when all else appears to be sinking.
It is thought that none of the selection of vintage aircraft sold, the Stearman, for example, reaching £30,000 against a reasonably realistic estimate of £35–38,000.
With the auction taking place in the hangar nearest the airfield flightline, the auctioneer fought a verbal battle at times with the public address system on the airfield and the constant opening and closing of the hangar doors, the latter not known for their quietness!
With low prices being realised and the distinct lack of enthusiasm from the floor, the Onslow's auction reflected the depressed condition of the market.
The venue was excellent and, with a few ‘tweaks’ to ‘noises off’deserves become a ‘regular’on the auction calendar.
Rendcomb Lot 346, a Gipsy Major propeller, fetched £247 and Lot 362 (sans demonstrator!) wool-lined civil flying suit and accessories £550.
(Onslow's)
Billinghurst
SOTHEBY's sale of historic aircraft, medals and aeronautica was held at their delightful Summers Place at  Billinghurst September 19 — the Saturday after Black Wednesday .
With Norman Lamont notably absent, those that gathered witnessed a smoothly conducted auction where the sales emphasis was decidedly on medals and aeronautica.
Crowning the occasion was the record-breaking price of £120,000 for Mick Mannock's VC, DSO and two bars.
There was a lively trade in most of the decorations and the wide array of aeronautica offered.
One aircraft was sold, Jet Heritage Ltd (JHL) of Bournemouth selling their blue JP for what their Eric Hayward called a ‘fairish price’ at £69,000.
Eric commented that trade at JHL was steady and that two JP s had for some time been seen as a luxury, so they were pleased to release G-JETP.
The other JHL airframes (and a couple of engines) were entered to see how the market was going.
Tangmere Military Aviation Museum had a busy day.
While they were entering their ‘surplus’ Hunter and Meteor at Billinghurst, they were taking delivery of Hawker P.1067 WB188 and Meteor IV (Special) EE549 from Cosford, having received them on loan from the RAF Museum.
Curator Andy Saunders commented that the Museum had been ‘agonising after they had gone into the sale’ if they were doing the right thing with WA984 and E-412.
The bids confirmed that they were best to hang on to them and they will now be refurbished and pole-mounted at the entrance to the Museum.
Tangmere are still looking for a home for T-33A 19252 — more details on .
Estimate on the JHL Jet Provost was £75–£90,000 and this underlined a problem with the airframes — wildly optimistic estimates/reserves.
The John Pierce syndicate cache of former Soviet salvage attracted much interest, but the expenditure in restoration to museum static condition precluded purchase prices of the range anticipated.
The remains of Ju 87R-4 6234 was estimated at £28–£32,000, bidding started a £10,000 slumped to £8,000 before the item was withdrawn.
Likewise the much more complete FW 189A-1, certainly unique (at least for the time being!) but beyond the means of most museums at an estimate of £120–£150,000.
This figure might well have been aimed at ‘warbird’ restorers but the FW 189 is possibly too ‘off beam’for the tastes of most of the established operator/restorers.
All in all a fascinating sale and again staged on a weekend, allowing more enthusiasts to strive for the memorabilia but possibly increasing the voyeur attendance.
The market may be depressed, but aviation auctions are not a thing of the past!
Spitfire model (Lot 105A) dives for cover amid the opulence of Billinghurst — it didn't sell.
(Details of the Reno auction can be found on page 49 .)
Devoted to Dakotas
Dakotas have had a major impact on the development of South African aviation.
The SAAF is the largest military user of the venerable Dak and is quite likely the largest user anywhere on the planet.
Both the military and civilian sector in the RSA have long since discovered that the only replacement for a Dakota is another Dakota!
HAVING OPERATED both the Douglas Dakota and the North American Harvard since the 1940s, the South African Air Force (SAAF — or Suid-Afrikaanse Lugmag — SALM) has treated both types equally.
Until very recently that is.
Certainly the political situation has meant to both types have possibly served beyond the time that they would have served had the SAAF had access to an open world market.
But armed forces are not known for being bastions of sentiment and it is definitely true that had the SAAF really needed to replace both types, it would have found a way to do so.
The only replacement…
A SAAF C-47TP, fresh from the conversion line at Ysterplaat.
Ready for another 40 years of faithful service?
Both types have had, and still have, a utility within the SAAF — they are both doing their respective jobs well.
The Harvard has recently undergone an instrumentation update programme — Project Ice Cream — to keep it competitive.
(See FlyPast June, p10.)
Both types have been treated to the SAAF's exacting maintenance standards and very likely represent the best of their breed still flying on a day-to-day basis.
C-47B-35DK 6865 turns at the Cape of Good Hope, during a formation training sortie.
But now the venerable types are going their own separate ways.
The SAAF will name which turboprop trainer it has chosen to replace the Harvard with the CFS (which itself will move from Dunnottar to Langebaanweg in 1993), ideally from 1995.
This will ultimately release a large quantity of Harvards onto the private market, although the SAAF has announced that this will be done in a steady trickle, in an attempt to keep the market price buoyant.
And the Dak ?
Well, the SAAF has come to a conclusion that others have long held — the only replacement for a Dakota is another Dakota!
Thus the Republic of South Africa (RSA) has spawned an indigenous conversion of the Dakota: a stretched fuselage for centre of gravity and increased capacity reasons, a new freight floor, new instrumentation and fittings and, turboprop power.
In this manner, who can tell when the SAAF will ultimately withdraw its workhorses?
The C-47TP (as it is known) will certainly serve its masters well into the next century.
The first SAAF Dakotas were based in their homeland from 1945, shuttling South African personnel home from the European war.
The SAAF had been operating Dakotas since June 1943, with a total of 58 on charge, flying principally from southern Africa to North Africa and then into Italy.
Operating under the aegis of 5 Wing, the two founder SAAF Dak units were 28 and 44 Squadrons.
Both units are still operational within the modern day SAAF: No 28 flying from Waterkloof with a mixed fleet of C0130B Hercules and C.160Z Transalls; No 44 is still flying the Dak , also out of Waterkloof.
Views of 35 Squadron Dakota 6865 on a sortie out of D F Malan, past Cape Town and the all-dominating Table Mountain.
Left: Aircrew for the Flypast sortie — our many thanks to all at 35 Squadron.
It was 28 Squadron that came properly home, with its 20 plus Dakotas in October 1945, repatriating South Africa's valiant nationals, and undertaking general flying duties within this huge country.
(No 44 disbanded in Italy in December 1945, but was going to reincarnate in 1953 on the Dak again.)
Meanwhile, the Dak took on a new role in 1948, as the mount of 60 Squadron, being used for two years on a nationwide aerial survey.
(No 60 still flies, from Waterkloof, using multi-role Boeing 707s.)
South Africa's coastline is littered with testaments to the savageness of the waters…
In 1963 28 Squadron gave up most of its Daks , the SAAF having chosen the mighty C-130B Hercules to replace them.
But Herks are not the best for VIP passengers and a handful of Daks remained with the unit until 1969 when the VIP element became independent as 21 Squadron.
Two years later, the HS. 125–400 executive jet (known to the SAAF as the Mercurius took over the mantle.
No 21 still fly, from Waterkloof, still with a handful of HS.125s and a wide fleet of other business jets.
A Dakleton on the ramp at D F Malan.
With the advent of the C-47TP, 35 Squadron will be able to extend their search and rescue missions.
One look at the RSA's geography reveals that the maritime aspect is very important.
In 1957 the first Avro Shackletons arrived at Ysterplaat, equipping 35 Squadron, becoming the main thrust of the SAAF's maritime patrol and rescue operations.
(See FlyPast July, p72.)
The need to relieve the Shacks from inshore patrol work, and to fill a gap left by the retirement of the last Lockheed Venturas in the early 1960s, saw the rebirth of 25 Squadron in 1968 at Ysterplaat — the first taste of sea air for the SAAF Dakotas.
By the early 1980s there were three main Dak units,(plus a few of the breed scattered around as base hacks ): No 25 at Ysterplaat on maritime work, No 44 at Swartkop on general duties and a training unit, 86 Multi-Engine Flying School (MEFS) at Bloemspruit.
Dakotas were used to support the operations in South West Africa against SWAPO insurgents up to the peace settlement of 1989.
In 1984, 35 Squadron regretfully retired its Shackletons, as spares became impossible through the bite of sanctions.
The need for maritime work remained, although it was clear that the anti-submarine role was no longer a possibility (although in those days, Soviet submarines and surface shipping were still something to be feared as they passed the Cape in both directions).
Thus 35 Squadron took on a ‘new’ type at its base at D F Malan Airport — the Dakota!
Equipped for maritime operation and painted in dark grey and white, it was inevitable that they be called Dakletons !
In November 1990 No 35 absorbed the Daks from 25 Squadron at nearby Ysterplaat, becoming a mixed role unit, taking in maritime patrol, general transport duties, target towing and navigator training!
So, today, the SAAF still has three Dakota units and looks set to for a long time to come.
No 86 MEFS at Bloemspruit will continue to train for those bound for Daks and bigger transports and is tipped to be the last to convert to the ‘new generation’ Dakota.
During July this year, 44 Squadron ‘B’ Flight moved to a new home at Waterkloof from Swartkop and, along with the other transport units, is to embrace the C-47TP completely.
‘A’ Flight of 44 is getting ready to disband and to retire its fleet of Douglas C-54s and DC-4s.
These have served the SAAF well, undertaking a variety of roles, and all reported to be earmarked for museums.
FlyPast had the honour of visiting the very busy 35 Squadron at D F Malan Airport (Cape Town's main airport) and to fly with the general transport element on a formation training sortie that took in the Cape Town coast and the all-dominating vista of Table Mountain.
The unit employs a mix of camouflaged Dakotas for general transport and paratroop work and the maritime-configured Dakletons .
With 44 Squadron at Swartkop (shortly Waterkloof) to cover the north of the country, 35 has a vast ‘beat’ covering all of the south and west.
As already mentioned, the unit undertakes target towing work for the Army in the region — No 35's first C-47TP was so equipped.
Ysterplaat-based 25 Squadron used to boast superbly-painted yellow and black ‘dazzle’ striped Dak for this work, but with the guerilla conflict in South West Africa, all of the Dakota fleet were given tactical camouflage.
As well as these tasks, 35 Squadron also trains navigator students for the SAAF.
From D F Malan, trained nav students go down to Langebaanweg to take the  back-seat (literally!) in Atlas Impala jet trainers for further instruction.
Tactical formation training off the Cape Town coast.
Dakletons have a crew of seven or eight and a patrol time of six hours.
Their main role is search and rescue, but economic zone surveillance is also undertaken.
Cameras are carried to photograph trawlers thought to be abusing fishing limits and vessels suspected of drug-running.
Within the Dakleton is a comprehensive radar/nav fit and the rear fuselage has been modified to take a battery of smoke canisters and flares, which can be ejected from a series of chutes in the under-fuselage.
A 10-man air droppable life-raft is the main rescue element, although in most cases the Dak 's main aim in a rescue is to find the subject,assist if needed while directing surface assets to the scene.
No 35 operates a 24-hour service, throughout the year.
While the Dak can hardly be called a sprinter, its relative simplicity means that a true ‘cab rank’ operation can be staged, with the aircraft out on the pan ready to start as soon as the alarm is raised and a back-up aircraft ready to go beyond that very quickly.
While not as well equipped, the general transport Daks can assist their maritime brothers in eyeball searches.
With such a huge area to search and a coastline renowned for its ever-changing currents and vicious rocks, those who man the Dakletons rely on the sharpness and accuracy of the emergency call.
A precise call can dramatically reduce the size of the psyche area.
Aircrew were looking forward to full use of the C-47TP as it will have more room within its stretched fuselage for more equipment and have an 11 hour endurance.
No 35 Squadron have been introduced to the ‘new’ Dakota, but the maritime conversion will involve a lot of internal work and will consequently be carried out later in the replacement programme.
As well as survivors from the original 58 Dakotas acquired between June 1943 and mid-1945, the SAAF has added other aircraft to its fleet over the years.
In 1971 the SAAF took the five remaining Daks of national carrier South African Airways (SAA).
Others have been acquired from other sources, although the exact origins of some of these remain somewhat obscure.
Recently, the SAAF returned one of the SAA Dakotas, namely serial number 6888 which served with 44 Squadron.
This aircraft is being worked upon by volunteers to become ZS-BXF again and join CASA 352L ZS-AFA (see FlyPast May p40) in SAA's ‘historic flight’.
No 6888 was built as C-47A-1 by Douglas at Oklahoma City as 42–92320, but diverted to the RAF, becoming Dakota III FZ572 and was taken on charge at Nassau in December 1943, joining the SAAF as 6821 the following month and served with 5 Wing (28 and 44 Squadrons) until joining SAA as ZS-BXF in August 1948.
She was ‘called-up’ again by the SAAF in February 1971, this time taking on the serial 6888.
Now back at Jan Smuts Airport,X-Ray Foxtrot may well have flown for the second time in civvies by the time these words are read.
Under the project name Felstone , work is currently underway, at Ysterplaat and at Snake Valley (adjacent to Swartkop, near Pretoria) to convert the majority of SAAF Dakotas into stretched, turboprop powered, fully upgraded C-47TP ‘Super Dakotas’.
It is thought that up to 48 SAAF aircraft could be converted, with just a few of the original piston-engined airframes being held for museum use.
This conversion is very similar to that undertaken by the RSA's Professional Aviation (who had one of their Jet Prop DC-3 conversions at Farnborough — see page 52) and effectively produces a ‘zero-time’ aircraft.
This conversion is not to be seen as a ‘stop-gap’ conversion for the SAAF.
The resulting aircraft is much more versatile than even the legendary DC-3 and avoids the ever increasing costs of maintaining and operating a piston engined aircraft — turbine fuel is available worldwide but fuel for reciprocating engines is available in an ever diminishing number  
A 44 Squadron ‘A’ Flight DC-4 on the ramp at Swartkop.
The unit is shortly to retire the type.
what's new
USA Bound?
Aircraft and Aerospace Museum Guide (Bruce/Beeson Publishers, 214pp, illus, sbk, $18.00 inc air parcel post) by Ronald Stone should be in the pocket of any aviation enthusiast who is touring the USA and Canada, for listed between the covers are all the museums that include aircraft in those two countries.
All of the entries contain details of location, times of opening, admission prices, some of which are illustrated with a small map showing the exact location of the facilities, which when in a strange land will prove to be very helpful.
A glance through the pages shows the wealth of preserved aircraft that are accessible to the visitor throughout America and Canada.
Apres moi…
Next year sees the 50th anniversary of the astonishing Dambusters raid.
Tucann Design & Print commissioned artist Pete West to produce what turned out to be a stunningly atmospheric portrayal of the event.
This was no easy task, night raids are difficult to convey on canvas and a raid so radically different from all others presented many problems.
But Peter triumphed and this print will be much sought after.
(Key Publishing snapped-up Pete some time ago as illustrator-designer, so we may be biased, but the painting speaks for itself!) 25’ x 17’, there are just 1,000 signed by the artist and historian Jim Shortland.
A special offer to FlyPast readers puts Apres Moi, le Deluge at just £40 (inc p&p or £44 overseas.
Holy Smoke
Burnt Roof (published by the Author, 107pp, illus, hbk, £11.70 inc p&p) by The Reverend A A Upton is the story of St Laurence's Church, Foleshill, which was the first church in Coventry to be closed as a result of Germany's Blitz on Britain during 1940.
The recorded history of the church goes back to the mid-12th century, and in this study the Author describes church life in Foleshill from the outbreak of World War Two, right through to the restoration of the Old Church (as it is known locally).
Apart from the effects of the war on the local populace and their church, the book also contains a chapter on the German Luftwaffe 's KG100 that was involved in the attack.
Mossie in close-up
The de Havilland Mosquito, An Illustrated History (Aston Publications, 160pp, illus, hbk, £17.95) by Stuart Howe, is as the title suggests, a pictorial look at this classic aircraft's career.
If as the saying goes ‘a picture says a thousand words’, this book is full to the brim and overflowing.
Starting with a fascinating selection of photos taken during Mosquito production at Hatfield (UK), Downsview (Canada) and Bankstown (Australia), further sections deal with the fighter and bomber variants of this maid-of-all-work, only serving to illustrate what an aesthetically pleasing aircraft the Mosquito was from all angles.
Of particular interest to the reviewer were the sections of the book depicting the various foreign air arms that flew Mosquitos and the post-war civilian operators of the type, the latter illustrating numerous air racing and speed record attempts made with the Wooden Wonder .
Airmen
Night Flyer (Goodall Publications, 210pp, sbk, £3.50) by Lewis Brandon tells of some of the exciting episodes shared by the Author and his pilot, W/C James Benson, during their partnership as one of the most successful night-fighter crews in the RAF during World War Two.
Flying Beaufighters and Mosquitos in 141, 15777 and 488 Squadrons, these were the pioneering days of Airborne Interception (Al) radar, one of the best-kept secret of the War.
Pathfinder Pilot (published by the Author, 66pp, illus, sbk, £7.00 inc p&p) by Roger Perkins is the story of one representative lost airman, just one of the 55,000 RAF Bomber Command crews that were lost during World War Two.
F/L Selwyn Alcock was a pilot with 83 (PFF) Squadron, he was never famous, never a national hero, just one of the many that came from obscurity and passed into oblivion.
Lost with his entire Lancaster crew on his 49th sortie, this is his story, the way that he lived and the war that he fought.
Always unheard and underwritten, the war fought by pilots and crews flying hazardous torpedo missions is brought to the fore in Torpedo Leader (Grub Street, 206pp, illus, hbk, £16.95) by Patrick Gibbs.
With his first wartime posting as Flight Commander to 22 (Beaufort) Squadron culminating with the award of a DFC at the end of 1941, a move in the spring of 1942 saw the Author with 39 Squadron flying Beauforts in the Middle East.
Relating some of the harrowing experiences on torpedo operations the Author succeeds in filling the reader with admiration for the unsung crews of the torpedo aircraft.
While books abound about American pilots and their P-51 Mustangs and B-17 Flying Fortresses, very few books are written about the training that these pilots had to go through before being sent out to fight.
Mister (University of Washington Press, 207pp, illus, hbk, $19.95) by Eugene Fletcher is one man's story of his training in the USA.
The danger, the boredom, the ever-present discipline along with the exhilaration of aviation training are all vividly recalled.
By January 1944, Fletcher had command of a B-17 bomber and a ten man crew.
He was 22.
Colour softbacks
Two more ‘picture books’ have flown into the FlyPast office recently.
Classic Propliners (Airlife, illus, sbk, £9.95) by the late Colin Addison will delight any propliner fan.
Full to the brim with photographs taken around the world of Dakotas, Constellations, DC-4s/-6s/-7s, Viscounts, Electras, Convairs and Commandos, in various colourful paint schemes, these pictures show why there is such a following for the propeller-driven airliner of yesteryear.
Sadly no longer with us, this book is a fine testament to the camera skills of Colin Addison.
Century Series Fighters (Airlife, illus, sbk, £9.95) by Peter Foster is a colourful look at the American second generation jet fighters, from the F-100 to the F-106.
Illustrated in a multitude of colourful paint schemes are the Super Sabre, Voodoo, Delta Dagger (or Duce as it was known to its crews), Starfighter, Thunderchief and Delta Dart.
While both these colour books provide hours of pleasant browsing material, I do wish that the habit of printing a picture across two pages would cease, for inevitably part of the subject disappears down the crease!
Fighting quartet
RAF Fighter Command 19-36-1968 (PSL, 253pp, illus, hbk, £18.99) by Norman Franks puts into one packed volume the 32 years of the Royal Air Force's most famous Command.
Not intended to be an in-depth study, but rather to present an interesting view of Fighter Command with a ‘what it was like’ aspect, brought out through the input of famous veterans of the force.
Fighter Command's finest hour was of course the Battle of Britain, but this book gives the whole story of the men and the machines from its formation in 1936 until its absorption into Strike Command in 1968.
The recently-published biography of ACM Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory Big Wing (Airlife, 200pp, illus, hbk, £16.95) written by Bill Newton Dunn (the great nephew of Leigh-Mallory), gives a great insight into the man who will be remembered for his implementation of the Big Wing theory during the Battle of  Britain.
As Commander of 12 Group during 1940 he later rose to become C-in-C Fighter Command during 1942.
Losing his life in the crash of Avro York in the foothills of the Alps late in 1944, there is no doubt that despite the controversy that still surrounds the Big Wing theory, the RAF lost one of its most brilliant commanders.
Fighter Operations (PSL, 176pp, illus, hbk, £17.50) by Jerry Scutts, puts forward an overview of the role that pilots have played over nearly eight decades of flight, not as gung-ho gladiators (as many view the fighter pilot), but as part of a finely honed fighting unit.
Looking in detail at an RFC squadron on the Western Front, a typical RAF fighter sweep during World War Two.
Mustang bomber escort missions to Japan, MIG-15 and F-86 Sabre clashes in Korea and Phantom versus MIG in Vietnam, the reader can learn how fighter tactics have evolved alongside the fighter aircraft employed in them.
The story is brought bang up to date with chapters on the Falklands conflict and the more recent Gulf War.
For those with an interest in tactics and techniques, this book will be worthy addition to the bookshelf.
Fighter Pilot's Handbook (Arms and Armour, 224pp, illus, sbk, £14.99) by John Roberts, will be of limited interest to the die-hard FlyPast reader.
However it does give very authoritative descriptions of fighting aircraft, training, tactics and war reports.
Some interesting comparisons can be made between RAF and USAF training methods.
Includes many listings of comparative aircraft, fighter pilot films, fighter aces, and fighter terms, the latter describing some of the slang used by fighter pilots over the years.
From the mint Canada continues to produce coins with an aviation theme.
Sterling silver, containing one troy ounce, struck in proof finish with a 24-carat gold-covered oval cameo, each £20Can coin has a run of only 50,000 and come in presentation cases.
Latest show the Curtiss JN-4 Canuck and Sir Frank Wilton Baillie's Gipsy Moth.
(Those previously released are: Anson & Harvard, Lancaster, Silver Dart and Beaver and complete sets are still available.)
Aviation heavyweight
Chronicle of Aviation (JL International Publishing, 984pp, illus, hbk, £29.95) edited by Bill Gunston, is one of those coffee table sized encyclopaedia books that contains almost anything and everything about aviation!
It's the sort of book that requires two hands to lift, but will provide endless of hours of browsing pleasure.
A mass of facts and figures which embrace not only the year by year progress of aviation, but also features separate sections on piston and jet engines and their development, propellers, fuel, and world airlines and their respective histories.
Charting aviation's history from 1903 to 1991 the tome is illustrated with no less than 4,000 photographs.
If the bookshelf can stand the weight, readers will find themselves dipping into the mass of information which is ideal for both research and casual reading.
On the gate
RAF Gate Guards (Airlife, 203pp, illus, hbk, £19.95) by Jim Simpson is a handy guide to all the aircraft that guard the gates of RAF establishments at home and abroad.
Presented in base alphabetical order, it ranges from Abingdon to Wyton, with a detailed history of each aircraft for each gate, along with photographs of the aircraft whilst in service and/or in its position on the gate.
Also listed are the various plastic Hurricane and Spitfire replicas that now replace the real thing at several RAF stations.
An interesting addition is a presentation of all former gate guard airframes and their subsequent fates.
Stars n Bars
With the 50th anniversary of the USAAF in the UK, many books have appeared this year, and will probably continue to do so.
One of the most recent ones being Martin Bowman's Four Miles High (PSL, 240pp, illus, hbk, £20.00).
Combining text and photos from two of his previous books,Castles in the Air and Fields of Little America , the Author updates those two volumes and many more original photos gained from private collections around the world, and along with additional narrative, puts together a comprehensive account of the USAAF's war in the skies above Britain from 1942 until final victory in 1945.
Previously published in 1978,Thunderbolt, A Documentary History (Arms & Armour, 152pp, illus, hbk, £16.99) by Roger Freeman has recently bee released in an updated form.
Up to Roger Freeman's impeccable standards, the book details the history of World War Two's largest single-seat fighter from inception to operational service in World War Two and beyond.
Able to absorb large amounts of punishment in combat, the P-47 Jug was respected and admired by its pilots and groundcrews alike, emerging as one of the great fighting aircraft of World War Two.
Classic Coonts
All His Own Work could have been the title of Stephen Coonts' book, instead he chose to call it The Cannibal Queen (Century Publishing, 344pp, illus, hbk, £16.99).
It tells the fascinating story of his summer of 1991, which he spent flying a Stearman (nicknamed Cannibal Queen ) around the USA, touching down in all 48 states of the continental United States.
Coonts, whose experiences include flying A-6 Intruders from the carrier USS Enterprise during the Vietnam War, relates this aerial odyssey across America as it can only be told from the cockpit!
During the trip the tiny biplane swoops under storms and over mountains, across swamps, deserts, forests and the large expanse of the Great Plains, with the Author painting a vivid panorama of landscapes beneath him, from San Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge to the Presidential Heads on Mount Rushmore.
Apart from the obvious aviation interest, reading this book is like watching a travelog on the USA, and once picked up it proves to be difficult to put back down!
On the run
Full Circle (Independent Books, 380pp, illus, hbk, £14.95) by Ulrich Steinhilper and Peter Osborne, is the third in the trilogy of books relating the experiences of German World War Two fighter pilot Ulrich Steinhilper and completes the remarkable story of his escape from a PoW camp in Canada.
Having escaped from custody three times, he was more determined than ever to use all and every means to return to Germany.
Along with his colleagues, more escapes were planned and other schemes hatched.
Then, against the advice of all, he embarks upon a final desperate attempt, which he later describes as the worst mistake he ever made.
Forced March To Freedom (Ryerson Press, 100pp, illus, sbk, $12.95) by Robert Buckman is the Author's story of PoWs of Stalag Luft III and their two forced marches across Germany in the final months of World War Two.
Compiled with notes and drawings made by the Author at the time, this small book gives an insight into the hard life endured by PoWs.
Good journals guide
Cross and Cockade International Journal (56pp, illus, sbk) published quarterly by Cross and Cockade, the society of World War One historians is a high quality publication obtainable through membership of the Society.
Featuring many in-depth articles regarding the aircraft of the Great War the journal is packed with facts and figures that will satisfy any World War One buff.
To tempt people further to sample their journal, Cross & Cockade are offering FlyPast enquirers a free copy.
DCO (Spitfire Enterprises Ltd. 28pp, illus, sbk) is the journal of the Southampton based Spitfire Society and is issued to members on a regular basis.
The society and the journal is a must for anyone associated with or interested in the Spitfire.
Containing many items of interest,DCO keeps members up-to-date with Spitfire comings and goings around the world, as well as historical articles.
Biggles and Co, The W E Johns Quarterly Magazine (40pp, illus, sbk) is another society produced magazine.
Keeping members in touch with all things Biggles (the aviation hero from the pen of Captain W E Johns) it consists of historical articles as well as news of new Biggles book releases.
THAT time of the year is approaching…
Our December issue will carry a bumper What's New , which will include books, videos, prints and other aviation-related gifts.
Retailers, publishers etc make sure your product gets a mention — contact FlyPast before October 23.
AIRSHOW 92
Rendcomb Aerial Derby September 13
FOR THE SECOND Rendcomb Aerial Derby, held at the picturesque Cotswold airfield, pilots and aircraft battled with all that the elements could provide.
Low cloud and rain hampered the flying during the early part of the afternoon's flying programme, but by mid-afternoon the bad weather had passed and bright sunshine and blue skies were the order of the day for the rest of the event.
Even though the morning's inclement weather prevented some aircraft from reaching Rendcomb, an interesting selection of display and visiting aircraft could be seen by the undaunted crown that turned up during the awful morning.
The trio of intrepid wing-walkers take-off atop the Crunchie Stearman biplanes at their home base during the Rendcomb Aerial Derby.
‘Guesting’ on the Save The Children Fund -schemed example was the somewhat backward Simon Ward!
In the main, biplanes ruled the roost at Rendcomb, although a warbird interlude included Spitfire IX MJ730/G-HFIX owned by David Pennell, but flown by Andy Sephton.
Paul Warren put on the usual impressive display in the Grumman Tigercat, Norman Lees flew David Gilmour's Mustang N51RR and Peter Henley put Mosquito T.III RR299/G-ASKH through its paces in a smooth, co-ordinated display showing the lines of this classic British World War Two aircraft.
On the aerobatics front there was much to interest the audience, ranging from: Cap 20 G-BIPO, Laser 200 G-BOYZ, Pitts S-1E G-OTSW, Stampe SV-4C G-AYWT, Zlin Z.50LS G-MATE and Yak 50 G-IVAR.
On a more sedate note there were classic British de Havilland biplanes which included the Tiger Moth Diamond Nine Team, DH.83 Fox Moth G-ADHA and Torquil Norman's recently-restored DH.90 Dragonfly G-AEDU.
Others in the participating list included, Leopard Moths G-ACMN and G-ACUS, Puss Moth G-AAZP, the Harvard Radial Pair, Chipmunk WG348/G-BBMV and Ryan PT-22 N56028.
Performing a rip-roaring display over their home base were the Crunchie Flying Circus, with guest wing-walker Simon Ward.
The trio of Stearman biplanes had the crowd enthralled with their formation routine.
Providing a nostalgic look back to the days of World War One were the Great War Combat Team, who were ideally suited to this venue, flying three SE.5a replicas, Fokker D.VII G-BBFPL, Fokker Triplane N152JS along with Robin Bowes ‘guesting’ in Fokker Triplane G-ATJM, the latter failing to sell at the Onslow's Auction that was held at Rendcomb on the same day (see page 30).
Above: Tiger Moth G-AKXS flies low along the crowd line at the end of the Diamond Nine Team's routine.
In only the second year of operation, the ‘jetless’ Rendcomb Aerial Derby looks firmly set to take over the mantle of the Badminton Air Day, now sadly defunct.
Below: Enthusiasts present at Rendcomb were pleased to see Fokker Triplane G-ATJM displayed by Robin Bowes.
Since its restoration at Duxford several years ago, this Dridekker has been an infrequent visitor to airshows and was most welcome flying alongside the other replicas in the Great War Combat Team.
Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada Crowds at a small airshow here were treated to a formation of three TBM Avengers of the resident Forest Protection Ltd.
Not content with this, they then turned their attentions to the runway and ‘bombed’ it with the full venom of coloured water from their tanks!
C-GFPL is shown at work here.
Dreamflight Airshow, Cranfield, September 20 Overshadowed at Cranfield due to Vulcan XH558's last display (see also page 26) was Westland Whirlwind Srs 2 G-AYXT making a rare appearance in the flying display.
Formerly HAS.7 XK940 with the Royal Navy, it is now privately owned and operated by Jim Wilkie, based at Blackpool.
Battle of Britain Air Display, RAF Finningley, September 19 Dominating the aircraft at Finningley were the F-18 Hornets of the US Navy Blue Angels team.
They were caught here during the press preview when the elements were much kinder!
Also welcome was their TC-130G Hercules Fat Albert support ship, still steadfastly wearing team colours.
National Championships Air Races, Reno Nevada, September 17/20
Hot-foot from Reno with the race results as ever,FlyPast will cover the event with a full report in the December issue.
Seen at Reno in 1986 undergoing engine runs,Tiger Destefani's much modified P-51 Strega N71FT romped home in this year's Unlimited Gold Race on September 20, breaking the dominance of Bearcat Rare Bear .
Brian Sanders flew the corncob R-4360-powered Sea Fury NX20SF Dreadnought, pictured here in the pits during 1986, to second place in the Unlimited Gold Race at this year's Reno event.
Rick Cole's Reno Auction
LOW PRICES were realised at the Rick Cole Reno Auction on September 18/19.
Around 40 antique and warbird aircraft flew in for the auction, which co-incided with the annual Reno Air Races.
Reportedly a total of only 14 aircraft were sold over the two day event, and those that actually sold realised low prices, making it somewhat of a buyer's market.
A full report will appear in the December Fly/Past , but some of the prize ‘lots’ were either withdrawn or bids came nowhere near their  allotted reserves.
Lefty Gardner's P-38 Lightning White Lightnin and a 1929 Ford Trimotor, both of which were included in pre-auction publicity were withdrawn from the sale.
Bob Hoover's well-known P-51D Mustang Old Yeller had a reserve of $1m and only reached $500,000 in the bidding.
However, bargains were to be had in this depressed time, with a Cessna 0–2A expected to sell in the $85–105,000 range actually being sold for $56,000.
At the same time, this year's Champion T-34 at Oshkosh, N9053R had a reserve of $300,000, and only reached $175,000.
Alongside the massive Oshkosh fly-in is lovely Lake Winnebago.
Here is staged a ‘fringe’ event, the Seaplane Pilots' Association ‘Splash-in’.
FlyPast sampled a happening that many enthusiasts ignore.
Far Left: Idyllic scene at Lake Winnebago, as a Lake  Buccaneer floats towards its mooring position.
Top: Rare visitor at the Oshkosh Splash-in was Willie Ropp's Curtiss-Wright Travel Air 16E N12380.
Above: Serene scene as a Piper Cub floatplane taxies past a selection of Cessna floatplane variants at the Brennand Seaplane Base, during Oshkosh 92.
Left: Float equipped Piper Pacer King Loon N17PC joins the throng of other ‘floaters’ at Lake Winnebago.
Note the downturned wingtips and large ventral fin.
HEAD to HEAD
Farnborough International 92, September 6/13
Two rivals glared at one another across the ramp.
While they might have looked out of place next to the modern heavy metal, they are vying for a lucrative market.
SEDUCTIVE though the Russian hardware might have been at Farnborough, the seasoned Fly/Past reader had the eye drawn by two aircraft nose-to-nose at the ‘Black Sheds’ end of the static.
After several false starts, it would appear that viable turboprop conversions of the Douglas DC-3 have at last come about and two companies are actively campaigning to take a slice of the market.
Head-to-head, the Basler Turbo-67 (left) and the Professional Aviation Jet Prop DC-3 attracted a lot of interest at Farnborough.
Rugged, reliable and easy to maintain, harnessing a complex turboprop to the Dak would seem to be going the wrong way.
The notion of converting the Dak to turbo-power has come about not primarily to give it better performance, better uplift, greater range — although all of these assets, and more, are by-products of the transformation — but to allow the aircraft to survive in a world where Avgas — fuel for piston engines — is becoming increasingly rare and Avtur — aviation turbine fuel — is the dominant motion lotion.
The turboprop has also undergone a maturing process that now makes it an easy engine to work on and spectacularly reliable.
Both turbine options were in close formation in the static at Farnborough and a superficial look would show little between them.
Both are US in origin, the Basler Turbo-67 having been around since 1988 and in ‘production’ at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, since 1990.
The Professional Aviation Jet Prop DC-3 from the Republic of South Africa (marking the first time the RSA has ever displayed an aircraft at Farnborough) employs the Schafer/Aero Modifications International design (first flown in the US in August 1986) and they have been ‘building’ examples since 1991.
Both use the very successful Pratt & Whitney Canada PT6A turboprop of 1,424shp (the -67R in the Turbo-67, the -65AR in the Jet Prop) driving Hartzell five-bladed feathering and reversing propellers.
(These Daks can go backwards, with care!)
Formal view of Basler's N96BF, with cargo door open on the port side.
Basler have chosen to alter the cabin glazing to porthole style.
A deeper look, however, reveals different approaches in engineering and aerodynamics required to replace the faithful Pratt & Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasps of  1,200 hp.
The turbo engines have a much smaller frontal cross-section than their reciprocating forebears and therefore require modifications to the centre section, bulkhead, bearers and nacelles.
The routing for the jet efflux also needs to be considered.
As will be seen by the illustrations, Basler and Professional/AMI have come up with very different looking installations.
Fore and aft view of the PT6A installation on the Basler Turbo-67.
Fitting the PT6As requires major surgery to the fuselage because they are much lighter than the R-1830s and would radically alter the DC-3's centre of gravity.
To balance this out both conversions have ‘stretched’ the fuselage by 40’, placing a ‘plug’ahead of the leading edge and before the flightdeck.
This brings the aircraft back into balance and instantly increases both the capacity and length of the cargo floor, or cabin if seats are to be installed.
As the conversion required a full strip down, both Basler and Professional have taken the opportunity to ‘zero time’ the airframe, to replace and radically improve systems, change and update all of the cockpit instrumentation.
This is extensive work and provides the DC-3/C-47 operator an opportunity to greatly enhance the navigation, blind flying and communications facilities at the same time.
Customer options are legion.
Professional's former RAF Dakota maintains the large cabin windows and original freight door.
Apart from the geometry and ‘plumbing’ of the engine installation, the two conversions differ also in the flying surfaces and the cargo door.
Basler have gone for metal-covered flying surfaces all round and have altered the shape of the wingtips — giving the DC-3's nicely curved wingtips an angular look.
Professional — with a greater mind for ‘bush’ operations perhaps — have opted to keep the fabric-covered flying surfaces, citing ease of maintenance in the field as the main reason.
Basler have undertaken extensive modifications to the already capacious DC-3 cargo door.
This allows for up to five of the airline-standard LD3 containers to be loaded — many DC-3s still earn their crust flying night mail and small package freight and ease of cargo handling is important.
Professional had not modded the doors on their demonstrator at Farnborough, but were offering options that included a cargo winch and other turnaround improvers.
The Professional Aviation/AMI engine fit is less chunky and employs the original Douglas rear nacelle.
Both aircraft head-to-head at Farnborough were built in 1944 at the Oklahoma City plant, but beyond that they went very separate ways until meeting up in the UK in September, both toting turboprops.
Basler's N96BF was built for the US Navy as R4D-5 (C-47A-25DK equivalent) BuNo 17223 and served with them until joining the French naval air arm —Aeronavale — in early 1964.
She was sold in the USA, as N17223, in 1982 and filtered through to the impressive ‘stock’ at Basler's Oshkosh facility, before becoming a Turbo-67.
Basler have a knack of being in the right place at the right time for acquiring military disposals, their ramp is currently full for former Canadian Armed Forces Daks , awaiting their turn for conversion.
Professional's ZS-LYW was built for the USAAF as C-47B-1-DK 43–48541 and joined the RAF as Dakota IV KJ863 in August 1944 before joining the nascent Pakistan Air Force (as H-713) sometime in 1947/1948.
Acquired by UK dealers Field Aircraft in 1954,Lima Whisky was briefly on the UK register as G-ANLK before travelling to the USA, initially as N1592V before joining the Canadian operator Millardair.
Via a US dealer, she made the journey to the RSA in 1990.
With a large population of working Dakotas still ploughing faithfully on, the marketplace for turbo conversions has great potential.
While purists may look on and dislike what the engineers have done to the looks of the Gooney , it looks as through this surgery may help keep the old girl flying commercially well towards the type's centenary!
National Warplane Museum Display, Geneseo, NY, August 15/16
Britain was not only one to have wet August displays, Chuck Sloat presents an air-to-air portfolio from a damp Geneseo.
Top: Craig Wadsworth at the helm of International Vintage Aviation's US Navy-schemed JRB-4, based at Hamilton, Ontario.
Above: The Confederate Air Force SB2C-5 Helldiver was part of a varied, but down on previous years, attendance at the charismatic Geneseo airfield.
Right: Two more from Canada, former RCAF bubble-canopied Chipmunks
‘026’ flown by Peter Spence and ‘035’of the Canadian Warplane Heritage, flown by Doug Brown.
american classics
Gee Bees
OF ALL THE CLASSIC American aircraft, the products of the Granville Brothers must rank very near the top of the tree.
Although they built a mere 30 or so aircraft between 1929 and the end of 1933 when they formally went out of business, their racing craft took most of the major air races in that time and broke the world speed record for landplanes on one occasion — no mean achievement for a team that worked from hand-to-mouth most of the time and had little formal education.
Zantford Granny Granville was a motor mechanic who decided that he wanted to get into aviation, so offered to work as a mechanic at East Boston Airport in exchange for flying lessons.
By the time he had got his licence he was rated as one of the best aircraft mechanics in the area.
He then decided he could make a better biplane than many that he daily worked upon and with his four brothers (Tom, Mark, Bob and Ed), they built the first ‘Gee Bee’.
This became their Model A (sometimes listed as Model P), and attracted the attention of local businessmen who financed its production, setting up in Springfield, Massachusetts.
The Model A was a two-seater side-by-side biplane, powered by a 118hp Kinner K-5 five-cylinder radial engine.
Construction was conventional, with a tubular steel fuselage covered in fabric.
The wings had spruce spars and ribs, with ailerons on the top wings only.
The tailplane and fin were of steel tube and the undercarriage of split type, using combined oleo and rubber in compression shock absorbers.
Floats could be fitted.
Nine Model As were built  but the depression threatened the future well-being of the Company, and drastic measures were needed to survive.
This year's Oshkosh was graced by the Super Sportster replica NR2101 (alias N117GB), powered by a Wasp Junior.
Granny Granville decided that there was a potential market amongst sports pilots, the relatively few rich young people who still had money.
He designed a small single-seat monoplane which could be used for little but fun flying and possibly racing.
Nine of these were sold before the market was used up.
The sportster was a low wing single seater, with fixed undercarriage.
The fuselage was of welded steel tube, faired to an oval section, with spruce formers, and fabric covered.
The cockpit was well upholstered, to suit the well-heeled customers needs and 40 lbs of luggage could be carried.
The wings had solid spruce spars, and consisted of a centre section and outer panels, with spruce and plywood ribs.
The ailerons had sheet steel ribs on a tubular spar.
The centre section was braced to the top longeron by two, steel, tubular struts, and the outer wings by streamlined, steel, tie rods to the undercarriage structure underneath, and to a steel tube pylon inside the fuselage, above the wings.
The tall surfaces were of steel tube, fabric covered.
The landing gear was unfaired on the prototype Model ‘X’(NC49V), but the first Model E had spats and later streamlined pants were fitted.
Five different engines were offered on the Sportster.
The Model X had a 110hp ACE Cirrus Ensign, later designated the Model B. This was followed by the Model C fitted with a 95hp Menasco Pirate B-4 and the Model D with the 125hp Pirate C-4 (NC855Y and NC 11043), certificated under ATC.404 in March 1931.
The Model E was the last and had a 110hp Warner Scarab,(NC 11041, ‘11044, ‘856Y, ‘46V and ‘72V) but the Model F was the original B with the Fairchild 6–390, but none was ordered as such.
The B, C and E were certificated under ATC.398 in February 1931.
The original Model X (NR49V) was known also as the Cirrus Derby Racer and Lowell Bayles flew it into second Place in the 1930 All-America Derby.
This was over a 5,500 mile course.
The Model E NC46V was used by Bayles to gain fourth place in the 1931 National Air Tour at over 140mph and at the National Air Races in that year Robert Hall (chief designer to Granville Brothers Aircraft Inc) flew the Sportster D NC11043 to gain first place in a 400cu in pylon race, and Bayles and Mae Haizlip used the same aircraft to gain places in several other races in 1931.
William Rausch flew it in 1932 in the New York to Cleveland Leeds Trophy Race and the Sohio Mystery Derby.
Cash was flowing out quicker than it came in during 1930 and this led to the idea that a new racer could be built to earn the ‘big money’ at the National Air Races, where the winner had just taken $15,000.
Hence the Springfield Air Racing Association was formed to finance the building of the Model Z ‘Super Sportster’.
Cash was slow to come in, but Pratt & Whitney offered the loan of a Wasp, and NR77V soon took shape.
Lowell Bayles paid $500 for the chance to fly the aircraft and it was completed with only a week to go to the National Air Races at Cleveland.
It was estimated to do as much as 270mph on the 535hp Wasp, but on the Shell Qualifying Course managed 286 mph.
On the following day it took the Goodyear Trophy at 206 mph, flown by Hall, it took the next two races, again cruising round the course.
In the next race, the Thompson Trophy, Bayles won at 236 mph, beating Doolittle in the Laird Super Solution which had a broken piston ring.
In the name race the newer Senior Sportster Y, flown by Bob Hall, came fourth.
Gee Bee A N901K is kept airworthy by the New England Air Museum.
The Super Sportster Z had won every race it entered and the shareholders go a good dividend.
As it was certain that the aircraft could go faster an attempt was made on the world speed record.
Four passes were needed over the course, but on the first three attempts engine trouble prevented  completion, even though 314 mph was clocked on one pass.
Finally on December 5, 1931, the last attempt was made.
During this the right wing broke up — probably due to aileron flutter — and Bayles was killed.
At the same time as the Super Sportster was being built, the loan of the engine altered the budgeting and allowed the building of a new model, the Senior Sportster or Model Y with a 420hp Pratt & Whitney Wasp.
This was a two-seater Sportster fitted with a high powered engine, and the airframe beefed-up.
The first aircraft, Model YW, was registered X11049, and apart from success in the Thompson mentioned above, was flown by Mae Tait to win the 1931 Aerol Trophy at 187.6 mph.
This followed repairs when Bob Hall took two feet off a wingtip while turning too close to the ground in the Goodyear Trophy race.
She won several races in 1932.
A further Model Y with a 240 mph Wright J-6 (designated YL, registered N718Y), was built and raced by Florence Klingensmith.
She came second in a women's international free-for-all at the 1933 Chicago races, at 189mph, but while leading in the Phillips Trophy race at the same meeting lost fabric off a wing and was killed in the subsequent crash.
X11049 was also lost later in the year when the propeller threw a blade, and the engine fell out.
Fortunately the pilot had a parachute.
For the 1932 races two more Super Sportsters were built.
These were tailored for different races, the R-1 (Registered NR2100) with an 800hp Wasp Senior and enough fuel for pylon racing and the Thompson Trophy in particular.
The R-2 (registered NR2101) had the lower powered 550hp Wasp Jr, but weighed considerably more, with enough fuel for the Bendix trans-continental race.
Pilots were to be Russ Boardman and Lee Gehlbach, but Boardman was injured prior to the race and Doolittle found he had no mount (his landing gear had jammed), so he took over for the Thompson.
Gehlbach, flying the R-2 had engine trouble in the Bendix, losing oil, and finishing second.
At Cleveland, Doolittle took the R-1 over the three kilometre speed course four times to take the world air speed record to 294.4 mph.
Two days later he won the Thompson Trophy at 252.7 mph.
More power was needed for the 1933 race season, so the R-1 had a 900hp Hornet fitted, and the R-2 took over the R-1's Wasp.
It was decided to enter both in the Bendix as well as the Thompson, with Russell Boardman in the R-1 and Russell Thaw in the R-2.
The Bendix started at New York, as the races were being held at Los Angeles.
However, on landing at Indianapolis, Thaw lost the R-2 and smashed a wing.
Boardman landed safely, but after refuelling, took-off and lost control, and was killed when the aircraft flipped over.
The toll was mounting.
Despite this blow, the Granvilles rebuilt the R-2 only to have Jim Haizlip cartwheel the racer, fortunately without injuring himself.
The final blow in 1933 was when Granny lost his life while landing a Sportster, trying to avoid two men who had wandered onto the runway.
The remains of the R-1 and R-2 were again rebuilt for the 1935 Bendix, but crashed on take-off killing Cecil Allen.
Super Sportster Y replica, built by Ken Flaglor in 1984.
(Author)
Back in 1933 work was begun on a racer for the 1934 MacRobertson race from London to Melbourne and Jacquelin Cochran got as far as Bucharest before damaging it in a landing accident.
This was the QED (Quod erat demonstrandum ), registered NX 14307.
It was a two-seater, designated R-6H, and powered by a 675hp Hornet.
Following its accident the QED was repaired but flew little until the 1938 Bendix race, when George Armistead was forced out by an oil-line problem.
The aircraft was sold then to Francisco Sarabia, who used it to break the Mexico City to New York record in 1938.
Registered XB-AKM and named Conquistadores , it crashed in the Potomac River at Washington on the return flight, killing Sarabia.
A rag stuffed into the manifold to speed the engine warm-up was blamed.
Back in 1936 Frank Hawks asked the Granville Brothers to build him the ‘fastest landplane ever’.
The result was Time Flies registered NR1313 (the same as an earlier Travelair Mystery Ship).
It was ultra-streamlined, with retractable undercarriage, and a windscreen which folded down to lie flush once height had been gained.
On an early test flight the undercarriage retraction mechanism jammed because a glove got caught up and the gear collapsed in the subsequent landing, fortunately without damage to the airframe.
Later, on a return flight from Newark to Miami, Hawks was delayed by head winds, and reached Newark after dark, and short of fuel.
In a hasty landing he hit a bump and cracked a mainspar.
Hawks couldn't afford to repair the aircraft and after a long rest in the hangar, it was bought by Ed Connerton who rebuilt it as a two-seat military aircraft registered NX2491.
It was flown by Wade to fourth place in the 1938 Thompson Trophy race.
Subsequently Ortman dived it to 500 mph plus, but flutter caused it to break up and he used his parachute.
Thus, by the outbreak of World War Two, all Granville's racers had been destroyed.
Only the last Model A,(N901K) survives today in the New England Air Museum, but that is not the end of the story.
One of the features of the 1991 Experimental Aircraft Association convention at Oshkosh, was a celebration of the Golden Age of Air Racing, when as many as possible of the surviving pre-war racers were gathered together.
There were no Gee Bees from the past, but there were four replicas, covering virtually the whole range.
The oldest was Bill Turner's Model Z, registered NR77V (again).
This was first flown in 1979, but Bill found himself hanging upside down when the brakes  seized on landing, and was reluctant to repeat this so it is now owned by Disney Industries, featuring in a recent film The Rocketeer .
The next replica is Ken Flaglor's Model Y Senior Sportster, registered NR718L and built in 1984.
It is now owned by Jack Venaleck and was flown to Oshkosh.
Next was the Model E Sportster built by Jim Jenkins and registered NC856Y.
It has a 110hp Warner and is painted red and white, as are all the replicas except the black and yellow Z. At Oshkosh time it hadn't flown, but did so on September 12, 1991.
Lastly came the R-2 Super Sportster with a Wasp Jr.
This was built by Steve Wolf (who also has a Pitts Samson replica), and Delmar Benjamin, but was not quite complete when displayed at Oshkosh.
It was flown by Benjamin, two days before Christmas 1991, and has so far not shown signs of problems associated with the originals.
In the first flight it was taken to 240 mph and did four-point rolls.
Since then NR2101, alias N117GB, has been seen at many US airshows.
Flying-Boats of the Royal Air Force
SYDNEY
SATISFACTION WITH the all-metal hull of their Iris II flying-boat had led Blackburn Aircraft to propose a monoplane development of the Iris in accordance with Air Ministry Specification R5/27.
This design was approved by the Ministry, and on February 23, 1928 a contract was awarded to Blackburn for one prototype to be powered by three 510hp Rolls-Royce Falcon X engines.
This order was amended to request the fitting of 525hp Rolls-Royce F.XIIA engines, superseded later by F.XIIMs.
The monoplane wing comprised a lengthy parallel-chord centre section, with tapered outer panels incorporating Frise-type ailerons.
Main support for the wing was provided by a large central pylon constructed from tubular steel and covered by Duralumin.
The wing was braced by tubular steel struts located between the hull and underwing surfaces.
These struts intersected the stabilizing float struts.
A monoplane-type tailplane was fitted braced by struts joined to the rear hull.
Triple vertical tail surfaces consisted of rudders only, the outer pair carrying trailing-edge servo tabs, while the centre rudder was used purely for trimming purposes.
Designed to carry a crew of five the new flying-boat was named Sydney and serialled N241.
It featured an enclosed glazed cockpit for the pilots with sliding panels, and portholes were located along the hull sides.
Armament comprised three .303in Lewis machine-guns mounted on Scarf ring-mountings, one each in bow, midships and tail positions.
Underwing bomb racks could be fitted to carry up to a 2,00lb bomb load, or alternatively two Mk VIII or Mk X Whitehead torpedoes could be carried.
The Sydney made its first flight on July 18, 1930 painted silver overall, but on emerging from Blackburn's works the following October N241 was in battleship grey finish.
Following further tests, the Sydney flew to Felixstowe where it underwent trials with ‘A’ Flight of the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment (MAEE).
During tests a number of problems arose and modifications were made to float struts, the elevator, and new strut fitted horizontally between the rudder posts.
Further trials proved the Sydney to be unreliable however, and N241 was struck off charge (SOC) during 1934.
Sydney N241 riding the waves as she runs up her outer engines.
(Author's collection)
LONDON
MEANWHILE, in April 1934, a much more successful flying-boat design from Saunders-Roe had commenced its sea and air tests at Cowes.
This was the Saro A.27 London biplane the prototype of which (K3560) was sent to the MAEE, Felixstowe, on June 6 for its type trials.
These proved very successful and a glowing report came from the Establishment.
On October 5, 1934, K3560 was released by the MAEE for its service trials by which time it had already clocked-up 122-½ hours flying time plus 881 hours at moorings without any problems.
The Saro London was designed to Air Ministry Specification R24/31 which required a twin-engined open-sea reconnaissance and coastal patrol flying-boat.
It was stipulated that the design must be robust, of simple construction and involve only low maintenance costs.
A fast turn of speed was not as important as a range of at least 1,000 miles, and flight would have to be maintained on one engine with 60% of the fuel still aboard.
In flight shot of the prototype London, K3560, taken in 1934.
Note polygonal engine cowlings.
(Westland Aerospace)
When it emerged the Saro London showed a family resemblance to an earlier S E Saunders design, the A.7 Severn, but although some design features of the Severn were incorporated into the London, this new boat was much stronger and more sophisticated than its predecessor.
However, it did retain the S E Saunders patented ‘corrugated’ hull method of construction, as used on the Severn, in which longitudinal corrugations replaced riveted stringers.
The hull was a two-step, all-metal structure with stainless steel fittings and Alclad skinning.
In the extreme bow was an open cockpit containing a gunner's position and bomb aimer's station.
The gunner was provided with a .303in Lewis gun mounted on a Scarf gun ring which moved aft on rails for mooring purposes.
The bomb-aimer operated his sight and electrically-controlled release gears from beneath the gunner, a hinged wind-balanced panel in the extreme nose opening outward for the purpose of sighting and aiming.
The two pilots sat side-by-side in an enclosed cockpit, with a gangway between the seats and full dual control provided.
Aft of the pilots' cockpit was an officers ward room, navigator's table, two bunks and, further aft again, engineer's station, wireless operator's position, bunks for the crew and a baggage compartment.
Beyond this was a galley with cooking stove, ice chest and other gear, while for minor repairs there was a workbench and vice fitted.
Behind the galley was the mid-upper gunner in an open cockpit armed with a .303in Lewis gun on a Scarf ring.
Aft of him was stowage space for a collapsible dinghy, maintenance platforms and a spare propeller!
A third gun position was located in the extreme tail with a .303in Lewis gun mounted on a Scarf gun ring.
Also on board were marine distress signals, bilge pumps for the hull and wingtip floats, drinking water tanks, plenty of spare ammunition drums and an anchor.
For its offensive role the London carried either four 250 lb, two 500 lb, 520 lb or 550 lb bombs on Universal carriers beneath the lower wings.
Alternatively mines or depth charges could be loaded.
Londons could also carry eight 20 lb and eight 8-½ lb practise bombs or a number of flares and/or smoke floats.
There was also provision to carry (not launch ) an 18 in torpedo on the hull top, where the missile was secured at purpose-built anchorage points.
Bombs could be attached quickly via a special Saro winch, and when a London was moored its weapons could be loaded from a general-purpose dinghy in good weather.
An unequal span biplane, the London had all-metal, fabric-covered wings (except metal-covered upper surfaces on lower inner wings) of two-bay configuration.
Upper mainplanes were built in three sections, the lower ones in four; the lower outer sections, most vulnerable to damage, were joined beneath the interplane struts in such a manner that they could be removed without deranging the remainder of the structure.
Ailerons were fitted to the upper mainplanes only.
The stainless steel, fabric-covered, empennage featured a braced, adjustable, monoplane tailplane with twin fins and rudders fitted at its extreme ends.
When the prototype London (K3560) first appeared it was fitted with servo-rudders, but these were removed prior to the aircraft's Felixstowe trials.
Power for the London was provided initially by two 875hp Bristol Pegasus IIIM3 radials, with Boulton & Paul polygonal cowlings, driving two-blade wooden propellers.
These were installed in the prototype and first seven production aircraft (K5257-K5263), a batch ordered by the Air Ministry in March 1935.
Majority of these ‘boats went to 201 Squadron at RAF Calshot during 1936, when they replaced that unit's Supermarine Southamptons.
Take-off view of the prototype London.
(Westland Aerospace)
Excessive oil temperature caused a problem with the Pegasus engines on early Londons, and the prototype was subjected to numerous tests and experiments to iron it out.
This was eventually overcome, but in the meantime revised Specification 3/35 resulted in the prototype (K3560) being updated to Mk II standard in which two 1,055hp Bristol Pegasus X radials, encased in Townend ring cowlings drove four-blade propellers.
Thus K3560 served as the prototype Saro London Mk II and, from late 1936 onwards, remained mostly at the MAEE on trials work until struck off charge (SOC) in April 1939.
Eventually Mk I Londons in RAF service were returned to Saro for updating to Mk II standard, while a first production batch of six London IIs (K5980-K5913) was delivered during 1936/1937 of which five went straight to 204 Squadron at Mount Batten.
Two more batches followed in 1937, K6927-K6932 and K9682-K9686, and a final batch (L7038-L7043) was delivered early in 1938.
In October 1937 Londons replaced the Supermarine Scapas of 202 Squadron at Malta, where they remained until the outbreak of World War Two when they moved to Gibraltar.
Last Coastal  Command unit to receive Londons was 240 Squadron at Calshot in July 1939.
In August the Squadron moved to Invergordon leaving a detachment at Falmouth, but later made rapid deployments between Sullom Voe, Invergordon, Sullom Voe and finally Pembroke Dock, where the Londons were replaced by Supermarine Stranraers during June 1940.
Meanwhile between December 1937 and July 1938 204 Squadron had undertaken a long-distance cruise from England to Australia as participants in celebrations commemorating Sydney University and the State of New South Wales’ 150th anniversary.
For this epic flight, which covered 30,000 miles, each of the five Londons involved (K5910, ‘11, ‘12, K6927 and ‘30) was fitted with a large auxiliary, pump-fed, fuel tank mounted atop the hull aft of the pilots’ cockpit.
This tank increased the London's range from 1,740 to 2,600 miles and after the cruise ended, was left on the ‘boats concerned as well as being added to other machines in order to increase patrol range in the event of war.
The five long-range cruise Londons had also been fitted with three-blade metal propellers with spinners, and by the end of 1938 these were standard equipment.
First production London, K5257, 1936.
Cowlings are circular and propellers four-bladed.
(Westland Aerospace)
AT the outbreak of World War Two in September 1939 Coastal Command still had a number of biplane flying-boats on operations including, Saro Londons, Short Singapores and Supermarine Stranraers.
Three Saro London squadrons involved were 202 (Mediterranean), 201 (Sullom Voe) and 240 (Invergordon) the latter unit receiving a number of its Londons from 204 Squadron which by then had changed to Short Sunderlands.
In the early months of the war Londons carried on with routine patrol duties and, despite their ageing characteristics, were no walk-over for the enemy aircraft in a fight.
For example on November 26, 1939 a 240 Squadron London, piloted by F/L McConnel, engaged a Dornier Do 18, damaged the enemy flying-boat and returned safely to base.
Three days later another London from 240 Squadron had a running fight with a Do 18 and it too arrived back safely.
The following month yet another 240 Squadron London (K5911) showed its mettle when it ran into a formation of Heinkel He 111 bombers of KG26 near the Shetlands.
In a fight with one of the Heinkels the London's gunners scored hits on, and damaged, the bomber's starboard engine.
Unfortunately, the London's pilot was fatally wounded, but his co-pilot managed to alight in a very rough sea.
Twenty minutes later this London was airborne again and returned with its gallant crew to base.
Several Londons were lost due to accidents.
By 1941 the type had been largely replaced by Sunderlands and a few newly-arrived Catalinas.
As they were phased out of first line units Londons went mostly to 4 Coastal Operational Training Unit, but a few passed to the Flying-Boat Training Squadron (FBTS) at Stranraer.
During 1942 any remaining Londons were returned to Saro at Cowes for breaking-up.
It was the finale for a grand old lady which filled a gap pending the arrival of more modern types.
She performed well a mundane but essential service protecting Allied ships against the U-Boat menace.
NEWS…
NEWS…
NEWS
Once upon a time…
…
There was a computer, let's call him Mac .
Alongside Mac worked an organic interface unit, let's call him Ed .
In general Mac and Ed amicably agreed to differ, but in the October FlyPast (p58)Mac succeeded in wiping the floor with Ed .
With apologies to readers all over the glove (and especially the innocent contributors!) herewith the real version!:
Airship museum
THE GOLDEN AGE of airship flight is fully explained in the new museum, recently opened at Zeppelinheim (east of Frankfurt Airport) in Germany.
Housed in a 270m building, designed to partially resemble the form of a full-size Zeppelin structure, displays include relics from the ill-fated Hindenburg , an original Mercedes-Benz diesel engine from the LZ130 Graf Zeppelin , among many other airship-related exhibits.
Open to visitors Friday to Sunday, and for pre-booked visits from Tuesday to Thursday, this Museum is sure to interest all with a fascination for airships.
Mercedes-Benz engine from the Graf Zeppelin , just one of the many exhibits at Zeppelinheim, near Frankfurt Airport.
Tropical haven
STUMBLED ON whilst on holiday in Hawaii recently was an airfield approximately 40 miles outside of Honolulu.
Known as Mokuleia, the airfield was formerly Dillingham Field and was constructed late in World War Two, with some of the fortified revetments from that period remaining.
A number of vintage aircraft and gliders operate from the field, the runway runs parallel to the beach.
Shore Aviation Service Corporation, owned by Peter Crown and Mike Van Arkel (both avid readers of FlyPast specialise in vintage aircraft and film work.
An Avenger, Hellcat, T-33, F-101 and DC-3 survive in the airfield scrapyard, whilst types like Cessna O-1, T-6 Texan, Navion and Naval Aircraft Factory N3N, plus various gliders fly from the airfield on a regular basis.
Remains of a TBF Avenger recovered from the hills near Barbers Point NAS by Shore Aviation Service.
Working T-Bird CANADA'S NATIONAL RESEARCH Council's (NRC) Institute for Aerospace Research still employ CT-133 CF-WIS as a working aircraft.
Currently dedicated to microgravity flight experiments, but also used for atmospheric studies and pressure standards calibrations, the CT-133 is one of a small fleet of aircraft based at the NRC Headquarters at Ottawa International Airport.
Keep 'em flying!
THREE BRISTOL FREIGHTERS (or Frighteners , as they are known by their crews) continue to be gainfully employed by Trans-Provincial at Terrace, some 500 miles north of Vancouver, British Columbia.
Flying freight for mining and forestry concerns, the trio are reputedly the last remaining airworthy examples of their type in Canada.
C-FDFC, C-FTBA and C-FYQS are expected to be flying for some considerable time, as the Freighter's life is measured in landings, and each of the trio have about 6,000 landings remaining, ensuring their continued employment.
C-FDFC is more familiar to UK enthusiasts as G-BISU, one-time part of the Instone fleet, operated by Air Atlantique at Coventry Airport.
Trans Provincial Airlines Bristol 170 Freighter C-FDFC (ex-BISU) looking very smart after its recent repaint
Le swap
AT ABBEVILLE airfield,l'Aero Club de la Somme have for a long time have shown off Dassault Ouragon No 215.
Resident outside the airfield's motel for nearly 30 years, it was beginning to look very much the worse for wear and, as other Ouragons have given in to the ravages of time, attract the nearest of museums.
Earlier this year, the Association des Amis du Musee du Chateau at Savigny-les-Beaune effected an exchange whereby they gained the Ouragon for restoration and the Aero Club gained a freshly-restored Mystere IVA on a specially-built ‘tripod’.
Before and after.
Ouragon No 215 was a familiar scene in the airfield carpark at Abbeville to thousands of tourists as they left the ferry ports and headed south through France.
It has bee replaced by an impressively-mounted Mystere IVA.
Chedburgh remembered
ALTHOUGH MANY former RAF Chedburgh, Suffolk , personnel have had cause to return to their old Station, at least 398 have had that choice denied them — although it was their sacrifice that made their colleague's choice possible.
Such notions have driven the RAF Chedburgh Aviation Group (Memorial Trust) to establish a lasting memorial to those who worked and fought from the base, perhaps best remembered for its association with the Short Sterling.
A memorial was unveiled on the village green on October 4 — the village sign already incorporates a Lancaster.
On August 30 a Book of Remembrance was dedicated to 214, 218, 301, 304, 620 Squadrons and to 1653 Heavy Conversion Unit.
The work of the Raf Chedburgh Aviation Group continues in fund raising and research, further details from: Maurice Leary,.
Newsbreaks
TORBAY Aircraft Museum (currently in ‘Care & Maintenance’) have loaned their Focke-Achgelis Fa 330A-1 rotorkite w/nr 100545 to the Fleet Air Arm Museum.
It was delivered to Yeovilton on May 19.
STILL MORE Phantom news.
The following RAF bases (or enclaves) will have the following FGR.2s on the gate on display: Akrotiri, Cyprus: XV470; Benbecula, Scottish Isles (also August 6), XV422.
The RAF Museum are reported to have been ear-marked XV424.
And still on gate guardians, Lossiemouth's newly-installed Buccaneer S.2B retains her Operation Granby colours as Sea Witch .
VINTAGE & ROTARY Wing Collection (see also page 17) have passed on three of their gliders to collector and restorer Nigel Ponsford: Cadet TX.1 RA854, Grasshopper TX.1 XK819 and Grunau Baby BGA. 1410 — the latter having been transferred to the Real Aeroplane Club at Breighton.
VULCAN B.2 XM602 has been sectioned up ready for a move away from RAF St Athan, Wales.
It is owned by property developer Robert Lance Hughes who plans to re-erect it on an as yet unconfirmed site.
RUDY FRASCA's Spitfire XVIII TP280/G-BTXE (FP October, p 61) has been crated and shipped to Champaine, Illinois, home of the owner's Frasca Flight Simulators.
TEXAS AIR MUSEUM have nearly complete restoration of their FW 190F-8 w/nr 931862, after six years of work.
The aircraft was shot down over Norway on February 9, 1945 and salvaged from underwater.
HERALD G-APWA arrived at its new home, the Museum of Berkshire Aviation on the former Woodley Aerodrome, Berks, on August 29 after a road journey from Southend Airport.
It will be restored by the Herald Society and an appeal has been launched to raise funds for the project.
Hurricane verdict
Aircraft Accident to Royal Air Force Hurricane Mk.IIC LF363
Date:September 11, 1991
Parent Airfield:RAF Coningsby
Place of Accident:RAF Wittering
Crew:One
Casualties:One Major Injury
Circumstances:
1
On the afternoon of September 11, 1991 a Lancaster, Spitfire and Hurricane of the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight (BBMF) were in transit from their home base, RAF Coningsby, to Jersey to take part in the Jersey Air Show.
Approximately three miles north of Stamford the Hurricane's engine suddenly hesitated.
Suspecting a fuel problem the pilot selected his reserve tanks but the engine continued to run roughly.
The pilot therefore set the aircraft up for a diversion to the nearest suitable airfield — RAF Wittering — using residual engine power.
But this time the engine was giving only intermittent power and the pilot was unable to maintain height.
2
Some two to three minutes later, when halfway between the RAF Wittering airfield boundary and the main runway, with the aircraft in a right turn at only 100 feet above the ground, the engine ceased providing power.
Since the landing path straight ahead was obstructed, the pilot attempted to continue the right turn, but the Hurricane's right wing touched the ground and the aircraft cartwheeled.
3
A fire subsequently spread from the bottom of the cockpit and engulfed the pilot as the aircraft came to rest in an upright attitude.
Despite sustaining a broken ankle in the impact, and having difficulty with his parachute harness, the pilot succeeded in making good his escape.
However, he received severe burns to his legs.
4
The Board of Inquiry established that the engine had started to run roughly and eventually failed because of a broken camshaft on one of its banks of cylinders.
The complete loss of power had occurred when the aircraft was in a position from which a successful forced landing could not be accomplished.
Subsequent Actions
5
Although the aircraft was severely damaged in the fire, it will be rebuilt for further service with the BBMF.
There was no damage to civilian property.
A number of modifications are being carried out to the BBMF's other Merlin engines to prevent a recurrence of this type of failure.
(Reproduced in full from the MoD's Military Aircraft Accident Summary received September 15.
For more details see FP November 1991, p6.)
Farnborough launch
MIDLAND AIR MUSEUM chose no less an occasion than the SBAC Display at Farnborough to launch the first phase of their aerospace education initiative.
With support from a consortium of Midland aerospace companies, the first stage includes the establishment of an Aerospace Education Centre at the Museum at Coventry Airport.
The new centre will offer a range of pupil activities and will be available to schools throughout the country.
Richard Mavro-Michaelis of Lucas Aerospace announced the plans at a gathering of teachers at Farnborough.
Displayed inside one of exhibition halls at Farnborough were some of the artefacts from the Greenland Expedition's salvage from the famed cache of P-38s and a B-17 trapped in the ice cap.
Theft
IN RECENT WEEKS, prize specimens of the human race have succeed in stealing a Hawker Tempest II cowling from the Autokraft works at Brookland's, Weybridge.
This fully-restored cowling was destined for use on the Tempest IIs that Autokraft are restoring.
Autokraft are offering a £1,000 reward for information that will lead to the retrieval of this essential item.
Anyone with any information on the whereabouts of this cowling is asked to contact: Geoff Rodwell,.
OFMC comings and goings
CHANGES TO THE Old Flying Machine Company's (OFMC) fleet of Duxford-based warbirds are underway.
During the winter, FG-1D Corsair NX55NJ is scheduled to take on its original Royal New Zealand Air Force colours as NZ5648.
Grumman TBM-3E Avenger N6827C and Tora Tora film Zeke /Harvard IV N15798 have been sold to Tim Wallis/Alpine Fighter Collection in New Zealand, and are making the long journey ‘down under’ by sea.
The Avenger is expected to shed its current ‘George Bush’ colours and be repainted as NZ2518 Plonky of 30 Squadron RNZAF during 1944.
Globe-trotting Ray and Mark Hanna are due to attend the November airshow at  Auckland , New Zealand, where they will fly some NZ-based warbirds.
Coming into the OFMC fold soon will be Spitfire Vc AR614 from Canada.
This Spitfire has a full operational and ‘blooded’ history behind it, having served with 312 (Czech) and 222 Squadrons.
Post war, AR614 served as an instructional airframe at RAF St Athan, and was purchased by the Air Museum of Calgary, Canada in 1964.
In 1970 it was acquired by its last owner, Don Campbell of Ontario, who was in the process of restoring it to flying condition.
OFMC estimate that it will take a further 18 months to two years to finish the rebuild.
Go Buggy flies home
FIGHTER COLLECTION flew their P-38 Lightning back to Duxford from Lydd on Monday September 28, 22 days after it came to grief in a belly landing at Lydd Airport, en route to the Shepway Seafront Airshow on September 6 (FP October, p6).
Piloted by Hoof Proudfoot, the Lightning flew with the undercarriage locked down for the 35 minute flight back to base.
TFC's Chief Engineer, Peter Rushen, told Flypast that repair and rectification work on the aircraft will now take place during the winter months and that the P-38 will be fully airworthy in time for the 1993 airshow season.
Peter also commented that the MIG-15 currently sitting in a corner of TFC's hangar is only transiting through and will not be flying with TFC.
Newly arrived at Duxford in early October was the immaculate Bristol F.2b Fighter G-ACAA/D8084 built by Skysport for TFC.
Spruce on the move
AS REPORTED in September's FlyPast (p46), Howard Hughes' famous H-4/HK-1 Hercules, the Spruce Goose is to move home.
Disassembly began during the week of August 10.
Plans call for the huge aircraft to be dismantled into no less than 38 separate elements, starting with the engines and ending with the wings.
The whole programme of taking the aircraft apart is estimated to take eight weeks.
On, or around October 6, the fuselage, wings and tail section of the aircraft will travel by ocean barge from Long Beach, along the Pacific coasts of California and Oregon, and then east to Portland, via the Columbia River.
From there the aircraft will be loaded onto shallow-draft barges and travel up the Willamette River, through the locks at Oregon City to a discharge site near the Yamhill River.
From here the components of the Hercules will be transported by road to the Museum's storage facility.
During the entire voyage the large portions of the aircraft will be cover with Polymax film to protect them from damaging sunlight and moisture, ensuring that they arrive at their new home in pristine condition.
Evergreen Air Venture Museum, is to be built on a 200 acre site, adjacent to the McMinnville Municipal Airport.
The Museum will have a purpose-built taxiway direct onto the airport enabling the Museum's aircraft to be taxied direct into the Museum.
Deenethorpe reborn
FORMER B-17 base Deenethorpe, near Corby, Northants, is coming back to life as the home of the Deenethorpe Flying Club.
The 1.2 long main runway is in excellent condition and work is underway to get the Club up-and-running before the end of the year.
In the meantime, the organisers can offer outside storage of aircraft, with hangarage to follow.
More details from Derrick Buttress on .
Duxford addition
DUXFORD's collection of historic aircraft at the Imperial War Museum (IWM) never stops increasing.
Latest addition to the IWM is Westland Wasp HAS.1 XS567, which served on board HMS Endurance during the Falklands War in 1982.
The helicopter arrived in late September.
Bouncing back
ONE OF THE experimental bounding bombs devised by Barnes Wallis, later version of which were used by 617 Squadron in the famous Dambuster attack on the Mohne, Eder and Sorpe dams in Germany on May 16, 1943, was raised from the seabed off Chesil Beach, Dorset on Wednesday September 30.
A joint venture between Weymouth and Portland Museums Service, the Royal Engineers and the Royal Navy, the bomb was one of the last prototypes made by Barnes Wallis and is constructed of steel, filled with a concoction of concrete, cork and wood, bring the device as close as possible to the ‘operational’ weight of 9,250lbs.
After preservation treatment, it is intended that the weapon should be displayed at the local Portland Museum, in conjunction with a 50th anniversary exhibition to be mounted there in 1953.
David Tennyson
HANDICAP air racing in the UK lost one of its stalwarts with the death of David Tennyson in September.
The title of ‘Aviation Secretary’ did no justice at all to the scope, depth and integrity of the painstaking work he undertook to make air racing a safe and professionally-run sport.
He retired from the sport in 1991.
Heartfelt sympathies go out to Barbara and family.
Tangmere's Hector
TANGMERE MILITARY AVIATION Museum have embarked on a project to salvage the dismantled and buried remains of a Hawker Hector in West Sussex.
The aircraft had been resident with an Air Training Corps unit until the late 1940s when it was disposed of by burying it!
So far a portion of the upper wing has been recovered and strong metal detector readings indicate that other parts of the airframe are buried nearby.
Details of Hector's history were obscure at the time of writing.
(See also page 30 for more Tangmere news.)
Canadian Pilatii
A TRIO of Pilatus P.3 trainers have been purchased by Montreal-based warbird owner Jacques Lacombe.
Acquired at a recent Swiss Air Force surplus sale, A-817, A-863 and A-868 are currently in Quebec with the latter (as C-FNQB) awaiting final Ministry of Transport documentation before being allowed to fly in Canada.
Dating from 1959 the aircraft are reported to have less than 2,000 flying hours on their airframes.
Latest addition to Canadian ‘warbird’ ranks is Pilatus P.3 trainer A-868, which along with two others is based at Montreal.
Oz heavyweights
VICTORIA State Museum and the RAAF Museum formally committed their collective resources towards the development of the National Air & Space Museum of Australia (NASMA) in 1991.
Since then the search has been on to acquire a Lockheed Constellation for the collection.
These efforts were rewarded last November when the USAF Museum at Dayton, Ohio, agreed to make its last C-121 available to NASMA on an ‘as is, where is’ basis.
The last Connie is 54–157, a C-121C (L-1049 Super Constellation) and moves are currently afoot to make the aircraft airworthy for a 1993 trans-Pacific ferry flight.
In April of this year the Constellation was moved from the AMARC storage facility at Davis-Monthan, Arizona, where it has stood since 1977, to the Pima Air Museum, conveniently positioned alongside AMARC.
Sole surviving Avro Anson Mk.1 capable of flight is currently up for sale in Australia.
After a 43 year period of ownership, Terrt Brain has decided to sell the venerable aircraft.
The metal-winged VH-BAF joined the Airworld Collection in 1988, who continued to maintain it in airworthy condition.
Australian War Memorial has called for tenders to purchase its B-25J Mitchell bomber, VH-XXV.
This airworthy Mitchell, which has been grounded within the Museum for the past five years, is expected to attract a lot of interest from the Australian warbird community.
Hullavington preserved
IN AN UNPRECEDENTED move RAF Hullavington, Wilts, has been designated as a conservation area under Section 69 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
In October 1991 it was disclosed that as a result of the Ministry of Defence (MoD)Options for Change report, Kemble and Hullavington would close.
It was also announced that the MoD were to optimise the development value of Hullavington, probably offering it for a large housing development.
However, at the next meeting of the North Wiltshire District Council's Development and Planning Committee, a proposal was made to make the whole site a conservation area.
Experts on RAF airfield history and architecture were consulted and a commercial study was launched as to the opportunities arising from conservation of the site.
After having the proposals deferred in January of this year, the matter again came before the committee on September 15 and after a lengthy speech from the Chairman of the Airfield Research Group, along with various other expert witnesses, the committee voted in favour of listing RAF Hullavington as a conservation area.
This is a major step forward in preserving one of the country's significant Expansion Scheme airfields, and shows hope for several more sites of aeronautical heritage around the UK.
The local authority involved should be applauded and encouraged in their efforts.
RAF Hullavington's distinctive control tower, hangars, airfield buildings and the entire airfield itself is now a declared conservation area.
Latvian gems
SEEN RECENTLY at the old Riga Airport, which was closed some 15 years ago to commercial traffic and relegated to military helicopter use, were a number of Soviet aircraft, old and not so old.
Included are a number of ex-Aeroflot Antonov An-2 biplanes which are reported to be airworthy and available for sale at $600 each.
Other aircraft of note included: Mil Mi-6, Tupolev Tu-22M Backfire , Tu-134, Tu-154 and Ilyushin II-62, all of which seemed to be just parked out on the airfield amongst the overgrown grass.
Line-up of eight Antonov An-2 biplanes seen recently at Riga Airport, Latvia, all of which have seen service with Aeroflot at some time during their flying careers.
Brussels MiGs
BRUSSELS AIR MUSEUM have recently added two Soviet-built aircraft to their collection.
A generous (anonymous) benefactor has purchased MiG21F Fishbed-C Red 77 and MiG-23BN Flogger-H Red 23 and donated them to the Museum, where reassembly is underway.
next month
Bumper issue for the coming festive season.
FREE with the December FlyPast a wall-planner calendar .
We conclude the story of Jack Alcock with the dramatic trans-Atlantic flight of 1919.
Full report and results from the action at the Reno air races.
We feature the fascinating story of rotorcraft pioneer George Walker and his part in the amazing Flying Jeep.
Lindsay Walton's F4U-7 Corsair celebrates its 40th anniversary and the 10th year of its operation in the UK.
All this plus the very latest in news from around the world in the December issue — on sale November 19.
Fly Post
Centrefold
FlyPast has now started to show provocative pictures in its centrefold.
A beautiful lady with as much charisma as  Marilyn Monroe still maintains, can make a man feel romantic when this lovely creature is shown performing a kind of fan dance with all four fans in motion.
MATS N494TW at Oshkosh is one of the best shots of a Connie that I have ever seen (FP August, p36).
She is alive and just as attractive as ever, so please don't lose touch with this thing of beauty that is certainly a joy forever.
I G Kasper,
Kittyhawk GA-?
My late father, F/L Eddie Ross, flew with 112 Shark Squadron from February 1943 to the end of May 1944, ending his tour as ‘A’ Flight Commander during the Italian Campaign, flying Kittyhawks Is, IIIs and IVs up to this date.
F/L Eddie Ross originated the symbol ‘?’ on his aircraft FX561 ‘GA-?’and flew this machine under the new markings in May 1944 (above).
This aircraft was returned to the maintenance unit for an engine refit around May 21st.
FX740 was my father's replacement aircraft for FX561 and he retained his ‘?’ symbol on this aircraft.
My father's tour with 112 Squadron finished at the end of May and on the 31st Sgt Pilot Davis flew FX740 for the first and last time, sadly being shot down by ack-ack in the vicinity of Frosinone, south of Rome.
A grim reminder of how ground attack/dive bombing had become at this stage of the war in Italy.
FX760 ‘GA-?’(below) replaced FX740, again retaining my father's ‘?’ symbol and was then taken on charge by 112 on June 3, 1944 and then being flown by S/L Attearne DFC and Reg Wild eventually being replaced on June 22, 1944 by the incoming Mustangs, re-equipping the Squadron, thus disproving the news item on FX760 in August's issue of FlyPast stating 112 did not operate this aircraft but 3 Squadron RAAF!
Incidentally, the P-40 in the RAF Museum at Hendon was based on a picture my father had of FX760 ‘GA-?’ which I had donated to the Museum a number of years ago for such a display.
Unfortunately, despite my advice to the Museum, the teeth are not a true representation of the teeth on the original FX760 ‘GA-?’.
What a mouthful!
Alistair Ross,.
I refer to the article in your August edition, page 49, regarding Kittyhawk IV with markings GA-?
FX760 on display at the RAF Museum, Hendon.
I would like to correct the statement that 112 Squadron did not operate the real FX760.
In fact this aircraft was in operation with 112 Squadron from June 3, 1944 until June 22, 1944 when 112 were equipped with Mustang IIIs.
FX760 was handed over on June 23 and subsequently flown by 3 (RAAF) Squadron from June 26.
When operating with 112 Squadron FX760 was regularly flown by ‘A’ Flight Commander F/L R A Wild DFC, an Australian, who had been posted to 112 Squadron from 3 RAAF Squadron on June 1, 1944.
This was Reg Wild's second tour with 112 Squadron.
R W Sinclair,.
Proof that the RAF Museum got it right!
FX760 in June 1944.
Vulcan lament
By the time the next issue of FlyPast hits the magazine shelves the Vulcan will be making its last appearances as a flying exhibit.
Barring a last-minute volte-face by the MoD, the aircraft will then be at the mercy of the highest bidder, who might just be a scrap dealer.
Realistically, this was always likely to be the end of the line for the Vulcan.
In its 40th year as a type, on the 10th anniversary of its only active service and the year before the 40th anniversary of the RAF, the aircraft is increasingly viewed by those who hold the purse strings as an anachronism — a symbol of a past which has no relevance in the new future.
That the aircraft is almost time-expired and costs a small fortune to operate is almost a secondary consideration, but a damning one nonetheless.
In 1993 the RAF will celebrate 75 years of existence as a independent armed service and doubtless this will be a major theme of air shows and events, publications and programmes during the year.
Inevitably this will tend to concentrate on the more prominent actions in which the service has been engaged and its present reduced role.
In this context the Vulcan would be perhaps less relevant than in recent years.
The reminders of the V-Force will live on for a while yet until the Victors are retired so perhaps we will see more of this not unimpressive aircraft in 1993.
For the present, then, the vital need is to do everything possible to secure a safe retirement of XH558, where she will be cared for as well as she has been since becoming the VDF display aircraft.
If the highest bidder turns out to be a scrap dealer, then it is to be hoped that an exchange can be effected between XH558 and one of the deteriorating examples of the type which are still fairly widely scattered within the UK.
The aircraft at Wellesbourne Mountford, under its new ownership might well be a suitable candidate and a fairly accessible location for public viewing.
Perhaps this could form the basis of a proper housing for XH558 and its potential as the centrepiece of a museum.
It was always an objective of the sadly-moribund Vulcan Association that the future of the aircraft be safeguarded once retired.
It is perhaps doubtful in the present climate that the aircraft could have been kept in the air beyond the end of this year, even if the VA has still been in a position to influence affairs.
As suggested in his recent editorial by Ken Ellis of FlyPast , the huge amount of public support which has surface this year for the Vulcan and which had Parliament not been in recess would almost certainly have led to ‘questions in the House’, may lead to a revision of the Official View in matters of aviation preservation.
If this review actually takes place, then it may indeed be the most suitable valediction for the Vulcan, and its supporters association whose disappointment and bewilderment has cast a shadow over this final year of the mighty delta.
finals Help!
RESEARCHING private flying between the wars in Warwickshire.
I am looking for photographs of pilots, aircraft and airfields that would be available to copy and return to the original owners.
Also interested in personal anecdotes relating to aviation in the aforementioned county.
All postage expenses would be reimbursed.
Please contact Alf Jenks,.
SEEKING information on an aircraft identity plate that I have in my possession.
Along the top line it has stamped ‘Messerschmitt AG’ Elsewhere on the plate are the letters and figures ‘109 651–04’and on the bottom row, ‘1091–2 3006/19’followed by ‘BA’or ‘BH’— the last two digits are somewhat indistinct.
Any information on this aircraft plate would gratefully received.
Contact: Nigel Harrison,.
RAF LLANDWROG.
Researching the history of this airfield for a forthcoming book.
Has anyone a photograph of the airfield taken during World War Two?
The book will include details of the RAF Mountain Rescue Service, which was originated at Llandwrog.
Any information and or  photos would be most helpful.
Eddie Doylerush,.
SEEKING information on the RAF Bomber Command raid on Friedrichshafen on the night of April 27/28, 1944.
The following squadrons are known to have taken part in this raid, 7, 15, 35, 75, 101, 103, 115, 156, 166, 460 and 622, and if anyone who flew on this operation with any of the listed squadrons have any details of the raid, I would like to hear from them.
Bill Hird,.
INFORMATION required on a rescue attempt by a Walrus which went to the aid of B-17 2102610 Boomerang on Saturday December 30, 1944, after it had crashed into the sea approximately 16 miles off Beachy Head.
Captain of the Walrus was F/O Robinson.
An unknown British gunner on board the Walrus tried to save the Navigator of the B-17, but failed.
Please contact: J Sienkiewicz,.
ANY INFORMATION on a Leslie W Malone, USAAF.
His identity bracelet has recently been found in somebody's garden which during World War Two was part of a US Army camp.
Contact: R Robertson,.
RESEARCHING Lancasters ED611 and RF141, both of which served with 463 Sqn at Waddington.
Both aircraft were coded ‘JO-U’(one replaced the other), and one of these force-landed at Woodbridge after a raid on Politz in 1943.
I am trying to find out if it was ED611 or RF141 that was involved in the Woodbridge incident?
Contact: J P Holdway,.
FLYING FORTRESS Old Bill , 42–29643 with the squadron code ‘XK’.
Thought to be from the 365th Bomb Sqn of the 305th Bomb Group.
Details of the nose-art and other relevant points needed for a detailed model.
Please contact: Tom Stafford,.
INFORMATION for a proposed memorial needed.
The Oakworth Village Society intend to create a memorial to the six Canadian airmen who lost their lives in a crash of Wellington BK387 during the night of January 2, 1944 at Tewitt Hall Wood.
All the crew are buried at Stonefall cemetery, alongside many of their fellow countrymen.
We intend to create a memorial on an engrave piece of Yorkshire stone and we wish to ensure that the details of the incident are as accurate as possible.
If you have any information on the crash of this aircraft, please contact: Janet M Armstrong,.
SEEKING information on Peter Roberts, who I believe to have been a bomber pilot during World War Two.
He wrote poetry about his experiences, examples of this are Target Area and Return , both of which were written by him whilst captive in a Prisoner of War camp.
I am 15 and will shortly be taking a Grade 5 speech and drama exam, in which I intend to read one of the two poems.
Contact: Ivan Marshall,.
ATTEMPTING to unravel the fate of a Luftwaffe bomber that was shot down during 1940.
I believe it to be one of two aircraft, both Dornier Do 17Zs which were both shot down in the same area within a few days of each other.
First machine was from 8/KG21, coded ‘U5+DS’ and was shot down by F/L H Ferris on August 13.
Second aircraft was from 3/KG2 and was shot down by F/S F W Higginson, F/L P S Weaver and Sgt C Whitehead, flying Hurricanes of 56 Sqn.
Crash site is on mudflats that are exposed at low tide some 150 yards seaward of The Old Neptune public house, Whitstable, North Kent, and part of the aircraft's bomb load was destroyed by an Ordnance Disposal team in November 1991.
I am looking for unit markings for the second aircraft, personal accounts of the crash and photos of the crash site.
Any material loaned will be handled carefully, copied and returned promptly.
Please contact: Mr A Gray,.
AUTHOR compiling a detailed history on the 300/400 Australian Short Service Commission airmen (mostly pilots), who were serving in the RAF at the outbreak of World War Two.
I would like to establish contact with anyone who may have information or data regarding them and their service.
The success of this venture depends heavily upon the quantity and quality of the research which can be assembled and examined.
Please contact: Dennis Newton,.
ANY RECOLLECTIONS welcomed of my sister, Renee Owen, LACW, R/T Operator, WAAF, 1942/1945,, died February 1980.
Also her husband, F/L Frank Wilbraham (d 1989) who was a pilot on Whitleys and Halifaxes, shot down over Berlin in 1942, ending-up as a prisoner of war.
Please contact: R E Owen,.
INFORMATION needed on the following American aircraft serving with the RAF in the Burma campaign, for air observation, communication and casualty evacuation purposes.
Stinson L-1, Stinson L-5 Sentinel and Beech C-45 Expediter.
Any information about the three types mentioned would be greatly appreciated.
Contact: Eric G Saunders,.
No 235 SQUADRON Aircrew sought.
W/O E Brown, F/O Kiliminster Hollins, F/Sgt Seear, S/L Jackson-Smith, W/C Simmonds, W/C Younge, F/L Mayhew.
Any information on the whereabouts of the listed personnel to help complete 235 Sqn research.
Contact: A D Bird,.
TRYING TO TRACE F/L Eric (Bob) Milliken and Claude Belcher.
The former flew with 100 Sqn from 1942 until April 16, 1943, when he was posted missing on operations, and the latter was a New Zealander, nicknamed Codger , formerly of 214 Sqn at Stradishall flying Wellingtons, who made one of the best lone escapes in North Africa.
Any information on these two people, their service history and any relevant information to help me find next of kin, will be most helpful.
Please contact: Eric Edward,.
‘Just popping down the greenhouse, darling!’
Buccaneer S.1 XK488 taking a close look at progress with the begonia cuttings, near Hatfield.
The shot was supplied by Chris Baldwin who thinks the observer was Tony Buxton, does not know who the green-fingered pilot was, but knows they both survived.
So did the aircraft, as can be seen from the inset, it is now cherished by the Fleet Air Arm Museum at Yeovilton.
We know that XK488 was built at Brough and first flew on October 31, 1958 being used by Blackburns for trials work.
It then moved to de Havillands at Hatfield for more trials (on the 7,100lbst Gyron Juniors) from November 1960 to April 1961.
We take it the greenhouse ‘event’ took place during this time — but when exactly?
Beyond that, XK488 joined Bristol Siddeley at Filton (from July 1962) until at least April 1964.
By May 1968 this resilient Black was on the gate at Yeovilton and later taken into the FAAM's fold.