

From:
Date: Tue, 4 Jan 94 10:34:28 GMT
Subject: Holiday games
Well a return of 3 points from the 3 games played was disappointing, despite gritty performances at Newcastle and Scum.
Blackburn now look to be the only only team capable of catching scum.
I reckon Leeds need to win 14 of the last 18 games to even give us a prayer.
At their present rate scum will get 100 points!!!
I can see them getting 90 at least, and it will take quite a collapse from them to not get the 85 which would just about guarantee the title.
If they beat the scousers tonight, I'm afraid I'll concede the title to the B******s especially with the boost such a victory would give them.
I've got mixed feelings about Blackburn's challenge as we need to finish 2nd to guarantee a place in Europe.
This is of equal/greater importance than someone other than Leeds catching scum.
I think we should give Fairclough a pat on the back for his performances in the last few games.
The goal at Newcastle, marking Cuntona out of the scum match, and then nearly winning the game late on.
Although Batty's been missed, Fairclough can provide a John Wark-like threat in the opposition box.
Amazing isn't it? that now Batty's moved to Blackburn, within a month he's being hailed as a good passer of the ball.
A skill he has obviously picked up under the guidance of Dalglish.
This despite being played in a slightly deeper holding role.
What a load of crap eh?
Lastly, I got as far as Mansfield last night, on my way to the Villa match.
I was really pissed off when it was called off at 5.20
I assume the tickets will be valid for when the game is eventually played.
Has anybody any idea when that will be?
Still it gives Wallace, Speed and Strachan? chance to get fully fit.
We should be able to beat Crewe without any if them, if necessary.
Much was made of the fact that Ince, Sharpe, and Hughes were not playing even though scum have this fabulously strong squad.
Leeds were missing Speed & Wallace the 2 top scorers (I think), this was largely overlooked.
Oh well, that's about it.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 4 Jan 94 11:14 GMT
Subject: Holiday games
I agree.
Looking at games individually the performances have been good, and results good (‘cept QPR).
However 3 draws means 6 points dropped.
Being unbeaten is something positive though considering the last 4 or 5 games.
Yes, the qualification for Europe is a bit of a bugger.
I want (sort of) Blackburn to catch Scum, with the pressure they may break (as they have done previously) and then drop back into the chasing pack.
Blackburn are in a purple patch (well, shearer is really), and will get back to normal at some point — we will always catch them.
Yep.
Theres been a lot of criticism of fairclough (and the other central defenders).
It would be nice for you critics to stand up and be counted:-)) Newsome has also been praised and had a good game vs scum.
But Kev, people were sayng he was a better passer before he'd even played a match for them!
I knew we'd get all this crap — Im amazed there's not been more.
At least Rocky has been quiet for Man City.
This fabulously strong squad meant that Robson and McClair played.
Both not in the same league as the people they replaced.
Giggs started the match and was overshadowed by Kelly's superb performance.
Scums strength in depth was exposed when you see they had Ferguson and Dublin on the bench.
And not to mention that their most crucial department (the defence) remained unchanged (as usual).
This is where this fallacy about their squad would have been completely exposed.
What defenders have they got in reserve???
Lets hope for an injury to schmeichal.
That will REALLY fuck them up.
From:
Date: Tue, 4 Jan 94 12:28:58 +0100
Subject: Re: White Christmas
agree.
im all for giving white a chance — i saw him on telly vs scum and he did OK (deane was crap though!)
you misinterpret me (or my english is inconsise (?)—‘some of us people on the list’ should prabably be ‘some people on the list’— i am —not—‘anti-Wilko’and i am not going to have a party when wilko is leaving.
sorry for my broken english — but you will have to live with misunderstandings like that on the list…
sgt wilko does a remarkable job — as for my constant hyping of frank — see that as norw. patriotism — i do not value wilko out from his (non-) use of frank — managing a club is a lot more than that…
you and Mr. Olsen disagree.
that's OK — Olsen announced his 18-man squad for Norways trip to USA next week and he showed this quite clearly:
Kare Ingebrigtsen — who has had trouble getting selected for the first-11 in city was left out (he started last nigh though — and even scored after 4 minutes in city's 2–0 abandoned match vs ipswich).
Jan Age Fjortoft — attacker with trouble at Swindon — did not score in 13 matches — Swindon bought Scott from some lower div. club — Scott has put in some goals — and Fjortoft is left out both from Swindon and the national team.
also regulars in our national team like Mini Jakobsen, Sorloth and even Bjornebye (Liverpool — has been injured and have had trouble coming back after that — but played in Liverpool's last game) were left out: and the papers over here concluded with: to go to the USA — you —have—to be in the first-11 of your club.
BUT (as they say;-)) Olsen and assistant manager Okland made one exception: Frank is included in the squad — solely on his impressive U21-display vs Turkey.
Okland was interviewed in one of the papers on why Frank was included and mentioned the strong Turkey game and also spoke about Frank not playing in Leeds:’ Frank not playing is strange.
We think Frank is a better player than any of the two attackers Leeds use now (Wallace/Deane)’.
(Okland played as a pro in the Bundesliga and in France and as far as i remember he played in the team that beat England 2–1 at home in the 1981 chock-winner for Norway).
Also a couple of days later Olsen himself once again spoke upon the matter — and the headline was something like ‘Get a new club, Frank’.
Olsen had called Leeds (Wilko i guess) and expressed his concern about Frank and inquiring why Frank did not make it.
The answer he got was in the line that Frank looked uninspired in training (well as ‘inspired’ as Deano looks from time to time in the games i guess Deano most look —very—inspired in training).
Olsen also mentioned that Frank and a couple of other U21 players has all along been good enough for the WC-squad but as the U21 team had a chance for making it in their own qualifying these players were not considered when games collided (they usually do).
Frank will probably be rented out to a norw. club this spring (as will many of the other players not playing in the first-11 — among them Fjortoft).
halvard
From:
Date: Tue, 4 Jan 94 12:28 GMT
Subject: Strandli
It sounds like your TV coverage is better than ours!
Manc of the Day hardly showed any Leeds posession at all.
McAllister was touted as man of the match in some reports — but according to MOTD he only touched the ball about 3 times!
Sky had a better highlights show (as usual).
Sorry:-) I should have known from your previous mail that youre not anti Wilko.
Although I can see your frustration re: franky boy 
Ok.
I can see theyve got this rule about players to be selected.
My opinion is that this is a bit harsh and narrow sighted — in the long run Norway will be better if their players get wide experience in good leagues around the world.
But Olsen has got you to the WC94, so he must be doing something right;-)
But he has made an exception for Frank.
Now, lets say he picks him to play in your next match, and he scores 5 goals.
Is Olsen then going to drop him from the next side if hes not playing in Leeds first team?
The only reason I can see that you need players in the first teams is to see if they are playing well enough at a high level.
Olsen has belief in frank, and has also seen him play U21 successfully.
I just cant see what difference playing 1st team for Leeds would do.
I hope you understand what im trying to say.
Olsen needs to SEE people play to judge if they are good enough.
He KNOWS frank is good enough.
Furthermore, his pressure on Frank to get away will not help anyone.
This would probably cause Franks mind to be elsewhere in training, and so lead to him being uninspired — whereas he should be getting his head down and working.
His confidence should be OK because Olsen must think highly of him to actually call Wilko about him.
And Im sure Wilko has spoken to frank about the situation.
Let just hope he plays and scores for Norway.
Then that he realises his promise at Leeds and starts pushing Deane, Wallace and White for a place.
Has Olsen said that if they play first team whilst on loan — this will count?
If so Frank has little to worry about I think.
He played well enough for Staart last year, and the loan period should be in time for Olsen to select the finals squad.
Frank can then return to Leeds with a World Cup beneah his belt and settle down to getting a place.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 4 Jan 1994 12:53:27 GMT
Subject: Penalty save
Little known and useless facts £327
Beeneys wife is a football fanatic and spends her spare time studying old match videos.
During this time she drew the conclusion that Beardsley takes his penalties at alternative sides (if he scores).
She rang hubby up at the team hotel the afternoon of the match and told him which way to dive should beardsley get a penno. £
All hail Mrs Beeney!!!!!
(Useless info courtesey of a half page spread in the Yorkshire evening post)
Sean
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 1994 08:05:37 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Holiday games
On Tue, 4 Jan 1994, wrote: Worst joke to come from a scum supporter over the xmas hols.
Why wont Wilko allow his players to have puppies as presents for xmas?
Because they cant hold onto a lead!!
I may agree with sentiment but it pissed me off none the less.
Any body heard any good scum jokes lately??
Another draw for the scum last night.
They may well crack altogether if Blackburn could win 3 or 4 games on the trot.
If the whites can only hold their form, this may allow us to sneak up on the blind side and pip them both at the death.
‘Sweet dreams are made of this’!!
I think the defence as a whole unit has played tremendously well over the hols.
Fairclough has proved in the past and is proving again now that he is an outstanding man to man marker.
I still believe though that he is no longer effective as a zonal defender.
Kelly is just sensational (stuff you Giggs!!).
Dorigo has just been his normal consistent self.
I for one have never criticised Newsome.
I think both he and Weatherall are outstanding prospects, but need an ‘old head’ to bring them on over the next couple of years (pity about O'Leary).
Newsome was praised very highly by Radio 5 during the scum game.
As for Pemberton, at 250,000 he must rank as one of Wilko's best buys.
Certainly better value for money than donkey Deano.
I've got some news on Batty from an article I read over the hols.
Forgot to bring it with me today.
Will mail you all tomorrow.
They really are short on defenders if anybody gets injured.
I think Robson would probably be used as back up because Taggart face has very few options.
Ditto
Happy new year everybody — even the Wilko lovers:-))))
Roger G.
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 10:15 GMT
Subject: Holiday Games
Yeah…
Why wont Fergie allow his players to have puppies as presents for xmas?
Because they cant hold onto a lead.
hehe. 3–0 up after 22 mins.
Vs Liverpool.
Tsch tsch.
Thats 6 draws from 10 games for them…and notably draws vs the higher sides.
What they are doing well is beating crap sides.
We're doing a similar sort of thing.
Blackburn could now get within 7 points — if anyone saw the game last night (I saw the last 30 mins), when Liverpool scored their 3rd scums defence was absolutely sh*tting itself EVERY time someone put the ball into their area.
Ill never forget the desperate look on Bruce's face on one particular (easy amd unchallenged) header out of the area.
Yep guys…scum will break and break good.
Their fall from grace will be meteoric.
When they do go, spit will have one hell of a job rebuilding that side — and hes not good enough to do it.
Also their directors wont really be able to sack him for a few years.
I wonder if the good old English press will stick the boot in when it happens?
They do with every other side — somehow methinks scum will avoid that on the whole.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 1994 11:52:19 GMT
Subject: Bits and bobs
On the teletext today it had a few words from Fergie saying that he reckoned that the no. of points they need to win the league is 84.
At that rate of going they need only scrape 26 points from 17 games which SHOULD be quite an easy task.
He also said that teams such as leeds, arse-nil, norwich, newcastle and blackburn had each put up a brief fight but none were good enough to sustain a serious challenge.
He was basically gloating from what I could gather.
Good to see the ‘pool comin right back at em last night after the scum went 3 up in about 25 minutes.
The pubs I was in had a crackin atmosphere, and when ruddock scored I guess it was almost like when Leeds get a goal…not that us leeds folks have got anything against the scum you understand!!!
Ian Baird (Blast from the past!) in hospital with a collapsed lung.
I think its bristol shitty that he's with now.
Things have been quiet…no messages for 24 hours after picking up the 49 that were waiting yesterday.
They have been buggering about with things a lot though…
No news as yet about the Villa game, except that leslie silver was a bit pissed off at losing the stlg75,000 (I hope you see a pound sign as I do, and not ‘stlg’) that comes with a sky appearance.
They're trying to arrange a ‘mutually convenient’ date (and in the back of their minds they also want it to still be on sky…so unless we both get knocked out of the FA cup this weekend (perish the thought) we'll probably end up playing a saturday and the following monday if moneygrabber silver is owt to do with it.
In a way I suppoise it was quite fortunate as we would have been without speed and wallace, who have now got a longer recovery period — as have all the other cripples that we're carrying.
Sean.
From:
Date: Wed, 05 Jan 1994 14:45:23 +0100
Subject: Aston Villa Game
Hi there
When will the postponed match against Villa be played.
Thanks in advance
Mads
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 14:48:04 GMT
Subject: random comments
Happy new year everyone!
I got back to Durham today after staying on in Leeds to watch the Villa match!
It will cost me a packet to travel down to watch the rescheduled match!
It is sad to see Leeds slip to 5th in the table (only one above Shef Wed) despite some good performances.
The one positive thing over Crimble has been our defending.
I think Newsome, Fairclough and Kelly have been playing brill.
I am ashamed of all the slagging off I dished out to Jony boy, the radio 5 commentator (Alan Green I think) said Newsome was the most underratted center half in the league!!
It is a pity our goal scoring has dried up (probably due to Speed and Wallace being injured)
It was sad to see Rocky go but at least we got a player back, White seems a strong and determined player and has fitted in quite well already.
However Strachen, Kelly and White all in the same area of the field seemed to get in each oters way against QPR).
A lot of reports said we were very negative and cynical against the scum.
However, every time we had a break into there half we were hacked down.
Cantona should have been sent off for poking Fairclough, BBC didn't show that.
Wilkos comments after the game seemed to suggest that he thinks cantona is a fair-weather player.
If his team is not doing too well he doesn't perform.
Matches againts Battyburn and Villa away have been scheduled for Sky.
Just a few random comments!
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 15:11 GMT
Subject: fantasy footie league
fantasy Footie league stuff…but first this…
Ahem.
I think yull find it was Jimmy Armfield — who did a gallant job defending Leeds against the rantings of Alan Green.
That bloke is seriously moving up my list of most irritable shits.
He is so much a scum supporter it makes me heave.
At the end of the match all he could do was criticise Leeds, saying they should have attacked more, and at least scum had class/flair.
Yes Alan.
Lets leave holes at the back for your whippets to run into.
If they were/are so f*cking classy why couldnt they break down the defence ONCE????!?!?!?
Sorry, i just couldnt let people think green was getting impartial in his old age.
KEV…have you thought any more on this fantasy league???
I only say 'cos the Telegraph have printed some stuff today for their league, and I thought it would be a good idea if we jumped aboard their system/rules etc.
The results/stats for each player will be printed each wednesday starting next week.
that means little or no calculation required for you (or whoever the moderator is), aside from collating team scores and positions etc.
just an idea.
btw, what did you get for xmas mate??
Nice pair of comfy slippers.
Smoking jacket.
Dominoes set.
Its not easy buying for old ‘uns these days.
:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 16:20:04 MET
Subject: I've being saying that for years!
Having watched the game live on the telly I though Leeds did a great job containing the scum, and remember we went the closest to scoring in the end!
Don't mind what the papers said!
I nearly bit my lip when I saw that header from Fairclough looping into the top right hand corner from the McAllister free kick.
I thought McAllister played quite poorly and with Strachan having a quiet game, this meant that nothing much was happening in midfield.
It was the first time I've seen either Perberton and White so I'll reserve judgement on them for the time being.
Kelly was excellent though he was mighty lucky to get away with tugging Giggs in the first minute.
It looked from my position that we couldn't have much to argue about if the ref. had given a penalty.
Other than that he showed up Giggs for the puke faced brat that he is (all 10,000,000 and Papin worth of him — Ferguson will rue the day he turned down that offer).
As for our old friend frog face he was psyched out of the game.
No love was lost between himself, Fairclough and Hodge.
The treatment they gave him made me proud to be a Leeds fan.
At one stage, so eager Leeds were to get the ball off time, there were four Leeds player battling with him.
Of course, even though no foul was committed the ref. for peace sake gave the scum a free kick.
Beeney was well positioned for the few shots he had to take.
Newsome is growing in stature with each game though still looks a little shaky (that's partially because we know him so well already).
The defence in general is 200% better than at the start of the year.
Deano is poor enough up front though his supply was pathetic.
I think that Wilko should give ‘fat Frank’ a chance — he's nothing to lose.
Deane, after all, has only scored 5/6 this season.
A long ways away from his 20 for the past four seasons with Sheff.
Utd.
We missed Wallaces speed and Speeds heading ability around the area.
On the whole, though it was a partly negative performance on Leeds part, I think we did very well to get a draw.
The media is going on about how negative Leeds were, what else could they be given the circumstances.
Playing United at their own game would probably have been fatal, the way they are playing at the moment.
A truer word has *never* been spoken.
I still remain to be convinced that either Cantona (or McAllister for that matter) can stand up and be counted when the crunch matches come around.
Do we get some money even if we are the away team if these games go ahead?
I heard the real reason the game on Monday was postponed was because Hunslet ploughed it on Sunday.
If that's the case then the sooner Leeds loses those losers (2nd division of rubgy league?) the better for us and the pitch, which is already the envy of the premiership: 0.
James.
From:
Date: Wed, 05 Jan 94 15:44:44 IST
Subject: Ireland U16 Team and Leeds Youth Team
My wife was flying from Tel-Aviv to London and who should be in front of us at the airport…
The Ireland U16 team who were here in Israel for an international competition.
I was chatting to the team doctor and secretary and I told them I was a Leeds United supporter, and I kept up with the Leeds news via the computer network (spread the word;-)).
Well, after them telling me how good Gary Kelly was, they said they had a Leeds youth team member in their squad.
Ian Hart.
Looked like a well disciplined and well organised team.
I don't know how they did in the comp…
Hoping for a few more Leeds wins as the draws have seen us slide from 2nd to 5th.
There's a bit of a traffic jam and there's a danger of Blackburn pulling away from us…
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 17:26:48 MET
Subject: league table and oh one further thing!
Was the Dylan Kerr who played 1/2 games in the Championship winning season the same Dylan Kerr who is now starring with Reading in the second division?
Is there any other less well known, former Leeds players, starring for other clubs nowadays out there?
James.
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 16:31:23 GMT
Subject: Villa Match
Did anyone get as far as buying a programme for the Villa game, or didn't they even go on sale?
The reason I ask is that I would be interested in knowing where Leeds are in the attendance league.
The QPR match may have a bearing as it is the highest gate so far.
I assume that it reads.
Scum Liverpool Newcastle/Arse/Leeds Villa
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 17:37:01 GMT
Subject: Re: league table and oh one further thing!
Was the Dylan Kerr who played 1/2 games in the Championship winning season the same Dylan Kerr who is now starring with Reading in the second division?
Yep.
I also noticed that Carl Shutt is playing in the premiership on loan from Brum City (Man City I think).
I think he got injured last match though.
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 18:57:38 MET
Subject: Player statistics
Players so far this season, 24 league games and 2 cc-cup:
Leeds United players 93/94 after 26 matches 
From:
Date: Wed, 5 Jan 94 18:13 GMT
Subject: Manc reflections
McAllister was touted as MOTM by Sky's reporter.
Hard to tell from highlights (impossible from MOTD).
Apart from the fact *IF* there was a pull, it happened about 2 yards outside the box.
kelly never had hold of his shirt or anything.
Very well played.
it looks like he's learnt from the Arse match where he was hauled back for 5 yards by Campbell before they scored their 2nd.
Well, the match was called off because the pitch was underwater.
Sky showed pictures of the ref rolling the ball at hisinspection (about 5 I think), and even then it was unplayable.
Although I agree — the sooner they kick hunslet out the better.
It wouldnt be so bad if it were Leeds RLFC, at least thered be some revenue generated.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 07:02:00 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Hunslet RLFC
According to some local newspaper report I read, Hunslet are getting the heave-ho at the end of this season.
It did say where they are moving to but i've forgotten.
Anyway who cares; I'm a Bradford Northern supporter on the rugby league front.
The major reason given for giving them the boot was the requirement for a shit-hot pitch when the Euro championships come round in 96.
If the pitch doesn't come upto scratch it was suggested that Elland Rd might lose out to St James Park.
Heaven forbid!!
Cheers Roger G.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 11:02:58 MET
Subject: Update Leeds versus the rest league table!
Updated Leeds versus ‘the rest’ league table.
Not so bad looking, even if we are only 5th at the moment?
I'm sure it will improve.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 10:37:07 GMT
Subject: Re: Hunslet RLFC
I suspect part of the reason behind the council buying the ground in 1983? was so they could knock down the old rugby league stadium.
Getting rid of Hunslet is probably 1 reason why Silver wants to buy back the ground.
(That and so that Leeds United get any revenue going from the EC matches).
In the 70's we had one of the best pitches in the league, so let's hope it gets sorted out.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 10:40:47 GMT
Subject: Re: league table and oh one further thing!
It is the same Dylan Kerr, and local guys here, who watch Reading are raving about him.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 10:51:21 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Villa Match
On Wed, 5 Jan 1994  wrote:
The Leeds average including the 39,106 that attended the QPR game is now 34,104 which keeps us in 4th place.
Simon.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 12:00:15 MET
Subject: Former Leeds players
Well, what about striker Damian Henderson (20) who has played in the Leeds reserves for at least the last two seasons.
He went to Scarborough this summer, and I heard him mentioned as one of their goalscorers lately.
Other even less well known players?
Carl Erik.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 11:04 GMT
Subject: Ex players
On the subject of ex players and how they are doing now.
Does anyone remember a guy called Ken DeMange.
He was transferred from Liverpool in around ‘87.
He played a number of games that season in a centre midfield role.
He move on to Hull in around ‘90.
He played twice for the Republic of Ireland in 88–89.
He has recently moved to Bohemians club) in Dublin and is playing ok.
Secondly, a while ago I mentioned that a guy called Alan Byrne had been over for a trial, in Elland Road, from Shamrock Rovers in Dublin.
Wilko seemingly has made a bid of (I think the figure was) 90,000.
His manager Ray Tracey says that Alan can move in the summer and Wilko is said to have agreed.
Byrne is a central midfield played who plays the Batty role ie. an agressive tackler/ball winner.
I'm not sure though of where he'd fit in under the current team structure.
Lastly, David O'Leary is due to play his first comeback game for the reserves this week.
Even without him playing the improvement in the defence must be due to a large degree to his presence.
Not bad for a free transfer.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 11:11 GMT
Subject: Ex Leeds players
Let us not forget young Imre varadi.
He scored a hat trick for Rotherham t'other day.
Also, Bobby Davison is now at Sheff Utd.
This happened awhile back, but noone has mentioned it as yet(AFAIK).
Is Terry Connor still playing (for Swansea?)?
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 11:18:43 GMT
Subject: Re: fantasy footie league
Hi, I bought the telegraph yesterday and have got all the fantasy stuff.
I also got in touch with the real FFL lot at the weekend, they said they'd send me an information pack.
(Not come Yet).
I also noticed that there is going to be an FFL programme on the telly starting 14th Jan.
As the real FFL costs money, I think the Telegraph one which is basically the same game, but with slightly different rules to set your team up, is the one to follow for us.
I'm actually going to go in for it in the Telegraph's competition, so I may as well use the same team for our one if it gets going.
I'm not going to go into all the rules here but.
You get to pick your team in 4–4-2 formation from 470 players.
Players have set positons Eg Giggs is regarded as a mid-fielder.
You must not have more than 2 players from 1 team.
(The teams the players are with according to the DT.
Eg White is down at Man City, Rocky at leeds) You may only spend up to 20 Million quid.
Each Player has a set price.
In theory 2 people could pick the same team, but unlikely.
I suppose doing it this way limits the no of participants to how many I can cope with.
Now the problems.
It would take me Fucking years to type in the details of all the players and the rules to distribute them.
Suggestion: Anyone who can get hold of a copy of the Telegraph (Wed 5.1.94) can send me a team by the end of next week.
(13.1.94) I will then keep track of who's doing the best.
I will set up an alias including all participants, and some time during the following week will send everybody copies of each others teams.
We will use the telegraphs stats.
I understand they will be publishing the cumulative and previous week's scores for each player every Wednesday.
We will operate the same system as the DT for transfers, but without the silly form.
It may be a laugh to enter your team in the official Telegraph one as well.
Have Fun — Kev.
PS Mark, I did not get any slippers although I could do with some.
Have paraded the tasteless christmas jumper though.
One benefit from being an old fart is that you get chance to play with yer kids’ stuff.
Scalextric is always fun, and FIFA international soccer on the megadrive is great.
(Pity you can't edit the team or player names though).
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 11:28 GMT
Subject: Alan Byrne
Declan, how old is he?
Is he any good??
Also, how has the irish press taken to the rave reviews for Kelly — with WC94 in mind?
Charlton HAS to pick him, even if it means playing Irwin at left back and dropping Morris/Staunton.
Yup…
I always said it was a good bit of business.
:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 11:41:00 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: fantasy footie league
On Thu, 6 Jan 1994  wrote:
Just so that i'm clear on this; we are talking about right wing fascist rag THE ‘Daily Telegraph’ are we?
I entered a similar type comp in the Daily Star before crimbo.
Did allright for three weeks, but then my twat of a goalkeeper let in 4 and my strikers played like donkeys.
No Deano isn't in my team:-))).
I'll try and get hold of a copy.
I wouldn't mind having a go now my Daily Star teams well F****d.
Yes I think my socks garnished with holly and ivy will last me for quite some time!!
Couldn, t agree with you more.
I know Jungle Book, Beauty & the Beast and several Ninja Turtles cartoons backwards.
I haven't quite mastered dressing the dolls just at the moment though:-))).
Roger (Another old fart!!).
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 11:44 GMT
Subject: Re: FFL
Yes, as I said — theyll also be printing player stats each wednesday, so we have an ‘official’ adjudicator when it comes to what constitutes an assist or not! just like in countdown where the oxford english dictionary is the bible…the telegraph stats can be our bible!:-)
Me too.
Whats yours called Kev?
Mines ‘ANTISCUM UNITED’…well, I only had 5 mins to think one up…: -p 
I think the telegraph will be re-printing the details quite regularly.
As a last resort, Ill volunteer to photocopy the page and fax the details onto people (ie overseas).
Unless someone has a scanner and can get it into ascii??
Hey…what about an official LIST side?
Dunno how we could choose it though??
Maybe a couple of people send Kev proposed LIST sides…then publish them so we can all vote on the winner??
Im not telling you MY side though:-))
Hey…you old git:-))
I wanted a Scalextric…and also FIFA soccer.
Spooky.
I dont need the excuse of having kids though.
I went out and boughta subbuteo set on Tuesday!!
Our flat is like a wing of Michael jackson's mansion.
Anyone any ideas where you can buy pinball/arcade machines??
Oh and Kev…get an Amiga and Sensible Soccer.
Can amend all the names/kits, and even the colour of the players!!
Ace game too:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 12:10 GMT
Subject: RE: Alan Byrne
Opps sorry I should have said more about Byrne.
First of all let me state I like him as much as I like Cuntona.
Byrne move from Bohs (my team) to Rovers durning the summer which is like moving from Elland Road to the scum.
Anyway he is 24, is a good ball winner and throws himself around a bit.
He has a good eye for passing and can play with both feet (sort of) even though he is right footed.
Is he good enough to play for us?
I think his problem is his age.
Coming from a semi-professional level to full Leeds player would not be easy for him but given time he could make it.
The press here, like the list, are raving about Kelly.
As for whether Charlton will pick him, I don't think he will pick him straight off.
He has Irwin at right back and Terry Phelan at left.
Staunton now plays left sided midfield for Ireland.
The option Charlton has is to move Irwin to the right of midfield and play Kelly.
This is unlikely as we have Ray Houghton, Eddie McGoldrick and Paul Byrne (from Celtic) who can play there.
Phelan and Staunton seem to have a great understanding on the left wing and I doubt Charlton will move either.
Irwin is just too good to drop and if he can score free kicks, like to the other night, for Ireland he'll stay.
Anyway Charlton is usually slow to change something that isn't broken (rightly so).
Now if either Phelan or Irwin were to loose form or get injured Kelly would play.
Significantly Kelly was one of the named subs for the game against the North recently so obviously Charlton can see what we see.
On the subject of Kelly.
RTE showed the whole game v the scum last week.
Kelly was f! ing brilliant.
The tackle he made in the first few minutes when Giggs was straight through on Beeny must be enough to get him Young Player of the Year.
I though Newsome was marvellous also.
McAllister was, let's face it, shit.
He did nearly nothing the whole game.
Johnny Giles commentating on the game expressed the view, expressed by someone on the list recently, that he is only a fair weather player.
Fairclough was also marvellous keeping the fat French guy at bay.
I thought Deano played well with really no service.
Anyway back to work.
Declan
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 12:43:58 GMT
Subject: FFL
For anybody who wishes to enter Fantasy.
I have photocopied 10 lots of players and rules, for anybody who really cant get yesterday's Torygraph.
This won't be any good for the official one cos it has to be on an original form
BTW the season as far as scoring concerned started on Dec 27.
As there are no Premier games between now and 14 Jan, we all have the same inside information.
My team is called ‘Hot Currie’ Mark H has already submitted ‘Antiscum United’
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 14:03:32 MET
Subject: Scan in a copy of the page and teams?
Anyone whose got a scanner and a paper could do us who didn't get the paper a big favour by scanning the section concerning the 470 players and then sending it around!
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 14:17:21 +0100
Subject: stuff + fa(s)t-frank speaks again
under the headline ‘Frank asks Drillo about advice’ Frank is yet again figuring in the norways largest newspaper VG (and on the leeds mailing-list…).
‘Frank Strandli (21) is leaving Leeds to try qualifing for a place in the WC squad.
He has three clubs to choose from, but it is Drillo (nickname of Egil Olsen) who decides which club.
Frank is driven out in the darkest darkness in Leeds, but he got a golden oppurtunity when he was selected for Drillos squad to play USA [and Costa Rica — killers of Sweden in last WC for those who remember — my comm.]later this month.
The national coach has earlier said that FS must play first-team football to be in consideration for the WC. — I will let Drillo know which clubs and i will listen to his advice, S say.
Brann, Bergen is the only norw. club.
The two other (foreign) clubs is (yet) Frank's secret.
The only thing which i sure is that i will not play for Start.
[FS and Start have a disagreement on GBP 65000 after him signing Leeds].’
— I have to find a new club as soon as i return from the USA and has spoken with Drillo, a tired-of-Leeds Frank say.
I'm included in the squad, but i end up in the terraces in every game.
That's why i want to leave as soon as possible.
Leeds will not make any problems if a club wants to rent me, and the price for 10–11 matches in Norway would probably be around GBP 25000, Frank say.
The spanish club Albacete was interested — but this deal is now definetely off.
— The price was to high for the spaniards, Frank say.
so the most-talked-about terrace-player gets another half-page over here— if Frank play well in the US that might make it easier for him to get a new club.
personally — after watching Deane again vs scum and considering that our top scorer is injured — i think Frank should be given a place on the bench — at least as a ‘threat’ to Deano…
the list of scorers posted by fellow scand. white Carl Erik really show our problems — with wallace and speed injured — who is gonna score those goals — deano is (once again) out of it — he's only got 6 goals in 26 matches and that's —bad—for a striker.
what is sad to see is that a player like tony dorigo has not yet scored a goal this season and the same for kelly — that is: our wide defenders has not (yet) been a threat to the opposite team — which — if i rememeber correctly — did happen a couple of seasons back with both Love-Machine Sterland and Tony getting the occasional goal.
I had a close look at the table last night — what really — ehh — scares me is Scum's away form — in fact they are better away than at Old Scumford — even so they are just as good away as we are at HQ…yes they are vulnerable — but as they got points from the games vs us, Newcastle, Blacburn and Scousers recently i can't see what (who) is gonna crack them?
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 13:19:15 GMT
Subject: World cup tickets
You thought that you had problems halvard…on the teletext yesterday it said that agencies in Ireland were selling tickets for their 3 games at a staggering 250 quid each!!
They are expecting it to come down though.
I should bloody hope so too!
Just thank our lucky stars that we don't have such problems here in England!!!!!!
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 13:42:28 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: stuff + fa(s)t-frank speaks again
On Thu, 6 Jan 1994, wrote:
I think Frank deserves a chance in the team let alone on the bench, the way donkey is playing.
I hope Wilko cuts his losses with our Brian and then goes out to look for a decent striker.
On his present form we really would have been better sticking with Chappie.
As the Leeds United reporter in the local rag put it recently ‘Deane is equally as clumsy as Chapman, but without any of the qualities’.
Roger G
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 08:46:16–0500
Subject: Give Strandli a chance!
I have to agree with our scandinavian bretheren's sentiments.
As soon as Chappy played a duff match last season, Wilko couldn't drop him fast enough, yet he was knocking in goals at a far better rate than Deano.
Deano has had a string of duff matches, yet Wilko sticks by him!
What's up?
He stuck by Wallace a while, but he too has had regular spells as a sub and in the reserves too.
I'd give Frank a chance.
My 2p worth
John
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 14:53:53 +0100
Subject: Fantasy Football
Could somebody fax me a copy of what was in the Torygraph yesterday please.
I work for a sports info service and would be interested to see how they are going to do their version.
My fax number is 0532 420650.
Mark it FTAO Joanne.
I would really appreciate this.
Cheers.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 14:56:45 +0100
Subject: Re: World cup tickets
that was — uh hu —‘expensive’— well at least they —can—get hold of ‘loose’ tickets…over here you have to buy a package with trip, hotel and tickets for the three first games — comes in around GBP 1400 which might not be that bad compared to the price you mention.
that is if you don't work in the FA or is employed by one of their sponsors — the news showed some guys at a large fruit company (main sponsor) looking at brochures for USA-trips arranged by their company…tickets will be no problems for these people.
anyone out there working as executives for Snickers, Coca-Cola, Sun or something — a couple of tickets for each of Norway's games (and Ireland-Italy) would be most welcome!! naah — thought so;-)
i called the norw.
FA yesterday and it looks like me getting tickets from them is the same chance like the famous snowball in hell — i might settle for a new video player instead — in fact i still have got almost all of WC'90 on video — pictures from —all—games — and complete games from the 1/8 finals and onwards — including the England-Kamerun game which is quite a favorite.
I guess i have to start watching these games again sometime soon — havent seen them for years — i could relive the period — watching the games and sending out match reports to rec.sport.soccer the day after — 4 years after the events took place — sort of a madmans project i guess…but could have been —really—fun if i had the time (ie no work & no wife/kid…)
fa(s)t-halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 13:59:12 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: I've being saying that for years!
Absolutely, couldn't agree more, thats why I was fucking astounded to see the headlines in the sunday papers saying GIGGS BACK TO HIS MAGNIFICENT BEST the little shit did fuck all.
The headlines should have been KELLY KEEPS GIGGS IN HIS POCKET.
SIMON.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 14:06:09 +0000
Subject: Leeds goz
Over the hols I learned a gossipy thing or two from my brother in law who deals with some Leeds United staff in the course of his work at a certain Leeds City Centre bank (not saying which one but it's not hard to guess).
Howard Wilkinson has walked into the bank on at least two occasions under the impression he was in the Bradford & Bingley Building Society over the road.
He even handed over his B&B passbook once and asked how much he'd got in it.
David Rocastle was among the chattier of the players who come in.
Why wasn't he picked?
He hadn't a clue.
‘The boss has his reasons’.
Jon Newsome has big trouble with his cash dispenser card — he regularly puts it in the wrong way round.
And when the software in the cash dispenser was changed to return card before giving cash, he came into the bank scratching his head.
He reckoned the machine had swallowed his card, cos, he said, he'd got his money and then waited for it to come out but it hadn't appeared.
‘Look in your wallet’, he was told, and sure enough, there was the card…
Despite this Jon Newsome's lovely new wife thinks he's wonderful but apparently the other players' wives think she's a bit of a bimbo.
This seems a bit sad given that footie players' wives and girlfriends often score high marks on the bimbometer in any case.
One thing no one ever talks about is Why Cantona Went: everyone is banned from doing so.
The cover-up is official.
Also I read in the Belfast Telegraph that Gordon Strachan is a big fan of the Saw Doctors.
This is not entirely surprising because Gordon looks just like their lead singer (whose name escapes me right now), right down to the ginger mop and lack of height.
Allegedly, Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 14:09:34 GMT
Subject: seperate server
When we ger this fantasy football stuff going, would we be able to put it on a different server.
I have a few non-leeds mates who would be interested.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 15:13:39 MET
Subject: I got a reply from Tonys mother:-)— Wow!
Hi James,
I was pleased to hear that you arrived safely home after your excursion to Southampton.
We do hope Leeds make it to the FA Cup final, however the players now only receive 6 tickets (or the Leeds players will) As Anthony's wife and two children, and his father, myself and Lisa his sister will be going I am afraid Anthony wouldn't have any spare.
I could ask the other players (providing of course that Leeds are in the Final), however because of all the troubles the players and Managers have had in the past, most of them won't sell their tickets and usually only give them to their families in case they fall into the wrong hands, and then they are in trouble.
Anyway, it was nice to hear from you, although I haven't got around to responding until now.
I hope you and your family had a good Christmas and I hope you have a successful and happy new Year.
Regards, Rosemary
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 14:29 GMT
Subject: Leeds gossip (allegedly)
Well…how much WAS in it??
Not the current balance, but the last balance.
Can your B-I-L at least divulge whether todays players do actually save loads of dosh, or whether they squander it like most people do?
Cos he didnt have a B&B account perchance??
Maybe this explains the cuntona stuff aswell.
Just maybe Cunt couldnt handle having a book which had 2 shady blokes in silhouette on it…not avant garde or rimbaut (sp?) enuff?
Nah.
this is made up.
Admit it gav.
How would the bank staff know if hed put it in the wrong way round…it just doesnt ‘suck’ it in. unless he forces it in.
Another pointer to this being made up is that he has got a degree, so should have an IQ at least marginally above yer average player.
Unless of course this is a Lloyds bank.
They are rubbish when it comes to ATM machines.
Jeez, it looks like all the players and wives nip off down the bank for a quick gas up north.
Sod Claire rayner.
‘Just sign there…will you do that for me luvvy, will you, will you do that??’
Em, er, quite how could Gordy look like anyone UNLESS they were ginger haired and short??
Aside from a duracell of course…yuk yuk yuk…
Thassit…cover yer back.
What with Mrs Dorigo maybe lurking:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 14:43:46 GMT
Subject: World Cup & Leeds Tickets
I must be going as senile as Mark H thinks.
I have probably got a chance of getting tickets through Jack Charlton.
His Auntie (Mothers sister) lived most of her life in Harwell village, having come down this way to do domestic service.
Her daughter (Jack's Cousin) runs our postroom at Rutherford here, and her garden literally backs on to mine.
I talk to her quite often, so I'll have to start dropping hints about tickets.
She tells me that Jack was a real piss-head, and was always having to borrow money off her husband when they went out on the town.
They have been going to stay with Jack regularly for years, and the only thing that has changed is that Jack doesn't need a sub any more.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 15:46:04 MET
Subject: I think you mean Wetherall?
I think you might be mixing up Wetherall and Newsome.
Wetherall, I think, has a first in Chemistry from Sheff.
Utd.
University.
On the other hand, Newsome too could have a degree.
Just because one has a degree doen't automatically mean one can't be an idiot at the same time:-).
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 15:00:04 GMT
Subject: Re: seperate server
I don't think I will be able to set up anything quite as fancy as Gav's I was just going to add all the e-mail addresses to a list.
So they can e-mail me at my normal address.
Perhaps I will post occasionally to the list to keep you all informed.
Faxing the stuff, may prove awkward as it is on 2 large A3 sheets.
The best idea would be a scanner, if anybody has one.
Other than that the only advice I can give is to get hold of the Torygraph, from Wednesday 5th.
Most public/Work libraries should have copies.
If you are outside the UK, You should get it a day or so late anyway.
So it may be around today or tomorrow.
Lastly, I should have said that entries close at 17.00 GMT on Fri 14th (not 13th, as I said earlier).
Bye, Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 15:11:34 GMT
Subject: Re: Leeds gossip (allegedly)
He won't say anything about their financial affairs, although between the lines I detected a certain amount of mirth that Mel of the Mars Bars' custom has gone elsewhere.
It's a glass fronted building.
I expect the staff watch when they're bored.
And they probably have cameras on it for all I know.
Jeez Mark I was having a laugh and a beer at the time, not researching a new episode of Inspector Morse!
To give the poor lad his due, he's only one of many who've done the same.
The BIL says he worked out a Paul Daniels routine to deal with all the people who came in complaining about it (count to three — say the magic word — now look in your wallet).
I've just checked, and Anthony's mother is not yet amongst us.
Maybe you could tell her about us James?
And suggest that Anthony gets a modem for his next birthday so's he can join too?
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 15:59 GMT
Subject: Egg Heads
Nope…afaik they both went to Sheff univ.
at the same time…and both got degrees.
I agree about the idiot bit…but on the whole people who have degrees at least tend to know if they are being completely dense, so would not advertise their problems with ATM's.
Especially being famous too.
The ATM problems sound more like your Keane or Giggs sorta problem.
Mind you, Spit probably takes young Ryan down the bank (aswell as up the back), and holds his hand.
Probably doesnt even let him speak to the staff there.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 94 16:10 GMT
Subject: Poor Old Newsome
Now come on Gav.
You know the list comprises of mainly Newsome groupies here.
You cannot tease us with a smidge of inside info on Jon, and not expect us to be hanging on every word.
LISTers who have links with these idols SHOULD carry notepad and pen, of not a tape recorder.
And then to slight Jon in such a way.
Well…well…its just blummin not on…it might force hamsters to be renamed amongst other serious repurcussions.
BTW, if there are cameras…how about flogging the tape to Jez beadle (every man has his price, and mines a grand to publicly humiliate old thunder boots);-))))
No Mrs Newsome I spose <sniff>
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 6 Jan 1994 17:46:48 GMT
Subject: Thick as two short planks?
I can understand that sentiment fully.
In around 6 months time I'll have one of these famed degrees (hopefully) and at times I can be equally dopey…to the extent that the same thing happenend to me regarding my cashcard.
I thought for two days that the machine had swallowed it and it was only on the monday morning on the way to the bank that I found that it had miraculousloy reappeared in my wallet again.
What I want to know is how do they do it?
Mirrors?
A trapdoor?
A box of matches secured to the bank managers arm with an elastic band?:-)
Sean
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 06:55:28 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: ‘Batty blasts Leeds’
I don't know if any of the other Sunday rags picked this up but here are a few snippets from an article in the ‘Yorkshire on Sunday’, entitled ‘Batty blasts Leeds’(26.12.93)
David Batty is braced for a bruising reunion with his old Leeds team-mate Eric Cantona today.
But he hinted that if Howard Wilkinson had a bit more flair, then both might still be in Elland Road harness and jointly pursuing another championship.
Instead the French star has been the spark that has ignited a dazzling new united era, while Batty has also departed the title winning Leeds side of 1992 to become part of Kenny Dalglish's millionaires club at Blackburn.
‘Eric is always going to be special’ admits Batty.
‘But I think the way we played at Leeds he was something of a luxury sometimes — there were times when even his team mates didn't know what he woeld do next’‘It's different at Scumchester United where they really do play through him — AND OF COURSE HE'S ALSO SURROUNDED BY BETTER PLAYERS’…
Batty a 2.75M signing, has also flourished since his move, showing a skilful side to go with his tigerish tackling.
‘At Elland Road I was expected to go and win the ball and that was about all they liked!!— get the ball up to the big front men and look around for the knock downs’(Batts obviously didnt look very hard cos he didnt find many!!)
‘HERE AT BLACKBURN THEY LIKE TO PLAY THE BALL THROUGH THE MIDFIELD.
IT'S ONLY WHEN YOU COME TO A CLUB LIKE THIS THAT YOU APPRECIATE WHAT THE GAME OF FOOTBALL IS ALL ABOUT’
The capitals and!! are mine for emphasis but i'm sure everybody gets the drift of the article.
Now I dont believe everything I read and I only believe half of what I see, but if these words have been uttered by the ‘poor mans Billy Bremner’, then even I think it's a bit rich!
As a confirmed anti-wilkoite I may agree with his sentiments on lack of flair, but thats not really the point is it?
He has not only tarnished his relationship with Leeds United Football Club (the club that he owes everything to including his 2.75M price tag), he also shit on the manager and those players who are left at the club, who helped him win a championship medal.
Batty certainly can't be excused on the grounds the manager didn't give him a ‘fair crack of the whip’ can he?
Come on all you personal friends of Batts out there; is this report true?
Roger G
Gav — I notice there was no gossip about Batts nipping in to the bank for a few sov's.
I Assume he is taking his 8 grand a week elsewhere these days.
Perhaps the Blackburn & Bingley?:-)))
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 07:24:46 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: FFL
To anyone who got Wednesdays Daily Telegraph — did it say when they would printing rules, details of players etc again?
Thanks in anticipation
Roger G
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 11:57:21 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: computer question
Hello folks, my boss has been away this morning so I've been busy scanning a few leeds picies and saving them as gif files.
I have managed to get them onto my unix account area,(can you tell I don't realy know what I'm talking about?).
I am now trying, in vain, to uuencode the files so that I can send them to anyone who wants them thro' mail.
Can anybody show me the error of my ways?
This is what I am doing:—
tower 2% uuencode strach.gif gordon
the computer then encodes the file, that is the screen scrolls through loads of spurious characters stating with ‘begin' and ending in ‘end’.
If I then list my files ls — al the gordon file is nowhere to be seen.
where could it be? or what could I be doing wrong? any ideas?
Cheers in advance.
Simon.
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 94 15:20:36 +0100
Subject: FFL/scan/Re: computer question
hi — there is a man with access to a SCANNER!!
would you be willing to scan in the famous (Fantasy Football League) page(s) from the telegraph? several scans (files) may be necessary but most of us got tape on the desk…
somebody send the (a copy of) the pages if he does not have it before his boss comes back!
as for the unix stuff: do a:’ uuencode strach.gif strach.gif > strach.gif.UU’to redirect the uuencoded output to a file.
also do a compress on the file afterwards to save bandwith when sending to other unix-systems (ie ‘compress strach.gif.UU’— the new file will be called strach.gif.UU.Z)(do net send the compressed version to people with PC's — they might not have programs to uncompress it)
halvard 
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 15:53:06 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: pickie
Thanks for the help everybody, you're all bloody marvellous you are.
We only have an A4 scanner but if somebody would like to send me the relevant pages from the Torygraph I will have a go, the address is coming up at the end of the progrmme.
Here is the first of he gifs and its a bloody good one too, even if it is a bit big;-) 400k+.
It is a team photo taken on the pitch shortly after the presentation of the championship trophy.
Halvard, I compressed one of the files ok and then mailed it to myself first to see if I was getting everything right.
When I then tried to uncompress the returned file, it would not.
So, I appologise for the excessive size of this one;-}}(I've never had to say that before) but I have decided not to compress them.
You will just need to uudecode the following file called champs to get at the gif called leeds2.gif.
cheers Simon.
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 94 17:25:55 GMT
Subject: Fantasy
Hello again, 2 points to make about the FFL
1.
Wednesday is Fantasy day in the Torygraph so I expect the details to be in there again next week, as nothing more will have happened by then fantasy-wise cos there are no Premiership games.
This is just a guess.
2.
I have discovered we have a scanner here at Rutherford.
So I may be able to make a gif file or 4 next week when I have learned how to use the thing.
Simon, I will send you a photocopy of the stuff.
One of us will probably be sucessful.
Has anybody heard any team news about tomorrow.
It shouldn't really matter, but then good old Victor Meldrew may be around:-{
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 7 Jan 94 09:34:53 PST
Subject: Re:Fantasy
WHO HE?
Simon.
From:
Date: Sat, 8 Jan 1994 15:18:11 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: latest
17 mins — Leeds 1 Crewe 0
Scorer — Brian Deane
Pity about that Halvard:-))))
Roger G
From:
Date: Sat, 8 Jan 1994 16:52:46 GMT0BST
Subject: RESULT?????
Anybody!
Whats the final score (and scorers if possible)
From:
Date: Sat, 8 Jan 1994 16:59:02 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: RESULT?????
On Sat, 8 Jan 1994, wrote:
Final score Leeds 3 Crewe 1
Scorers — Deane, Forrester (2)
Roger G
From:
Date: Sun, 9 Jan 1994 18:59:15–0500
Subject: Forrester scores!!
Forrester scoring twice!
This is intriguing.
Was this his first match in the starting line-up?
I'm really looking forward to reading the full reports.
BTW, how on earth did we let Crewe put one past us?
After Sunderland, I guess I'm plain relieved.
John
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 9:59:51 GMT
Subject: Re: Disunited
Yeh — I would hope that we can all live together though, after all if you can't criticise the manager then there's no point on being on the list.
How about a separate we hate wilko group???
Yep The Don was crap — I could have done a better job.
NOT!!!!!!!!!!!
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 10:22:09 GMT
Subject: Re: Forrester scores!!
Yeah, Wilko pulled a fast one there.
Dario Gradi, Crewe's manager thought White would be playing up front, and prepared his defence for that.
They were relieved to be facing Forrester.
Of course they did not know what to expect.
According to reports, he not only scored twice, but played very well throughout.
Forrester has played before.
He started at home to QPR at the end of last season and possibly in other games.
Looking at who played, I assume the line-up was.
Crewe are top of div 3 by 8 points, and had not lost for about 15 games, so were always going to have confidence, good organisation and scoring ability.
Right now they are probably as good as Sunderland.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 10:23:51 GMT0BST
Subject: jesus! we haven't drawn Arsenal
It was a very close run thing though, three balls left in the bag.
Away to Oxford can't be too bad—could this be the year??
Well, it's good to be back on the list and catching up on the mountain of messages.
Sorry to anyone who'd been hoping for a match report from Newcastle, but I went home to Wakefield the morning after the game and so didn't get a chance to post one.
Mind you, the combination of a few too many pints before the game and only being able to see about 3/4 of the pitch wouldn't have made for a very comprehensive report anyway!
I couldn't agree more with those who've been praising Newsome for his performances over the Christmas games.
What a star!
But can it last?
I know it's early days yet, but White hasn't made the kind of impact we'd hoped for.
I reckon he'll probably come good in time, but we can't afford to leave it too long to wait for both him and Deano to start coming up with the goods.
Anyone got any info on the rumours about Wilko being interested in Ian Rush?
Shame about the result yesterday, but what a joy to see Hughes-less being sent off on live tv!
But just to add to the usual conspiracy theories — why couldn't it be repeated at the end of the game — surely it was one of the key points of the game.
And also, did I imagine the match against Crewe on Saturday?
I must have, 'cos there was no mention of it on Manc of the Day on either Saturday or Sunday, despite Jamie's brilliant goals.
Well, if it's not too late to say it, happy new year.
Steve.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 10:26:57 GMT
Subject: Oxford.
Oxford away in the next round, a home game for me, and another chance to take the piss out of the locals.
Rugby and tickets permitting, I'll be there.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 11:46:25 MET
Subject: FA Cup
Is this a turning point in our FA cup history:
Draw for the 4th round, two matches to go, Leeds was still left, so was Millwall/Arsenal, the outcome seemed obvious (NOT AGAIN!!!), but it didn't happen!!
I think I heard that White set up Jamie's first goal, any details about the second?
By the way, Jamie started 5 matches last season (was substituted in 3 of them) and came on once as a substitute (all in the league), but no goals.
Great contributions to some goals though, in particular Strachans (one of them) vs Blackburn, Wallace's vs.
Norwich and Chapmans vs.
Blackburn if my memory is right.
I couldn't really see why he wasn't given the chance this season (apart from the last mins vs Swindon),
Carl Erik.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 11:50:39 MET
Subject: Oxford tough but not impossible!
Oxford away is not mission impossible!
I couldn't believe the bookies were giving 9/1 for Leeds to win the whole thing on Sat. morning.
Are they bananas?
I'd have trouble betting on Leeds at 20/1, let alone 9/1.
I somehow don't think they will take major amounts of money at those very restrictive odds, though I suppose you may get a couple of punters putting down a few quid each way:-).
Forrester seems to have played a lovely game, or so we are told by the Sunday tabloids.
The largest report was all of 4 inches by 2 inches in the 6/7 newspapers I went through yesterday morning.
On BBC 5, Forresters second goal was described as ‘delicious’.
Yum-yum, I'd say.
Crewe as a previous reply rightly said are running away with the 3rd division, so a 3–1 defeat is a good result considering the mauling some other Premiership clubs got from the likes of Peterborough and Stockport.
re:: Images of Leeds teams/players!
How about a dedicated FTP location to store such things — Adrian T. any ideas?
IMHO it is a much better idea in the long run to post the material to an anonymous FTP location rather than wasting valuable Internet bandwidth E-Mailing the material around the list!
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 10:55:13 +0000
Subject: Re: jesus! we haven't drawn Arsenal
Someone else noticed too!
I couldn't believe that we weren't mentioned once, whilst Battyburn, Scousepool etc had coverage.
Had the score been the other way round I'm sure we'd have been the first match to be shown with umpteen repeats of all the goals.
Even in the papers we received v. little coverage — NOTW was 50 words if that.
Ade
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 10:56:10 GMT
Subject: Leeds, Crewe and Life
Hello and Happy New Year I've just returned to uni after the crimble hols and have just finished shifting through all the e-mail — thank god the Wilko/List abuse thread has finished!!!!
Anyhow I thought the team had a pretty good crimble period, despite the number of draws which were due mainly to bad luck and some inept finishing.
The defence was really impressive especially vs the scum and we were unlucky not to pinch the game with the Fairclough header.
I've become throughly demoralized with the Beeb who appear to only show the Scum games now.
But to business, the game against Crewe on Saturady was a run of the mill 3rd round cup tie agaainst a team from the lower divisions, namely they came to shut the Leeds midfield down and run around alot while Leeds sat back and attempted to play footy.
In the first half we attacked the Kop end and hopes were high that Crewe would conceed a bagful of goals in the first half when Deane actually managed to score in the 17th minute.
This occured after a sustained period of Leeds pressure which resulted in a whole string of corners, the goal came from Crewe's inability to clear the ball and after several rebounds and with players flailing around the ball broke to Deane who scored from about six yards out.
Up to this point as I said Leeds had been on top — this included a period when Hodge was off the field after colliding with a Crewe player and injuring his wrist, thus Leeds were down to ten men.
However Crewe came back into the game a scored after 30 minutes or so when Strach misplaced a pass in the midfield where upon some Crewe player broke away and rolled the ball past Beaney and Hodge (who only just missed intercepting it).
Crewe finished the first half the stronger and were possibly unlucky not to go in with a lead, the Leeds defense was looking fragile (Fairclough was back at central def. — agghhhh), the midfield (esp.
Macca and Strach) was ineffective, Hodge ran around like a headless chicken trying to pull down every Crewe player he came near and White and Deane were not in the game.
Deane seems to have to problem of going to collect the ball on the wings and as a result he's never in the centre when the ball comes across — I hope someone will tell him that centre forwards are supposed to hang around near the goal.
In the second half Leeds looked slightly better but almost went 2–1 down when poor marking let one the Crewe forwards in with a chance, the ball came across from the right wing and the bloke had a shot at goal from about 12 yards out that only just missed.
Leeds fortunately got their act together and started passing the ball around and a couple of minutes later Forrester volleyed in from ten yards after good work on the right by Dave White.
With about 10 minutes of the match to go Forrester collected the ball on the right edge of the penalty area after agood run from Kelly, turned and curled the ball around the goalie and into the opposite top corner of the net — a truely brilliant goal.
A fair result in the end, Leeds dominated most of the second half especially after scoring the second goal — however a number of players had poor days on the whole (Macca, Strach, White) and some had a downright shit day — Deane and Hodge.
Good performances came from Kelly, Forrester and my god half wit Newsome!!
So over all a deserved win — i just hope Speedy is back soon as Hodge is definitely not a good enough player.
We've got Oxford United away in the 4th round so hopefully we'll get past them and establish a good cup run — who knows if we win the FA cup I may even relent in my criticsim of Sgt Wilko.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 11:05:08 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: FA Cup
I think I heard that White set up Jamie's first goal, any details about the second?
I couldn't see it too clearly 'cos it was at the other end of the pitch, but it seemed that Jamie had the ball around the right hand edge of the box and curled it into the top left hand corner.
There was a bit of a fuss because a Crewe player was flat out on the ground injured and had to be carried off afterwards, but it was all over by that point anyway, really.
To be fair, Crewe deserved a goal.
They played some good passing football and had us looking very worried until half time.
They got a brilliant reception from the Leeds fans at the end.
Steve.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 11:17 GMT
Subject: Manc of the Day
BBC really are going from bad to worse.
They fall over themselves to show scum.
The way they edit matches for ‘highlights’ is a disgrace IMO.
Their one saving grace was the FA Cup coverage…usually showing the goals from EVERY FA cup match.
But now they cant even do that.
Im getting extremely pissed off having my TV Licence money spent on Scum hype — and then not to be shown the goals.
Im sure if they could manage to go to some obscure town on the borders of scotland last round, they could manage to ‘waste’ 10 seconds on Leeds.
Bet your f*cking life, if we had lost theyd have shown extensive ‘highlights’.
Anyway, as usual Sky's ‘Goals on sunday’ came to the rescue…although not completely.
They showed Forrester's 2 goals, but not Deano or Crewes goals.
Forresters first was after a ball dinked over to White on the right hand side of the box (facing goal), he hooked it over his shoulder — square to about the pen spot and forrester did a flying scissor-kick/volley which flew into the net.
His second followed good work on the right wing by Kelly, he played it infield to Hodge, who passed it along the ground to forresters feet…in the same sort of position as white for the 2nd goal…except facing the touchline.
He took it a few feet out, so now he was on the edge of the 18 yard box…near the corner (so approx 25 yards from goal), he pulled it back the other way, turned and curled the ball into the top left corner with his left foot.
Those goals are VERY important for Forresters (& therefore Leeds) future.
Its funny cos I decided to watch the fa youth cup final from last year on friday…coincidence or what.
As for Oxford in the next round — a chance to avenge that awful 4–1 League cup defeat from a few years back once and for all.
I dont think we will have any problem at all, in those days oxford had Aldridge and Houghton, whilst we were playing shite.
So, its all round to Gav or Kev's for tea and cake before the match then;-))
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 11:21:56 GMT
Subject: Villa game/ticket info req'd
A couple of questions:
Firstly, does anybody know if the Villa game has been re-arranged yet?
If so, what's the new date?
Secondly, I've decided it's time for one of my all too infrequent trips to Elland Road.
I was thinking about the Sheff Wed game on 12 Feb.
The thing is, it's been so long since I've been that I haven't got a clue how much tickets are likely to be.
Is it possible to get tickets for the Kop or are they usually sold out?
What are the cheapest seat tickets?
I suppose getting tickets for the Oxford game is going to be out of the question?
Thanks in advance for any help,
Andy K.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 12:34:11 MET
Subject: Was he the lad who…
Was Forrester the lad that scored the amazing overhead kick to win Leeds the youth cup last term?
It had to be Leed's goal of the season, and by far the best goal shown on the highlights video from last season.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 12:04:14 +0000
Subject: Crewed Language
Sorry about the pun, this is my match report.
Elland Road was the emptiest I've seen in a long time, 23,000 of which 4000 were Crewe fans.
They were noisy, and a tribute to their club in terms of getting behind their side.
We hardly sang a note.
I'm worried that Wilko has put a distance between the fans and the team by selling popular players too often, though obviously Batty is a case in point and that wasn't Howard's fault.
At kick-off we were all over them and had loads of chances.
It looked like it was going to be a doddle.
The Kop was strangely silent, watching impassively as several clear chances came and went.
White was a culprit I recall, as was Deane and Forrester.
Gradually Leeds relinquished control of the game although Deane put us ahead with a scrambly goal.
Macca was quiet.
Strach was giving the ball away, it was this that led to Alex's equaliser.
Thereafter we had to put up with Crewe elegantly stringing passes together while our overpaid boobies struggled.
The midfield was dismal.
Shots on goal were weak.
There were significant boos at the end of the half.
The second half wasn't that much better, the opposition apparently decided that they'd had their cup final however, so they meekly attempted to defend their 1–1 scoreline and this was their undoing.
Deane had a couple of fine shots at some thirty yards distance which went unfortunately wide.
Despite their silky passing, Forrester was able to score twice and kill them off.
Our midfield was mediocre.
Our passing wasn't up to their standard (!) and we kept giving it away too often.
McAllister had something to do with a Forrester goal but was a disappointment.
Strach was pretty good as usual despite his error.
Newsome is a towering presence in our defence — fact.
The defence is well sorted.
Anthony was crap compared to his usual self though.
Let's hope the boys enjoyed their rest on Saturday.
It's a shame we had to pay 14 quid to watch them.
I drew some cheer from Jamie and his goals.
Let's hope he keeps it up, and makes himself a permanent fixture in the side.
Unless some of those cripples get well we may end up in midtable anonymity by May.
I was very very angry to read Batty's comments about Leeds.
I hope he get's a right roasting at Ewok Park on the 24th from the fans.
The c***.
So Leeds might play crap sometimes but we will get better.
Blackburn are nowhere compared to us after two seasons in the top flight, but with tons more cash spent, and in theory a far better management.
I still reserve the right to laugh at Newsome BTW.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 12:17:43 GMT
Subject: Re: Manc of the Day
We did hammer them twice in the promotion season.
Winning 4–2 from 0–2 in Oxford.
I think Aldridge was bought later in that season.
He scored a hat-trick the following season in the league when Oxford won 5–2.
Houghton did not go to Oxford until the season after, when they they were in Div1.
I think the record since that game v Oxford is, though I can't remember the result of the game at Oxford in Jan 89 W3 D2 L0
Just showing my age in remembering the distant past:-}Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 12:48 GMT
Subject: Fa Youth cup…
Yes.
Thinking about it hes got some kind of ‘hot streak’ when it comes to the FA Cup.
I think he scored about 9 goals in the 5 or so matches he played in the youth cup, and 2 more in the senior!
Looks like weve found our lucky mascot this year:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 12:57 GMT
Subject: Re: Crewed Language
Dont you think its more to do with the fact Elland Rd is always quiet in the first round of cups?
Especially playing some 3rd div side — we were on a hiding to nothing.
Strangely enough I think this leads to a chicken-egg thing with us.
We are quiet in the first rounds cos we are scared of being giant-killed…but this lack of atmosphere gets to the players who rarely perform in the first rounds of the cups??
Oh well, I think so anyway:-)
Those comments came just after hed left Leeds, just after his 1st game for them I think.
Although Id not read the ‘full horror’.
Im afraid its the usual pro footballer thing where they say nice things about the club theyve just joined.
I dont think it was meant as anti-Leeds, but more pro Blackburn.
I though batty was above it…and for that I agree 200% hes a c***.
If Leeds are so shite why does he still go to Elland Rd to watch on his days off I wonder??
Silly boy.
Mark 
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 13:03 GMT
Subject: Oxford/Leeds history through the ages
Yes.
One of Gary Speeds first outings I believe.
Also led to that famous shot in the video with the bloke leaping onto/into the crowd as the 4th rattled in.
Still laugh aloud at that:-)
Im sure I remember them having SOMEONE decent.
I was there in body if not spirit.
I remember Kenny Burns playing for us (still with hand bandage I believe).
I also remember leaving about 5 mins before the end to make the 5 mile walk to the station, only to hear the Leeds goal…or was it that I thought the noise was Leeds making it 3–2???
Oh, I dont know, I was only about 2 years old (probably).
Come on Kev…exactly what minute did we/they score??
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 13:14:34 GMT
Subject: He flies through the air with greatest of ease
I wasn't the only on that saw him then!
He was standing on top of one of the crush barriers by the look of it and when the goal went in he either jumped or the surge forward did the job for him and he defied gravity for a while.
Another thing that tickled me about that game was that when vinny had got his second he went over to one of the hoardings that had ‘Alexei Sayle’ written on it and kicked the shit out of it for some reason (same goal I think as above)
Vinny also missed a penalty which would have given him his hat-trick and brought the score to 5–2.
Sean
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 13:53:55 GMT
Subject: Re: Manc of the Day
I can't believe it either, the BBC has got much over the crimble period all of there coverage is tailored to the scum — in fact the last match featured on MOTD that didn't involve them was us vs Arse.
What's worse is that the commentators are constantly fawning to the scum, the game against us at the pigstye being the prime example, going on the BBC coverage Leeds didn't appear to touch the ball let alone get it out of their own half.
As for the Giggs/Kelly incident at the beginning of the game it looked like a perfectly fair challenge after all it's not as if Girly Pallyster doesn't make contact with the person he's marking (and that's in both senses of the word marking).
You lucky B*****d — we haven't got sky.
The first two goals were shown on Look North staurady evening.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 13:53:55 GMT
Subject: Re: Manc of the Day
I can't believe it either, the BBC has got much over the crimble period all of there coverage is tailored to the scum — in fact the last match featured on MOTD that didn't involve them was us vs Arse.
What's worse is that the commentators are constantly fawning to the scum, the game against us at the pigstye being the prime example, going on the BBC coverage Leeds didn't appear to touch the ball let alone get it out of their own half.
As for the Giggs/Kelly incident at the beginning of the game it looked like a perfectly fair challenge after all it's not as if Girly Pallyster doesn't make contact with the person he's marking (and that's in both senses of the word marking).
You lucky B*****d — we haven't got sky.
The first two goals were shown on Look North staurady evening.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 13:56:58 GMT
Subject: Re: Villa game/ticket info req'd
Kop is £9, the west stand is £14 and the new east stand is £18 — I don't know what ticket availability is like though.
Got to be a member of the supporters club and I don't know how many tickets we've been allocated by Oxford.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 14:02 GMT
Subject: Oxforf Remembered
It must have been deliberate.
It was an important match, and after being 2–0 down at half time, that goal would have been the icing on the cake.
He sort of cart-wheeled.
I wonder if he hit the floor…if he did it would have been on his head.
Ah yes, heady days indeed.
That was Chappy.
I dont thin Vinny ever scored 2 in a match did he?
As it was chappy I think he was trying to stand on it…but his board control let him down and he put his foot through it;-)))
And wilko was apparently pissed off that they let chappy have the pen.
He had an eye on the goal difference as Newcastle were closing the gap between us and Sheff Utd.
Sorta linking this in with the Manc of the Day stuff…who remembers the BBC2 program that ran nearly half the season…
‘UNITED’…all on Sheff Utd.
Are the BBC just anti Leeds then?
Mark
PS JOANNE…could you send me your fax number again if you still need the telegraph thing, the number you gave before is wrong — or I copied it down wrong.
Ta.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 14:08:01 GMT
Subject: Re: He flies through the air with greatest of ease
Didn't Lee Chpman score 2 & miss the penalty.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 14:18 GMT
Subject: More anti BBC…
I only watched the first 10mins of the FA cup game yesterday…funny how no mention was made of Pallisters hand ball in the box…or dick head schmeichal pushing Kamara in the face.
What was even ‘funnier’ was when I went into the car i thought Id switch it to radio 5, to see how they could manage to report on a different game as usual.
Sure enough old Alan green was there, quite obviously watching a different match to that Id been watching just minutes earlier.
It made me really sick that I hadnt listened to the Liverpool Scum match 2 years ago on the radio — instead of watching it on the box.
Id LOVE to hear Alan greens commentry.
Bet he had to be substituted towards the end as he was so gutted.
Anyone got this on tape perchance?
If it werent for Sky I wouldnt have a clue exactly what teams were playing like.
On the radio whenever Leeds have possession they seem to waffle on about a load of bollocks.
All of a sudden they start commentating again when the other side have possession.
It gets right on my wick.
Manc of the day are just a joke.
The turning point for me came after scum had been one fo the chosen matches for about 8 weeks in succession, then one evening it seemed they werent.
Hoorah!
But, wait for it, they decided to do a ‘special’ report on Swindon town that week…youd never guess who they were playing.
So, we still get extensive scum highlights.
And they wonder why us Leeds fans have a complex.
now whenever scum are on tv (especially live), all you can hear is me screaming ‘kill’‘maim’‘clatter the b*stard’‘break his f*cking legs’.
Still, at least todays papers had some stuff on us.
From all the reports and markings Leeds were the better side by far.
Forrester unanimously man of the match in them all.
Kelly getting 8's everywhere, macca getting a couple of 8's.
Scums marks were on the whole shit.
Pallister and Bruce getting the better marks (presumably for handling and tackling from behind respectively).
Giggs, Kanchelskis and Keane got 5's.
Not too bad for about 25 million pounds of talent.
Such a shrewd manager is spit.
Keane — well worth 4 million.
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 14:21:20 +0000 (GMT)
Subject:
Review Leeds-united
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 14:36:01 +0000
Subject: Tickets
Just rang up the Dial-a-ticket but there's no news as to when the tickets for the Oxford match are available.
However, other info for you punters out there:
Ipswich tickets are still available but the game against Blackburn has sold out.
They still haven't fixed a date for the postponed Villa game, but for our away match there on the 6th Feb tickets go on sale on the 15th jan (same day as tickets for Sheff Wed).
Oh, and they're also doing special deals on season tickets now.
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 14:48:32 GMT
Subject: Re: Tickets
Is the Villa away game on the 6th Feb?
I seem to have it down as being on the 30th March.
Has it been moved?
Andy K.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 14:48:32 GMT
Subject: Alan Green
I think Alan Green is the best commentator of them all.
It does piss you off admittedly when scum are on so much, and I've a sneaking feeling that Leeds have still not been forgiven in some parts of the press for being close enough to sneak the title when scum fucked up (due to Fuckerson's crap team selection).
Criticising Alan for saying how well scum are playing is a bit like shooting the messenger who brings bad news.
Unfortunately the bastards are 13 points minus 2 games clear, so they must have been playing well.
Hansen won't say a word against the scum at the moment.
However he did have a lot of good things to saya bout Leeds when we were winning the title.
Greeny is generally pretty good, like a laugh and takes the piss a bit too.
Him and Martin O' Neill together were very good on the Norwich match.
I think we are all really fucked off that Scum are the team at the top.
In reality it's nowhere near as bad as the Scouse hype during the 80's, it's just that we found that a bit easier to take.
I'm afraid we're just going to have to weather this for a while, and gloat twice as much when we turn the tables.
Kev.
PS, I know this is not really the platform for this, but as we were talking about Radio sport, It was a shame to hear of old ‘Jonners’ snuffing it.
John Major was right for once, even if he didn't mean it himself, when he said ‘Summer will never quite be the same’:-(
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 15:56:57 GMT
Subject: Re: Crewed Language
Have had better atmosphere's at funerals — i was in the kop just to the right of the goal and other than the odd comment from fellow fans around me it's the quitest it's ever been when I've gone.
Had a good view of the first half chances, especially in the early period and despite the opportunities looking promising the finishing was really crap — the kop seemed to feel that we were never going to score and it was a relief that Deano actually managed to put it in the net from 6 yards.
Speaking of Deano — everyone I talked felt that as we had paid £2.7 million for a centre forward wouldn't it be nice if hung around near the goal or in the box for that matter instead of running all over the show and when we finally get the ball in the box there's nobody there.
I can see why he's not scored so often this year and why we're now being linked with Ferdinand.
I personally think the linesman on the dugout side of the pitch had the best touch of the ball in the first half.
A long clearance from one the Leeds defenders found it's way into the Crewe half where upon rolling out into touch the linesman controlled it neatly with his left and passed it back to the returning Crewe player with a neat right foot pass.
Yes that's all very nice but Deano ain't gonna score from 10 yards let alone 30 — the shots looked nice but he should be closer to goal.
I didn't think that strach had a good game — both he and Macca had poor games mainly because White and Hodge couldn't win the ball back in midfield.
Strach and Macca work well when we have a ball winner in the side (i.e Fairclough or Batts) but they had to hang back quite alot to cover Hodge and White who were playing crap.
Yep we need Wallace and Speedy back quickly!!!
Batts may have been set up or mis quoted something which I'm sure the press would never intentionally do especially against a team like us who they all love.
Leave half wit alone he had a good game Saturday althoug I still think he's a bit of a donkey + I prefer Weatherall
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 94 16:00:02 GMT
Subject: Re: Manc of the Day
In your letter dated Mon, 10 Jan 94 15:05:29 +0100, you wrote: Who????
Sorry I don't think even the BBC could look that far North after all they're having probs seing past London and Scumchester.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 1994 17:06:39 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: erm?
For some reason anything I have sent to the list today has been returned marked…access denied; send subscription requests to 
Has anybody any idea how I could have unscribed without knowing it?
Gav?
I know I walk around in a daze most of the day but this is bloody rediculous.
I have been receiving mail from the list all morning ‘n’ all.
Could it be some sort of retribution for sending a 440k gif file last week?
Si.
Getting paranoid again.
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 09:33:22 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Jonners
I found this on a BB yesterday…
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 11:28:14 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: gifs
James, Point taken (see below) but in the absence of any ftp site at the moment, if anybody would like more leeds gifs they could let me know by mailing myself and not the list.
I will then send the gifs to whoever wants them.
If I get 100's of replies I will have to send them to the list anyway.
Si.
On Mon, 10 Jan 1994, James A. Lundon DTN 822–4715 — skrid mvj unger 10-Jan-1994 1044 wrote:
amongst other things…
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 13:29:38 +0000
Subject: Re: gifs
I'm not sure that there are sites here in the uk.
I dont think that it would be a good idea for someone to set up their own as many admins would consider it a waste of resources.
Also, you'd need to have anonymous ftp in order to get them.
I could put some in the World wide web — I think that you can get them across that way, but this depends on people having access to the web — ok if you're on a unix box, tough s*** if not.
If there are enough requests for them in the web, I'll stick them in.
I know that there are gif sites in the states: wuarchive.wustl.edu is one of them.
I dont know about their upload policy — you can ftp anonymously (username anonymous, password — email address), there should be some info about it.
Also, anyone know of ticket availability for the cup match vs oxford?
Ade
Internet email  X400 email G=Adrian; S=Thomson; O=Nexor; PRMD=Nexor; ADMD=CWMAIL; C=GB
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 13:43:41 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Manc of the Day
On Mon, 10 Jan 1994, wrote:
I see the beeb have chosen the scum game for live coverage in the next round as well.
It really is getting past a joke!!
I dont know why they dont just leave an outside broadcast team with them on a permanent basis.
Hows about jamming the BBC switchboards with complaints folks??
The attendance for their game against Tranmere was piss poor.
Perhaps Gav could buy up all the tickets for the Leeds faithful?— As long as he's got a good limit on the old credit card:-)))
Roger G
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 13:55 GMT
Subject: UK FTP Site
Yes, there are UK FTP sites.
The following is the UK mirror site of ftp.luth.se — probably THE FTP site in the world…anyway, you can log into this UK one anonymously…which basically means theres no account/password needed as such.
You will be prompted to enter your email address as the password.
All calls/actions are logged though — so its not a sort of free-for-all.
Anyways, I only go into the Amiga areas, but Im sure there are general gfx areas.
It doesnt really matter as Gifs are not computer specific, so you can upload them to any suitable gfx area, just let us know what directory they go to, then we can find them!
The site is;
src.doc.ic.ac.uk (146.169.2.1 if you want to use the numbers)
I have a list of other FTP sites if anyone is interested.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 14:01:25 GMT
Subject: GARBAGE IN…
Sorry for whinging, but when I get onto the computer and it says ‘8 new messages’ I think Oh goody!
But then find out that they are all to do with computer stuff that I don't understand and so therfore cannot enjoy.
If you have to put this stuff in I think that you should be obliged to include a joke so that the rest of us can get something from it.
Just a thought
Computer illiterate and proud of it
Sean
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 14:08:46 GMT
Subject: Future predictions
The premier league is renamed ‘The FA Carling Manchester United premier league’
The cup is renamed ‘The FA Manchester United cup’
The FA is renamed ‘Manchester United’
The premier league is renamed ‘The Manchester united league’
(That would mean that the first one would become ‘the man U carling man u man u league’)
Then carling will probably sponsor man u and get that into there somewhere as well.
The new TV channel that has been talked about for a while will be named ‘The Manchester United channel’ and will outbid the BBC for the right to be channel no.1 and will have a completely unbiased opinion of football (just like the BBC)
Attempts to Change the name of manchester airport to ‘manchester united international airport’ fail, for unknown reasons.
Cynical sid
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 15:39:00 GMT
Subject: CRAP LEEDS PLAYERS
Just to pass some time cos I'm bored I'd thought I'd list a team of crap Leeds players I've had the misfortune to see over the years.
This has probably been done before but I'm new to the list so forgive me.
The one position I had trouble with was keeper, were I couldn't find anyone as truly awful as the outfield players, so suggestions for the keeper are welcome.
Sadly, it only took me about ten seconds to think of this merry lot so I've probably missed lots of good candidates…
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 15:39:00 GMT
Subject: CRAP LEEDS PLAYERS
Just to pass some time cos I'm bored I'd thought I'd list a team of crap Leeds players I've had the misfortune to see over the years.
This has probably been done before but I'm new to the list so forgive me.
The one position I had trouble with was keeper, were I couldn't find anyone as truly awful as the outfield players, so suggestions for the keeper are welcome.
Sadly, it only took me about ten seconds to think of this merry lot so I've probably missed lots of good candidates…
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 16:00 GMT
Subject: RE: CRAP LEEDS PLAYERS
Re your CRAP 11.
I'm interested to see my old buddy Ken DaMange taking pride of place in midfield.
Was he that crap even then?
Ken has recently joined Bohemians in Dublin (the team I support).
I saw him play on Sunday and to be perfectly honest had he sat down in the middle of the field I reckon he'd have had a bigger influence on the game.
He was awful.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 16:27:31 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: CRAP LEEDS PLAYERS
An alternative crap 11:-
Worst match I've ever seen? losing away to Frickley Athletic in a pre-season friendly aa few years back—even worse than losing at home to Chester in the league/milk/littlewoods/whatever cup
Steve.
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 16:43:11 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: Crap matches
Losing away to Halifax in a Yorkshire cup match 3 seasons ago is nothing to sing about either…
…or losing 7–1/7–2 to sheff weds in a mel sterland testimonial (I think it was for fat mel)
Sean
Anyone on the list who was at the infamous away games at Stoke where we got battered in 2 successive seasons?
Care to share the experience with us?
Steve.
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 16:46:49 GMT
Subject: irrrelevant
Getting pissed off trying to apply for jobs (I haven't applied for any yet and I've missed loads of deadlines) just thought that somebody out there may have a high flying job for a graduate (preferably in leeds) that pays loads of money.
A few (well one) stat(s) from the crewe game (Courtesy of the YEP)
Shots on target Leeds — 17 Crewe — 2 (And one of them went in!)
Sean
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 17:07:03 GMT
Subject: Stop Whining
In your letter dated Tue, 11 Jan 1994 14:08:46 GMT, you wrote: Wot a load of bollocks, from now on Scumchester United have the divine right to win any match they see fit to play, they have the choice of the opposition, date, location and whether the tv will cover the game.
All other teams are instantly relagated to shiteball teams and have no say in what they do or if they are honoured by an invitation from the team of the universe to play them then the scum also have the right to select the opposition team and to decide on the appropriate scoreline before the match begins.
So if you cry babies would stop moaning and get a life and support the greatest, most wonderfully gifted team in the world instead of worrying about petty, shitty sides like Leeds then you'd be able to watch them on tv all the time.
Barney Bollocks
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 17:13:36 GMT
Subject: Re: CRAP LEEDS PLAYERS
In your letter dated Tue, 11 Jan 94 15:39:00 GMT, you wrote:
Neil Aspin
Mel Sterland (in the last year he played)
Iain Snodin
Chris White
David O'Leary (although I gather noone in Leeds has seen him play)
Chris Fairclough (last year, and only in this position)
Brian Deane (who don't know where the goals are!!!!)
Same here Cheers Chris
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 17:19:38 GMT
Subject: tiff files
I've scanned the relevant stuff for ffl in on a Mac scanner.
The only format that looked appropriate to save it to was ‘tiff’.
So, Here I am with a f****** great tiff file (600K).
How do I look at it? xv doesn't work.
Can it be converted to gif?
How can I make it suitable to send out over the internet to anyone interested.
-Compress???
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 94 19:08:52 MET
Subject: gif's to.
jpg's
Lads,
If you are interested in sending out gif's over the network, be careful about the picture sizes!
I suggest, if at all possible, to transfer the gif's into jpg's, as they are even more economical in space.
Just my 2p worth.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 18:08:08 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: CRAP LEEDS PLAYERS
It's taken me quite a while to come up with this team and i'm sure i've missed some absolute wankers out, but here goes.
Roger G
From:
Date: Tue, 11 Jan 1994 18:31:30 +0000
Subject: Stoke ‘87
Don't remind me.
I was at University at the time (showing me age) at Keele which is right by Stoke-on-Trent (except no-one knows where the bloody Trent is).
I was sharing a flat with a Potter that year and they beat us (7–1 I think).
Anyway the local rag, the Sentinel, had a headline ‘The Magnificent seven’ which he proceeded to photocopy and stick up everywhere.
Thankfully one of the other people in the flat was from keighley and a fellow whites fan (had trials with them he kept telling me, and scored against Lukic — a fact he celebrated by naming his cat after the illustrious man) so they press cuttings didn't last too long.
We thought we'd had the last laugh when we got to the play-off finals against Charlton but he was an even bigger pain in the arse after that.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 08:52:51 GMT
Subject: fantasy
All the stuff is in the telegraph today.
Along with scores so far, so you could get a bit of an advantage.
However, You've not got much time to get your teams in to me.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 9:57:06 GMT
Subject: Re: Stoke ‘87
In your letter dated Tue, 11 Jan 1994 18:31:30 +0000, you wrote:
Are you sure it wasn't his cat that scored against John???
Lets face it just about everyone who can kick a ball scored against him last year!!!
Loosing to Coventry and then Charlton in the space of a couple of weeks made just about everyone I knew suicidal — and all cause of Brendan Ormsby failing to kick the ball out into touch on his own dead ball line.
Cheers Chris
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 10:13:13 GMT
Subject: Fantasy info
It doesn't look as though this scanning is going to work out very well.
I've managed to scan it in, but the resolution is so low as to make it unread- able.
I will have another go, at higher resolution.
This will make any resulting file very big.
So I'm afraid it could be the telegraph or one of my posted photo copies.
I have chopped up the Info in such a way as to make it Faxable on 2 sheets So I could do that too, at a pinch.
Anybody who want's to take part, and can't get today's Torygraph, send me another mail and we'll work out the best way to get the stuff to you.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 10:14:15 +0000
Subject: Tickets for Oxford
They're on sale on the 15th to members only.
The price is 13 pounds for seating and ten pounds for standing.
I gathered from the locals here that Leeds have been given something around the 2,500 mark so I expect they will go quite quickly.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 10:21:04 +0000
Subject: Re: Stoke ‘87
No, the cat came later.
I remember a drunken coversation with him along the lines of you can't call a cat Lukic it has to be Bonetti.
Mind you, Bonetti v the Krauts in the World Cup 1970, and Lukic v Rangers last year at Ibrox.
same player?????
Yeah.
There was even an article in the paper the next day by Gormlessby saying ‘I should have booted it.
It was all my fault.’
No, really?
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 10:50:35 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: Tickets for Oxford
They're on sale on the 15th to members only.
The price is 13 pounds for seating and ten pounds for standing.
I gathered from the locals here that Leeds have been given something around the 2,500 mark so I expect they will go quite quickly.
Stu
Anyone got any idea how much the train fare costs from leeds to oxford?
cheers, steve
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 11:25:13 GMT
Subject: Re: Tickets for Oxford
Last time I did Oxford-York return by train it was 40+ quid.
(since then I've learnt to drive, thank god)
Check train times before paying up too — last connection from Leeds back down to Oxford leaves too soon after the end of a game to be any use; it may be the same from Oxford back to Leeds too.
You could go with the travel club, I suppose, but then you don't get the chance to come down the Three Goats Heads pub in the city centre before and after the match and meet everyone else from the list — hopefully.
We'd like to see loads of you visit us here in the ‘home of Leeds-United’ for this one.
This pub's good (the landlord hates Man U for one thing — he supports Man City), Sam Smiths beer and nice grub.
So come if you can, and let us know.
We'll send details of the pub, the ground, etc etc nearer the time.
Gav
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 12:37:17 GMT
Subject: Ox game & tix, was Re: Manc of the Day
Hah.
Don't talk to me about credit cards, I just got the bill for my Christmas execesses today.
Anyway I gather from my office cleaner that tickets from Oxford are now on sale to their season ticket holders and members, and will be on sale soon to public people who get a voucher from this saturday's game.
I don't know who this is against, and I'm off to see us v ippo in any case.
Prices are High — up two quid from a normal category A game for standing.
They're cashing in, but at least they're cashing in on the locals and not just on the Leeds.
So getting tix from Oxford looks like it will be tricky.
The locals are getting wound up about the game.
It shouldn't be a problem for Leeds, but seasoned cup characters like Denis Smith, Malcolm Crosby and John Byrne have a lot of experience in tripping big teams up (rem YCFC v Arse, mid 80s…what bliss, Sunderland, etc etc).
Byrne reckons they've been playing brill recently and are just waiting for a chance like this — but he was talking before they got turned over 0–3 by the makems last night.
Gav
BTW Mark — I now gather that Jon Newsome always goes to the cash machine that's INSIDE the bank.
Hence the helpful and revealing insights of the staff into his cash card habits.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 12:39:59 GMT
Anybody going to the Ipswich game and fancy a meet?
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 12:45:27 +0000
Subject: Player values
Where do they get the values from?
An comments?
McAllister is surely worth more than 2.2.
Ade
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 13:03 GMT
Subject: player values
Fair enough…
Kelly higher than dorigo is a bit strange.
Anthony should be higher cos he takes free kicks.
Mind you, it looks as if they did quite a bit of homework and know kelly is a converted winger…
Sterland is a mystery, aside from the fact that if you pick defenders who arent playing, you get a nil return…which is good/average scoring for defence.
I think they did these figures a week or so before xmas…which explains the figures if they looked at the high scoring charts for each club.
Deane and wallace were both in the middle of good run then.
There arent that many midfielders higher than speed/macca — and basically midfield only score point for goals/assists…so strach is good value, macca is good value, speed is about right.
The figures arent (necessarily) a reflection on the players' respective real life values…just on their values to this system — hence irwin being 3.1 million…in a good defence, and he scores free kicks quite regularly.
In real life hes a bollox left back.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 13:15:46 GMT
Subject: Bits and bobs
News from last nights YEP says that leeds will have just over 3,100 tickets of which about 98% will be standing.
Tcket prices are going up 3 pounds for leeds fans (from 7 to 10 for terraces) but only 2 pounds for the home fans (who have some special card apparently) Could turn out to be quite an expensive trip…
As for the telegraph…
I went into the students union to buy it today (as it only costs 28p in there) and they'd sold out!
Can't say I agree with all their figures…good as he is I don't think kelly is worth that sort of money at such an early age…certainly shouldn't be more than dorigo.
Speed should be at least 15 million for being the star that he is.
Shorn/shaun/shawn
but then again
Sean
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 13:49:58 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Latest injury info
up-to-date injury info from last nights Bradford Telegraph & Argus.
Weatherall — Starts his comeback in the reserves against Coventry tonight.
O'Leary, Wallace, Speed — Not yet resumed full training — AAGGHHH!!
Roger G
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 14:47:35 GMT
Subject: Leeds are worthless!!!
In your letter dated Wed, 12 Jan 1994 12:45:27 +0000, you wrote:
The bit about is OK but should the Lukic figure read — 1.5 million, he has after all scored more goals for the opposition than for us.
Good call on Kelly although if he keeps playing like he is that would be a conservative estimate, how anyone could ask 1.4 for fat ‘mars’ mel is beyond belief though — he hasn't kicked a ball in 2 years!!!
Donkey O'Leary 0.9 — aghhhhh!!!
The person that wrote this must be an Arse fan!
And does the 1.4 mil include a brain transplant for Jon???? or is this without the item.
Didn't they quote a figure for Rocky and White, it would be interesting to compare the quoted values for these two players and see if Wilko got a good deal.
Speaking of ex united players, how much was Cuntona valued at and also according to the sun today (come on Sean there's no excuse for buying the Torygraph the Sun's only 20P!!)
Cuntona's brother is looking for a club in England — wonder if the Scum will buy him as well?
Would have thought that Forrester's value would have gone up after Saturdays double strike — and Whelan's worth more than that, although both have had limited exposure unless you happen to be a Leeds fan.
If someone wants to pay 3.0 mil for Deane god help them — are then any quoted values on Rush and Ferd — both players we have recently been linked with.
For the best midfielder in the country I'd be looking closer to 5–6 mil especially if he went to Rangers or abroad — but personally I wouldn't sell him, so going on past experience that means Wilko will get rid of him before the end of the season.
Chris 
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 14:56:54 GMT
Subject: John Lukic = Farm yard animal???
In your letter dated Wed, 12 Jan 1994 10:21:04 +0000, you wrote:
Would any readers out there like to comment on what sort of animal John Lukic could be compared to?
I my personal opinion a Sloth might be a good analogy although they have been know to get down quicker than John (i.e falling out of the tree)
It was an honest mistake and one that all of the current Leeds back four have been repeating frequently since then — however if I ever see Bredan ‘F***k**g’ Gormless I'll kick his head in (NOT!).
Chris
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 15:38:58 GMT
Subject: Re: John Lukic = Farm yard animal???
A few possibilities for John:—
A lemming (given his suicidal tendencies for giving away games last year) A bat Any bird (as they all tend to flap at thin air)
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 15:44:51 GMT
Subject: Re: Leeds are worthless!!!
Rocky 1.0m White 1.7m Cuntona 3.5m
I guess you have to bear in mind that when these values were compiled, White was in the first team whereas Rocky wasn't.
Personally I think Rocky's a better player than White.
Andy K.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 15:57:35 +0000
Subject: Lukic
Actually, I don't think too badly of old John as any goalkeeper that wins two league championships can't be all that bad (cue people listing goalies who were crap and have won more).
I thought he played excellently in our Championship year and although his confidence went completely after the punch at Ibrox, he can't be blamed totally as the whole defence (except Dorigo in fairness) didn't exactly help matters.
Even when they knew he was going through a bad patch they would continue to deliver dangerous back-passes to him.
Having said that I'm much happier with Beaney in goal.
However a few points about Big Bad john:
1)
Why did his hair never seem to change?
It never got longer, shorter, or change style.
it reminded me of one of those plastic haircuts you used to get as a kid for the legoland men.
2)
Why, when the opposition goalie was taking a goal-kick, did he crouch forward and remain motionless like Johnny Fartpants? was this some attempt to psyche out the opposition?
Or was he addicted to the game Striker as a kid where the goalie adopted a similar position (mine always seemed to do a Sprake and throw the ball back into my own net).
We need to know.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 16:10 GMT
Subject: PLayer values
I dont.
And, as I said before, these ‘values’ arent supposed to be a reflection of the players value in real life.
They are solely geared up to the FFL scoring system.
Any Arse defender will cost a lot cos they dont let many goals in.
Any player who scores regularly will have a high mark — be that a defender, or midfielder (or a GK).
So, if Lukic signed for Arse as a left back…his value would go right up.
Whites price was obviously done whilst NOT in the first team.
If he were his value would be high because is also a forward.
Check out Ian Marshalls rating…hes down as a central defender.
Cuntonas rating is also fair enough.
He scores a few goals, AND hes now their pen taker.
Thats why Bodins rating isnt rock bottom…hes Swindons pen taker (so their highest scorer:-)).
It all makes much more sense if you look at the ratings that way.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 16:21 GMT
Subject: ‘Lucky’
I agree Lucky isnt that bad.
He played very well during the champ.
year especially.
I really do think the backpass rule completely fucked him up.
I think its more of a play-do haircut.
It did seem to get a bit longer.
In the early 80's it was almost new romantic.
Pity he lopped the fringe for the rangers match, maybe it would have filtered out the floodlights a bit better 
I blame Bob Wilson.
Still, at least he doesnt/didnt look like Seaman.
Oh Mr Trendsome.
Oh Mr perfect hair.
Oh Mr Black Polo neck sweater man.
He even tries to look cool when taking his free kick.
He reminds me a bit of Cat on red dwarf.
Oh and Stu…the ‘sprakes’ were caused by winding the keeper back too much.
It needs more of a quick flick of the wrist.
Back to lucky.
Who can explain the ‘Lucky shuffle’ which suddenly entered our johns run up to goal kicks.
He even has a hand jive in there too.
He didnt have THAT at Leeds the first time round.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 16:25:07 GMT
Subject: Xwords and the scum?
In your letter dated Wed, 12 Jan 1994 15:25:48 GMT, you wrote:
Kin ell, wot r u?
Brain of Britain — I'm struggling with todays Sun crossword — I know it's embarrassing but I've only got a degree in Chemistry and we all know that chemistry students are amongst other things the partners of defenders with no brains, i.e Weatherall and Newsome.
Also the other reason for avoiding the telegraph is that they hate Leeds and luv the scum — especially in the year we one!!!
Although I have to admit to buying Sat, Sun, Mon cause it does have a good sports section — especially the cricket.
The torygraph is full of tits — namely the people who write — especially the football correspondents and even more so those that don't give Leeds a good write up (see Leeds vs Arse).
Chris
PS Sean — is that the quick xword or the cryptic effigy??
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 16:45:48 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Lukic
On Wed, 12 Jan 1994, wrote:
I'd be even F*****g happier with Coton Or Southall in goal.
Personally I dont think theres much to choose between Lukic and Beeney.
Beeney just shades it but lets face it, they're both crap!!
Did your Gary Sprake also dive right over the ball when you were leading 1–0 in the cup final:-)))
Roger G
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 16:49:49 +0000
Subject: Re:Striker
Ah.
never could get the hang of it.
I painted all mine white with some paint I had left over from an Airfix model of Apollo 11 but all I managed to do was clog up the mechanism.
you had to belt the players so hard that you ended up with small bruises all over your hand from where their heads indented.
Also, I lost the green tape that went round the edge so the ball used to shoot off at speed.
Still, I always had my Blue Peter bar football game to fall back on (made of doweling and clothes pegs with a ping-pong ball).
Great days.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 17:08:32 GMT
Subject: lukic
I don't think I have seen enough of Beeny to critize/praise him (even though I've seen about 12 live games this year).
I can't remember him making either a glaring mistake, or a top class save.
The only possible gaff was when he picked up than so called back pass at spurs.
He is ceratinly better than Lukic with crosses, he catches it whereas lukic would punch or drop leading to panic.
he is okay at kicking from back passes, especially when he side foots it back to Dorigo or Kelly instead of hoofing it.
Although Lukic has made bad mistakes at (unfortunaltely) critical times I don't think he is a complete donkey.
He started to lack confidence at the end of last season, but who wouldn't with that defence.
I still think that Lukic is the best one on one keeper there is.
He is also (probably) a better shot stopper than Beeny.
He is just applaing at crosses!
Just my thoughts.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 17:11:16 +0000
Subject: Toy gary sprakes
No, that was my Subbutteo one.
Even though the ball was, to scale, probably seven foot high it still managed to go in the back of the net.
To add realism I then used to turn one the ginger-haired player to face the goal and said ‘What the fuck was that’ in a Scottish accent.
having visited Toys-R-us pre Christmas I was pleased to see though that on the front of the new Subbutteo box is a pucture of Chappie and Whyte cavorting about in the goal area (against the Arse?).
Perhaps, in keeping with realism, they should produce the following:
1)
The Mark Hughes player.
this is in fact two players as the one in green and yellow has his boot firmly up the arse of the one in red and white stripes.
2)
The Steve Bruce player.
Has right arm extended to distribute fore-arm smash on any advancing attacker.
3)
For the side-line, the ugly jock manager, with automatic jaw movement.
Optional extra is to have the BBC Head of Sports Coverage figure with tongue firmly up the arse of aforementioned spit.
4)
For outside the ground (question: why were attendances at Subbutteo matches on par with Wimbledon?
Why didn't they produce a grandstand actually full of people?) complete Turkish prison with 6 of the ‘best fans in the world’ contained inside.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 17:15:35 GMT
Maybe but I still have the back page of the torygraph framed.
‘Leeds clich championship’ 'bright side of life has a hollow ring for fergusson’
with that picture of Speed, rodders and Macca looking as if they have orgasamed.
I agree that the crossword is also quite do-able cf other spreads.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 17:16:24 +0000
Subject: Beeney A Long Time Since I Conceded A Goal
OK so MB conceded a goal in each of his previous few games but I think he's ok.
He's only young and has a satisfactory record as far as I can see.
Southall is a seedy old Welsh greaseball.
If the scouse rumours I've heard are true, they'd better lock up Leeds primary schools if he came to Elland Road.
Leeds are OK at the back, it's all down to the front man not earning his transfer fee basically.
We'd be up there challenging the scum if it wasn't for his lack of goals.
I'm all for sticking by players through bad patches but my patience is running out.
It escapes me why he hasn't had a spell in the reserves to shake him up a bit.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 17:31:05 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: lukic
On Wed, 12 Jan 1994, wrote: His failure to gather the QPR cross was pretty glaring in my opinion.
Theres four points gone in just two instances off the top of our heads.
I also think he's not a very good shot holder, and therefore leaves tasty morsels for hungry strikers quick enough to take advantage e.g. Ekoku.
I think a top quality keeper should be a priority for any side that has ambitions to stay at the top.
Not only do they save you lots of points a season, an excellent keeper can give a whole side that extra feeling of confidence.
This is not to say that the other ten players don't have to be good as well(Witness Everton & Man Shitty), but I do feel a ‘top drawer’ keeper would make a tremendous difference to Leeds.
Roger G
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 17:38:56 GMT
Subject: Re: lukic
It' certainly nice to see a bit of Lukic criticism in the group.
I always thought he was largely to blame for the relegation in 1982.
He seemed to do better at Arse and had a good season when we won the league.
I agree the back pass rule really fucked him up.
The back-pass was Whyte & Dorigo's defensive speciality during the championship year, especially as Lukic's kick out of his hands to Sterland, just beyond half-way, wide on the right was a stock move for 3 years.
Lukic, Sprake, Stewart and Day were 4 of a kind really.
All suspect on crosses, great on 1 v 1, reflex saves & shots.
Beeney is more of a David Harvey, Unspectacular, safe.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 17:46:58 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Beeney A Long Time Since I Conceded A Goal
On Wed, 12 Jan 1994  wrote:
I agree wholeheartedly with your sentiments on Deano.
I have been saying he is an absolute ‘bag o shite’ since day one (I was so mystified by the signing I was moved to write to the local rag — and they printed it!!).
I think we would be even nearer to the scum if we had a class keeper though.
Perhaps Brian has the apocryphal enormous trouser snake, and has it stuck firmly up Wilko's arse on a regular basis:-)))) I can see no other reason for the failure to drop him.
There are alternatives, especially when Wallace returns.
It's time Wilko tried them.
Roger G
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 17:56:17 GMT
Subject: my thoughts on Deane
Yes, I would have thought this would happen soon, or at least on the bench.
Especially with the signing of White who can play in his position, Forresters brace on saturday, and Whelan and Strandli in the wings.
But I think he earned a reprieve when scoring on saturday.
Also, I don't think he will be dropped until Wallace is back — some experience is needed.
Also, in Deanos support, He does work hard and effectively even when hes not scoring.
It was a pity Wallace got injured when he did as I thought they were begining to hit it off together.
I wouldn't be suprised if he scores nearer 20 than 10 goals by the end of the season.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 17:59:23 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: lukic
On Wed, 12 Jan 1994  wrote:
Although Sprake got and still gets a great deal of stick, including from me, he was in fact an excellent keeper.
More often than not though, when he did make an absolute cock up, it was either a big occasion (fa cup final), or the cameras were there (throws ball in own net at Anfield).
Stewart was also excellent but without the glaring cock ups (not particualrly good on goal kicks i seem to remember though).
Without doubt for me though, Harvey stood head & shoulders above even those two.
An absolutely superb keeper.
Doesn't anybody else want to get up and scream DAVID HARVEY!!! at the television, when ex wino Greavesie says Scotland haven't had a decent keeper in thirty years.
You could also scream DAVID STEWART!!! for that matter.
Roger G
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 21:00:16 GMT0BST
Subject: Fantasy League
Well folks, Here is my virgin entry into the world of the Leeds-United mailing list (not counting my plea for the Leeds-Crewe score on Saturday whilst shackled to a PC).
I have been studeously avoiding doing my work for the last few hours.
As an entertaining distraction I have done some back of beer mat calculations on the Fantasy league in the Torygragh, and here are the results (which I take no responsibilty for accuracy) with some comment after:
(I have taken into account the transfer of White and Rocky, and also when calculating totals have taken the highest monetary value player in each category (full back, midfield etc) ignoring whether they are injured or not)
These are the monetary totals for all the Premiership teams;
Well no surprise at who came out on top then.
Arse's value is based on having the ‘costliest’ defense (counted as the back 5) in the country (stlg14.1m), and also a strong front 2.
What of Leeds though I hear you cry, or not as the case maybe.
Well we have, you maybe surprised to learn the 5th costliest defence in the country, valued at stlg9.3m (excepting the aberration of Ipswich who have Marshall in the defense valued at stlg3m, when he is actually playing up front).
We are just behind Battyburn and Villa (9.6 + 9.5 stlgm respectively) and of course way behind Scum (stlg12.2m) and Arse.
Our forwards are also rated 5th in the country (stlg5.9m, not as surprising).
This is behind Newcastle (stlg7.4m — what their high value is based on), Battyburn and Scum (both stlg6.5m), and Q.P.R. ($6.2m).
We do have though the 2nd costliest midfield in the country (stlg8.6m), behind guess who, who are valued at stlg10.8m.
I feel we have something to be proud of here.
Now down to some interesting little titbits (?).
Swindon the poor buggers scrape the barrel; the whole of their midfield (stlg2.5m) couldn't even buy Speed (stlg2.8m).
Wednesday are looking rather lowly, but that I feel is mainly due to early season woes, and as, I am assured from relatives down the M1, they have a much easier 2nd half of the season.
I am sure they are undervalued.
It does seem as though the Fantasy League people have it mainly correct however, as only the top 5 teams in this table seem to have any chance of getting 1st or 2nd place (excepting maybe Norwich at 9th), the rest destined for mid-table ignominy.
Also the bottom 4 in this table look as though they will be fighting out the bottom 4 places in the real table.
One definate statistical abberation is that Micky Quinn is valued at stlg2m.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 1994 21:26:47 GMT0BST
Subject: pound signs
Annoyingly, I have just discovered (on my ‘Fantasy League’ mail being sent back to me) that every single pounds sign that I lovingly put in the mail has been intpreted by the damn stupid mail program as ‘stlg’or ‘u’, and I'm sure there will be plenty of other variations.
I assume this has happened to everybody, so apologies, and I hope it's not confusing.
Adam.
From:
Date: Wed, 12 Jan 94 15:20:57 PST
Subject: Re:Toy gary sprakes
What about a Bryan Robson player that drops to bits as soon as you touch the fucker?:-)
Simon.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 02:31:51 GMT0BST
Subject: money well spent
As a follow up to my Fantasy League calculations, I have just worked out that our 1st team, which is; Beeny (1.9m pounds), Kelly(2.1), Dorigo(1.9), Wetherall(1.6), Fairclough(1.8), Strach(1.9), Macca(2.2), Speed(2.8), White(1.7), Wallace(2.9), Deane(3.0) (going purely on costings from the Fantasy League).
These players cost Wilko 9.75m approx, when they are now valued at 23.8m.
The midfield which cost approx 2.85m is now valued at 8.6m, in fact when we had Batty — worth 2m at Blackburn (woe is his loss) our midfield had cost only 1.6m, but had a value of 8.9m (in other words over 5x more, and the whole team 8.5m as opposed to 24m — 3x more)!
Of course there has been inflation in the economy, but even so you can tell Wilko is a Yorkshireman.
Adam.
p.s.
I'm not usually a statistician, but it's an entertaining way to avoid work
p.p.s have I got the figures about right for how much we payed for players — Beeney (.35m), Kelly (0), Dorigo (1.3), Fairclough (.6), Wetherall (.15), Strach (.3), Speed (0), Macca (1.3), White (1.25 — this is the one I'm most unsure of), Wallace (1.6) and Deane (2.9)?
p.p.p.s to head off any scratching of heads as to why there are some strange costings i.e. Macca being only worth 0.4m more than Fairclough.
The cost of a player in the fantasy league does not reflect his ‘true’ value; for defenders and goalies it's how many clean sheets, +4 points, or goals conceded — 1 point for each (but they get points for nipping in the odd goal; why Irwin is worth 3m and Tony 1.9m); for the midfield and forwards it is how many they score, +3 points, and how many they assist with, +2 points, explaining why Speed is valued higher than Macca, as at the time of setting this up he was putting them in the onion bag.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 09:51:02 GMT
Subject: leeds past and present (FFL)
I thought of these.
It would be interesting to see how these teams of similar price fair against each other.
Perhaps you could ‘enter’ them Kev?
I could have messed about to get the price under 20m to make them legit. teans but I couldn't be arsed!
Mark 
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 10:28:59 GMT
Subject: Fantasy Cheat.
Just for the hell of it last night I thought I ‘d go through the scores so far and pick the best possible legal team.
So I'm giong to outlaw this particular selection as an entry.
But I may monitor the progress of this team called the ‘Cheats’ along with our other entries.
There you are Mark H, that's what a senile old git does on a Wednesday evening.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 11:51:48 GMT
Subject: Goalies
In your letter dated Wed, 12 Jan 1994 16:45:48 +0000 (GMT), you wrote:
The Leeds defence has never looked as secure since they did away with the old back pass law — Whyte and Fairclough looked good because all they had to do was knock it back to big John.
Last year was abysmal, we conceeded so many goals because the defence couldn't cope most notable occasion was Man City away where 2 of their 4 goals came from shite defending ie defenders unable to pass back to the goalie who would then pick it up.
In fairness to Beeny he not done bad although seems susceptible to letting the ball rebound of him to opposition strikers but he's better than big John.
if we were going to buy a goalie (well fantasize about it anyway) then Flowers would be the best bet followed by Coton, Southall is too old and rapidly becomming crap.
Yep it was against Chelsea or Arse, although he commited his fair share of blunders he was supposed to be (I was around when he was) a decent keeper.
Chris 
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 11:56:40 GMT
Subject: Newsies
In your letter dated Wed, 12 Jan 94 17:15:35 GMT, you wrote:
The times is often quite good and tends to give Leeds a decent report when they play well.
Last years game vs Arse at Elland road when we pasted them 3–0 was great ‘Leeds humiliate pretenders’ I've still got that pinned up on my wall — shame about the rest of the season though.
The Torygraph is OK — we get it at home but it's just too London, Sum biased, but then again what isn't these days.
I see that the scum will be the live match in the next round of the cup, what a suprise.
Twas nice to see them draw against Portsmouth last night — strangely enough todays Scun fails to cover the game at all, I wonder why???
Chris
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 12:20:24 GMT0BST
Subject: goalies and defence
The Leeds defence has never looked as secure since they did away with the old back pass law — Whyte and Fairclough looked good because all they had to do was knock it back to big John.
I think to be honest Whyte and Fairclough were never that good — even in the championship year.
This isn't just with the benefit of hindsight-honest!!
Even in the year we won the league, there were worrying signs that the defence could be very fragile when teams made the effort to really attack us — hence the 4 goals conceded against man city and QPR—which was a sign of things to come the season after.
When it reached the stage in the title year when it looked as though the scum might beat us to it, if they had have done, it would have been largely due to the difference between Whyte/Fairclough and Pallister/Bruce.
It was the midfield and attack that won us the league.
I'm not saying the defence was crap, just not as good as it might have looked at first glance.
They just got away with more in 1991–2 than they did in 1992–3.
I still reckon Wilko's top priority should be signing a top class centre-half — unless SuperJon continues his amazing surge of form.
Steve.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 12:55:07 GMT
Subject: Villa ticket info
Re away game at Villa on 6th Feb:
For anybody who's interested — seeing as I think tickets for the Leeds end are currently available to members only, terrace tickets for the Villa end are currently on sale at 8 quid (or 9 quid on the day).
Andy K.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 14:18:52 MET
Subject: What a spy?
Intruder alert!
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 13:33:52 GMT
Subject: Leeds are white dog shit
WHOSE THE CHAMPIONS NOW SCUM
YOU SHEEP SHAGGING BASTARDS
THANKS FOR CANTONA (AND IRWIN)
Cheers
Randy Mandy
PS Ryan Giggs is much sexier than Gary Speed
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 13:48:58 +0000 (GMT)
Nice to know that the Scum have not learnt to spell yet!!…
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 13:51:22 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: ffl player stats — full listing
Ok folks I've working my bollocks off getting this together.
I scanned it all, and edited all the cock ups the recognition software made.
It is not perfect but I have no time to edit it further.
I must do some real work today or at least this aft'.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 14:09:38 GMT
Subject: manc scum
I did not send the pathetic message titled ‘Leeds are white…’
It was sent by a sad Manc git using my Id cos he's too scared to use his own — if anyone wishes to reply to his infantile shite they can send them to him at the following address…
Mandy.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 14:13:18 GMT
Subject: Re: Leeds are white dog shit
In your letter dated Thu, 13 Jan 94 13:33:52 GMT, you wrote:
As the language used in this posting is much snappier than normal I think I'll take this as arising from a Man Utd supporter — if there is such a thing.
It's nice to know that the Man Utd fans still feel so inadequate as to have to post things to the Leeds newsgroup.
The rather crass claims it contains only further go to highlight the illegitimate idiots that support this god forsaken club.
So if you've recieved this post Mandy — please go elsewhere and spare the rest of from this crap.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 14:15:37 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Fat Frank + intruders
The latest on Frank according to last nights local rag:—
Wilko has released him to play on Norways current ten day tour to America.
He is expected to play in both games — Against the United States and Costa Rica.
I know the opposition isn't up to much but lets hope he bangs a few goals in and gives Sgt Wilko something to think about.
Is Wilko capable of deep thought I ask myself?:—)))
Regarding the ‘fat factor’, he didn't look particularly portly in the picture in last nights local rag (looks like it was taken during Wimbledon at home).
Any comments anybody regarding Franks current waist measurement?
Halvard — Perhaps you could let us know how he gets on in the tour games.
As far as intruders are concerned — don't we have a ‘mole’ on the scum list?
I suppose nobody is willing to put themselves through reading all the SHITE.
Roger G
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 14:16:30 GMT
Subject: Re: ffl player stats — full listing
In your letter dated Thu, 13 Jan 1994 13:51:22 +0000 (GMT), you wrote:
You don't fancy doing the 1st div as well do you???
Chris 
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 14:17:31 +0000
Subject: list abuse
is a public mailing list for anyone interested in Leeds United AFC.
People whose footballing loyalties lie elsewhere are welcome to join if they wish, but they should be prepared to accept forthright biased Leeds talk: it is, after all, a Leeds list.
Those who join the list trying to insult and cause trouble are not welcome.
please leave the list immediately.
If you don't, and if further abuse occurs, you will be removed from the list and your site informed about the abuse carried out by this userid.
To unsubscribe, write to  and put as your message ‘unsubscribe leeds-united.’
Thank you.
To everyone else on the list, I'd ask that we ignore this provocation and get on with business as usual.
,
list admin,
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 14:35:34 +0000
Subject: All our exes
Here are more you could have in the FFL ex-Leeds team:
Ian Snodin 1.1 EVERTON (Telegraph class him as a full back?!)
Andy Ritchie 0.6 OLDHAM Terry Phelan 1.2 WOMBLES David Rennie 0.6 COV
John Scales never played for us though he was from Leeds, and Seaman never had a senior game for us though he was a trainee.
I saw that Frank Strandli play for Leeds once…
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 14:39:20 GMT
Subject: Re: Toy gary sprakes
Further to this I suggest that the optional extra subbuteo old trafford have the name written on the box as opposed to a picture as most of their ‘so called’ fans have never been there and so wouldn't recognise it.
Sean
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 14:54:13 +0000
Subject: Re: manc scum
I vote that Mark has a word with him.
stu
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 15:08 GMT
Subject: RE: Fat Frank + intruders
I joined the said list earlier this week, just to see what kind of shite was going on there.
So far the general level of intelligence, wit and originality in posting is about on par with what you'd expect ie. as Roger so wisely put it SHITE.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 15:08 GMT
Subject: ‘Youre going home in a Swedish Ambulance’
So do I…:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 15:13 GMT
Subject: Scum list??
They dont have one do they??
Theyre all too busy to see what everyone else does.
A couple of things I really need to get off my chest.
1)
Giggs and Cunt(ona)
Have you noticed how both these farts have their collars turned up and sort of‘pressed’ at the front.
Theres NO WAY they could do that, unless they are pressed for them.
Cunt managed to last the whole game yesterday with it erect.
2)
Penalties
has ANYONE seen a more blatant penalty than last night????????
Im lossed for words on that one.
(a first)
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 15:18:33 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: manc scum
On Thu, 13 Jan 1994, wrote:
I'll second that!!
Roger
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 15:20:57 GMT
Subject: Mole
I am a mole and I Live in a hole
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 15:51:59 +0000
Subject: Swedish Wit
Well it appears I am now elevated to the glorious role of being the contact point for the Bard of Sweden.
Got two utterly inspired messages from etlprky, and just so's the rest of the list can realise the true intelligence and wit of your average scum fan, here they are: AND:
Good aren't they?
Show a remarkable grasp of english grammar.
‘Whose Mark’?
It's ‘Who is Mark’ you moron.
‘Whose’ is a possessive pronoun (or adjective) meaning belonging to (or in the case of the adj., of whom or which).
As for the second one your use of rhyme pushes back the frontiers of english literature.
But, if you will forgive me, perhaps I can just correct you on a couple of points; I think instead of‘a mole’ it should read ‘an arsehole’, and for ‘hole’, dare I suggest ‘dreamworld’?
Anyway, this person obviously deserves no more comment so FOAD.
As to last night's match where Portsmouth came back twice to draw with aforementioned Scum, if the Parker foul on the pompey midfielder was not a penalty then I don't know what is.
Stu
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 16:03:50 IST
Subject: What do to with nasty Intruders…
I suppose we should ignore them…
But if all of us bombarded her mailbox with lots of junk mail…
;-);-)
Or sent back what she sent us…
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 16:19:01 GMT
Subject: Re: Gav gets hard!
Me?
Hard?
I'm about as hard as a tub of lard, tho some people are fooled by my fascist green bomber jacket…
Anyway, etlprky the mole has now done the decent thing and walked before being given out, so hopefully that's the end of the matter.
The unfortunate Mandy, and Simon, a fellow Leed at that site, are still on the list and are very welcome to stay.
What a way to get introduced!
For my next trick, I'm going wrap myself in a union jack and stand on the terracing at Parkhead.
Cheers, Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 16:24:22 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Turd burgling Swedish poet
Has anyone else got a love letter from our Swedish arsehole.
He has just offered to give me a good rogering.
The wit is really astounding isn't it.
Laugh!!
I thought my pants would never dry!!
I, ve got a better idea Mr Kelly.
Why dont you go fuck yourself!!
P.S You must be really hard — You're as thick as my house wall.
Roger
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 17:35:55 MET
Subject: Brighton in fact…
Stuart,
I don't think they're Swedish, more like from Brighton (Whatever you call people from there?), or more exactly Burgess Hill, and it seems what's happening down there is very interesting, or so my sources lead me to believe:-).
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 94 17:58 GMT
Subject: Erm…brighton
Rent Boys?(sorry Mandy — couldnt resist hehehehe)
Mr Scum, or whatever his name was, is from Manc land.
Strange that he should not support his hometown club dont you think?
Still, it explains the IQ level.
I think that we should not call them M********r Utd (sorry for swearing) but either Scum, or Stretford Utd.
Apparently fellow scum haters Manc City reckon the fact they arent actually in Manchester at all winds them up.
And while we were talking about Brighton (away back up there in the message), god isnt Brightons kit crap?
Wouldnt suprise me to see it being Scums new 6th kit.
Andy Pandy or what?
Mark (who really must get some work done now…)
From:
Date: Thu, 13 Jan 1994 18:09:40 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Erm…brighton
On Thu, 13 Jan 1994, wrote:
Now i'm totally f*****g confused.
just where was this twat Kelly from; Sweden, Scumchester, Arse Bandit City, Dublin, Braindeadchester, or where??
Who knows??
Who F*****g cares:-)))
Roger
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 08:49:33 GMT
Subject: fantasy
Hello folks, Today is the last day for entering a fantasy team.
This evening, or over the weekend, I will be putting together a mailing list so that us train spotter type supporters don't get in the way of the real reason for Gav's excellent listserver. (grovel, fawn…
Where's your team Gav??)
I will probably post to the list once a week to let the non-fantasy types know how it is going.
We now have 13 real (if you see what I mean) teams + the ‘Cheats’ a ‘Rejects’11 of ex Leeds Players, and a current Leeds United 11 (Mark S, I have made slight changes to your selections to get them down to 20M.)
In time, I will post all the team sheets, at least to all the players.
Then you can all see how each other are doing.
I will also let you all know how I'm going to deal with Transfers.
(Don't throw your fee info away).
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 10:59:26 GMT
Subject: Booking office number
Has anyone got the Leeds ticket office or fax number, We are planning to try and make the wednesday match on feb the 12th, that is if any tickets are still available.
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 11:12:37 GMT
Subject: Oxford meet
There are a few of us (3 at mo — myself, a mate and Steve Walsh) who want to come down for the Oxford match from Durham/Newcastle.
We were thinking about making a weekend from it.
We could have a few beers after the match etc.
So do any of you Oxford whites know of any cheap accomodation (or have any spare houses we could use:-))
Do tickets go on sale tomorrow before the Ipswich game?
If anybody is thinking about going and wants a lift our route will probably be a1/m62/m1 (posssibly via Leeds)
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 12:31:13 GMT
Subject: Re: Turd burgling Swedish poet
I've just had a thought — maybe our Mr Kelly is a relation of that much loved FA official Graham…it would explain his lack of brains anyway.
Sean
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 12:41:41 GMT
Subject: Tables
In an effore to pick a premium FFL squad, could someone send me the current (or a few weeks old league table that was published recently) as I seem to have got rid of it, and todays paper doesn't have one in
Mainly wanted for goal scoring/defensive records…
Cheers
Sean
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 14:19:42 MET
Subject: Re: Tables
Here is the table pr Jan 14:
By the way, it would be interesting if anyone of you in the Leeds area could give some info about the reserves (and juniors) once in a while (new players, spectacular goals, hat-tricks, comebacks from injuries etc…)
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 13:23:55 GMT
Subject: OY!
Do you mind mate
I've just had a thought — maybe our Mr Kelly is a relation of that much loved FA official Graham…it would explain his lack of brains anyway.
OY!
Do you mind mate, I don't mind what foul mouthed abuse you give me, but that pushing it a bit far.
And im not Swedish, i'm from Manchester.
I've got some pigoens to prove it.
regard
Peter
Sorry I sent it before without commenting
But the only pigeons that he's got is his pidgin english (AKA illiterate)
Sean
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 13:45:12 GMT
Subject: Correct name please
From: Fri, 14 Jan 94 14:19:42 MET To: Cc: Subject: Re: Tables
Here is the table pr Jan 14:
By the way, it would be interesting if anyone of you in the Leeds area could give some info about the reserves (and juniors) once in a while (new players, spectacular goals, hat-tricks, comebacks from injuries etc…)
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 15:01:57 +0000
Subject: Youth Team News
According to the Crewe Programme, the Youth have been going through a rocky period.
Burnley put them out of the Youth Cup on 14.12.93.
No score is available.
The result of this was that the side underwent drastic changes for the next game, with none of the Youth Cup winning side included.
This team lost 1–0 at Rotherham in the Northern Intermediate League.
The Rotherham goal was an og due to high winds from Leeds' Stephen Heath.
(11.12.93) The conditions were ripe for a freak result according to the writeup.
On 18.12.93, we lost 4–1 to a York City team who were all older and more experienced.
Paul Wharton got the consolation goal.
One more reason to hate York City then.
York City then lay second in the NI league (w/e 18.12.93) with Middlesborough top and us 5th.
Three members of the Cup winning squad have left, that is Alex Byrne, Kevin Daly, and Steve Tobin.
Byrne is in the US.
Daly would be with him but for a paperwork problem, and is in Harrogate Town where Frank Gray is manager now.
Frank's son Andy is in the current United squad and played in the Rotherham defeat.
There is a picture of him and he looks a lot like his uncle Eddie when he was nobbut a lad.
Anyway Steve Tobin is at Stockport County now.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 15:11:03 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: Booking office number
Has anyone got the Leeds ticket office or fax number, We are planning to try and make the wednesday match on feb the 12th, that is if any tickets are still available.
Ticket call: Dial a ticket:
BTW are you having trouble receiving mail?
I tried to reply straight to you, but according to the postmaster here at Newcastle, you don't exist!!!
Then again, it's much more likely that I just don't know how to use these things properly.
Cheers, Steve
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 15:11:26 +0000
Subject: list probs
In the interests of peace and harmony (such as it normally is on this list), please can we keep the topic of daft mail messages from Mad Manc off the list now?
If you continue to have problems with it, let me know privately.
And apologies if any of you have tried sending mail and stuff to the list or listserv over the past hour or so; it wasn't working.
Things should be back to normal now.
Glynn — I'll take off your UK address as per your request.
Andrew — don't worry, you're still on the list!
Cheers, Gav.
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 15:23:10 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Wierd happenings
On Fri, 14 Jan 1994, S.R.J.WALSH wrote:
I dont think so Steve, I've just had mail from the postmaster at Oxford telling me I can't send mail, and to subscribe to the list!!
I thought Gav had given me the heave-ho for the minute.
Any way I've sent a couple of mailings since no problems.
Must be something to do with those intellectuals at Oxford:-)))
Roger 
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 15:27:31 GMT
Subject: Speed
What I was trying to say earlier is that Gary Speed IS playing tomorrow.
He started training today and Wilko has said he will be in the starting 11 provided the pitch is ok for him.
It's nice having Radio Leeds here in manc…
Andy.
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 15:47:00 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Reserves + Wilko contract
Reserve team versus Coventry last Wednesday postponed — Tinkler and Weatherall comebacks after injury/illness delayed as a result.
And also: According to local rag, Wilko has denied he will be signing a contract next week that will keep him at the club until 1999.
He also denies knowledge of such a contract!!
Theres hope for us anti-Wilkoite's yet.
Come and take him away Jimmy:-)))
Roger
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 16:04:30 GMT0BST
Subject: good idea
Whoever put in the plea for more info about injuries, reserve and general team gossip should be given an electronic pat on the back.
Living up here in the wilds of Geordieland I don't tend to find out much except what is in the national press (in other words bugger all).
It would be great if all you people with access to YEP, radio Leeds/Aire, Look North and programme notes could keep the rest of us informed?
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 16:22:42 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: good idea
On Fri, 14 Jan 1994, wrote:
I do try my best to relay any relevant/interesting information from Bradford's nightly rag the Telegraph & Argus.
The T&A has its very own Leeds United reporter would you believe.
The Bradford City supporters are constantly writing to the rag complaining of too much coverage for Leeds (It really does piss them off).
Tough is what I say.
If they had a half decent team then perhaps they would warrant a few more column inches!!
Your roving Telegraph & Argus reader — Roger
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 16:52:22 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: ‘Your starter for ten’
Your teaser for the weekend folks.
Question: Which two British players have a European Cup winners medal and a European Cup runners-up medal won with different clubs.
Clues:—
1.
the two players won their winners medals with different clubs.
2.
the two players got their runners-up medals with different clubs.
3.
there is a Leeds connection in one instance.
I know it's easy but I had to think of something to finish the week off with.
Roger
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 94 17:25:37 GMT
Subject: fantasy
Well, the deadline has passed and we have 18 teams + the 3 I mentioned.
I've now got to do some work in sorting out scores, distributing info, etc.
Gav has said I can use the listserver if I want.
Will the fantasy stuff piss everyone else off?
Simon R. Is your friend Noel O' Connor on the list, or should I send him the stuff another way.
It will be no bother.
The only other person I don't recognise from the list is ???
Gav, Our beloved administrator, wants to put a team in late, I have agreed to this as a special concession unless he starts winning:-))).
Next Installment soon, Kev.
PS Roger the answer to your question is Kevin Keegan & Frank Gray.
From:
Date: Fri, 14 Jan 1994 18:36:43 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: fantasy
On Fri, 14 Jan 1994  wrote:
Go to the top of the class Kev.
It's nice to know we're in such knowledgeable hands with regard to the FFL.
Get ready with your calculator to tot all the points up for my team:-))))
Roger
From:
Date: Sat, 15 Jan 1994 12:08:15–0500
Subject: Ipswich result
The BBC World Service supplying the bad news…
Leeds 0 Ipswich 0 ‘Leeds didn't have a shot on goal in the 2nd half…’
Naturally, another win was scummed at Tottenham, 0–1 (the only possible score-line).
I look forward to the post-match analysis of the Leeds match.
From having the best midfield in the league it now seems to have gone distinctly limp — what price now Batty (nice to see Battyburn keeping up the chase).
I'm writing this without any knowledge of the Leeds line-up other than that Mac and Strach played.
Did Forrester play?
Why was Sharp dropped for the last few games, and did he play today?
Did Speed play?
Any reserves pressing for a midfield slot (Tinkler maybe)?
Will Deano finally be dropped and Strandli played instead?
Any news on Wallace's recovery?
Yours, thirsting for details
John
From:
Date: Sun, 16 Jan 94 13:03:14 GMT
Subject: Re: Reserves + Wilko contract
In your letter dated Fri, 14 Jan 1994 15:47:00 +0000 (GMT), you wrote:
Best thing that could happen would be that Wilko signs the lon term contract and then 4–6 months into it decides that he wants out say to go and play with Terry Vegatables at England.
Thus the FA would have to pay us a decent fee, didn't someone mention £15 mil and we could then go out and get a good manager (Terry Yorath etc etc) plus we'd have a fair share of the £15 mil to buy players i.e a really good center back and a good striker!!!
If Wilko does go and we do get a hefty fee for him who would you like to see at the club??
I think a center back and another striker are important for next year a youngish but proven pair would be ideal.
Ferdinand would be really nice but £5 mil asking price may put us off especially with |Keegan and Battyburn after him.
As for centre backs I've no idea — ideally I'd like to see him give half wit and Weatherall a good go along with Tinkler, Forrester and Sharp as I really can't see us winning the league after Saturdays shite performance.
Cheers Chris
From:
Date: Sun, 16 Jan 94 13:09:53 GMT
Subject: Re: Ipswich result
In your letter dated Sat, 15 Jan 1994 12:08:15–0500, you wrote:
The loss of Batty was a big blow to the midfield but the injuries to both Wallace and Speed have been the big set back this season.
The loss of Wallace's pace has allowed better marking of Deane who is so far doing a pretty good impression of a Donkey and also failing to score.
He sets up a fair few goals but we really need a finisher something Wallace managed to do (if you gave him enough chances in the game).
But perhaps the loss of Speed is the biggest worry, his late runs into the box, power in the air and explosive finishing have resulted in the goals from midfield completely drying up.
What we need is Speed and Wallace back and to buy a good striker, White is OK but stuck out on the right wing he won't score many goals IMHO.
Chris 
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 07:02:21 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Reserves + Wilko contract
On Sun, 16 Jan 1994, wrote:
I dont think the FA want to pay compensation to anybody.
Although I rate El Tel very highly I think one of the reasons he is being picked is that no money will have to change hands.
I know us anti-Wilkoite's have got to stick together, but Terry Yorath — Be serious!!
He made an absolute Bollocks of the job down the road here at Bradford Shitty, and he was one of the most unpopular players at Elland road during the ‘golden era’.
I'm beginning to become rather less concerned about the centre back situation.
The defence has been the strong point of the side recently.
I agree with you about a striker though.
My thoughts on ‘donkey’ are well chronicled (missed best chance of game V Ipswich according to most rags — free header from 8 yards straight at keeper).
As i said last week i think we need a top quality keeper as well.
Apart from El Tel I've also recently mentioned, Strach, big Jack, and a certain Mr Howard Kendall (calm down Mark H!!:-))))), as possible managers, but I just don't see it happening.
I think the few of us on this list who have our reservations about Sgt Wilko are going to have to ‘grin and bear it’, because in my opinion he's going nowhere.
I think a center back and another striker 
I hate to agree with you here but yes, I think the leagues gone now.
Should we lay down and die for Battyburn next week??
Comments please.
Will have to go and do some work now.
Roger G 
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 9:57:30 MET
Subject: Report on Strandli (this time)
(Sorry about the empty previous message)
At least one Leeds player scored a goal this weekend, as Frank Strandli gave Norway the lead against USA a minute before half time.
(USA won 2–1 after scoring on both their chances in the second half though.)
Frank played left midfielder/winger in a 4–5-1 formation (with Jostein Flo from Sheff.Utd. at the right flank and debutant Geir Frigard from Kongsvinger, Norway, as the striker) and did well, even though‘Drillo’ Olsen would have wanted more movement off the ball from him.
He used his pace and aerial strength and created some chances, one of his passed could easily have resulted in a goal.
The goal came when a cross from the right went over the whole defence, and Frank was unmarked on the left, 7–8 yards out.
He placed the ball in the keeper's left corner with a beautifully controlled right-footed volley, and the keeper was without a chance, rushing over towards his right corner.
He had another good chance when a high ball landed at his feet at the 18 yard line with no defenders in front of him.
He tried the volley again, but didn't hit it straight and the shot went wide.
He is rated among the best in the team in the papers, and my guess is that he gets a chance as striker in the next match against Costa Rica wednesday night.
So the question is whether he still is the 5/6-th choice as striker for Leeds when he returns, in that case I'll probably see him here in Bergen in the spring, on loan to Brann.
Carl Erik.
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 09:43:13 GMT
Subject: fantasy
Hello.
Scoring: Goal 3pts Assist 2pts clean sheet (back 4 + keeper) 4pts goal against (back 4 + keeper)— 1pt
I believe if a player is down as a defender but plays in another position.
eg Marshall (Ipswich), Fairclough (Leeds) then that player does not get the credit for a clean sheet.
The actual back 4 playing get the credit.
Christ knows how the rules deal with a team who play 5 at the back.
Also there is some funny rule regarding how long a player must be on the pitch to claim a clean sheet.
I'm just going to rely on the scores published in the Torygraph.
Transfers:
Similar to the Torygraph, I'm going to allow use of the transfer list ONCE during the season.
If you want to transfer up to 4 players, just send me an E-mail telling me which ones you wish to sell & buy.
Of course when you have done your transferring, the team must still satify the same criteria as before regarding positions, cost, 2 players per real team.
For the purposes of Fantasy, transfers between Premiership clubs do not count.
So the players belong to the same club for the duration.
You still keep the scores of any players you sell (even minuses;-) while they were with you team.
Obviously, you only score the points of any player you buy from the time you get him.
Finally.
I think that a week in fantasy goes from Monday to Sunday, so sometimes a club will get 2 or more games in a week, other times — none.
Tonight's game, If there is one will go towards NEXT weekends scores.
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 10:58:35 GMT
Subject: Leeds, life and FFL
Well having had chance to peruse the weekend papers and read the various match reports on the game I can only say that the season better end quickly so we can get the scum worshipping out of the way as quickly as possible.
The Torygraph gave us the usual shite report of the game — it did however comment on the poor state of the pitch and also get Sgt Wilko to display his disgust on it's current state.
Apart from that the report mentions poor displays from Strach (getting too old apparently), a quiet game from Macca, White stuck out on the right and crap from Deane.
i think we all have to accept now that the only team in a position to catch the scum are Battyburn and in answer to Rodgers question I personally would like to see us lose the game 4/5–0, this will at least allow someone to close the gap on them.
I wouldn't normally say anything like this but having drawn 4 out of our last 5 games then I can't even see us qualifying for europe anymore.
We need to concentrate on the FA cup, getting a deceent run will give the players some confidence and bring in the money as well as keeping us fans happy (well relatively speaking).
We've gotta buy players Deane's having a mare and Hodge isn't premier league material — he's had a fairly long run in the side and hasn't produced as much as Rocky did in his few opportunities.
Strach's looking tired and rocky would at least have been a reasonable replacement, White is more of a winger/ striker than a creative midfield player.
At least Speed made an appearance towards the end of the game — maybe he'll be fit enough to play the next whole game.
Any news on Wallace/Weatherall???
So where do we go from here?
First of all we need to get Hunlet off the pitch, as I'm not in Leeds I've been unable to keep up with this debate but at last sats Crewe game it looked terrible!
We need an injection off money from somewhere to spend on 2/3 quality players plus strengthening the squad with a couple of decent reserves or the next few seassons are going to be like this until the youth side is mature enough to carry the burden.
We are one of the biggest clubs in the country, the second best supported at home and I'm afraid that this season I've become very disappointed with some of the players and management decisions — I think we deserve better and while we're not in the position of say Swindon something needs to be done if (and I've ussed this line before) we're not to become perenial mid table finishers.
Yours disgruntled, dismayed, depressed, disinfrancised, disgusted,
Chris
PS Has anyone still got the torygraph listings for their FFL, if so could you please post them to me.
Ta
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 10:58:35 GMT
Subject: Leeds, life and FFL
Well having had chance to peruse the weekend papers and read the various match reports on the game I can only say that the season better end quickly so we can get the scum worshipping out of the way as quickly as possible.
The Torygraph gave us the usual shite report of the game — it did however comment on the poor state of the pitch and also get Sgt Wilko to display his disgust on it's current state.
Apart from that the report mentions poor displays from Strach (getting too old apparently), a quiet game from Macca, White stuck out on the right and crap from Deane.
i think we all have to accept now that the only team in a position to catch the scum are Battyburn and in answer to Rodgers question I personally would like to see us lose the game 4/5–0, this will at least allow someone to close the gap on them.
I wouldn't normally say anything like this but having drawn 4 out of our last 5 games then I can't even see us qualifying for europe anymore.
We need to concentrate on the FA cup, getting a deceent run will give the players some confidence and bring in the money as well as keeping us fans happy (well relatively speaking).
We've gotta buy players Deane's having a mare and Hodge isn't premier league material — he's had a fairly long run in the side and hasn't produced as much as Rocky did in his few opportunities.
Strach's looking tired and rocky would at least have been a reasonable replacement, White is more of a winger/ striker than a creative midfield player.
At least Speed made an appearance towards the end of the game — maybe he'll be fit enough to play the next whole game.
Any news on Wallace/Weatherall???
So where do we go from here?
First of all we need to get Hunlet off the pitch, as I'm not in Leeds I've been unable to keep up with this debate but at last sats Crewe game it looked terrible!
We need an injection off money from somewhere to spend on 2/3 quality players plus strengthening the squad with a couple of decent reserves or the next few seassons are going to be like this until the youth side is mature enough to carry the burden.
We are one of the biggest clubs in the country, the second best supported at home and I'm afraid that this season I've become very disappointed with some of the players and management decisions — I think we deserve better and while we're not in the position of say Swindon something needs to be done if (and I've ussed this line before) we're not to become perenial mid table finishers.
Yours disgruntled, dismayed, depressed, disinfrancised, disgusted,
Chris
PS Has anyone still got the torygraph listings for their FFL, if so could you please post them to me.
Ta
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 10:59:40 GMT
Subject: Boring Saturday
I used to look forward to commentary on a Sat. afternoon, but it seems such a tie as Ipswich at home cannot even produce a goal never mind a win.
The Radio Leeds commentary was a joint effort between them and R. Suffolk and the Suffolk bloke didn't seem to care a jot about Ipswich.
He was saying stuff like ‘and heres a rare and unexpected attack from Ipswich’, he just seemed like he was a Leeds presenter.
Old Norman Hunter sounded like he was bored of it all and just kept saying ‘looking at it, you just can't see where a goals gonna come from’.
Speed came on for White and didn't seem to have many problems although that's prob- ably because he didn't touch the ball much.
Strach said before the match ‘if we get the first goal, then there's only gonna be one winner’— fair enough, but you've got to get the first goal.
Hunter was on about Deane not getting away from his marker enough, from corners and stuff he just sits and gets marked instead of moving out to the far post.
Perhaps they need a little Radio tuned in to Norman out at that far post!
Andy (White in Scumland)
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 11:13:50 GMT0BST
Subject: Ipswich
Well, a bad day all round.
Oxford tickets sold out, and a woeful 0–0 draw as well.
It didn't start out that way, though.
After the first couple of minutes I thought we were going to be in for a really entertaining game.
Hodge had a good header turned round the post by the keeper, and from the resulting corner the header was cleared off the line by an Ipswich defender.
For the first 1/4 hour or so, I even thought that Deano was going to have a blinder.
He was looking really sharp, and winning everything in the air.
But then it all went rapidly downhill.
A few long-range efforts, but nothing to write home about.
Someone else might remember more of the details — personaly, I was bored to death.
Deano had a good chance about 5 minutes from time, but headed straight at the keeper.
To be fair, it really did look as though Ipswich had come for a draw, but we should have more imagination, pace or something to break down teams like that.
On a worrying note, SuperJon was back to his, er, erratic best.
Has anyone else noticed how, in the player interviews in the match programme, everyone so far has said without fail that the funniest player at Elland Road is our Jon.
He's certainly made me laugh a few times!
The team, from memory, was:-
Good to see both Speed and Weatherall back in action.
Speed came on towards the end, but didn't have chance to make much of an impact.
Cheers, Steve
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 11:36:52 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: The Team
I suppose I should put in my two penneth…
Deane isn't a bad player, at sheffield however he did score in bursts rather than every other game he also played not as a goalscorer but someone to play flicks etc.
Wilko should try him out with either Frankie or White.
When we signed him his ability to go out on the wing, but then at sheffield they had someone in the middle for the cross.
On white's debut we looked really good until wallace went off so that could bethe way to go…
I reckon that wilko is probably waiting for Tinkler to get back for him to play the Batty/Fairclough role.
He used to play centre back in the youth cup winning juniors team.
I agree Hodge is not good really…
I read summat about us swapping him for gemmil at forest…probably not a bad deal.
Was there any speculation in the papers yesterday…??
Cheers, Tim G.
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 12:02 GMT
Subject: Deane
I tend to agree with Tims sentiments about Deane.
I think we were lucky with Chappy, and we see Deane as a direct replacement for him.
This is wrong because in the Chappy/Wallace partnership it was Wallace as the provider/space creater and Chappy as the main scorer.
Because Deane is more mobile and able to go out to the wing and hold the ball up, it gives Wallace more space etc etc.
How many goals has wallace provided for Deane?
Like all departments, attacking is a team game.
Its not quite fair to single out individuals within the units.
By moving out wide, Deane invariably takes out a tall defender — which presumably leaves more space for people like Speed to move into.
I dont think its any coincidence that Speed and Wallace are our 2 top scorers.
Having said that I also think that Wilko should try out some other partnerships…maybe depending upon the opposition…like White/Forrester, Strandli/Forrester etc.
BUT we dont know if Wilko tries this in training.
The person in the BEST position to see exactly what each pair can do is Wilko.
Its not right to experiment on the saturday.
He must therefore go on what he sees in training.
I think we might see Frank get a first team run on his return.
The trip to USA will give him a bit more confidence — and hopefully a bit more resolve to show his stuf in training.
Similarly its no use getting all wound up over one result vs Ipswich.
Scum couldnt beat them when they went to the Sty with the same negative defence.
Ipswich also arent one of our favourite sides.
0–0 is always a dissapointing score — lets thank our lucky stars we arent Arse supporters:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 14:17:05 GMT
Subject: Good news
According to the club call Rod Wallace's recovery from his hamstring injury has speeded up greatly and he is ‘in with a good chance’ of playing against Battyburn on Sunday.
Please let this come true.
Kelly and Forrester picked up knocks on Saturday but are both expected to be fit for Battyburn.
The Guardian also says Shearer twisted an ankle avoiding a lunge from Carl Bradshaw on Sat and may miss their game with Pompey on Wednesday, I wouldn't mind him missing sundays game.
Anyone know who marked him for the 3–3 draw at Leeds?
(Not Newsome surely?)
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 09:41:24 EST
Subject: Re: The Team
Which one, Archie???;-)
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 14:51:34 +0000
Subject: Rocked
I noticed that in the report on City vs Arse, Rocastle played the 90 minutes and got no mention at all.
Presumably his anonymity at Maine Rd is some sort evidence as to why Wilko offloaded him.
Mind you we may as well call the Leeds team ‘anonymity-r-us’.
It brings to mind Danny Baker's comment about Millwall under Rioch, that they should play in grey kits.
Macca certainly should have a grey change strip all his own.
Laugh?
I paid 14 quid.
Incidentally is it a particular day that the FFL stuff is printed in the Torygraph?
I bought it today expecting some figures but haven't found any yet.
Tim K
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 15:22:56 +0000
Subject: At The Ewok Village
Re Shearer—
Whoever it was did a shit job.
He ran us all over the shop.
It wasn't Fairclough — he was playing in the Batty position.
(Until Batty came on.)
It would be real bad if we got Battyed.
I personally want us to win the game well, to resurrect team morale which seems halfmast at the mo.
No matter how much I hate —them—I will never root for my beloved Leeds to lose, even if it was to indirectly win the scum a treble.
(Honest).
Incidentally I was wearing my ‘holy robes’ at Alton Towers back in November, & some Blackburn fans came up to me to thank me for Batty!
He'd only played a couple of games for 'em by then.
Nice of them I must say.
Tim.
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 15:59:44 GMT
Subject: Shearer
I think we usually play a zonal system at home, but I wouldn't be surprised if Wilko played Newsome & Wetherall (if fit) as centre backs on Saturday, and Fairclough as an extra defender, man-marking Shearer.
This is what he did against Scum (Cantona) and Newcastle (Beardsley).
I think.
Andy K.
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 16:12:44 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Shearer
Putting Fairclough on Shearer would make a lot of sense and run to form…
Do people think Battyburn are that good or is it just shearer???
Tim G
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 11:13:47 EST
Subject: Re: Rocked
IMHO it will not be long before people are saying things like
‘getting rid of Rocky was a crap move by Wilko’(in fact I just said it!!)
We should have kept Rocky and left out Strach…
I can't think of many players who have the ability to replace him, but Rocky's one of them!
Also, I'm getting well annoyed at Deano.
I actually thought it was a REALLY good move buying him, but now…well, I say say bin him, and go for broke and get Ferdinand (f*** the bank balance!).
And another thing, where is O'Leary?
I had such hopes for him!
And yet another thing…
I move to the USA hoping to see the WC94, and what happens?
No England/Scotland; AND the first bloody game I R5 commerntary on is f***ing Scum vs Spurs (and they won!).
At least my 2 strikers scored in FFL (go Stein/Fowler).
Does anybody know if the Torygraph International will be joining in the FFL fun?
If not I'll just have to guess how well my team are doing!!!
Glynn
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 16:36:33 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Rocked
Well the Sunday Times had a headline saying ‘Rocastle is F***ing Brill’, or words to that effect:-), so people are already saying it!!.
It wouldn't surprise me either if I see headlines soon saying ‘Deane is F***ing crap’, or ‘Wilko's F***ing Mad’.
(Not that I'm anti-Wilko, but he does make some strange decisions).
Anyway, is the match against BattyBurn on Sat or Sun, and is it live on Sky by any chance?
Sunil
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 17:14:13 GMT
Subject: Re: Shearer
I think it was.
That certainly makes sense, perhaps perm any 2 from Newsome, Wetherall and Pemberton, whose pace can be useful.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 17:27:43 GMT
Subject: Re: Rocked
In your letter dated Mon, 17 Jan 1994 14:51:34 +0000, you wrote:
Nah Wilko offloaded him cause Rocky knew which way to put his cashcard in the hole-int-wall implying he had a brain and there fore could think for himself — something Wilko don't encourage.
4 out 5 reults have been drawn — sounds something like a well known cat food advert.
The FFL stuff is printed on a Wednesday in the torygraph.
By the way did anyone see the BBC 2 progy on FFL on Friday evening with Baddiel and Skinner, twas quite good I thought with ole Frank being the star — some interesting teams have been selected by the celebs as well.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 17:33:55 GMT
Subject: Directors
In your letter dated Mon, 17 Jan 94 09:41:24 EST, you wrote:
Archie would probably be Wilko's first choice given his preference for older players, but may settle on the younger version.
I saw him play a few times last year when they were still in the premier div. and was fairly impressed however I haven't seen his form this season and I'm sure a year in Div.1 won't have improved him.
We wouldn't have had this problem if the board hadn't got rid of Batts and Wilko could handle Cuntona and Rocky — poor management decisions are costing this club a chance of the title.
Isn't it time that Silver sorted things out and got us some money to buy players even if it means bringing in another board member.
As I said earlier I'm getting really pissed with the tight fisted attitued of the board — Shef Utd are becomming more attractive by the minute at least they've no pretensions of having dosh.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 17:36:38 GMT
Subject: Goals
In your letter dated Mon, 17 Jan 1994 15:59:44 GMT, you wrote:
How about the new 0–0-10 system where everyone plays up front and tries to score — at least we may score and a result is better than another bloody draw.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 1994 18:12:36 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: Leeds v Battyburn
Me the eternal optimist must now concede that Leeds have very little chance of winning the league this year.
My support for Leeds is just as great as my hatred of the scum, so I for one will be rooting for a 1 nil defeat on saturday, with Leeds hopefully going on to do well in the FA cup.
I'm sorry but I just can't support this view, what about pride, team confidence (just imagine what this victory would do to that — considering, correct me if I'm wrong, but the 3 sides we have beaten away from home are shit, and we have also been on a crap run recently), and not to mention a place in Europe — this is a 2nd place 6 pointer.
Additionally, why the hell 1–0, we could at least hope if we do lose that we will go down all guns blazing in a stormer of a match, say 4–3 (and Brian, might even score one against quality opposition — god forbid him score more though.
Ever seen him score more than 2?
No?
Its not surprising he never has, and he scores 2 in a game about once a season.)
From:
Date: Mon, 17 Jan 94 18:17:28 GMT
Subject: SUPPORT LEEDS NOT BLACKBURN
In my opinion all this talk about wanting Leeds to lose on Sunday is the most amazing bollocks I've heard on the list.
If we beat Blackburn we will be only 2 points behind then and have an excellent chance of securing a place in the UEFA cup next year.
If our losing directly prevented the scum from winning the league, and it was not very advantageous to us I can imagine a senario when I won't be bothered with a win.
Not at this stage of the season however!
I think Leeds have blown it for the league and there are sadly only one winners.
The race for second place and a crack at Europe next year is still very wide open.
So come on, get behind the lads.
Mark.
p.s yep, the game is live on sky at 4:00 pm
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 06:58:54 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Good news
On Mon, 17 Jan 1994, wrote: I don't know who marked him at Elland Rd, but i'd like to bet a few quid that Wilko puts Fairclough on him ‘man to man’ next Sunday.
It will be a severe test for him.
In my opinion Shearer is the most difficult player to shackle in the country at the moment.
A class act!!
Roger G 
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 07:04:48 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Rocked
On Mon, 17 Jan 1994  wrote:
A mate of mine who is a season ticket holder has a nickname for Macca —‘Lord Lucan’.
He shouts heads or tails at the beginning of the game and then F*****g dissappears:-)))
Roger G 
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 07:12:04 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Rocked
On Mon, 17 Jan 1994  wrote: after match phone in on Radio Leeds.
Did anybody actually listen to the programme??
Perhaps my attempts to undermine the managers credibility are coming to fruition at last:-)))
Roger G 
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 08:31:41 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Pitch & Hunslet RLFC
News from the local rag:
Wilko's complaints about the pitch after the dire draw on Saturday has brought the ‘Hunslet dabate’ back into the local rags.
My earlier assertion that Hunslet would be leaving at the end of the season, now appears to have been a figment of my imagination, and from what i've read over the last couple of days Leeds appear to be up ‘shit creek’.
Silver is becoming increasingly concerned that the Euro championships will be taken away from Elland Rd (despite the fact that a new pitch is going to be laid at the end of the season), and says that Hunslet must be gone by spring 1995 at the latest.
Unfortunately Hunslet have a ‘cast iron’ agreement with Leeds council (still 13 years of their current lease to run), and the full backing of the Rugby Football League in their fight to stay at Elland Rd.
A Hunslet director made the following points in last nights T & A:—
1.
Leeds were more than willing to enter into a ground sharing scheme when they were skint and needed the rent money.
Now they have a few quid and the rent money goes to Leeds council anyway, they want to ‘get shut’
2.
Hunslet only play approx 15 games a season at home.
Leeds play in excess of 50 including reserve games.
Whose doing most damage to the pitch??
3.
They would be more than willing to move as long as Leeds council offered them a suitable alternative with security of tenure (this in effect means building them a brand new stadium from scratch).
Unless the new pitch is going to be pretty hard wearing, prospects for staging Euro 96, and perhaps more importantly for playing good football over the next couple of seasons, do not look good!!
Roger G
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 09:44:02 +0100
Subject: sky shows battyburn game
the game is to be televized on —sunday—(SkySports) according to my local football pub.
game starts 16:00 MET (15:00 in england that is)— but the programme starts an hour before that.
halvard
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 10:19:08 +0100
Subject: more on frankie boy (fat frank)
hi —
some excerpts from norw. paper VG after norways 2–1 loss vs USA in the US (USA actually has a very good home stat. — beating England (you might remember!), drawing 2–2 vs Denmark just after D. was crowned EuroChamps, and also giving Germany some hard resistance).
‘Things looked bright when Erik Mykland found Frank Strandli [with a very delicate ‘chip (?)’]in the dying minute of the first half.
The former Start-forward pounced the ball in the net and Norway was ahead on the Sun Devil Stadium.
— I'm not completely satisfied with Strandli, even if he scored.
He is still not good enough without the ball.
…[words of manager Egil Olsen].
Strandli: Wants to play forward [he played in a wide left position — sort of the Giggs role]
FS (21) knocked in his first goal for the seniors and addressed the other contenders for the single forward role: I will have a go for the single place up front and i would like to try it vs Costa Rica.
But it is Drillo [Olsen]who decides, i just hope i get the chance.
…Against a team like the USA we shall win 9 out of 10 games Strandli says.’
The game vs Costa Rica is tomorrow.
I guess Frank will get another shot in the team — and i think he will get at least one half in the single attacker role.
Frank did not look to fat — i guess it's more a question of some people —looking fat—even though they aren't.
Points given for all the norw. players in VG (max 10 — which is —very—seldom seen)— 4–5-1 formation.
as for the Battyburn game — it will be a tough one…
halvard /scandinavian whites
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 10:25:54 MET
Subject: Could never want Leeds to lose!
I've supported Leeds since I was 5 and in all that time I've never once wished Leeds would lose a game, ever.
As a previous posting commented, I hate the scum but my love for Leeds is greater that and thus I will always want to see Leeds win, if I has the option between a Leeds win and a scum/Liverpool loss.
There are still 17, yes SEVENTEEN, games left in the season and Leeds are only 5 points behind Battyburn.
Second will guarantee a UEFA place, and I think if Leeds can get out of the rut of drawing so many of their recent games they will attain this position.
The game on Sunday is crucial to those ambitions of coming second.
It also is a chance to show those shits that we can still play without Batty.
When we played Battyburn last year it was on telly in Ireland and Leeds that day were brutal.
Two of Battyburns goals were scored in identical moves — the sign of a poor defensive team — I though for a minute the second goal was a replay of the first:-[.
Please lads, don't make the same mistakes and take something from the game.
A few of our players have an awful lot to prove both to themselves and to the fans i.e. Deane (to score more than once in a game), Newsome (to defend well against good opposition), Fairclough (to prove to the manager that he is one of the best man to man markers in the game).
Need I go on…
Seriously, if Fairclough isn't man marking Shearer on Sunday I'll eat my hat.
I'll bet if Fairclough is on flash he won't score, if he's not, watch out Leeds, for if he does score it will be all our own fault as we have the ammunition to stop him.
I hope Speed and Wallace are back to give up some gizz up front.
Strach, I think, is coming to the end of his career and I think McAllister has to start coming into his own.
Over the past few games McAllister might as well stayed in bed for all he did IMHO.
Come on lads, ever though we've only lost once in 20 games, it's upto 10 wins and 9 draws when we started with 5 wins on the trot.
Too many draws recently:-(.
We, also, have to be able to goto Blackburn and come away with a result if we expect to advance in the Cup any further than the 4th round.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 09:34:55 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Hunslet
There are moves to get hunslet out of Elland road…in particular there are plans to build a sports complex out at Stourton…it would be perfect close to the M1 even close to hunslet…!!!
Giving a 40000 stadium to hunslet whose crowds can be as low as 700 is stupid.
12000 more than adequate for hunslet…we could even play our reserves there.
I suppose if Leeds bought Elland Road they'd still be stuck with Hunslet!!
I still do not see why they don't.
Silver has indicated that if they bought the ground it would be on a 6m mortgage over 20ish years…that has to be less than the %age of gate receipts they are giving the council now anyway!!!
Tim G
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 10:04:16 GMT
Subject: Leeds: One up the Gary Glitter!!
In your letter dated Tue, 18 Jan 94 10:25:54 MET, you wrote: If I thought Wilko was going there with the intent to win I might feel a little happier, but with the form as it is I think we'll wind up in one of those boring 1–0 or 2–0 defeats where nothing exciting happens in the game.
If we're to win Fairclough must mark flash well and Newsome and possibly Pemberton play out of their skins — Battyburn don't just have flash although it does appear that way at times.
Deane's gotta score if he plays and Strach and Macca must put up — they've been pretty ineffective of late.
Strach's had it just about— so Wilko's decision to swap Rocky for White was a complete load of bollocks — if he can't manage players like Rocky and Cuntona then he shouldn't be a f*****g manager especially of a team with rather large delusions of grandeur.
Chris 
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 10:09:42 GMT0BST
Subject: oxford whites
A few of us tried to get tickets on Saturday for the Oxford game, but had no luck.
Do any of you down in Oxford know what the latest is regarding availability of tickets for the home end?
Cheers, Steve
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 10:31:16 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: cash…and the lack of it
One reason for the rather obvious lack of cash injection into Leeds could be some of the rather dodgy people on the board…
Fotherby just oozes dodgyness
Gilman Mr vice chairman could be the real reason…when building the East Stand the contract went to GMI who bid 2m more than the lowest bidder.
But then theywere building it with supporters money so that didnt matter.
Gilman was/is chairman of GMI…now bankrupt…
Tim…
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 10:47 GMT
Subject: Leeds United Supporters List????
An intent ‘not to lose’, is NOT the same as an intent to ‘get a draw’.
Ok, could someone please work out Blackburns results/form minus Shearers goals.
Blackburn are worse than Newcastle — at least Newcastle are a 2 man band.
Stop Shearer scoring and Blackburn are average.
They dont even create his goals — hes just got that luck/knack of being in the right place for deflections etc.
Cunt and Rocky are just not the same issue.
Cunt is an egotistical frog.
He couldnt handle being a sub every so often.
Wilko has always sought players with the right attitude.
Noel Blake was kicked out for exactly the same reason — he couldnt handle being in a squad.
With Cunt — Wilko would have tried to keep him had he simply had a huff every so often.
He didnt.
He put in transfer requests.
Au revoir.
Look at the player who joned Leeds, to the one that left for scum.
Wilko ‘broke’ Cunt perfectly into the English game.
If he had joined Scum first off he wouldnt even be in England now.
Rocastle is a limited player.
A good player — Wilko wouldnt have paid 2M for him otherwise — but limited in his ability to play in different positions.
Its no use really having Rocky sit on the bench, or play in the reserves because Strach is fit.
Its better for all concerned if we have a more versatile replacement.
White can play in several positions and is therefore versatile.
I happen to think it was a good deal for Leeds.
Thats my opinion.
But note how I at least attempt to show HOW I formed my opinion.
mail on the list is getting more and more out of order every day.
I dont subscribe to get lots of Leeds bashing each and every time we have a disappointing result.
Im usually pissed off enough as it is.
OK, people can vent their frustrations…but its the same stuff being regurgitated over and over.
Fuck me havent we gone 21 games with just 1 defeat?
Considering weve got such shit players and shit management thats not bad is it.
How about concentrating on the positive aspects every so often?
Singling out players is out of order.
Its not something Ive known Leeds supporters do a lot of — except to shite players like Kevin Hird.
It seems everyone is waiting for Strach to have 2 quiet games in order to start ending his career.
Macca has 2 quiet games and every slags him off.
What about the 10 superb games he had on the trot recently?
How about another clean sheet for the defence?
Ill tell you why this fucks me off so much — because I get all this crap from the media too.
An example;
Scum 0 Leeds 0; Leeds get criticised from all quarters for being negative.
Not a word on why Scum couldnt break us down.
Leeds 0 Ipswich 0; Ipswich get praised for a resolute defence.
leeds get slated for not scoring, and for the boring game.
Also, I might add, compared to scum saying ‘Man Utd have the class/skill to break down sides if they are so negative’…yeah you stupid cunt — just like they did to Ipswich themselves.
This was in the Sun's report on Monday.
Lets not forget this is a SUPPORTERS list.
Taking the piss for a laff is one thing.
Being 100% negative all the time is another.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 11:54:20 MET
Subject: Strachan/Wilko
In the match vs scum on New Years Day, Strachan played on the right and White on the left, and I hoped that meant that I would *never* again see Strach on the left side, which is mostly a sad sight.
(Last time I saw him there was in the first half vs Arse, where *Hodge*! was given the right side…
IMO it has been demonstrated time after time that Strachan is pretty useless on the left (even though he put in a nice cross for Hodge on saturday)) Even in the scum match, Strachan looked just a little too late and too slow in most situations, and I understand from the match reports that he hasn't improved since.
My question is: Have Strach and White swapped back, so Strach is on the left and White on the right?
(If so, I thought that was just the problem that made it impossible to use Rocky…)
I'd much rather see Sharp on the left, he seems to fit in there!
I don't intend to start another round of Wilko criticism, but I think much of his problem is that he uses extremely vague formulations and don't tell anything about his thoughts and considerations.
Coupled with his appearance, in particular during matches, this can easily raise questions whether there's something going on in there at all…
I think there is, but I would really like to know what!
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 11:25:58 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Leeds: One up the Gary Glitter!!
On Tue, 18 Jan 1994, wrote:
I think we're the better all round team when playing well so a win is certainly not out of the question.
The lads just haven't been doing the business over the last 2 or 3 games though have they?
The back 4/5 will have to be as solid as they have looked in recent games.
The midfield 3/4, presumably including Macca & Strach, will have to get their act together, and lets not beat about the bush, ‘drop the dead f*****g donkey’ and play Wallace and Forrester up front.
I agree with you about Battyburn.
Shearer is some talent, but Newell & Gallagher are no slouches.
Batts may even be trying a bit harder for his seasonal onion bag bulger.
You're obviously well wound up today Chris.
I agree with most of your sentiments re: Wilko.
White may be a very good player and Wilko could have ‘fancied him’, but Rocky should not have been allowed to go in the opposite direction, and as for the ‘Cantona thing’ I think that decision will haunt Wilkinson to the grave.
However pissed off we might get from time to time though, we're going to have to accept that Wilko is at Elland Rd to stay.
Perhaps the ghosts of great managers past could come and visit him one christmas eve:-)))
Roger G 
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 11:27:29 +0000
Subject: Anti Leeds
I heard an amazing comment when I was sat in the North East corner of Elland Road for the Crewe game.
When they announced that Hodge was playing, this Leeds ‘fan’ behind me groaned and said that he hoped he'd have his leg broken!
I can't believe that.
He may be a bit ropey at times but he plays his best for us and don't forget the goals he scored, including one which put paid to the scouse red shite in 1991.
I may moan about them — I reserve the right to criticise the team, but I would never wish for one of our players to get an injury — that is insane.
(I told this lad what I thought of what he said too).
Also I happen to think he is still one of our better players.
He puts in more effort than certain lanky playmakers…but I'd better not get personal, eh Mark?:-)
Tim K
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 12:14:10 GMT
Subject: Think positive!!
In your letter dated Tue, 18 Jan 94 10:47 GMT, you wrote:
Fair enough:-I agree that Wilko did a good job breaking in Cantona, and if he'd gone to the scum then he'd probably have moved on just as quickly.
But having said that surely Wilkinson could have kept him at the club, for someone who says that players are picked on the performances they produce how can he explain Deane?
He hasn't been scoring and he's a 3mil centre forward!
Cuntona was playing well most of the time, creating and scoring goals, alright he had a couple of off games but who doesn't.
Surely the manager could have massaged his ego enough to keep him at the club.
I agree White is a more versatile player than Rocky, but Rocky was bought to replace Strach and solely for that reason, NOT to play anywhere else.
Strach has been on his last legs for the past 2 seasons and while he still produces high quality performances more often than not he is looking more tired with each game he plays, not suprising for someone of his age.
Thus having sold Rocky we are left with no-one who can put his foot on the ball and control the game (Macca excepted).
White is more of a striker come winger and not able to do what Strach did.
Also the loss of Batty becomes more important, one of his neglected talents asids from the ball winning was his excellent ball distribution.
Bringing White to Leeds is a good move — yes, but at the expense of the best cover for Strach?
Surely there was some other way to finance the deal.
I think next season will tell, Strach's will probably too old by then and Macca and Speed will be unable to cope with the loss of these two players.
If Wilko was willing to try something else in order to get a result then the same criticisms would not be appearing week in week out.
However there is little enough flexibility in the team let alone the squad to allow this, OK one loss in 21 games is NOT a poor record but 10 draws, some against pretty poor teams is not brilliant either.
OK so people are grumbling at the moment about the players, some are doing well others are not, but having watch Deane miss goals and Hodge run around like a headless chicken every week is frustrating, but perhaps the media's failure to provide good, unbiased coverage of Leeds results in people moaning to the mailing list.
Agreed, I hope the team comes thorugh this rather barren patch and does start to produce the form they are capable of.
Leeds have alot of talented players and some OK players, they are capable of beating the best teams but for once in awhile I wish they would!!
If the players would perform to their potential there would be more positive aspects to concentrate on, so here's hoping they do at Battyburn on Saturday.
Chris
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 12:46:13 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: The team
As Sean will testify I have been pretty anti Strachan in the past especially when he was still playing when obviously suffering from his back trouble.
His dodging of tackles, chasing the ball less etc.
This season he has been OK.
Mcallister does seem to be overshadowed by him when he is on the pitch, looking for him to take the lead, provide the inspiration etc which strach is no longer doing as well as he once did.
Personally I reckon Strach will go to be manager somewhere at the end of the season probably in Scotland…
Hibs maybe or move onto the coaching staff ready for Wilko's move upstairs to a chief Executive thing.
Unless there are big Transfers with speed or Macca going, Gazza coming, something like that The midfield with probably be Tinkler, Macca and Speed.
With White Deane and Rodney up front.
It's possible that wilko has learnt his lesson with Rocky and is showing this with Deane.
A 3m price tag must weigh heavy on Deane.
Instead of leaving Deanein the reserves as he did with rocky he'll keep him in the firsts and he'll come good.
As rocky probably would have given the chance.
Anyway after Rocky Wilko would have to have a lot of Balls to drop Deane.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 12:48:50 +0000
Subject: The Ghosts Of Leeds Managers Past
I happen to have transcripts of the abovementioned spirits' comments to Howard believe it or not.
Revie:
You daft ‘apeth.
You get rid of Cantona, Rocky, Batty and who have you got left: Newsome and Fairclough?
Get down to Bob Cratchitt's this minute and give Tiny Tim that away kit he wants for Chrimbo you tight get.
Jock Stein:
Hello, er, tara.
I'm off to haunt the Parkhead trophy room.
Armfield:
Well Howard, you ca have the England manager's job, I've made my decision.
Mind you, last season Leeds were crap, er, what do you think of Venables, I might have him instead, and then there's that lad Keegan, etc etc dithering ad nauseam.
Adamson:
(The ghost of Adamson materialised as a lump of lard — it didn't say much).
Billy Bremner:
Hey laddie, the drinks are on me.
You'll no worry about that Rocastle business after a few wee snifters of Teachers’…
Alan Clarke:
You've ruined Leeds.
In my day we had great stars like that Peter Barnes, then there was Brian Greenhoff, he were grand.
We went down in style when I was manager, no question about that.
Brian Clough:
No no no young man.
Listen to me.
That Cantona was too classy for Leeds.
You are a cheat and not fit to manage a Premier League side.
If only you had kept hold of McGovern and O'Hare, you won't find players like them in a hurry.
Gimme back that bottle of Sainsbury's Cider…
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 13:08:54 GMT
Subject: Re: oxford whites
Still waiting to find out whether we've got tix or not, ordered by the FM (Fax Method) last week.
The queue on Sat am was outrageous, and I was told that the end of it wouldn't get Oxford tickets, so I just left and hoped for the best with the fax request.
I also crapped on about coming from Oxford and smiled winningly at the girl behind the gril in an effort to win her over and get our fax snuck to the top of the pile, but so far it doesn't seem to have helped, can't think why &-}
Well here's the very latest, hot off the cleaning lady.
If there's any left after members and voucher-clutchers have got theirs, and after season ticket holders have claimed an extra ticket for a guest of their choice, they may go on sale next week.
But even then they may think of some other way of avoiding public sale (vouchers and member-clutchers probably).
Doesn't help much does it?
I'll let you know more if I hear owt.
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 13:20 GMT
Subject: cant remember!! heh
Ah yes, I remember now:-)
I dont mind personal criticism of players…but I just think theres a limit to how far we should go.
We can criticise deane for not getting into the box enough.
This MAY be fair criticism — but we dont know what hes being told or asked to do for the team.
Similarly, we can criticise wilko for being negative — but we dont know if hes told the team to go out there and score at all costs, but the team just hasnt responded.
All Im saying is that football isnt always a simple game.
I wish that Deane was scoring 3 a match — but I havent had the opportunity to see him in action recently.
Therefore Im not going to criticise him because Ive not seen what hes doing/not doing.
If hes standing on the half way line — picking his arse theres a good chance that hes not been told to do that.
Ill then criticise him.
At the end of the day, Wilko knows what hes told them all to do.
He knows if a lacklustre performance is down to individuals, or his tactics.
He knows whether a performance merits keeping a place in the side.
hes won us a 2 championships and a 4th place in 4 years.
I trust him.
There, I think that covers it:-)))
Mark 
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 13:42:30 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: The Ghosts Of Leeds Managers Past
On Tue, 18 Jan 1994  wrote:
I wasn't thinking specifically of old Leeds managers, with a couple of noteable exceptions, but it was nice to have a lot of my favourite ever players included in the same message!!
Barnes, Greenhoff, McGovern, O'hare — What stars:-)))
P.S. Where was Eddie Gray when these spirits visited Howard.
Injured I suppose so couldn't make the away trip:-)))
P.P.S I see they've been feeding Mark H on the raw meat again:-))) How did ‘Antiscum United’ go on over the weekend by the way??
Roger G
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 14:09:28 +0000
Subject: Reasons to be Cheerful
Okay, here we go, reasons to be cheerful after another 0–0 draw against Ipswich.
The opening minute was fantastic — Steve Odge nearly scored with his ead.
In retrospect, the ref should have blown for full-time at this point.
Half time was fantastic too — community pushing and shoving up and down (mostly down) the back of the kop for the heck of it was in order.
No deaths or injuries, but a few hands waving feebly from under the pile of bodies indicated that rescue was required.
Stewards?
They were all sat on boxes in front of the Family Stand, making sure toddlers didn't stage a mass sit-down protest on the pitch.
At last I can reveal the full Brian Deane Riding Through the Glen song — in the absence of life on the pitch, people were talking about it (no need to sing it, sadly).
The missing first line goes ‘Brian Deane, Brian Deane, ball is in the net’.
Worth the wait, eh?
Also the Ooh Aah chant is back: ‘Ooh Aah Forrestah’.
Some lads near me thought this wasn't quite right, and spent most of the first half trying to think up a new Forrester song, to the tune of Monty Python's ‘I'm a lumberjack’.
They got as far as ‘I'm a Forrester, I score for Leeds, I hate Man U and I hate Chel-sea’, plus the line ‘I put on women's clothing, like Eric Cantona’.
Can we come up with an improved/new Forrester song?
News on Newsome.
Jon drew a rapturous response from the crowd on two occasions.
First he did another of his long-range rocket ball shots, and the kop started the guru-arm-worshippping stuff and singing his name.
In the second half he did an extremly dainty control of the ball by sort of twisting it off his middle with his arms up in the air, towards some nearby Leeds player.
Stomach-spin, I suppose, or one of his renowned piss-taking imitations — Mr Motivator's latest GMTV work-out routine, perhaps.
Whatever, it got him a long, heartfelt, high-pitched ‘Wooooooooooooooo’ from about 20,000 people who'd got little else to wooo about.
Controversey broke out about sportsmanship on the field.
Ipswich players were going down quite a lot, and every time they did, Leeds kindly punted the ball back to them after the drop-ball restart.
After the third such incident in the 2nd half, some sections of the crowd thought this was too much and while the trainer was bandaging away sang ‘keep the ball, keep the ball, keep the ball’.
They didn't.
I expect someone called 6 0 6 to go on about Leeds fans being fascist animals with grudges again.
The match finished with a few variations on ‘Boring Boring Ipswich’ and ‘I can't read and I can't write but I can drive a tractor/taxi’.
Mebbe for the Oxford game that should be the other way round (‘I can read and I can write but I can't drive a tractor’)?
Well, er, that's it really.
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 15:06 GMT
Subject: ANTISCUM (THIS TIME)
Sorry bout the last msg…
Im doing this on a PC, as opposed to me normal VDU, and for some reason the function keys are all up the spout.
I was just dithering, trying to see what the new keys were, when I thought ‘shit, unless I can send it, theres no point me carrying on’.
In a swift mindless moment, and one CTRL-Z later, the message was off on its merry way.
Ah well — least I got the new key first time:-)
So, where was i…
no, no raw meat.
I just have to read a few tabloids these days to get me going.
:-)
Antiscum did OK at the weekend as it happens.
Unfortunately I have 2 leeds midfielders, and Molby who isnt playing.
Therefore little happening on that front.
Did reasonable at the back and up front though.
Those who have 2 Arse defenders should be laughing.
6 clean sheets on the trot (although some of those were cup games).
Hands up who thinks the scoring for clean sheets is a bit OTT?
Surely it should be worth more for scoring a goal?
BTW Bad luck Kev.
Bodin — 3 for the weekend!
I told you Swindon will let in too many to make Bodin useful:-))
Still, at least Sheff Wed lost.
hahahahahahahahahahahahahaha ha.
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 94 15:49:05 GMT
Subject: The Dream Team
In your letter dated Tue, 18 Jan 1994 12:46:13 +0000 (GMT), you wrote:
OK you can criticise Strach for that, but his main talents which are those that have benefited leeds most since his arrival are his passing and ability to take on men resulting in him or a team mate scoring.
The ball winning was done by the likes of Batts.
What makes a truly great team is having two of these in midfield plus a ball winner and a roving midfield man.
Leeds possed this at the beginning of the season when Batts, Speed, Macca and Strach were on the field.
Although Strach's performances have been going downhill (by his standards) since he injured his back.
Thus to compensate for Strach, Rocky was the ideal replacement.
However the board went and sold Batts:-I don't know much about Tinkler is he more in the Batts or Strach mould?
What is clear is that we need another ball control, distribution player, it is unfair for Macca be responsible for us all the time and besides teams can do what Ipswich did to him and mark him out of the game in the forward areas.
Ball winners are easier to come across all you need is someone pretty fit, willing to tackle and with reasonable distribution skills: I can't name a likely or desirable replacement though.
Despite the constent media bollocks about the scum the one criticism constantly made of them is their lack of a truly great passer like Macca or Strach.
They win by being great breaking away, passing and moving quickly, they dominate by retrieving the ball quickly not like Leeds when we won the championship through what was probably the best midfield combination I'm ever likely to worship again.
Leeds could pass a side out of the game and dominate through the midfield something the scum are YET TO DO even with scumtona.
Macca's having a bit of a break at the mo, he had some good games when Strach was in the side, Arse and Chelsea i think were impressive.
I have a dream: Strach stays at the club and becomes coach type thingy until Wilko leaves upon which he becomes manager.
The sale of Speed or Macca would be unforgivable by the board or Wilko should either of these two depart then the club would face a wholesale revolt.
I know Macca comes in for a lot of stick from certain members but he's by far the classiest midfielder in the country and a damm sight better than alot of the so called european geniuses.
Dunno enough about Tinkler, what about Sharp as well I'm all for the youth team comming into the premier league side so why not try them more this year.
Deane and Rodders up front again I dunno I'd like to see him try for a goal poacher or someone like Ferds.
If Deane been told to be target man and also lay the ball off for the likes of rodders and Speed then he's OK this season, but £3 mil for a STRIKER!!
I want him to score goals as well, i.e like Chappy. firsts and he'll come good.
As rocky probably would have given the chance.
Hmm, a spell in the reserves may give him his confidence back, that's if he scores.
The problem is who to replace him with, White in the center with Forrester or Rodders that may work, don't think Rodders and Forrester will go to well as there's no height up front then.
How's the fat frankie situation?
Wilko must do what is right for the team, not what is best to save face.
Chris
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 15:58:34 +0000
Subject: Ticket news
Hello and welcome to Leeds-United ticket line.
Latest news:
Sheffield Wednesday game on Saturday 12th Feb postponed due to Wednesday playing in the Coca-Cola Cup.
Next scheduled home game is on Feb 19th vs Livehpewl.
Villa home game still not re-arranged.
Our tickets for the Oxford game are in the post!
Yeesss!
Another triumph for the Fax Method!(from an original idea by Mark H; ta Mark, it never fails…).
Oxfohhd heah we come.
I can read and I can write but I can't tie a shoelace
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 19:58 GMT
Subject: Dorigo in swap deal
News:
There's talk on team talk today that Anthony Dorigo could be on the move to Sheff.
Wednesday this summer.
The deal is supposed to be in a part money and part swap deal bringing John Sheridan back to Elland Road.
Now my comments:
1)
Tell Trevor Francis to F!
O$$.
2)
I'm sure everyone will agree Dorigo is our most consistant defender.
3)
He will probably be the England regular in futher
4)
Sheridan is a great passer and a free taker.
He is however out injured at the mo and has no sign of returning.
He has also been out fairly regularly for the past 2 or 3 seasons.
My only thought is that, IF this is true, Wilko must have great hopes for Mark Humphries, the left back he bought from Aberdeen?? last summer.
Comments????
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 21:18:37 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: Dorigo in swap deal
My only thought is that, IF this is true, Wilko must have great hopes for Mark Humphries, the left back he bought from Aberdeen?? last summer.
Or for Kevin Sharp, who played left back at the end of last season, and did a good job of it, too.
I really hope there's nothing in the story, and I'd be surprised if there was.
You're right, Dorigo is definitely one of our most consistent defenders, and it's not as though we've been blessed with an abundance of them in recent years!
If there IS something to the story, it begs 2 questions:—
1)
If Wilko's so keen to have Shez in the team that he's willing to lose one of our best defenders, then why did he sell the man in the first place?
2)
If Wilko's interested in signing a gifted, passing midfielder, should Gary Mac start brushing up on his Italian?
Despite his strange dealings in the transfer market up to now, I'm still one of the pro-Wilko group, and I'm not going to start slagging him off on the basis of rumours about what he might conceivably do.
If the story did turn out to be true, though, I think he might be pushing his luck.
Steve (a sad git working late at night)
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 07:06:49 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: The Dream Team
On Tue, 18 Jan 1994, wrote:
There may be just one or two of us on the list who are still dreaming of Bremner, Giles & E Gray as a midfield trio.
Bremner V Batts — No contest Giles V Macca — No contest E Gray V Speed — No contest
Strach would have got in the ‘Super Leeds’ team IMO.
In place of Lorimer.
Roger G —(A very biased old fart)
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 07:15:26 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Good news
Rod Wallace is about to sign a new contract that will run to the end of 97/98.
(Or so it said in the T&A last night).
More good news:-There is a good chance he will be fit to play against Battyburn on Sunday.
Is there any point in opening a book on who our Howard will drop to make way for rodders.
I think Forrester is a long odds on shot, unless donkey refuses to give Wilko his weekly ‘portion’:-))
Roger G
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 09:22:33 +0000
Subject: Sheff Wed
Glurk.
Sent off for my tickets for the aforementioned match on Monday, only to find out on Tuesday that it's been postponed (effin Bright).
So, it may come to the point where I ahve to offload three tickets for the Kop (watch this space).
As for Oxford, I'm one of the lucky ones in Gav's splendid purchasing scam via the Fax.
I'll check with my flatmate tonight but in theory, if anyone is stuck for a place to stay I can offer you a floor in the front room (generous, huh?).
Breakfast will only stretch to a cup of coffee unless I get my arse in gear and go to Sainsbury's.
However, I will video Manc of the Day so we can see the 8–0 drubbing all over again.
Price: One pint.
If those odds are correct 200–1 for Notts County sounds good.
I'm putting a fiver on them in the hope that they do a West ham (last 2nd Div club to win it?).
One thousand smackers would come in very handy at the moment.
I'm also putting a fiver on the England to win the World Cup this year, and the USA to win the European Championships.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 94 09:47:18 GMT
Subject: fantasy(long)
Here are the selections we've all been waiting for.
Our shop at work has sold out of the Torygraph today, so we may have to wait for the latest standings.
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 09:53:17 +0000 (GMT)
I'm wasn't trying a bit of Strach Bashing earlier just its frustrating to see not be as good as he once was…though I still reckon last year he was watchinghimself to make sure he did not got injured.
Shez for Dorigo…
I dunno Wilko kicked him cos he was a pisshead…
I doubt that he'll have changed…he's got a dodgy injury too…
Francis only gave hima one year contract a bit back because of it.Sheff Wed bought Coleman from derby last night so hopefully there is no truth in it!!
There was a story last year that Francis wanted to swap Dorigo for Worthington+ 500,000 (ha!) so its probably francis, one of the most annoying managers around, mouthing off and dreaming!!
Wilko could be interested in a shez type player…
He did bid 1.2m for Dane Whitehouse in the summer.
Tim G
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 10:01:46 GMT
Subject: Re: Sheff Wed (& George Graham)
Ah, you too eh?
I sent off for mine last week — I'm sort of hoping that they won't have posted them yet so it may be worth ringing up to try and cancel.
If not, then I'll probably have one to flog too:-(
By the way, did anybody read that piece on George Graham in the Independant on Saturday?
I only mention it because he had the decency to say that Leeds currently have the best midfield in the country, and have had for 4–5 years.
He also said that Cuntona was a cry-baby.
Maybe The Arse ain't so bad after all:-)
Andy K.
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 10:23:49 GMT
Subject: Sheff Wed tickets
Just a quick post-script to my last message about tickets for the Sheff Wed game — I just managed to get through to the ticket office, and they said that all postal applications were sent back yesterday with a letter telling you that it's been postponed, and to re-apply if you still want tickets.
Andy K.
P.S. Have you heard that god-awful music they play whilst you're waiting to get through?
They could at least play a recording of Marching All Together or something.
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 10:54:33 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Sheff Wed (& George Graham)
I read in one of the other papers that GG also said (what many on this list have said before) Cunt'anas was great when things were going well but would let you down when they were not.
He stated that Cunt'anas let Leeds down in both the Rangers games.
At last, someone in the game who can see beyond the hype and is wiiling to say so.
Now that makes a refreshing change.
I am beginning to like GG, perhaps him and wilko are drinking buddies (then again).
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 94 11:08:15 GMT
Subject: various.
Dorigo.
As all players have their price.
What would Dorigo's be?
In cash terms, cash + Players from S.WED.
Bear in mind, that we could do with class in some areas.
+ Sharp coming through.
Walker, Palmer+Worthington, 3M, Sheridan + Worthington?
These are just thoughts.
Fantasy:
You were right about Bodin Mark.
I think all of us now are trying to work out how we can re-configure our teams to get 2 ARSE defenders.
Og course that may mean we're shutting the door after the horse has shot its bolt.
Deane:
The only player from the current squad who could replace him, without a complete change of team style is Noel Whelan.
Chappy was good for about 23 goals a season in all major competitions, With Deane's greater overall contribution we should expect 18 from him.
Under 15 in League and cups will be regarded as failure in my book.
Wilko:
I know we're pissed off with him over certain things, but even if we're unhappy about his recent decisions, no-one can deny that going from bottom of Div 2 to League champs in 3.5 years was remarkable.
Even if we always had ‘potential’.
His strategy was that he spent big, to give the club momentum, once he had got us to the top, he knew we were living beyond our means, but hoped that the structure he created would maintain our position.
He never misled the fans, he always maintained that good players would sometimes be sold, in order to balance the books, too improve the ground or to raise money to ‘balance’ the squad.
The youth situation has never been better, We're still in with a chance of getting into Europe and the club is fiancially viable.
Perhaps the biggest thing he has done though is regarding the image of the club.
10 years ago, announcing an allegiance to Leeds United was regarded as an admission to being demented, a psychopath, or both.
That stigma has now gone.
It is unbelievable what Wilko, mainly with Strach's assistance has achieved in this area.
As recently as 5 years ago, Leeds would never have been given the Makita tournament or chance to stage matches with a global profile.
The Leeds manager would never have been given air time on general football matters as he was always perceived as someone who was fronting an organisation that stood for the worst things in football.
Players would not come to Leeds because of it.
No-one can argue against or overstate what Sgt Wilko has done in this area, that's why I believe no-one around could have done a better job, and why he is the best man for the future too.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 19 Jan 1994 11:10:50 +0000
Subject: Sheff Wed tickets
Andy,
thanks for the info.
I think I'll try and go for the scouse game then (unless that is going to be postponed — would it depend on us getting through to the next round of the FA Cup?).
At this rate we may even have several games in hand.
It'd be nice to have 5 or so in hand with Scum only 13 points ahead, we win em all and take the league from under their noses.
Dreeeeaaaam, dream-dream-dream…
Stu