

From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 10:52:36 +0100
Subject: testing
ere we go with leeds united
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 11:03:38 +0100
Subject: Ups and downs
We've been through it all together
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 13:01:34 +0100
Subject: Errors, and subscribers so far
Hello,
There's 9 on the new list already, which leaves 12 to catch up:
I've already spotted some errors in the subscriber file, to do with the SET commands.
I got things a bit back to front.
Please accept my apologies, and put these lines in your file to replace the wrong ones; it should be obvious which lines.
The file has been altered, so new subscribers will be okay.
— Gavin
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 13:43 GMT
Subject: Leeds v Cork match report
As usual in the Irish papers games involving League of Ireland club don't get much coverage.
So from what I have read I have culled the following 
The general consensous is that Kelly playing in the right back birth, instead of his normal striker role, had a brilliant game outshining everyone.
O'Leary and Deane both made very significant impacts.
O'Leary has trained particually hard pre season and looked very sharp by all accounts.
That's as much as is could gather.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 14:20 GMT
Subject: Leeds vs Cork
I hope so…
Wilko must have fome faith in his ability…he seems to be trying to ‘break’ him in somehwat like Speed.
Of course you must also remember he is Irish…do they have media bias over there too;-))
Yes, I think a lot of the negative remarks flyring round about O'leary were unfounded.
Primarily he will offer a steadying hand to the back four, and organise them…something lacking from last season.
But apart from that, when he played for Arsenal last year he seemed as fit as ever, and the impetus of joining a new club would spark him on further.
Maybe he eats bananas and porridge for breakfast:-) Could be a very shrewd buy.
Wilko hasnt a problem with buying players…the only problem he has is with selling players too cheap.
Cantona being the more obvious example, but I cant remember one sale where I thought we got a decent price.
Even when Vinnie left — although we sold him for either what we bought him, or maybe 50 grand more, he had a very good season at Leeds, proved he could play a bit, he should have gone for more.
I think Wilko gets rid of players as soon as he can.
Any one else agree/disagree??
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 14:38 GMT
Subject: RE: Leeds vs Cork
On the subject of buying/selling players
We now have 5 first team centre backs
O'Leary
Fairclough
Newsome
Wetherall
Whyte
Surely too many to be kept on the payroll.
Are we getting rid of some of these or are we going to turn in another Arsenal?
(God I hope not)
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 14:42 GMT
Subject: Listserver
Yeah…
I can see it solving a few problems here.
One of which is receiving mail from you (I always get it via my postmaster!!).
I also have some problems sending out to some on the list.
Gavins site is OK though, and I can even mail direct (not via the uknet-relay!).
BTW are you using it yet??
Or still using your mail list until everyone is on?
I only ask as this message also had an error and came via the postmaster…
:-)
Ah if only!!
I did write to Leeds once in my youth (about 6!) asking for a trial.
In those days they were very good at Leeds, I got a nice letter back and was also sent some programmes and stuff.
That happened a few times!
I also got (more recently) a signed card saying ‘best wishes’ from Billy Bremner, when he was manager.
Thats a prized possession, as he was one of my heros, along with Mr Lorimer!
If you want some inside gossip, I reckon Rocastle will be first choice this year…in fact why dont we have a poll of what our best team would be? current players only etc.
Any formation.
Including subs??
I d be interested to see who else has my ideas of the best team…
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 14:45:15 BST
Subject: RE: Leeds vs Cork
Hope so.
Judging from last season's performance, Wilko should have bought a decent right-back & central defender.
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 14:52 GMT
Subject: My choice for the new team
My choice for the new look team as I posted before is as follows 
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 08:54:43–0500
Subject: Leeds
Someone mentioned about Leeds having 5 centre backs, I think we should keep 4 (excluding Whyte).
Also, voting for this season's 1st team seems interesting, but should we wait for a couple of weeks before all signings are done.
Have any of our transfer listed players left? i.e. Whyte, Shutt, Kerr, Chapman, Fairclough.
— Joo
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 14:55 GMT
Subject: RE: Leeds v Cork match report
Joo,
Sorry as much as I know about Kelly is he is an Irish U21 international I think he played in Dublin in friendly against Shelbourne about 2 years ago and looked quite OK.
As for the subs since there was no more info in the paper that's as much as I know?
I will however keep looking for more info.
Declan
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 14:55 GMT
Subject: Potential problems
Well they are not ‘problems’ as such.
1)
Is there anyway of not getting our own messages sent back to us?
Unless anyone wants theirs?
If it is just a consequence of the new system…no worries:-)
2)
Quoting messages; The only way I can see of ‘reply'ing to a message, but sending it to the listserver is by FORWARDing it.
If not Ill have to SEND and import the message I want to quote.
This is just an obvious (?) tip for anyone whos editor allows quoting.
Changing subject totally again;-) does anyone know if Leeds are having one of their open days this year?
I dont think theyve had one for a few years.
The last one I went to was at the beginning of the Div 2 championship year.
Jus' wonderin!
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:01 GMT
Subject: Central Defenders
You hope were selling some or play like Arsenal;-)))
I think we need to give the current players a chance this year.
Its not uncommon for whole defences to have a crap season.
As Ive said to Arif before (direct email), I think O'Leary could make a BIG difference — especially for Fairclough.
Kerslake didnt have an easy task last year, but a whole preseason should show us how good he is.
Also Kelly might have got himself a start!
Whyte is on the transfer list.
Newsome is also a covering right back, so I think we have about the right number…
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:03:57 BST
Subject: Re: Central Defenders
Tut, tut.
Selling some of course.
I beg to differ.
But only time will tell.
After all, all he did was string together a lot of old, well-known quotations.
— H. L. Mencken, on Shakespeare
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:08 GMT
Hey — great minds think alike!:-)
Mmm, maybe, but IF there is any more signings I doubt they will be MAJOR.
Wilko does like his pre-season to fit in new faces!
I do think its more viable when weve all subscribed to the listserver.
Hasnt Kerr signed for reading?? 75,000 I think.
Peanuts!
Chapman has refused personal terms with carlisle, but they are still hoping to sign him.
Fairclough isnt listed is he?
After last year Leeds might have to pay someone to take Whyte.
Shutt is worth 500,000 IMO
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:09:08 BST
Subject: Wilko's Sales
I have always thought that Wilko did quite well on the selling front.
Getting Shutt + cash for Bob Taylor was a master stroke, as was getting 500K for Baird, when Chapman cost only 400K.
But I was disappointed to see Hendrie and Sheridan go for roughly 500K each.
Especially as Wallace (1.8m) and McAllister (1M) were direct replacements, about a year afterwards.
I suppose that as Leeds (hopefully) only sell players they don't want.
Then it is difficult to get a lot/make a profit if you are selling to a smaller club.
I reckon Wilko could've screwed gobber Ferguson for 2 million for Cantona.
He was willing to pay twice that for David Hirst!!
By the way, what is the concensus as to how many spits per minute Alex Ferguson produces?
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 15:15:46 +0100
Subject: RE: Potential problems
Yep: send a message to  which says SET LEEDS-UNITED NOREPRO
(Not ‘set norepro leeds-united’ as the early versions of the automatic subscriber message said).
That sounds great.
I guess it will vary from person to person.
It may be a bit tiresome for some people, but I think it's better than getting loads of bounced mail bunging up everyone's mailbox (it does happen…)
Declan: your address does seem to give some people's mailers big problems.
Mark is one, as he's said, and  () is another — your list messages sent to him bounce back to me.
Your address is best stated as , but it keeps appearing as  (or worse).
Maybe you could sort out something with your systems people?
The following people still haven't subbed to the new list, so remember your  messages aren't getting through to them.
(I'll tell you when everyone's on).
Judging by the number of messages, everyone on the new list is having a great time already!
Gavin
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:15 GMT
Subject: kelly
His name is Gary Kelly, and he is one of the youngsters.
Leeds bought him 2 years ago I think…although I may be wrong — he wasnt on schoolboy forms or anything.
He was a sub quite a few times towards the end of our first season in Div One.
He came on for one match at least.
I think hes 19 now.
Hes on duty with England U18 side.
He came on as sub (for Tinkler) during Tuesdays 4–1 win over Holland U18 
Forrester also on duty with U18's.
Dont know about Strandli, but he has been on loan to Start (Norway 1st Div side — where leeds bought him from).
This was to sharpen him up and get him fitter apparently.
he scored a few goals over there.
Maybe Wilko didnt think he needed as much match fitness as the others in the squad??
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:27:42 BST
Subject: Re: Central Defenders
Was a great defender, Will do well as a ‘John McClelland’ for a year but getting old.
Has a lot to prove this term, after a poor season Has to move on from the promising youngster stage.
Don't think he'll make it Transfer Listed — speaks for itself I'm afraid I'm not too keen on any of them.
If pushed I'd perm 2 from Newsome, O'Leary, Fairclough.
but I'd never put any of them at Right Back again, Or buy somebody.
Incidentally Ray Wallace had a couple of decent games at Right Back at the end of the season.
Why was he never given a chance earlier in the season?
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:40 GMT
Subject: Selling
Mmmm…not sure y'know.
It looked VERY good to begin with (shutt/taylor), especially when Shutt scored a hat-trick on his debut vs Bournemouth (I was there:-)).
But then Talyor had a storming season (and remember he was young), and then again last year at West Brom.
I think Shutt is a very good player, and Im happy with that deal.
Baird…
Hed gone through a sticky patch but he was a good player, and was signing from the runaway leaders of the division.
Which reminds me of Bobby Davison…what did we get for him??
Exactly.
We never seem to have a very big sale, isnt the record still for Ian Snodin to Everton??
Its not fair…hes a cheating bastard.
He only gobs miniscule amounts at any time…and has a constant supply waiting, poised on his tongue.
Why is it always so white and frothy??
Makes you wonder just how he gets his players going.
Might explain McClairs mincy walk/run too.
Oh have you all noticed just how many Scum vidoes are out for last season??
They even managed to hijack ‘youve been framed’ on a Friday evening, and show 30 mins of boring crap filmed by Steve Bruce…and thats out on video too.
I bet he was doing the same the year before.
id love to have a copy of that one…especially after the Liverpool match (THE Liverpool match!!).
They even decked out a Cantona video in black and red to get the arseholes buying it, but apparently is was virtually all Leeds and france on it! hehehe
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:51:51 BST
Subject: Re: Central Defenders
I'm not sure I agree with writing off Wetherall.
He is still very young and has only played for one season (Wilko let him do a degree first, a 1st in chemisty).
He is much faster than Newsome and I think shows more promise.
The problem was when Newsome and Wetherall were playing together (e.g against Chelsea, backend of last season) they were both unexperienced.
I think they would do well if playing with O'leary or Faircoulgh.
Fairclough is still a very good central defender especially when he is man marking.
He is very quick and despite his ‘angelic’ looks is very hard.
He used to be the ‘Hard’ man at Spurs for example.
I would play O'Leary/ Fairclough with Newsome/Wetherall i.e one from each pair
Kerslake and Dorigo would be first choice full backs with Bowman, Sharp and Wallace (and Kelly) as second choices.
As long as they don't start playing central defenders as full backs it should be ok.
If they have to O'Leary could play right back (but not against a sppedy left winger like Giggs) or even as sweeper.
I would be happier if they could sign just one more quality defender especially if they could play equally well at right back and center half.
Its good being able to talk about Leeds rather than sending messages about new names.
Well done Gavin and Stuart!
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:52 GMT
Subject: SALES
Poor old fairclough!!
Am I the only one who still thinks hes alright;-)
Did he ever have it:-) No, hes very good depsite his complete lack of coordination.
He scored some wonderful goals but I wonder how much was due to the number of chances created.
Deane has it all and more, so SHOULD do better.
Who remembers (who can forget) the 6–1 thrashing of Sheff Wed??
I still have vivid memories of Chappy bursting between two defenders and cracking a shot against the bar.
The first and only time Ive seen him ‘Burst’.
made me laugh (especially as I was happy at the time anyway:-)
Is he?(worth a bob or two?)
I think hes more use in the squad for the money wed get for him.
Still a good player and can score goals.
A little unfair.
Hes had several really good runs — stopped by injury.
The last lay off (remember after being selected for England) shook him up a bit and he took time to get his confidence back, but again towards the end of the season was getting back to his best.
Maybe he can only perform on nice pitches (at the beginning and end of a season??) and also remember what sort of service hed get from chappy!!
Hows the pub going Norm?
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 15:57:57 +0100
Subject: Frog vid
That's right, I've seen it.
If anyone out there still has any interest in the Treacherous Frog, it's worth a look cos it's got loads of Leeds stuff on it, especially stuff about winning the championship.
Should choke the Manc hordes who've coughed up for it.
Other highlights include the T.F.
calling French coach Henri Michel a shit bag, several outrageously filthy tackles, and some shirt-throwing tantrums.
The best Manchester bit is when he talks about still being with his wife — he looks dead guilty and starts feeling his nose in a very shifty manner indeed.
Gavin
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 15:59:29 BST
Subject: Re: Central Defenders
Sorry, don't agree.
His mistakes usually make Lukic pick the ball out of the net.
Couldn't agree more.
Let's start a petition.
Do you think Ruddock would have been a good buy?
Honesty pays, but it doesn't seem to pay enough to suit some people.
— F. M. Hubbard
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 16:04 GMT
Subject: What the F! do you think the subject is
Welcome back to the list Mark.
I believe the test was a wash out.
Pity that as you would end up getting hammered again.
Declan.
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 93 16:32 GMT
Subject: Fairclough (bless his soul)
hehehe!!
Sh*t, the secrets out Chris!
No, Im used to defending Fairclough, my girlfriend was slagging him off last season.
Its just difficult to explain how the defence works as a team, and one weak link can badly affect the rests confidence.
Football is ALL confidence.
Last year we had Whyte having a mare of a season, then Lukic doing it after his spectacular ‘backward’ punch.
fairclough has always been a good defender (ex England U21), but hes excellent when given a job, like marking Tony Daley out of the game.
But I know you have never really rated him that highly.
Mind you some people do like different types of defender.
You sound more like a Noel Blake man!
Am I right??:-)
From:
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 15:35:59 +0000
Subject: Sales Talk
If anyone is to go it should be Whyte and Fairclough, the two defenders who contributed so much to Leeds downfall in 1992–3.
Their nerve is gone.
Whether anyone will buy is another matter.
Others who should be sold are—
Chapman (too old and frankly has lost what it takes) Hodge (we don't need any more midfielders and he is still worth a bob or two) Rod Wallace (unless he bucks his ideas up)
The point made about Leeds losing out when selling is all too poignant.
Since the dark days of the eighties we have consistently sold for less than players were worth.
Sheridan, Seaman, Linighan, Sellars (twice!), all went for paltry sums and were good buys.
On the plus side we sold and bought Ian Baird twice and overall made a healthy profit of over half a million.
And he's crap.
Tim
Norman Hunter
Date: Thu, 22 Jul 1993 16:39 GMT
Subject: RE: Defence
Mark, I have being saying this for ages.
I posted it here earlier on in the summer.
I think Scales is the most under rated center half in England.
I reckon that give a good team he could turn in (God forbid) an England player.
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 23 Jul 93 16:02 GMT
Subject: England U18 European Chmp's
The 3rd (and final) group match was played last night.
It was effectively a semi final as the two group leaders go straight to the final, and it was between England and Spain all the way.
Previous results (including a late penalty to give france a consolation goal in Spains last match) meant England had the better goal diff, and could progress with a draw.
I must confess I didnt see much of the first 60 mins (football training!).
On my return I discovered the score was 1–0 to England, and later found out the goal was scored by Mark Tinkler!
The starting line-up only included Tinkler and Sharp, Forrester again left on the bench.
Gallan (his replacement) again played crap.
From what I saw Tinkler again looked like a man amongst the boys, with frequent excellent tackles, good passing and good control.
Spain had one man sent off just before I got in.
With 10 men they managed to score a goal, but then England scored 2 more quick goals.
At this point Spain had another player sent off, and England scored a fourth goal (a hat-trick for Fowler — a Liverpool player).
All his goals were well enough taken, but he seemed to have the David Platt ‘ball magnetism in a goal scoring position’ phenomena.
Forrester eventually got on the pitch with about 5 minutes left, and indeed Fowler was attempting to put him through when the ball richoched back to him, hit him in the stomach and sat up in a ‘kick me please’ type fashion, which he did, and scored.
Forrester was on the pitch for about 5 mins, looked fit/fresh/frisky.
Took up some good positions, had one half chance which the keeper did well to hold, and then chased after a long ball, outrun 2 defenders, hit it first time from 25 yards or so — straight into the bottom right corner, well the keeper got a slight touch which lifted it a bit higher but you get the idea.
Class finish which should keep the crap Gallon off the pitch.
(Do you get the idea I dont like Gallon!!).
So, there it is.
England won 5–1 to back up their 2–0 and 4–1 victories.
They now face Turkey, who are the holders of the trophy at the City Ground on Sunday, either 2pm or 4 pm (cant remember!).
Watch it if you can.
Our boys do look good, even when Whelan and Bowman have come on they look good (Whelan especially).
‘The future's so bright I gotta wear shades’ as they say.
:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 23 Jul 93 16:35 GMT
Subject: youngsters
It just occurred to me that not everyone got a chance to see the FA Youth Cup Final!
Boy, did you guys/gals miss something special:-)
…all the hype about busby's babes — fergursons fledgelings — the best theyd seen, better than busbys babes etc etc etc etc (yawn!).
We went out, 2–0 at Old trafford, in front of 30,000 — which was their only consolation…they all thought theyd see us get thrashed.
The second leg at Elland Rd — 32,000 plus, we won 2–1 (their goal was a dubious penalty!)…
…and the Forrester overhead (bicycle) kick…oh so sweet maaaan!!
There was LOTS of hype before the final was played, funnily enough hardly any reports when Leeds won!!
<sigh> Almost made up for the crap season:-)
From:
Date: Mon, 26 Jul 1993 14:11:39 +0100
Subject: Premier Cards
I haven't read anything official from Elland Road for the past few months, so I'm presuming that this season coming we won't need premier cards to go to away games.
Is this true?
What sort of ‘membership’(if any) is on offer instead, and is it important to have?
And does anyone else away from Leeds have ridiculous problems getting hold of tickets via the Ticket Office?
I've spent hours, literally, dialling and re-dialling the place only to get the engaged tone every time.
Maybe it's a ploy to get back at the people TSB calls ‘Rich Bastards’ for having credit cards.
Gavin
From:
Date: Mon, 26 Jul 93 14:30:39 BST
Subject: Fixtures Corrections
I've just received the fixture list from Elland Rd (yellow card this year).
Comparing it to the fixtures that were recently posted on rec.sport.soccer, the corrections are as follows:—
Nothing cures insomnia like the realization that it's time to get up.
From:
Date: Tue, 27 Jul 1993 08:15:17 +0000
Subject: Whiter Than White
No there is no Premier Card anymore.
The FA obviously have taken note of Leeds fans' good behaviour despite some horrible recent results.
Instead the club encourage people to join the membership scheme, which gives priority when buying tickets (and gets you into the West Stand), and with which you may be able to buy tickets at away grounds on the day.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 27 Jul 1993 10:35:32 +0000
Subject: Goole v Leeds
Last night Goole Town entertained Leeds.
Goole?
Where?
Goole is just down the road from where I live.
Its about 30 miles from Leeds.
Well, we missed the first half but saw the second.
Leeds fielded a team of youngsters.
Most of them only looked about 15 years old.
Noel Whelan was playing and showed some really good skills.
Leeds played good football, nearly always playing it from the back.
Can't remember the goalie kicking it.
It was a pretty entertaining match although there was only a couple of hundred people there.
There are loads of Leed supporters in Goole but they seemed to be more i interested in the young kids chucking themselves in the water jump on the running track which was right by the pitch!
Never mind, also, they were wearing last year's all yellow kit.
From:
Date: Tue, 27 Jul 1993 16:36 GMT
Subject: At last LOI v Leeds Match Report
Match Report
The two LOI goals were scored by two players from my local team Bohs.
Their names for the record Dave Tilson and Pat Fenlon.
Man of the Match was Dave Tilson (from Bohs) who out ran Strachan and just about everyone else on the park.
Well folks this was not a classic in fact the first 40 minutes of the first half was utterly crap.
Leeds were wearing their new away kit.
Hmmmm…
Its not actually as bad as it seems.
The jersey is yellow and blue vertical stipes.
The knick's are yellow and the socks yellow bodies with a blue rim around the top.
The crest is actually smaller than last years Admiral due to some new UEFA/FIFA regulation.
The most notable incident in the first half from a Leeds point of view was when Strachan placed a beautiful 40 yard cross field pass through the LOI defence onto the on running Wallace.
Wallace with only the keeper to beat (again the BOHS keeper Henderson) fluffed it.
He actully fell over the ball.
Lets hope it's the last one of those type of chances that he missed this season.
Batty was having a serious confrontation with Alan Byrne in midfield Byrne won the first half.
The half ended with a long lob from the LOI midfield and on to it runs Dave Tilson with a beautiful header which left Beeney stranded.
Who was to blame?
Wetherall/Newsome is the answer.
The second half started on a much brighter note with Shutt coming on after about 10 mins.
This added a bit of life to the Leeds attack.
Tobin was completely out of it and Wallace disappeared after the first 10 minutes.
Shutt's goal was exactally what Leeds deserved as Strachan/Mc Allister were just about running midfield.
Speed had dropped back and Wallace moved upwards in the second half.
Shutt got the ball about 15 yards out and hammered it low into the right corner (Nice goal Carl).
That started Leeds up.
They had a goal dissallowed for offside about 10 minutes later.
With 15 mins left Strachan put a cross across the box and Speed jumped highest to score, it was a deserved lead.
With 5 minutes to go Tilson who had completely knackered Strachan on the wing crossed a beautiful ball to Pat Fenlon who beat both Newsome and Wetherall in the air even though he is about 5'7’.
My brother reckons it was Beeney's fault for not coming off his line but I reckon it was the two centre halfs again.
That was it, a fairish result.
Comment on the game player by player with a rating out of 10.
Beeney: Looked solid in the air.
His kick out's were terrible though.
Seemed to be able to organise his back line very well.
Rating: 7
Dorigo: Looked as classy as ever made some wonderfull runs along the wing was never in trouble.
Rating: 8
Wetherall/Newsome: I class these both together as they both looked suspect.
Neither has the commanding influence in the air that guys of their size should have.
Whetherall was slightly better than Newsome though.
Maybe the Fairclough/O'Leary combination is the best available at the moment.
Hopefully Wilko is only experimenting as if this is our lineup for the season to put it mildly we're fucked.
Rating: 5 for Newsome and 6 for Wetherall.
Kelly: He had a great game.
Seemed to love going forward and was quick enough to get back when needed.
A bit like Dorigo ie he can cross a good ball when necessary.
Was only beaten once by Tilson and given the game Tillo was having that is no mean feat.
Rating: 8.
Speed: Had a quiet enough game including the goal.
Does not look quite fit yet.
Rating: 7
Mc Allister: Ran the midfield for long periods of the game but seemed to lose interest at others.
Rating: 7
Batty: was basically Batty.
Rating 7
Strachan: Showed some lovely touches but seemed to be just that bit too slow.
As I said Tillo ran him ragged at some stages in the game.
Rating: 6
Wallace: Had a terrible game.
Every time he tried to pass a player he tripped over the ball or just lost it.
Rating: 5
Tobin: I had never heard of this guy.
Looked far too small to play with Wallace up front.
He was replaced early in the second half by Shutt.
Rating: 6ish
Shutt: was as committed as ever.
Played very well when introduced and seemed to enjoy himself.
Rating: 7
To sum up: The centre of defence was as dodgy as ever.
Strachan lacked pace and should have been replaced by Rocky.
We need to play a lot better over the next season or else.
The most dissapointing thing about the game was the fact that O'Leary didn't get a game he would have got some reception.
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 28 Jul 1993 09:58:58 +0000
Subject: Wilko
Here are some quotes from Howard courtesy of the Press Association.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson claims he received hate mail abuse from fans during last season's disastrous championship defence.
Leeds failed to recapture the form which swept them to the title in 1991–92 and, according to national newspaper reports, Wilkinson has had to endure a torrent of abuse.
Wilkinson is reported by today's Daily Mirror as saying: ‘<I get terribl> letters — some of which are obscene
‘Some are done on word processors and faxed through to me on company-headed newspaper.
‘The letters say ‘you should have sold him, him and him and bought him, him and him’.
These people think it is like selling ashtrays.
Believe me, it is not that simple.’
However, Wilkinson insists Leeds can be champions again this season, saying: ‘People ask me if we are going to win the championship again and I say we are.
But our target really has to be Europe.
If we make that our aim we will be there or thereabouts.
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 93 08:56:09 BST
Subject: Premier Cards/away games
Excuse me for needing this spelt out, but does this mean that Leeds fans can now just pay at the door to stand at away games.
(Unless the home club decide to make it an all ticket match of course)?
Also, what's the situation with home games?
Will they be mainly all-ticket?
Is there any standing space left?
To get concessions for juniors do they have to be members and get tickets in advance?
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 93 11:00 GMT
Subject: RE: Leeds v LOI match report
Okay Ill bite;-)
Well, all I would say is that youca nt really be too critical of players in what is only their second match.
Apart from the obvious fitness/stamina and motivation factor, you also have a mixed side.
Remember last year when Speed played sweeper all preseason?!?
The main purpose is to get all the squad match fit…good performances are very much bonuses.
Also, apparently there was some kind of bug which the whole party got to some degree…which was why Deane was ruled out completely.
I think Wilko also lays most of the responsibility for the 2 goals with Beeny…without actually seeing the goals its hard to comment.
Oh, while Im here just like to mention the new kit.
Personally I LOVE getting the new kit…
As I play football, I do have a practical use for the shorts and socks if I get them.
Apart from identifying me as a Leeds supporter, the quality is normally a LOT better than your average socks etc, I have socks which I still wear going back 6–7 years, and they still feel like socks!
As for the shirts, I not only dont think theres anything wrong with wearing football shirts…in many cases its a bloody great help.
All of my local contacts for people who are willing to travel up to Leeds etc, came as a result of either me, or them wearing a Leeds shirt.
I wear my shirt with pride:-)
I just got the new shirts.
Aside from the ‘artistic’ merit, which is very much subjective, the material this year feels nice and light and smooth!
Sounds like egg custard;-) It occurred to me that the FEEL of a kit can have an influence directly on the players.
Last years kit had a funny, heavy sort of feel to it…and wasnt very comfortable to wear…especially running around for 90 mins.
You may laugh at this rvolutionary theory BUT I speak from experience.
Now I think back our sunday sides run of excellent results coincides with our new shirts which are nice ‘n silky.
They make you feel nice and cool and comfortable.
Classy in fact!
This kit has a classy FEEL to it.
Looks like everything is falling into place…
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 93 11:52 GMT
Subject: RE: Mark's fax
0532 706560 As I said this is the general Leeds Utd fax number (the same one that transfers are done on!:-) So mark any fax for the relevant office (ticket office, souvenir shop etc etc)
Yeah, but it is a LITTLE dodgy, you sometimes get announcements over the speaker during the match where someone whos parked in that area is asked to move their car!
If you go up Elland Rd (from that roundabout), you will find the official Leeds car/coach park on the left…its well hidden, and is basically a big field…you normally get a police officer standing just outside it.
It costs a quid.
Mmm, smooth on the outside, but dont you think it was sort of heavy and sweaty??
Anyhow, get the new kit…its gorgeous!!
Silky smooth to wear!
I ahve the away top on now:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 93 12:13 GMT
I have my footie boots on aswell (and the shinpads come in useful for the tea breaks) hehehe.
No, I wear what I want.
Most of the summer I wear shorts to work etc.
My whole life is casual wear so I spose I get more ‘mileage’ out of the Leeds kit than yer average user!
Definately cool to wear Leeds stuff down here in West London (Chelsea is most local big side).
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 1993 11:33:59–0500
Subject: Fans team
First of all, I like to thank everyone who participated in the team selection.
A total of 11 entries were received.
Declan, Will you send this to Sgt Wilko?
Here are the results:
NOTES:
Rocastle starts ahead of Strachan.
Wallace joins Deane in attack.
Fairclough gets to partner O'Leary in the middle of defence.
Dorigo, Batty, and Speed got everyone's votes.
Lukic, McAllister, and Deane each receive 10 votes
Kerslake, O'Leary, Rocastle are also favorites to start.
Top choices to be on the bench: Strachan, Forrester, Newsome, Weatherall, Beeney.
The fans ‘ideal team’ for 1993–94 is:
PS.
I think its time Wilko give some youngsters get a run of games this season.
Forrester, Tinkler, Whelan, Kelly, Sharp all seem ready to step in when other players are off-form.
Prime example is Forrester for Wallace.
Cheers,
—Joo
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 93 17:45:52 BST
Subject: Centre Half
It appears that centre-backs are being bought and sold like crazy, but Leeds can't get one.
Ruddock, Walker, Kernaghan have all changed clubs lately.
My first choice of defenders from what we've got are O'Leary and Fairclough.
I'm worried that niether is particularly tall, and have always felt that in the League you need one monster and one player with a bit of class and speed.
If the monster can play and/or the class player is big and good in the air, that is a bonus.
Of course a real class defender can do all the thinking and playing to leave the big man to just climb all over the opposing centre-forward.
My feeling is that Leeds are struggling to find a traditional centre-half, and until they do, will look in trouble whenever the ball is in their penalty box.
Lukic hardly inspires confidence either in such situations.
So who might be available to fill this role:
Ruddock — recently gone to Liverpool.
Kernaghan — Just gone to Blackburn.
Craig Levein of Hearts — not sure how big he is, but he looks steady.
Warhurst — too expensive.
Mowbray?— Not Good Enough Probably
Eric Young?— ditto
Dave Watson (Everton)?— Doubt He'd leave, Must be getting on.
Paul Elliot — Injured
Keith Curle — Over-rated — Doubt he'd leave Man City.
John Scales — I agree with Declan, he's the man.
Any other offers?
There must be someone to fit the bill in the League of Ireland Declan?
From:
Date: Thu, 29 Jul 1993 18:03 GMT
Subject: RE: Centre Half
Looking at your selections of centre halves Kevin,
Warhurst is not only too expensive I never rated him.
Elliot is supposed to be fit again is he not.
What about this 6 foot 5 guy that we're supposed to be looking at from Rangers.
His name completly eludes me at the moment.
Also there are a number of good centre halfs in the LOI.
The prime example of what your looking for ie tallish, good in the air and commanding is Paul Whelan (younger brother of Ronnie Whelan form Liverpool (still the best midfielder in England)).
Paul came on in the second half of the game in Dublin last week and played well.
He is very powerful in the air and seems to read the game quiet well.
The only problem is that he is the captain of Bohs so there would need to be lots of dosh on the table before I'd allow him to move.
Finally, Thanks to Joo for organising the team selection.
Maybe one of you good bodies over the water would fax this to Elland Road with a short message stating who we are and what we want:-))
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 30 Jul 1993 11:23:57 +0100
Subject: Membership 93–94
I just got the guff from Elland Road about the membership which replaces the premier card for the coming season.
It costs 12 quid, and amongst the more important things you get for that are
voucher booklet to get tickets for each match with discount for home matches (doesn't say how much tho)
priority for tickets when numbers are limited
free into home reserve matches
accidient insurance for travel to home & away games
year book
10% discount on stuff in the shop (not shirts and the stuff you really want to buy, if last season is anything to go by — it'll probably be Cantona keyrings and suchlike)
Gavin
From:
Date: Fri, 30 Jul 1993 11:44:12 +0100
Subject: List Update
The list's been on the listserv for over a week now, and everything seems to be going just fine (with the exception of Declan's wacky address:-)
We've got 33 people, which is well up on the the total from the old list.
Most of us are UK&Ireland based, but there's a good few from the US, and others in Switzerland, Denmark, Canada, Germany, and (I think) Israel, as well as a few in exotic-looking places I can't identify.
We even have someone from Bradford.
I've also had a query from a Sheffield Wednesday fan asking if they could set up a list here too (the answer was no!)
However, there are some people who were on the old set up who aren't yet on the new set up; addresses below.
If you've had any personal contact with these people you might like to give them a nudge.
Cheers, Gav.
From:
Date: Fri, 30 Jul 93 11:52 GMT
Subject: Crocks
I envy you…both drinking guinness and missing milwall play!!:-) I love Guinness.
Especially freshly drawn…mmmm silky smooth!!
What do you reckon of the bottled stuff?
I cant believe they even bother with it its absolutely disgusting.
The special canned stuff is a lot better…but nothing beats a freshly drawn pint (or seven)
Shouldnt that be Whelan Sr?
Well, I think he was good player — but playing in that Liverpool side wasnt difficult, and hes not really played for any other side so its hard to tell exactly how good he is.
I agree he plays well enough for Eire tho.
What do you reckon Mr O'Leary's international prospects are? how is he rated over there?
Last time i saw him play (Fa Cup final??)
I was quite impressed…
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 30 Jul 93 11:58 GMT
Subject: Membership
This sounds interesting!
Did they have oneof these for last year?
What are they like?
Yep, complete load of crap…out of order they even say it…its been the same ever since the premier card was first introduced.
Well, this voucher scheme sounds like it could be worth the 12 quid alone…any chance you could fax me the application form Gavin?
No mention of away fixtures at all??
Thanks…my fax number here is 081 943 4995 (If you can do it!)
Mark
From:
Date: Sat, 31 Jul 93 10:43:20 BST
Subject: membership
Well the list has certainly took off over the last few days.
I've been away for a week and I had about 70 messgaes to read.
I got my membership booklet today (at first I though they had sent me a season ticket by mistake).
It has vouchers for every game.
I don't know how much the discount is for each game, or wether you have to go to a special members area which probably costs more than without vouchers anyway.
I rang up the ticket office but just got a recorded message.
Tickets for West Ham are on sale on monday (2rd).
I think we are playing Hibs tommorrow at Elland road, I'm going to try to go.
BTW they said that season tickets were on sale and that Kop tickets cost 180, surely they can't have any of these left?
There was no details on the vouchers as to how much they are worth just a note saying that vouchers must be redeemed before 12 on the matchday.
I think you are meant to post the voucher with your ticket application, I don't know if you can use them over the phone.
Anyway I'll try to sort this out and let everyone know.
They look good value for 12 quid though.
I'm suprised at the lack of SCUM bashing on the server.
Shall I send a letter to the square ball and the program desk to announce our group?
I'm off for a few days again so i'll be a bit quiet.
Perhaps some of us could meet at the West Ham match.
Any ideas?(e.g red carnations in our button holes to identify us, I don't think wearing a leeds top would be successful!)