

From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 09:40:43 GMT
Subject: Saturday /Batty /Rocky
Another barnstormer of a game I here (3–3).
All the goals looked pretty good to me.
That git Waddle's free-kick was unstoppable!!
Wilko's comment when asked if there's anything he can do as a manager to counteract that sort of thing was, ‘shoot him’!
Good points: We can still score goals; Rocky's playing well (resurgent was the word I heard used on R5)
Bad points: We still can't defend; Dean still can't score.
As far as defence goes…
I have a suspicion that when DOL returns things will improve quite significantly.
As far as Brian Deane goes…wait and see I suppose!!
I'm a bit less pissed off about selling Batty now since a) we didn't loose on Saturday; b) Rocky played well (I bet he's been given a run in the 1st team and a confidence boost with it); c) I heard Batty saying things like ‘he didn't have to sell the club (rovers) to me’, with no hint of remorse at leaving Leeds.
I still wish him all the best though.
I'm sure he's done his England career a load of good…he'll be concidered a good footballer now he's at Rovers (even though he'll be doing eaxctly what he was at Leeds!!!!
So, let's get Hoddle's men next!!!!
glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 01 Nov 1993 10:02:18 +0000
Subject: Saturday
It was a hell of a match, one of the best I've seen in a long while (live that is).
Hillsborough is a great stadium to be in when it's almost full and you've got a barnstorming derby to watch.
Wed went 1 up in the space of a couple of minutes.
Waddle played a lovely through ball to bright I think, who was then hacked down.
Waddle then scored an unstoppable free-kick.
From then on Leeds showed some good attacking play but thankfully Bright is a donkey who gets caught off-side alot or we'd have been in trouble (Newsome and wetherall look dodgy to say the least).
When we equalised I thought we would begin to walk it but almost immediately (it seemed) Wednesday were back in front.
Second half began with Leeds on full throttle.
A through ball from Rocastle (I think) caught Wednesday napping and Wallace raced through (although the ball bobbled a bit) to slot home.
The crowd around reckoned he was off-side (guess where we had to sit) but I don't think he was.
Rocastle continued to play brilliantly and it was he who crossed the ball in for the third.
We then began to go to sleep a bit and wednesday came back to make it 3 all.
The last 20 minutes or so were frantic but great to watch.
It could have gone either way but a draw really was the only fair result.
The ‘protest’ over Batty was in the form of a few banners ‘The crown jewel's gone, now get rid of the silver’, ‘Silver — 100% Leeds or 100% greed?’and a few chants of ‘Batty’(the Wednesday replied with ‘Where's your batty gone?’).
But the team played well (apart from the dodgy defence).
Rocky did what was asked, but McAllister was incredible.
He never stopped running, played some great through balls, tackled hard, and kept the team going.
I think the commitment shown by the players kept the crowd happy and off the Batty subject.
Speed was a bit of a non event (although he did score a goal!) and Deane lumbered about a bit, but was strong when he got the ball.
It was an encouraging performance showing we can come back when it counts (unlike last year).
A draw at Wednesday isn't a bad result but with the scum winning it may be academic.
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 10:06:21 GMT
Subject: Silver
Just a couple of points first:
a)
This is my first message on this mailing list.
b)
OK, I have the name Silver, but no relation (although I do come from Leeds)
I was in Leeds over the weekend and had a chance to see a couple of copies of the Yorkshire Evening Post.
They had a phone poll last week, the question being ‘do you think it was right to sell Batty’.
The results showed something like 94% saying ‘no’.
Also in Saturdays edition (front page), Silver says we sold him cos we are 6m in debt, apparently LUFC owe Silver 1m.
They need the cash to pay off debt and also ground improvements like seating the kop next summer.
Macca said in his column, that nobody knew about the deal until it was all but completed and said he was sure everyone at Leeds and the supporters would wish him great success at Blackburn.
Still looks like Wilko's going soon…
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 10:09 GMT
Subject: Debts…and Batty
Silver revealed over the weekend Leeds' financial situation.
As noone has posted or commented on it I will in case some of you didnt hear it.
Apparently Leeds WERE 6Million in debt to the bank.
This was before the Batty sale…but Im not sure if it was before all the other sales this season.
It probably was, but they wont say that to make the Batty sale seem more justified.
Anyway, the bank WERENT exerting any pressure…despite some things said on TV over the weekend…hence Silvers comments just after the announcement of the sale, that the money would ensure we have some flexibilty should we need to enter the transfer market again.
Ie its quite OK for us to be 6million in debt, but no more…by getting the money from Batty we keep the bankers happy in the short/medium term — and also would de able to get money should we need it again.
As for Battys comments.
This whole saga ruins any faith you had in the game.
You know that new players always make out that their new club is the one for them etc etc.
Sometimes you wish that it was genuine.
For batty to start spouting it makes you wonder.
The bloke has lost all respect from me — and fuck knows have I stood up for him in the past.
It wouldnt hurt to say ‘Yes I m sory to leave Leeds and the supporters behind…but the club needed the money and if I had to join another club it would be Blackburn (and onto the usual bullshit)’ Fuck me even Cantona said something nice about us.
Nice to see Speeds' reaction when he scored on saturday.
Not only did he look very pleased, but he did the ‘show the shirt’ routine to the crowd…as if to say — look boys, Im a Leeds Utd player — and proud of it.
I hope Batty was watching.
Also note who is the first player to congratulate any scorer — and look extremely chuffed…
Macca
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 1993 10:16:49 +0000
Subject: Just Talk
Batty won't ever get a serious run in an England shirt until he starts scoring goals in the league.
He is a good midfielder but without the goals he'll never really be considered a great player.
We miss him mainly 'cos he was the fans representative in the team.
2.75 was a good price, he is their second most expensive signing (to Shearer), not bad for a midfielder with only 4 goals in 8 years.
The Wednesday result shouldn't be considered in too bad a light.
OK we leaked the goals but they were at home, they had their crowd behind them, and they have some top players now, despite their poor form.
This is probably the best ever Wednesday side.
Likewise the leaking of 3 goals vs Bankburn — Shearer is a goal machine — 3.75 million for him was a bargain.
He could have destroyed Tottenham except for their world class goalie who is shaping up for a good World Cup eh Halvard?
Batty was OK for them, nothing sensational, I reckon he'll be his anonymous England self without the Leeds fans to inspire him.
I think Wilko's preference for Deano isn't unfounded, given that he's rattled the post often enough despite not scoring.
He'll come right soon enough.
Plus he's English, which is very important in European games when the UEFA ruling prevents you from fielding more than a couple of non-nationals.
The scum are having severe problems with that right now.
The league isn't won yet, the media are going to make things harder for the scum by saying it is.
An early European exit would set them tottering…
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 10:54:29 GMT
Subject: Help with Scum
I expect we've all had winging, ‘supporters’ of the Scum baiting us, especially recently.
I had one pissing me off all weekend.
My ‘put downs’ and arguments for the Scum being scum, although indeniably true are getting a bit thin.
I wondered if anybody out there could help enhance my armoury?
There of course are the obvious ones:—
no scum fans in manchester
have you ever been to watch them (shit if they have)
rich club, not much success (getting a bit thin)
beat you two seasons ago
TURKEY (this hopefully will be the way forward!)
Cheers, Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 1993 11:00:35 +0000
Subject: Why?
Because
Man U are vulnerable from many angles:
Took them 26 years to win the title.
During that time we won it 3 times despite being in the second division for half that time.
Manchester — not an olympic city.
Hah!
George Best was/is a drunken waste of space who wasn't fit to tie Eddie Gray's shoelaces.
The black kit is horrible and an insult to football
They are the footballing representatives of satan — c.f. black kit, also devil in their club badge, nickname Red Devils.
Lancashire is their home county — nuff said.
All the lowlife at my school (Gladstone Road Primary, Scarborough) were Man U, while the hard+groovey were Leeds — my original reason for following Leeds:-)
The evil evil hardcore of scum supporters who caused aggro all over Europe and the UK in the seventies and eighties, under the smokescreen of media adoration.
Unlike Leeds' evil hardcore who had no such media approval.
Totally unfair.
All the snotty spotty little nerds who support them, who would go weak at the knees and soil themselves if they ever ever went to see MUFC and met the abovementioned evil evil types.
The way the media suck up to them all the time.
I mean, when we lost to Sunderland in the 73 FA Cup, they've never let up about it since, but noone mentions MUFC losing to second division Sheff Wednesday in the 1991 League Cup!
Radio 5 and Manchester Of The Day may as well move their studios to Old Trafford.
Constantly rely on Leeds rejects — Jimmy Greenhoff, McQueen, Jordan, Irwin, and now Cantona.
Won the league above us in 1965 by 0.00001 of a goal difference and yet criticise our 1992 title when we won it by several clear points.
Man United's owners the Edwards family made his fortune flogging rotten meat to school kitchens.
Will this do?
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 11:20 GMT
Oh…
I could hold my own against ANY scum supporter.
Do you want one-liners or just topics of converstion??
a few suggestions…
1)
Hype.
They are all hype, and unluckily for them…the players are believing it.
Its gonna be one hefty fall.
2)
Giggs.
How can he be this world class player…when he is a winger but cant even cross the ball??
When his bollocks drop hell slow down just like sharpe did.
All sharpe does these days is score a few goals…he cant beat players for pace down the line anymore.
3)
Hughes.
Haircut
4)
Ince.
Haircut.
Forehead.
5)
Crappy defence with NO cover.
Can you believe that pallister missed his first game in 70 matches on saturday??
How many goals have they been leaking recently…and against who?
6)
Being regularly outplayed these days.
Everton for 80mins.
Galatasaray for 90mins.
QPR for at least 45 mins.
7)
Not actually being in Manchester (hence no fans from manchester).
All they get is sad sheep for fans…who just follow the crowd — try and be uncontroversial.
EVERY man utd fan I know in london fits this description — even those from up north.
8)
we can all see the OTT hype now for them (fuck me Liverpool won the league nearly every year for 15 years…but the hype just didnt compare with what we are getting now), so whats to say all this busby babes crap wasnt exactly the same?
9)
the age of the side (in crucial positions).
10)
Their famous away colours…traditional black/blue and orange.
Just the club cashing in with the sad sheep crawling out of the woodwork everywhere.
There ya go Mark, that should give you enough ammo for a good few months yet:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 1993 13:45:28 +0000
Subject: Man U: George Pissed speaks out
their sad ex-star George Best:
Telly bosses have scrapped a This Is Your Life tribute to George Best — because of his drunken tirade at old club Manchester United.
The special, which had taken six months to plan, was axed after Best called United ‘f***ing crap’ and his former team-mate Bobby Charlton ‘a miserable bastard’.
On the page opposite there is a cartoon of Pissed dressed up in a suit lying face down in the gutter clutching a bottle of lager, and Mickey Aspel coming out from under a manhole cover saying ‘George Best!
This Is Your Life!’
Plenty of ammo there for those of you battling against the red tide.
Gav
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 15:00:14 +0100
Subject: Re: Frank going…
more whining from the norwegian wood:(OK — i promise that this is my last posting about Frank before/if he leaves)
work permit?— that's bull: Pedersen (joining Oldham), Bohinen (Forest) and Nilsen (Sheff Utd) are all leaving norway for england in these days and Nilsen is just as Frank not a regular in our World Cup squad.
Also from january first 94 i think there is to be signed an agreement between EC and some other european countries (Norway, Sweden, Switzerland ++) which will make this no problem.
yeah — i talk to him the next time i see him;-)(joke!— well i stayed at the same hotel as the norw. players before our game against england and actually talked to a couple of players…the next time i will have a chat with leeds-fan rekdal;-) i will however forward your wishes of luck if/when i write to the supporters club.
it might be — he was once again at the bench this weekend but did not get on the field this time.
but just being on the bench gives me the tiniest little bit of hope…
he is good.
he is forward in one of europes finest U21-teams, topping their group ahead of Turkey, Poland, England, Holland and mini-nation San Marino.
Andy Cole is getting lots of play and lots of support at Newcastle — and he is top scorer right now (bot cup&league) in the premiership.
Andy plays forward for Englands U21 — Frank for Norway — and Norway is the best of the two teams.
I'm not saying Frank is as good as Cole — but he is not far from being.
I guess Frank feel that Deane will be given unlimited support and that he will not get to play anyhow so he might as just leave…
So Deans record is 2 goals in 13 games — im quite sure that Frank at least would have doubled that if he had gotten the chance.
Im all for giving an attacker the chance and boosting his confidence by allowing to play even after a couple of no-scoring games — but in the Deane case i feel it has gone a little to far.
Bring on Frank — give Deano a couple of games on the bench and he might come back looking a little sharper.
As for hitting the post — that levels out over 13 games! 1/4 of the season and Deano sure looks behind schedule…
It seems kind of strange to me that the club sells the largest opponent for their money-hyped out-of-form attacker just when he need some rest…(he, he)
well — it looks like we have to rely on Speed and Macca for them goals — i guess one of them is our ‘top-scorer’ right now?
scum won again and if all contenders keep slipping them points i'm sorry to say it will be hard to pick them up…
halvard — stranded and batted
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 15:14:46 +0100
Subject: Re: Man U: George Pissed speaks out
OK —
i just have to say this: George Best is easily one of —the—very best players to ever come out of the british isles — yeah i know he played for Scum — but he —was—a bloody excellent player.
As for his personal problems during the seventies — well i guess we can have some fun about it but at least he got to meet (well not just meet…) two or three miss world's.
—And—we also have had players under the influence — Peter Lorimer (now dry mee thinks) to name one — i don't know how many testimonials Peter have had; when i was at his pub ‘The Commercial’ in Leeds some of the other guys spoke of three…
As for Giggs — he is good but clearly over-rated: i go mad when papers/commentaries starts whining about him when he does a little trick or two and starting with the ‘world class’ and ‘new George Best’stuff.
I still think highely Cuntano though — can't see myself throwing away my ‘French connection’ t-shirt…
halvard 
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 1993 14:59:27 +0000
Subject: 606 Allegations
Anyone listening to 606 on Radio 5 last saturday: can they enlarge on what the Leeds fan was saying about one of the managers at Elland Road — one Alan Roberts I think.
I tuned in halfway through as this guy was complaining about the official.
He was saying he was ‘hard-faced’ and cited an incident where his girlfriend got attacked in the ground and the man ‘didn't want to know’.
The general manager of LUFC is called Alan Roberts, but as I said I only heard half the story.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 16:56 GMT
Subject: Batty…be prepared
Y'know, when all the Batty stuff finally happened I thought to myself that at least some other people might see that he is a good player after all (and prove me right).
It seems like we wont even get that much.
All of a sudden there are quotes in all the papers saying how Dalglish will get the best out of him.
So now, whenever he plays well, it will be nothing to do with Leeds…just Dalglish/Blackburn.
Can you fucking believe it??
Ever since Cuntona joined scum, all of a sudden hes a class player — despite still not playing as well as he did for Leeds.
Its going to be the same for Batty.
As if Leeds cant/dont play football.
Noone has come out to say it (excepting twats like Emlyn Hughes), but even all the Wilko for England stuff has been negative saying hes the same a taylor, ie long ball.
Why is it football teams are stereotyped and pigeon holed?
All this bollocks about Swindon ‘making friends’ cos of their nice passing game.
Fuck off.
Its because they are crap.
I saw the game on Manc of the game vs Villa.
If anyone lets you play football its Villa.
Swindon struggled to put more than 3 passes together.
Because they played OK (in the 2nd division) under hoddle/ardiles Swindon will now be forever ‘a nice footballing’ club.
Just like forest, West ham and Tottenham.
Even though forest lumped the ball in the air to rosario more than we did to chapman when we last played them.
Even though West ham bought lee chapman (reknowned for his close ball control).
Even though forest and West ham are CRAP.
The media (and your average punter) are so narrow minded and stupid they cant see past the hype and stereotype.
You say something often enough you begin to believe it.
Swindon are a crap 1st division side who shouldnt have been promoted even.
Because they put 3 passes together 4 years ago does not make them a footballing side and they are only making friends now cos they are an easy touch.
Thank you and goodnight
Mark (feeling better now that soff his chest;-)
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 17:10 GMT
Subject: George Best…
WAS he that good??
My generation of football supporters have no idea at all if George Best or even Pele were that good.
Just because a lot of older people say so does not make it true.
Pele probably was (read: Im prepared to accept he was).
Best I dont know.
From what video clips Ive seen — OK he did some clever things…but nothing too special…and nothing on a regular basis.
He was just one of these players prepared to try something a bit different every now and again — which is laudable.
Genius??
More like Guinness.
With all the hype that Giggs gets I can imagine the same back then…sooner or later its taken for granted and believed.
Just like the Busby Babes.
The only way to see if he was world class was to play him against world class opposition…how many times did he play in the World cup??
So halvard, if youve actually seen a lot of him in action (on the pitch) then fair enough…but i wouldnt believe the hype mate.
Eddie Gray is genuinely regarded by some clever football people to have been every bit as good as best, and could have made a similar name for himself had he not been dogged by injury.
With player like Greaves etc, they have statistics to back them up.
With ‘entertainers’ its purely subjective.
I havent seen Best do anything I would regard as making him such a good player.
The stats cant leap to his defence either.
BTW Ive always felt this — even before I became so anti-scum (in truth only a few years ago).
You can tell he was a scum player though, because of the stark lack of modesty.
Another who believed the hype (and look where its left him).
mark
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 17:43 GMT
It started last week (apparently) when 2 Norwich fans whinged about treatment they got at Leeds when they lost their tickets or something.
Altogether now…
AAhhhhhhhhh.
That bloke phoned up about Batty and then went on to say that leeds (Alan Roberts especially) are equally bad to their own fans.
Not in my experience mate…mind you Ive never had problems.
What does the bloke expect…if you booked a seat at the theatre…then lost your ticket…your problem.
How does the theatre know you havent sold on your originals etc??
He didnt even have anything decent to say about the Batty fiasco.
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 17:48:27 GMT
Subject: Re: Batty…be prepared
He may well enhance his reputation at Blackburn, IF he scores more goals.
If not he may even be out of the team.
His chief rivals Sherwood and Warhurst, are both good on the goals per game stakes.
Also he will have to convince a new set of supporters of his worth.
We are disappointed that he left Leeds, but I'm not sure that I would have regarded 2.75 million as money well-spent on a player of his type.
Carlton Palmer is often bracketed with Batty, in fact most neutral observers (not me) would possibly prefer Palmer.
I would not be happy if Leeds spent that much money on him.
It will be interesting to see how Blackburn fans view the deal a) now and b) after 20 or so games.
I'm sure the ‘What an improved player so-and-so is’ syndrome often happens to other clubs as well.
Just as a player is often said to be struggling to justify a big fee.
Similarly you get players such as Pallister who strulled at first and then became a bargain.
It ‘s mainly the press having to find a story or supporters letting their bias colour their judgement.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 93 18:13:23 GMT
Subject: Best v Gray
I saw Best play a few times.
He din't really impress me, but — The Leeds team of the time had a great defence, I don't think Best ever scored against Paul Reaney, who he regards as his most difficult opponent.
Having said that, not saying George Best was one of the greatest players in the world, would be similar to denying Maradona or Cruyff that status.
Eddie Gray was a great player too and lasted longer than Best.
He could still play left-back in div1 at 34.
Periods of injury between 1972 and 1976 possibly robbed us of his best years.
Compared with Pissed, Eddie had as much — if not more — skill, but lacked electric pace, Best's killer instinct and a venomous shot.
(There were times when he got in great positions and you wanted him to hammer the ball, but he'd end up doing a sort of ‘clip’ shot.)
Ryan Giggs has achieved nearly as much as Best at the same age.
If he improves over the next 3–4 years and lasts until he's 30, then you will have to put him up alongside the other 2.
IMO Giggs is already the best left winger in the Premiership/home countries.
Ferguson may be stupidly obstructing his development by playing him on the right, where he does not cross the ball so well:-) Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 1 Nov 1993 19:07:00–0500
Subject: Line Up and Can Rocky cut it?
No-one posted Saturday's line up.
From the reoprts I assume it was something like 
Is this right?
Who were the subs?
The comments on Rocky all seem to have been positive.
When he was bought (all those years ago) I assume he came as a Strach replacement (what with Strach's back giving gip), but with Batts gone too, what sort of role is he playing?
In fact, what sort of shape did the midfield play?
Was Speedo central or not?
Was Rocky in Strach's left sided role or more in a Batty-esque type of slot.
He's waited an awful lomg time for his chance, and it seems the fans love Rocky.
I hope he produces the goods.
John
P.S. Will this 5 man defence last if we keep leaking 3 goals a game?
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 09:27:07 GMT
Subject: 606
I only heard the start of the prog but it sounded like the Norwich fans had booked tickets at Leeds, went to pick them up and were told to f*** off!
This was mentioned on 606 last week (I didn't hear it then) when Leeds promised some sort of ‘investigation’(??)
If Leeds have cocked up you can see why the fans would be a bit upset, but I guess mistakes do happen.
As far a treating their own fans goes, well Elland Road isn't exactly the Ritz, but I've never had problems picking up tickets etc either.
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 09:33:48 GMT
Subject: Re: Line Up and Can Rocky cut it?
I guess the fans love him because 1) he's a bloody good player — he proved that at Arse; 2) they think he's had a bit of a raw deal especially last year when he wasn't played and the rest of the team wern't exactly setting the Premiership on fire!!
I still think he's potentially as good a player as Strach/Batty and likely to score more goals than Batty (!)
We could always try a 6 man defence!!!;-)
With DOL back I think it'll get tighter
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 09:43:00 GMT
Subject: Lee vs Brian
You probably know that Mr Chapman scored again for West Ham last night (nice on Lee!).
That make 4…and the whole teams only got 10 (I think!).
This makes me think why did he go & Deane arrive?
Deane bad points: only scored two; ‘appears’ to lack determination/motivation
Deane good points: english; strong; young; ‘wanted’ to play for Leeds
You could say that with all the service Deane gets from the midfield he should have scored more than two (as I say Lee's got 4 & he gets hardly any service!).
BUT in some ways it's hard for Deane because 1) he's under a lot of pressure to score; 2) Wallace is another good striker who gets many of the chances he'd expect; 3) the rest of the bloody midfield as always in the penalty area scoring goals!!!!;-)
I still think he was a good investment, BUT if he doesn't get 20+ Premiership goals this year I'll be disappointed (unless he gets the winner in the FA cup final on bags a few vs Scum!!)
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 1993 09:50:40 +0000
Subject: Life Of Brian
I think it is tough for BD because the midfield have their own way of playing which they've had since the first season back, and Chapman knew where to be cos they built it round him.
Now Rocky is in, things'll be more fluid and Brian will be able to work his way into the whole picture.
He can play, if Wallace was more inclined to work WITH his partner they might strike more times (he's a selfish git).
It is tough to not score.
Saunders, Wright, Lineker all went/are going through lean spells.
Brian'll come right in the end.
He's a good player and he'll fit in.
In the meantime lets be thankful Speedy and Macca are scoring!
Courtney Fairclough (Chant HIS name when he bites the opposition's legs)
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 10:20 GMT
Subject: Giggs = winger…
HAH!
Well, Kev…face it, youre an OLD man;-)
I can comment on Cruyff and especially Maradona — both who I HAVE seen enough of to call them world class players.
No doubt.
*I** have not seen enough of Best…and even when we are shown clips of Best at his best…
Im not impressed — he hasnt lived up to the hype.
You old men who used to watch him on Manc of the Day may have got more exposure etc.
As I get older I get more sceptical.
Who's to say that in those days there wasnt as much hype/stereotyping and bullshit as there is today??
In fact we should know in Leeds case, we were/are branded nothing more than cheating kickers, professionals blah blah blah.
Revie was in no doubt who was the better player…and its skill we are talking about.
The fact that Best was a 9 stone waif, and Eddie a chunky lad probably contributed to Best's turn of pace.
Eddie had to do it with SKILL.
Youve lost it Kev.
Tell me…what is the ‘job’ of a winger?
Just how many goals to scum score from crosses into the box…let alone from Giggs. the bloke is absolute CRAP at crossing.
The very few times an accurate cross goes in its nothing to do with planning…just the law of averages and thats helped by the fact they normally have more than 2 people heading into the box.
Sinton, Waddle, Strachan, Walters, Sharpe, Holden…
I could go on and on…are ALL better ‘wingers’ than Giggs.
Fuck me Peter Barnes was a better winger:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 10:55:16 GMT
Subject: Re: Giggs = winger…
HAH!
I think I just proved that again by sending you a completely accidental reply.
Sorry Mark.
I've also become so senile as to be publicly defending Georgie Pissed, Maradona, and Giggs:-[I don't remember ever having having it.
But niether have most of the blokes below apart from Waddle & Strach.
Come on, surely you'd prefer to have Giggs in your team than any of the above, and If you had him, you'd stick no.11 on his back and play him (predominantly) down the left.
I remember Jimmy Greaves, Jim Armfield, Penis Law etc being world-class players ramble…ramble.
All old farts now…
In my day we treated our old heroes right and they only played for 10 bob a week.
Blah Blah Blah.
Oh christ me pacemaker needs adjusting.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 1993 12:05:12 +0000
Subject: Emlyn Hughes' Gardeners Question Time
Emlyn Hughes joins the mailing list this week, and he is fielding questions on the subject of gardening:
Dear Mr Hughes, my garden suffers from a lot of twitch.
I never seem to be able to get rid of it.
Why I spent all Saturday weeding and the next day more had appeared.
What can I do?
My pansies are choking.
— Well mate, its a good question, what with winter coming and the need to feed the soil in preparation for laying the seedlings.
However I played against that Leeds team, and believe me you had to wind the tape right up to your neck when you were facing them.
Hunter was a psycho.
Bremner loved nothing better than to kick hell out of the opposition.
Giles was a dirty bastard too.
Mind you they could play too.
Unlike today's Leeds team who'll never win a thing.
Burble burble burble.
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 12:23:17 GMT
Subject: Euro-Champs
Good to see Elland Road has been chosen as a venue for the 1996 European Championship finals.
Hopefully this will help to fatten Silvers wallet and stop him selling again.
Other grounds are:-Wembley, Scum Trafford, Villa Park, Hillsborough Anfield, St Jmes's and one of either Arsenal or City Ground (forest).
Semi-final: England vs.
Germany, Elland Rd, Wilko Manager,(Batty captain?:-()
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 12:43 GMT
Subject: Wingers
Dont worry gramps.
I make allowances for old'uns who have rubber sharks in their cars:-)
Maybe, maybe not.
But I wouldnt call him a winger.
I wouldnt even encourage him to take on players to get a cross in…no point.
Whilst he has this weight advantage (you get with youth) Id let him run at defenders but especially the 2 central ones.
My worry (hehe) is that when he grows up into a ‘proper’ man (with proper stubble and no stupid necklace thing), and puts on the weight — hed have to completely change his game.
cant wait.
Remember to stop and make sure you are well balanced before letting go of the zimmer frame.
You know how fragile your bones get.
Mark:-)
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 1993 14:28:54 +0000
Subject: Elland Road — International Arena
Actually Elland Road belongs to Leeds City Council so hosting the next Euro Championship games will fill their coffers.
Instead of going to Silver it'll be used to build homes for the people of Leeds or other most desirable things.
Or maybe ticket price cuts for LUFC fans…:-)
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 16:46 GMT
Subject: Elland Rd
Nah…
I imagine Leeds City Council are the freeholders and LUFC the leaseholders (maybe joint with Hunslet RLFC?).
In any case LUFC WILL get money from the Euro champs.
All the ‘direct’ money I hope.
After all Leeds City Council didnt pay for the new stand did they.
Weve had to sell players to fund it.
Leeds City will get enough revenue from the visitors to Leeds for the duration of the competition.
When Silver et al talked of ‘securing the long term future of Leeds’ I envisaged that as meaning we have to bite the bullet a little now, but once the ground has been finished — the revenue from the Euro champs will get us back on an even keel (maybe into the black).
this is not beyond reality.
Gate receipts (using an average of 13 quid a seat), assuming 40K crowds = 1/2 million quid PER MATCH.
This is without sponsorship, exec boxes, TV rights and all the other ‘extras’.
I would hope to clear 500k profit from each match.
I only hope we dont have to share a league with Hillsboro.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 17:53:18 GMT
Subject: Re: Elland Rd
Why?
I reckon the FA will take all the profit but give Leeds a fee.
I understand the EC will have 16 teams next time.
Just like the World Cup were in my day when you had proper football.;-))
So I should think the groups will be
Wembley & Villa Park (Arse) Scouseland & Swine Park Newcastle & Leeds Hillsboro & Nottingham (Villa)
() =If Forest don't get their act together in time.
I'm sure England will play all their games at Wembley for as long as they stay in.
So Wembley will get 3 qualifying games, a QF, SF + Final.
I bet Swine Park get the other Semi.
So Villa, Hillsbro, Anfield, Newcastle & Leeds will be fighting for the other 3 QFs.
Looking at the Geography I bet Leeds won't get one.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 2 Nov 1993 16:28:18–0500
Subject: News of Shutt: Wilko on Rocastle
This is probably old news to UK based listers, but for the ‘rest-of-the-worl= d’ crew here are two bits of info gleaned from the Grauniad which= has started to reach these nether parts.
1)
Carl Shutt who was on loan to Birmingham City has now transferred= for 50,000.
His 4th goal of the season this Saturday takes them= into the top 10
2)
In Saturday's match, Rocky apparently had to go off after 75 minutes= because of cramp!!
The Grauniad said…
’ Rocastle, as now he must, had played his part for Leeds but paced= himself more than he might have and still succumbed to cramp 15= minutes from time.
‘That's something he has to do something about,’ = said manager Howard Wilkinson.
Clearly he believes it is not just= a matter of a lack of match practice.’
Comments anyone??
John  
From:
Date: Wed, 3 Nov 93 10:16 GMT
Subject: Re:Elland Rd
I should have said ‘I hope we dont have to share a league’, and assumed it would be hillsboro if we did.
Less matches we cover = less money.
That was when they use a coule of coats for the goalposts and used a cabbage wrapped up in pigs bladder for a ball wasnt it?
Oh well…16 teams = 4 groups of 4 = 2 venues per group = 3 matches per ground.
Hahahhahah.
You ARE kidding arent you.
I wouldnt be at all suprised to see them play in the ‘theatre of dreams’.
The draw and opening thingy are being held there.
(never)
I bet they get both:-)
As for the quarters…
I think they will choose one of each of the pairings.
That looks good for us…we should get the nod over hillsboro and/or newcastle.
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 3 Nov 93 12:58:42 GMT
I recently attended my first match at elland road (V blackburn) and was very impressed by the stadium and the atmosphere.
I have a season ticket for Ibrox stadium and travel to all their matches, home and away.
I have a few points to raise:
I have heard stories from Rangers fans who were at elland road for the euro tie last year, that the leeds fans applauded the Gers off the pitch at the end of the match.
Also, a few leeds fans who noticed some rangers fans in the crowd, actually wished them good luck for the rest of the competition.
I would like to hear anybodies views on this who was at the match.
did anyone encounter any trouble from Hibs fans in Edinburgh pre season.
Hibs have by far the worst shower of casuals in scotland, and there is almost always trouble everytime Aberdeen, Rangers or the Scum travel to easter road.
I saw no trouble at the match, but I heard on TV afterwards that there had been fights in Waverly station before and after the match
that new EAST STAND is one total fuck off bit of engineering.
I thought the new deck at ibrox was big until i saw it.
if anyone wants to go to a RANGERS match, contact me and i will let you know the ticket details.
I was surprised at the amount of abuse Macca received from the fans at the blackburn match.
I only ever see highlights of the odd games on Tv in scotland but from that i've always been impressed with him.
Everyone knows his feelings for Rangers, And I would most readily do a swop for a number of our players — Gary Stevens, Trevor Steven, Alexi Mikhailechenko, Ally Maxwell, Chris Vinnicome.
Clever Trevor must be the most over rated player in Scotland (except for Paul McStay) and it surprises me how Taylor picks him for the England squad yet doesn't give big Mark the nod.
Hateley has got to be one of the best target me in Britain.
and finally.
Brian deane may have only scored two goals for leeds but thats two more than Drunkin Fergusson has scored for Rangers.
4 million quid for a guy that almost went to jail and has been injured for most of the season
bye for now, Colin (Rangers/Leeds)
From:
Date: Wed, 03 Nov 1993 14:09:51 +0000
Subject: Exemplary fans
The so-called ‘fantastic fans, at the theatre of dreams’ are currently going on the rampage in Istanbul.
160 have been arrested so far after trashing a hotel so that should add spice to the clash this evening.
Stu
P.S. Although I hate them, one has to admit that there is a touch of class in the fact that 30 of the 160 arrested have just managed to escape.
From:
Date: Wed, 3 Nov 93 14:21 GMT
Subject: fantastic fans…
Sorry.
No way.
Impossible.
Must be some Leeds Fans.
I wouldnt be at all suprised if all we see now is how they were provoked/mistreated etc etc.
At least the Turks should be able to, erm, ‘cope’ hehehehe.
‘Were the famous galatarasay and we come from turkey, turkeee, turkeee’
‘ooh ah catch this brick i said ooh ah catch this brick’
‘Youre going home in a coma, home in a coma, youre going home in a coma’
Hes the famous ryan giggs with a bottle up his arse, never mind, never mind’
From:
Date: Wed, 3 Nov 93 15:34:49 EST
Subject: Man Utd Ha Ha Ha
For those of you who may not have herad anything yet, according to a poster on r.s.s.
Galatasary v Man U finished 0–0.
If this news is correct then scum are out.
Please please please can someone confirm the good news.
Ha Ha Ha I can't wait for the bullshit to flow as they try to explain away this one.
John
From:
Date: Wed, 3 Nov 1993 23:31:00–0500
Subject: RE: BATTY…*** THE CHAIRMAN REPLIES!!! 
Perhaps we could arrange for our illustrious chairman to get himself a logon onto the internet or what ever so he can get instant feedback from the fans.
Also get Wilko a logon so he can send us match team sheets — Rupert
From: To: LEEDS-UNITED Subject: BATTY…*** THE CHAIRMAN REPLIES!!! **** Date: 04 November 1993 06:00
I sent my ‘protest’ fax to the list for you to see…
I received this back yesterday…
Dr Mr Humphries
Thank you for your fax of the 26th October, and whilst I fully appreciate your views and the reasons which prompted you to write, I would like to make one or two points which may help you to understand our position.
The Club is committed to notifying a player should a bid of a certain amount be received, and I would stress that the final decision is always that of the player's.
When running a football club one had to take into account the overall strength of the squad, and, to quote Norman Hunter ‘Leeds is overloaded with midfield players and this is a good deal for the club’.
I would be happy to discuss this further with you in my office, but accept that because of the distance this may not be possible, but if you have the opportunity of travelling to Yorkshire during office hours please contact my secretary, Pat Slater, who will be pleased to arrange a mutually convenient appointment for you.
Thank you again for taking the trouble to write expressing your views, and thank you also for your valued support of our Club.
Yours sincerely
Leslie H.Silver OBE Chairman
(personally signed)
My initial reaction was to write back thanking him for his time etc and making a few followup points, but Ive come round to the idea a personal meeting might be nice:-))
I will probably widen the scope a little and speak for the list…so if there are any questions loosely related to the topic of transfers and mid-long term strategy etc…forward them to me so i can compile a list.
It might be nice to have a few of us go along, and I will drop a few subtle hints so a meeting with the players or at least a trip round the ground and watching a training session is on the cards:-)
Anyways…
Ill be writing soon to test the water — but the trip up wont be until at least 15/11, and before 2/12
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 08:31:30 +0100
Subject: Man Utd Ha Ha Ha
writes:
Yup that's right.
I did see the match live on TV yesterday.
It was a VERY, very poor game from the lame ‘Red devils’.
Bye,
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 1993 09:09:35 +0100
Subject: Man U
I thought I'd post some information about the match last night, mainly for our overseas friends.
Eric Cantona got sent off after the match and then was assaulted by a Turkish riot policeman.
I think he got punched in the head.
Also Bryan Robson had to have stiches after being attacked after going to Cantona's assistance.
It seems Cantona kicked one of the Galatsaray subs when he tried to hide the ball.
When he left the pitch he started hurling abuse in French at the referee.
It turned out the Swiss ref was a French teacher!
The match was terrible.
If I remember rightly, it all started going wrong with Cantona and Leeds after we got knocked out of the European Cup.
Hopefully, the same will happen for ManU.
Also, shares in ManU have dropped by 57p on the Stock Exchange.
I don't think it could have worked out better if we had written the ending ourselves.
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 11:00 GMT
Subject: BATTY…*** THE CHAIRMAN REPLIES!!! 
My initial reaction was to write back thanking him for his time etc and making a few followup points, but Ive come round to the idea a personal meeting might be nice:-))
I will probably widen the scope a little and speak for the list…so if there are any questions loosely related to the topic of transfers and mid-long term strategy etc…forward them to me so i can compile a list.
It might be nice to have a few of us go along, and I will drop a few subtle hints so a meeting with the players or at least a trip round the ground and watching a training session is on the cards:-)
Anyways…
Ill be writing soon to test the water — but the trip up wont be until at least 15/11, and before 2/12
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 1993 11:41:52 +0000
Subject: Poachers
Oi you, Rangers fan, trying to poach Macca!
Don't you know that Leeds fans express their affection for a player by verbally flaying him alive.
Examples:
Fucking hell Strachan yer yoooseless!!!!
McAllister yer a lazy wanker Newsome yer a fucking waste o' space
The last example is of particular note.
Not since Aizlewood, Welsh international and 1980s inspirational captain has a defender evoked such tender feelings amongst Leeds fans.
Newsome is the mainstay of our central defence and worth all your Ibrox millions and more.
Not that Wilko'll ever sell.
He may soon be honoured by the club and forever bear the title Newsome O.G.
By the way Hibs have a large contingent who also follow Leeds…
I have heard of the Hibs casuals though, they attacked a Manc baggy band called Paris Angels a couple of years back and left the singer with stitches.
I don't know if the offending crew have a Leeds affinity though.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 13:00:54 GMT
Subject: leeds (suprise)
Its funny what a week in football has in store.
Last week I was gutted at the sale of Batts, but last night I was so happy that the scum failed.
I'm very impressed with Silver's reply Mark.
I would love to have a meeting with him and have a tour etc if it were possible.
Has anybody any news on O'leary, Stachan or Standli?
Do you think there will still be some BATTY protest on Saturday?
I'm off to Leeds this afternoon to my parent's house.
I can scour the local rags!
I hope we get a win on Sat, having an 8 match unbeaten run is excellent but we haven't had a win for 3 games.
Also there is a gap before the next match (due to internationals) so to win and get up to second place would be good.
The Scum might start to shit themselves if they see its us over their shoulders (unlikely I know)
BTW Teltext said that Robson got hit in the tunnel and that his HAND got injured.
Bit suspicious.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 13:39:21 GMT
Subject: Re: BATTY…*** THE CHAIRMAN REPLIES!!! 
The question I'd like to ask is,
‘Given the current levels of sponsorship, Average gates of around 30,000 and allowing for players’ wages.
What is the net figure a club of Leeds' size can afford per season in transfers?
My guess is about 2 million with up to a million more with decent European runs/ cup runs etc.
Even having some ‘finger-in-air’ figure from Silver, would enable us to gauge/understand why we need to sell or cannot by certain players.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 15:07:21 +0100
Subject: Re: leeds (suprise)
mark — no news about Frank over here today — sports pages are just filled with headlines of scum going out…frank's new club played another draw this weekend — they now have a 1–6-2 (w-d-l) record (i watched the goals on Eurosport/Eurogoals programme — never cared much for spanish futba — but i guess i will be following Albacete for a couple of weeks now — when/if frank scores/goes i will keep you guys informed)
HO HO HE HE — what a night last night — i switched between Galatasaray — Scum and Norwich — Bayern Munchen on the telly (yeah — i have cable and german channel RTL showed three matches in a row involving german teams, Scum vs G. was shown on a norw. commercial channel — Scum have a great following over here and i guess they would show Scum because the thought Scum would make it…)
Scum out — Bayern Munchen out —
german world cup star Lothar Matheuss was interviewed after the game and he said that the team scoring the most goals over 180 minutes is the best team and thus Norwich deserved the win.
i will post as soon i know more on when the strandli deal is ready — the papers said last week that he was to debut this weekend so i guess he will…
news on ronny johnsen is that he probably will not be offered a contract with spurs — he was tried out as a central marking defender (the style most teams play — each central defender marks one attacker) and as such he was no succes — norway play what we call a zone defence; ‘marking’ their zones instead of players — journalists from Holland were laughing as Norway's coach Drillo Olsen was asked ‘who is to mark van Basten?’before our home game against Holland and he answered ‘No one is’— they did not laugh afterwards (we won 2–1).
So Ronny might still go for a trial at Leeds — he is no Neil Ruddock type; more of playing defender.
halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 1993 15:41:02 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Last night
Did anyone see the Leeds fans in fancy dress at the Scum game last night?
They were dressed as Turkish Police men.
Ha Ha Ha!
It's great to see the red filth ‘knocked down’(punched in the back, whacked with a riot shield) a peg or two.
Unfortunately tho' it does mean, even after they played soooo crap last night, that the press will still kiss their arses and make excuses for them.
Reading this morning I get the impression that the win was rightfully scums (as we all know, so is every other competition going:-}) and it was only the fact that they were playing in such a ‘cauldron of hate’ that denied them their place in the champions league and inevitably the trophy itself.
Sickening isn't it?
I predict a defeat for the scum at Man city this saturday, a win for Leeds against chelsea, a win for New Earswick (my team) on saturday and on sunday and a few jars and a curry on saturday night to make this week a truly memorable one.
Delighted to see Norwich and the Arse doing well tho', hope they go all the way.
From:
Date: Thu, 04 Nov 1993 16:15:12 +0000
Subject: Midnight Express (er…
I mean Excuse)
A splendid night of football although I had hoped Villa would go through.
Man U were absolutely crap, made all the funnier by the fact that the ref gave free-kicks to the Turks for all their play-acting, booked 3 or four of the red twats, and sent Cuntona off after the match.
Just when I thought it couldn't get any better the Turkish police steamed in a chinned Big Nose and Bryan ‘As I say’ Knobson.
Will this mean Hughes buggering off 'cos he didn't play?
Eric attempting to find a new spiritual home?
What makes it even more sweet is the fact that they crapped on about us only getting to the 2nd round last year and how they were going to get to the final.
Bollocks.
We turned over the Bundesliga championships, and then were unlucky to come across an inspired Rangers side, who, but for the odd-bribe or two could have gone all the way.
I suppose the sad thing is that the mancs thought that neutrals were behind them.
No-one was.
Everyone wanted them to get turned over.
Everyone hates them.
Hilarious.
Stu
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 16:27:09 GMT
Subject: Re: Last night & FAX-EMAIL
But how do you get your hands on a jar in New Earswick???
They don't even have a pub there, never mind a decent curry house.
You might get a Yorkie bar or a pack of polos I spose, but even this will be no good if you're playing Haxby and Wigginton teams cos they'll have you.
Anyway, Fax-by-email has arrived in Oxford, and seems to work okay.
To reach me, for example, send a normal email message to 
I mention this cos it could be THE way for list members to get their tickets from the LUFC ticket office, and avoid all that hopeless phoning.
I reckon something like this *might* work, depending on local arrangements:
The number on the right is the full international phone number in reverse: 44 532 706560
Kev, I seem to remember you said you used this method for the Sunderland game and the Elland Road shop — is this address how you did it?
If it does work, it means Leslie Silver doesn't need a logon to join up with us — all I have to do is put ‘Leslie—Silver’ instead of‘Ticket-Office’, and add the address to the list!
Handy, eh?
Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 16:44:55 GMT
Subject: Re: Midnight Express (er…
I mean Excuse)
I'm sure Lee Chapman had a grin when Cuntona got sent off.
I pointed it out to the wife.
She thought I was just being silly as she doesn't believe the rumours.
I said that they can hardly ask Lee on the box if big nose really fucked his wife.
He probably thinks Lee Chapman's house is his new spiritual home.
The reason Chappy is moving around so much is to keep one step ahead I suppose.
Watch out for Cuntona moving to a London club.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 93 17:04:59 CET
Subject: Leeds Synopsis.
I have been out of europe for about six weeks and come back to find all this transfer mania going on.
Can anyone give me a brief update on what exactly has been going on in my absence, i.e. who is being sold and why?
Cheers Tim.
End of Message
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 1993 17:31:54 +0000
Subject: New subscribers; TSB
We're up to 81 subscribers right now, which is pretty good.
We got 10–15 this past week or so: you're all very welcome.
Just out of curiosity, did any of you join as a result of the article in TSB?
Or did you just see the info on rss?
TSB hasn't reached Oxford's newsagencies yet, so if any kind soul could grab me a copy this Sat and send it on I'd be grateful (I'll pay for it and the p+p of course).
Ta, Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 1993 17:26:50–0500
Subject: Where are they now?
Some questions on where ex-Leeds people are
1)
One of the wonder boys we sold a few years back was Ian Snodin, to Everton.
Within seconds he picked up some crippling injury.
What's he doing now?
2)
Eddie Gray, Allan Clarke, and Billy Bremner all made a hash of managing Leeds.
Are any of them still in management and with whom?
3)
Is Scott Sellars playing first team football at the moment?
(I've forgotten who we re-sold him to).
4)
My dubious memory of mid seventies Leeds retains memories of a fickle talent called Duncan MacKenzie being in the team.
What happened to him?
err that's about it for my curiosity at the moment.
Could the UK listers send team news for Saturday when they can.
Thanks.
John
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 10:55:36 +0800 (SST)
Subject: Home and Away kits
Hi, this is the first time I am posting to the list.
I am a new Leeds United fan.
I have not supported any other football club before.
But I know I don't like Manchester United.
As I am new, I have some difficulty following nicknames some of the players have.
Can someone give me a list of these nicknames so I can know who is being discussed.
By the way, is there any way I can get the home or away kits of the team?
I am all the way in Singapore.
Thanks.
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 12:48:40 JST
Subject: Silver: Leeds & Japan
Hello Mark, how's the form?
It's a great opportunity to be able to meet with the Leeds Chairman and talk about the points you raised.
To be honest, I think Mr. Silver has reacted to your letter with such courtesey that it is very pleasently surprising.
Not that I had a bad opinion of his character,(I don't know him), it is just that I feel most other clubs would not have even responded to you.
I believe that you will be well able to represent the views of the members of this mailing list so there is not much I can add except perhaps a comment, that with all the transfers at the club in the recent past, that the team is perhaps unsettled and that gaining the championship this season seems difficult.
Leeds & Japan: On a totally different point, as a number of premier league teams have come to Japan recently,(Man.
City and Aston Villa), I would appreciate if you could find out if Mr. Silver has thought about bringing Leeds over to play.
(I'm not sure if they have been here already).
If there is interest perhaps you could ask him would he mind if we got in touch with him.
(The lads on our soccer team here would be able to show the team around Tokyo, etc.)
cheers neil
ps.
Can you let me know the fax number you used to get in touch with Mr. Silver?
Neil Day email:
From:
Date: Thu, 4 Nov 1993 23:45:00–0500
Subject: Re: Last night & FAX-EMAIL (Another Yorkie)
Anyone else from the Acomb side of town??— Rupert (an ex Peterite)
From: gburnage To: Cc: leeds-united Subject: Re: Last night & FAX-EMAIL Date: 05 November 1993 06:25 you.
Gav, you must be a Yorkie!
Elder Grove, Haxby to be precise.
Am I right?
If you're at Oxford it's unlikely you went to Jo Ro, Arche's perhaps?
All this without even seeing your tea leaves.
By the way, members can now get a pint at the sports club in N.E. Some times I even venture into town you know, but only when my mum lets me.
Simon.
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 09:52:44 +0000
Subject: Re: Where are they now?
Snods is still in the Everton squad and frequently gets a game, since coming back a year ago after his injury.
He recently asked for a transfer though.
Eddie Gray is an occasional Radio 5 match commentator and does a lot of sports writing in the upmarket tabloids (I don't read them so don't ask me which one).
Billy Bremner does Radio 5 and other radio commentaries.
Allan Clarke is interviewed on telly a bit(e.g. on the recent Clough special) but seems to be out of football completely.
Sellars sadly doesn't seem to be in the first team at Newcastle.
Duncan McKenzie was indeed the lad with the touch of an angel whom Clough bought.
He had a spell as Radio 5's 606 programme presenter.
He does a lot of celebrity after-dinner speaking like Franky Worthington Frank seems to appear in every charity penalty shootout or random presentation at Elland Road before a game, usually in the company of a page three girl and clad in an appalling 70s suit and to massive cheers from the Kop:-).
Among other old boys: Johnny Giles writes a regular football column in the Daily Mail.
Terry Cooper manages Birmingham City.
Peter Lorimer does commentating on Leeds videos and was recently declared bankrupt.
He's still brill though.
Norman Hunter sells insurance to footballers:-) and generally is asked for his comments by the telly and Radio 5.
Paul Hart manages the youth team at Leeds.
Ray Hankin manages Darlington I think.
Robert Plant recently released a great solo album Jimmy Page released a rather disappointing album with David Coverversion That's all I know.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 10:08 GMT
Hes still there.
Every so often he has ‘comeback’ matches…but then after a couple of games hes out again.
The last ‘comeback’ was this season I believe.
Nope, not as far as I know.
Newcastle.
Hes a fringe player there even.
Got a start for the first time this season when Cole went AWOL.
He ‘writes’ a weekly (I think) column for one of the tabloids.
Mark
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 10:27 GMT
Subject: Johnny Giles
Johnny Giles, as well as writing for the Mail, writes regular articles for the Evening Herald in Dublin.
He also commentates along with a plonker called George Hamilton on the live Premier Matches that RTE (Irish televeision) show.
He is also the regular panelist along with Eamon Dumphey (former Milwall ‘player’) on all the Irish international games.
I have to say I like Giles as a commentator and a punid.
He says things like they are.
He loves Strach as a player and always mentions the fact that Strach is still the best right sided midfielder in the league.
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 10:29 GMT
Subject: Home & Away kits
You must have been a Leeds fan subconciously before:-))
Anyway…welcome.
I think youll find us fellow Leeds Fans here a nice bunch, although we do have some OLD men (Kev), so if they start on about John Charles…dont worry.
:-))
Mmmmm.
There arent too many we use.
‘Stupid twat’ could be any central defender:-)) hehe.
Seriously…
They are quite simple and all derive from their names;
Strach…
Gordon Strachan Macca…
Gary McAllister Deano…
Brian Deane
thats about it I think.
If you (or anyone else) wants a run-down of the whole squad with their squad numbers, email me and Ill see if I ve still got it.
Mark  
The souvenir shop does overseas orders.
Try sending a fax to the main Leeds Utd number (coming up), and mark it for the attention of the SOUVENIR SHOP.
The shirts cost 33pounds each, plus post and packing.
Anyway, you could ask for the prices to be faxed back to you, or even just posted.
If you are feeling brave you could always try phoning:-)
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 11:32:59 MET
Subject: Wait a minute
Tim,
Maybe I'm a bit young to remember but I don't recall those two playing for Leeds at any time!
Maybe it's a subtle ploy of Tims to figure out whose awake at this time in the morning:-).
For our American and Far Eastern readers its 10:30 A.M. Friday morning.
Thursday night in Galway is the night to be seen out in the town:-), but I've still got more than the two brain cells needed to see through your ploy Tim.
James.
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 10:36 GMT
Subject: Leeds & Japan
Yep, it was the main Leeds Utd number +44 532 706560
Ive noted your questions about a possible tour etc.
Leeds did play Grampus 8 preseason…maybe theres a chance of a return match??
Ah, any cameras going cheap;-))))))))))
From:
Date: Fri, 05 Nov 1993 11:20:08 +0000
Subject: Spunky Dunky
I heard Duncan on the 606 show and he made the classic comment about Jimmy Armfield that ‘the manager's indecision is final’.
Other nicknames?
Stu…
(Stu)
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 11:25:24 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Last night & FAX-EMAIL
Gav, you must be a Yorkie!
Elder Grove, Haxby to be precise.
Am I right?
If you're at Oxford it's unlikely you went to Jo Ro, Arche's perhaps?
All this without even seeing your tea leaves.
By the way, members can now get a pint at the sports club in N.E. Some times I even venture into town you know, but only when my mum lets me.
Simon.
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 11:52:20 +0000
Subject: RE: Last night & FAX-EMAIL
Ooooooh that was close.
Nunthorpe actually.
I was down for Jo Ro but made a last-minute escape.
Oxford's nothing to do with it, tho — I only ended up here cos I failed my A levels (long story).
Good job me parents are the only Burnages in the York phone book, eh?
Heh.
Many's the night I've walked back late from town and stopped off in the New Earswick hedgerows to supply them some used beer…
Do you ever travel with the York Whites, btw?
I reckon there's a chance I'll be up there when the Newcastle game's on at Xmas, info on coach travel would be useful, if you have it.
All this local stuff is weird.
Colin MacDonald is writing from Napier University in Edinburgh, which I think used to be my primary school.
(James Gillespie's in Marchmont).
Well bloody ‘ell.
Leeds fans here, Leeds fans there…
Gav
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 12:05:18 GMT
Subject: Re: Last night & FAX-EMAIL (Another Yorkie)
no, but if you went to Woodthorpe Junior School there's a good chance my dad hit you with a plastic ruler.
Ah!
You went to the same school as Guy Fawkes!
How will YOU be celebrating tonight?
This is getting daft.
Followups to  (someday…)
Gav
PS I take it we all hate Scarborough almost as much as Chelsea?
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 93 12:13:13 GMT
Subject: Old Men
Oh shit have I got the ‘old fart’ reputation now.
There must be someone in the group older than 35.
By the way, did anyone ever collate the results of the poll for most lumbering Centre Forward, biggest transfer failure etc.
I expect that most readers are in the 20–30 age group.
So that most of the players mentioned will be from the 80s & 90s.
The disribution of votes would probably mean that any really appalling player from the 70s would get a similar number of votes to a pretty poor player from more recent years.
Of course when you get to my age, it's the short term memory that goes first so I really only remember players from 15 or more years ago.
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 14:52:08 +0000
Subject: Scarborough FC on the net
For any Whites who harbour a sentiment for the famed Seadogs of Scarborough, chairman Geoffrey Richmond has resigned after a boardroom row over admission prices.
YYYYYEEEEEEEESSSSSS!!!!!
Gavin and all you other YCFC Whites, look out you're slipping, you could be back with us in the 3rd again this time next season.
He he.
Tim (Seadog White)
From:
Date: Fri, 5 Nov 1993 15:36:01 +0000
Subject: Poll results
Well I only got a few responses so the rest of the votes I made up.
Here goes.
(votes given afterwards).
1.
The most clueless defender I think Mr Newsome can stand forward.
Congratulations Jon boy.
1 million votes
2.
The most leaden-footed centre forward John Pearson 200,000
3.
The worst expensive flop Peter Barnes, Allan Clarke says he needed to buy eight players and was only allowed four, one of which cost a lot, well Allan, you bought the WRONG ONE! 30,000
4.
The dullest game attended/seen on TV Wimbledon away is always a surety, Coventry mentioned in despatches.
23
5.
Jammiest goal by absolute donkey ‘Hunchback’ Whitlow vs Sheff Wed 900000
6.
Most undersold transfer We've had loads but over the long term Seaman has to be the one 245
7.
Most humiliating defeat 4–0 at home by Notts Forest (always call them that, they hate it!) 34
8.
Laziest player Again there've been a few.
Macca got plenty, but I'll cast the decider for Barnes, a shiftless f-er. 343
9.
Most eccentric signing Stand forth John O'Hare, by Clough.
Come to think of it Clough was probably our weirdest signing.
He HATED Leeds.
289000
10.
Jimmy Page's best guitar solo The one from Since I've Been Loving You on the third album.
345 million votes
11.
Worst shock Discovering Robert Plant was a Wolves fan — ugh.
See how fallible the gods are…
Tim
From:
Date: Sat, 6 Nov 1993 14:38:16–0600
Subject: Chelsea result
A posting on r.s.s. said Leeds won 4–1.
Anyone has the scorers and team lineup?
Joo
From:
Date: Sat, 6 Nov 1993 19:13:41–0500
Subject: Leeds v Chelsea
We won 4–1.
I was only half awake when I listened to the World Service.
I think all goals were scored in the second half.
Deane (his first at Elland road and his third all season), Rocky and Wallace scored.
I don't know who got the other.
Chelsea's only goal was right at the end.
Crowd 35,000.
It sounded like the now standard line-up according to Stuart Hall's typically manic report.
Quote ‘Chelsea looked like a village vicar caught in a New York revolving door’!!!
Full report please from someone who was there.
STuart Hall reckoned we looked like ‘nearly championship material’.
I'm happy.
John
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 10:38:53 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Reply to Gav & Tim.
You've rumbled me, it's a fair cop guv 
That must be why they grow so tall so quickly and such a peculiar shade of green.
No, I'm ashamed to say it but the only time I've seen Leeds away was the charity shield at wembley.
I play every saturday so don't often get to the home games either, I've not attended H.Q. at all this season.
I am determined to get to the next home mid-week game, Does anybody know when that will be?
As for the York Whites, I would not even know who to contact, sorry.
Did you manage to get to the play-off final at the end of last season?
Wembley has a strange atmosphere with one side of the ground full and the other completely empty.
A good day out all the same.
Stranger things have happened but not this season.
Simon.
From:
Date: Mon, 08 Nov 93 11:07:39 GMT
Subject: Battys salary
I've just read in the Yorkshire Post this morning that ‘it is believed that Batty picked up 500,000 notes when he signed for Blackburn’ besides a lucrative salary around double his Leeds pay packet.
I suppose you can't argue with that sort of money, unfortunatly.
Club loyalty is one thing, but for 1/2 a million I'd sure be tempted.
There was also a bit about Lesley Silver denying that there was a link between Battys sale and a 2.5M offer to buy back Elland Road from the council.
Hmmmmmm.
Cheers, Mark…
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 93 12:31:54 MET
Subject: Loyalty is one thing but money talks
If I were Batty I would have jumped at the offer.
Pro footballers are only in the game for so long and have to make as much out of it while they can.
They aren't renowned for becoming millionaires after their footie days are over, so I suppose it's a case of doing as well as you can while you can.
There are countless stories of famous footballers not having enough money for life after football — Ray Kennedy, Danny Blaniflower…
Come on people: How many of you would turn down such a contract if it were offered to you.
You would have to be out of your mind not to, IMHO.
Bet you his parents and the girlfriend helped him out a bit with his decision —‘You join them Rovers or else!!!’.
I say: wish him luck but not when they come to play us again:-).
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 14:02:17 +0100
Subject: league table
Hope this is OK.
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 8:07:23–0500 (EST)
Subject: Loyalty
Having read some of the recent articles on the Batty move in parallel with ‘What happened to ex-players, I have come round to the view that Batty was probably right to move.
He's had 8 years with the club, successful years no doubt, and yet everyone, no matter what job, needs new challenges at times to stimulate their abilities.
For Batty, this MIGHT be one such occasion.
Also, how would you feel if your bosses came in and told you suddenly that you can move to another firm ‘if you want to’.
Doesn't really help you sleep at night, eh?
Finally, the finntial security angle must be important.
Look at all those ex-players who haven't managed to find security after the age of 35.
I wish him luck and hope that after a couple of years he is transferred back!
Regards, Richard
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 08:14:56–0500
Subject: Match report anyone?
Could anyone please post a full match report please?
Plus the latest Premiership standings, please.
Thank you.
John 
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 93 13:19:32 GMT
Subject: Leeds 4 Chelsea 1
Well Leeds have managed to extend their unbeaten run to 9 matches with a good win against Chelsea but comments in todays (Mon) Daily Telegraph attributed to Howard Wilkinson echo my sentiments.
The comment concerned the standard of opposition Leeds have been facing during this unbeaten run and in particular the last match.
In brief he said that the performance we produced against Chelsea was as good as that against Arsenal earlier in the year but the result was completely different, i.e a 4–1 win vs a 2–1 defeat.
Whilst there are no ‘free wins’ to be had in the Premier League (with the possible exception of Swindon) the teams we've beaten have generally been struggling (exclude Wimbledon from that — but we always seem to thrash them at home) and those we've drawn against have been relatively good footballing sides hence the need to comeback after going behind.
Thus is it not resonable to suppose that when we come to play the likes of Liverpool, Arsenal, Norwich and Man Utd that once again these teams will once again expose our defencies and we'll be on the loosing end of the scoreline.
Even in our championship winning year we failed to beat the ‘elite’ sides in the league and although Wilko has made a few changes to the squad we still have basically the side and thus the same problems that have cost us dearly in the most important games.
Wilkinson's failure to strengthen the defence especially at the centre back position (and right back through most of last year) will continue to hinder the team and deny us a claim of genuine championship contenders.
Although David Weatherall seems to maturing well his partner Jon Newsome appears to be unable to produce the goods consistently and against good strikers.
The transfer of David O'Leary was a disaster as seen in him missing injured since the third game and has yet to return to full fitness.
Surely he must strengthen the squad although the willingness of the directors to produce the kind of serious money needed to purchase and maintain a squad equal to Man Utd's or Liverpool must be in doubt.
The selling of Batty leaves the club better off finacially but with only Steve Hodge to cover the midfield should there be injuries and with David Kerslake departing the old cherry of right back could return to blight the team again.
The plus points of the season so far though are the introduction of Gary Kelly at right back who is currently playing very well and hopefully will prove less frail in defence than the venerable Mel Sterland was.
The sale of David Batty has at least made room for the introduction of Rocky (something which I would like to have seen earlier given the injury problems of Strach) and his performances to date have been good although showing signs of the years lay off.
Rod Wallace appears to be producing some good performances although he's not putting all his chances away — those misses in the first half on Saturday would probably be crucial against a good side.
Brian Deane has scored his first goal at Elland Road (thank god) and hopefully it will be the first of many — he does tend to have a hand in the build up to many of our goals but really he was bought to SCORE the bloody things.
Last but not least the two Gary's in midfield have been brilliant — Mac looking assured and displaying his talents for all to see — he has really blossomed when Strach's not been playing and Speedy has scored some important goals and displayed his prowess at getting forward.
On the whole Leeds have a lot of positive points at the moment but the deficiences of the squad I think will not see us challenge the top two places this year — I hope I'm wrong but unless serious money is spent strengthening the side the likes of Man Utd and Liverpool will defeat us.
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 13:39:04 +0000
Subject: Saturdays game…
I only saw highlights on match of the day, but from what I saw, the play was amazing.
Chelsea were in a different league.
Lets hope that we can keep it up.
Forest getting relegated is a reall bummer.
None of the Midlands sides are in the premiership -> can no longer go to <insert team> vs Leeds matches.
Pity about the scum winning though (spawny *£ $%; £)
Ade.
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 13:57:22 +0000
Subject: Report?? & RE: Reply to Gav & Tim
If anyone who went to the game on Sat has the time and inclination to write a report on it, I for one would be glad to read it.
I haven't seen Leeds of the Day, and it's always better to hear from the fans on the spot in any case.
Spurs game a week on Sat — there's already four of us off to White Hart Lane: Kev, Stu, Charles, me.
Anyone else going?
Meet ups?
Paul — I got a note re TSB from you but it was blank.
It was a brill day out!
My first time at Wemberly, wouldyoubelieve.
I could dribble on at length about but I won't cos this is a Leeds list after all, and also Tim might get narky:-]
Ooh Aah Gary Swann say…
Gav
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 93 15:01:31 GMT
my mailing system was down over the weekend and I did not receive any mail.
If anyone replied to my letter concerning Rangers and Leeds, please write again.
PS Two good wins this weekend for the boys — leeds 4–1 and rangers 2–0
Colin
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 15:48:56 +0000 (GMT)
Subject:
On Mon, 8 Nov 1993, James A. Lundon DTN 822–4715 — skrid mvj unger 08-Nov-1993 1129 wrote:
I can't remember who or where, but I remember somebody suggesting that clubs should introduce loyalty bonuses so that players are not tempted to leave a club simply to get their hands on a fat signing on fee.
Sounds like a good idea to me.
Unfortunately I can't imagine any chairman introducing measures that would make it harder for him to flog of a few prised assets in order to raise some hard cash.
Si.
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 93 17:05 GMT
Subject: Loyalty
Yep, that was my idea:-))
One of the points I want to make to Mr Silver in person:-)))
I do think players get a fee when they renew contracts…but not in the same league as a big signing on fee.
I dont see why a chairman would be against such a scheme…lets say he gave Speed a 500k ‘bonus’.
If that guarantees he will stay at Leeds for the rest of his career, isnt that BETTER than say signing him now from somewhere else??
Even at his ‘going rate’ it'd be a better deal, but if its just for 500K.
You could look at it and say its 500K more than you COULD have spent.
Then again, to buy a similar quality player — with 5 or 6 of their best years ahead is SAVING 3.5million Id say.
Thats at todays prices.
If Keane is worth 3.75million, Speed is worth 4 at least.
He scores more goals, is a better passer, a better tackler, 100 times better in the air — but most of all, he has a decent haircut.
He also doesnt bring to mind Mr Potato Head whenever you see him.
Shit, Ive had another idea (for Mr Silver and Mr Fotherby).
Gary Speed bedlinen.
Im sure he puts on about 1000 screaming girlies at yer average game (home or away).
Just imaging the sales of a Gary Speed pillowcase!!
Sell in its thousands down at Brighton:-))))
Mark (being sexist and homophobic — but not giving a toss cos he lives in West London and can continue gloating to Chelsea fans for another season)
From:
Date: Mon, 8 Nov 1993 17:29:48–0500
Subject: Wot no match report!!
Aaaaah, woe is me (and all the rest of us stranded miles from Elland Road).
There must be someone out there who was at the match or saw highlights.
Please send details.
John
PS Thanks Joanne for posting the current league standings.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 09:25:33 GMT
Subject: Re: LOYALTY BONUS
Isn't there still the concept of testimonial matches/seasons?
In the 70's I remember Charlton, Bremner, Lorimer, E.Gray, Hunter, Madeley, Harvey, Giles (Not sure) all having them.
The nominal qualification period was 10 years service.
In those days some players never got one: Sprake, Bates, Cooper despite qualifying.
So many of that team got well over 10 years service that they just had to join the queue.
In recent years I can't really think of anybody who's got near, apart from Batty.
Gary Speed must be the longest serving player at Leeds now with about 5 years.
I can't really see any of the current players qualifying, apart from Strach as part of the management team.
Still most of them will have picked up a bob or two out of their transfers to Leeds.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 09:50:28 +0000
Subject: Bill Fotherby says Merry Christmas Everyone
Did anyone else get a copy of the mail order catalogue accompanied by a nice letter this morning, or was I specially chosen for the honour?
They got my name wrong (‘Dear Mr Burndige…’) and sent it to my work address for some reason.
Presumably they didn't know I've already got a copy of the catalogue.
There's a whole load of great stuff in there.
The Leeds United crested wallpaper and matching curtains look superb, as does the pot of yellow paint — but sadly the paint ‘is not included in the Leeds United product range’.
Damn, drat, blast.
Also there's some LUFC Christmas cards — one has Santa diving to his left with a snowball going to his right.
I bet John Lukic isn't going to be sending many of those this year.
Most tasteless item has to be the LUFC tie-dye t-shirt (makes you yearn for the return of black-and-white photography), while certain of our older list members may be interested in the fetching blue slippers with Leeds United crest.
Can I thank you for your support over the season and on behalf of everyone at Elland Road wish you a Merry Christmas and a peaceful and prosperous New Year.
Yours sincerely,
W.J.FOTHERBY MANAGING DIRECTOR
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 10:36:05 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: United offer £2.5m
Here is an article from last nights Yorkshire Evening Press…
Leeds United will not budge from their £2.5million offer to buy back Elland Road.
That is the same price Leeds council paid them in the mid 1980's and about £2.5m less than the local authority are looking for now.
But club chairman Leslie Silver gives three reasons for not paying more:
1.
Land values have not increased much since the council bought the ground.
2.
Their purchase included the Fullerton Park training pitches which are valued at £1.5million but they are not included in this deal.
3.
Leeds United and their fans have spent over £8m on Elland Road.
As well as the new East stand they have rebuilt the south east corner and the banqueting suite.
‘We are not budging from £2.5m,’ Silver said.
‘We are quite happy with the current arrangement if the council doesn't think that's enough.’
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 10:41 GMT
Subject: Loyalty
More in your era Kev…hasnt John Charles had about 3 testimonials?
Thats the point.
In those days no freedom of contract meant clubs had long serving players.
These days there is freedom of contract and agents.
Far more money orientated.
My point is that if a player wants to play for Leeds, and has no wish to leave, they shouldnt have to FOR FINANCIAL reasons.
Obviously if the club wants to sell them its a different matter.
But in the Batty case, if he had refused to leave, he would still be playing first team football.
It wasnt as if he wasnt wanted by the club, the most important element (for a player) beingthe manager.
So, he WAS wanted, he supports Leeds, hes lived in Leeds all his life, why else would he want to move if not for financial reasons???
What I am saying is that
1)
Football shouldnt be about money IMO.
The fact they get paid so much should be a bonus to them.
If they left football completely skint — so what??
Their ‘fame’ during their football years often gets them cushy numbers as reps etc — aswell as jobs in industries around football.
If they did their work at school/college then it just means their career starts later than normal, and shouldnt make a difference.
There was a thing about Rick Holden on Sunday where he says that most of the players just sit around or go to the pub etc after training and on their days off.
He is doing a physiotherapy degree in that spare time.
Its not a hard life.
2)
Even if it IS about money, again a player should not have to leave Leeds if he doesnt want to just to get a few bob extra.
Exactly…for those who signed from another club.
But for those who came from the youth system OR came as youngsters/inexperienced — they dont get that money, and one day might ask for a move just to get that one lump sum.
If you have got any sense, a lump sum of 400k can easily set you up for life.
Fuck me I think you get about a grand interest a week from a million, so living off 500quid a week aint too bad (and you should be working so thats extra).
A lot of players decide to ‘invest’ their money into stupid things like running a pub, when theyve got shit all business acumen.
The agents/3rd parties come in…take their cut, and disappear when the money runs out.
I have as much sympathy for players in this situation as I do pools winners:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 10:59 GMT
Subject: Another where is he now question
In the ‘Where are they now Questions’, I was watching a vid. of the Leeds V Arse.
cup final from 72 last night.
Great bloody game that.
I weird now looking at a game where you can pass back to the keeper, anyway I digress, the question I have is where is David Harvey now.
All the other players you hear about from time to time, Charlton, Giles, Hunter et all but never a word about Harvey.
Anyone any ideas?
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 11:04 GMT
Subject: Merry Xmas you Leeds Fans
Thats a candidate for Danny Baker's After All (serving suggestion).
I hadnt noticed that before:-)
Shit…
I havent got the cards in my old catalogue.
You obviously have the extra special festive remix.
I imagine they are going alphabetically…
I should be next (Mark Cumfreis).
HEY!!!
I *LIKE** tie dye stuff.
I almost bought one of those on our trip to the Sunderland game…as you well know.
Im saying NOTHING Kev.
On my wish list is the Kickmaster (Ball on an elastic band).
‘Theres no substitute for skill’— wise words mate.
‘Practice makes perfect’— indeed.
Endorsed by Ossie ‘Wembley’ Ardiles no less.
‘Nngthssnngst emmm innsstnngg tottinham’.
Exactly Ossie, exactly.
Im going to get a marker pen and colour in one side — hey presto, a KeaneKickmaster.
Isnt christmas a wonderful thing?
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 11:10 GMT
Subject: 2.5Million for Elland Rd
What is the current arrangement???
How can we spend that much money on a ground that isnt ours???
Theres got to be some clause in there about ownership…surely by spending that much we legally own the east stand etc?
And how much have Hunslet RLFC, or the council spent on the ground?
The sooner it is ours the better.
That money can/will be recouped in a season or two.
By kicking out hunslet, the pitch will be in good enough condition to be able to stage semifinals of the FA cup without Francis whingeing.
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 12:18:44 MET
Subject: Where is Harvey?
Declan,
I think he's a part time milkman some where in the deepest bowls (sp?) of the north of England.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 14:22:24 GMT
Subject: Re: Loyalty
d s Surely, the testimonial system is still the best way of doing this.
The trick is to make the qualification time long enough so that the people who go to a club towards the end of their career and get large transfer bonuses do not qualify, but short enough for the players to feel that they will not have to wait half their lives to get theirs.
Freedom of contract has made it less likely for a player to stay with a club long enough.
He may feel he can get 2 or 3 lucrative moves over a 10 year period.
But remember a player does not get as much out of it when he requests a transfer.
Perhaps these days 8 years would be about right.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 14:43:57 GMT
Subject: Everton v Leeds United Game
Hello All,
The Everton v Leeds United game at Goodison park is nearly here, I can't remember the exact date, all I know is that it is on a Tuesday night.
Well, I have a friend who is an Everton fan, and he says he can get tickets for this game, the only thing is they are with the Everton fans.
Well, I will be going to this game, sat with the Everton fans, so if anybody is interested in a ticket for this game, can you please get in touch with me, by mailing the list, or mailing me direct at 
Tickets will be between 9 to 13 pound I think.
Cheers.
Neil.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 15:36:37 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: David Harvey
On Tue, 9 Nov 1993, wrote:
I know he has done some bar work,(hardly surprising for a pisshead like Harvey) I remember seeing him in the Three Cups at Stamford Bridge a few years back.
That's the Stamford Bridge in East Yorkshire not the one which gives David Mellor a stork on at the mere mention of the place.
I also heard He spent some time in charge of North East Counties side Tadcaster Albion but didn't last long.
He probably drank the clubhouse dry.
As for what he's doing now, I don't know, he'll still be tipping them over the bar somewhere.
<Groan! >
Si.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 15:40:30 +0000
Subject: Mersery
writes:
I went to this fixture last year and it was totally miserable.
We (as usual) lost.
I was in the home end with a bluenose mate and a Rangers supporter mate (Al Doggett — well-known to Gavin and Sunil).
Leeds didn't play too badly, though defensively — as throughout 1992–3 away- we were bad, but we lost 2–0 and it felt really crap because Everton were so jammy to win it.
We forced loads of corners and they were under siege in their box for much of the game.
This was one game in which Frank Strandli had a chance to prove himself and salvage some points when we really needed them but he didn't deliver.
The Evertonian crowd are the most miserable supporters ever, but who can blame them — glory hunters from the eighties the lot of them.
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 16:43:54 +0000
Subject: Cantonas trial
Just picked up from teletext…
UEFA have banned Eric Cantona from attending his own trial on charges of serious misconduct.
The Frenchman landed himself in hot water after Manchester United's European Cup exit in Galatasary.
After being shown the red card as the players walked off he gave a TV interview allegedly slating some European referees, and now faces a possible ban from the game.
UEFA said it was not their policy for players or club representatives to attend disciplinary meetings.
The hearing will be on Thursday.
— what a shame
Ade
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 16:58:42 GMT
Subject: senility
As I'm going senile + reliving my second childhood, I have been trying to keep Gav's fabulous tex fixture list up to date.
Trouble is, I only remember to do it every-so-often, and find my ageing mind has forgotten the details.
Were the Leeds scorers against Sheff Wed recently Fairclough, Wallace & Speed?
Did Strach & Macca score the goals in the 2–1 home win over Sheff Utd?
On another subject what happened to our predictions we used to make,
did everyone get pissed off with me gettinhg them right always? |:–}
Anyway, What about the England game?
S.Marino 0 England 6 I reckon.
Perhaps England could sign up Bernard Tapie for the games next week.
Poland 1 Holland 2
Spurs 2 Leeds 2.
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 17:01:42 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: French Scum
That last message about C*ntona, has just reminded me of something.
I was watching the Scum Derby on Sky this weekend, and managed to catch some of the phone-in afterwards, where someone was going on about an Autobiography written by the froggy himself.
Apparently, so the bloke on Sky said, Wilko gets a major slagging off in it, and Cantona even says stuff like Wilko sold him cheap to the Scum just to piss him off.
Should make interesting reading.
Anyone know any more?
Sunil
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 17:04:25 GMT
Subject: Newsome and Scumland
I thought Newsome played very well on Saturday (Jon that is, not my hamster or Tim's white rat!).
Maybe we wrote him off too soon.
He even made a decent back pass when under some pressure!
Deano was obviously chuffed to break his duck.
I can still picture him standing in the centre circle wth both arms held above his head with a grin from East stand to west stand!
I got a letter from LUFC this morning.
Tickets for Olds Scumford on New Years day are on sale only to those people who went to the Sunderland away game.
I went to this game and although I probably don't deserve to get a ticket I will probably take the opportunity.
The problem is I have no transport and public transport will probably be scarce on the day.
Is anybody else thinking of going, especially from the Leeds area so I can cadge a lift.
Alternatively, has anybody been on an official leeds bus?
If so where do they pick up and do you have to be a member of the travel club before you go with them?
Cheers, Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 17:26 GMT
Subject: Results
Not bad for an old'un.
Yep thats right.
Without stats to hand myself, maybe you could post the latest top-scorer stats.
Macca and Speed must have about 6…
Wallace 5…
Fairclough 3???
Shame about Batty not being picked for England…after all one of his reasons was to further his England career…
HAH!!
We still do them Kev.
Dont you remember??
You always have Stanley Matthews down for a hat-trick, and complain that John Charles has lost his scoring touch for Leeds and should surely be dropped for Glynn Snodin.
We had a closed discussion and decided to humour you for a bit…
Never mind, have a horlicks.
see??
You even predicted the Leeds score when you meant to predict the England score <sigh>.
The way spurs are playing Ill be disappointed to let a goal in, and not score at least 2…so Ill go for a 3–1…nah, only kidding, 0–2
Mark
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 17:29:42 GMT
Subject: Re: senility & Newsome and Scumland
Yep, that's right (at least according to what I've coloured in so far).
One correction to the DIY fixture list is that the away game at West Ham is on Wednesday 8th December (not Tuesday 8th December which doesn't exist this year).
There's a full premiership programme that night for some reason.
Bastard about Man U tix only going to people who went to Sunderland away.
Why couldn't they've made it the Soton game??
Now I'll have to get my local scum contacts to help out — if I dare.
Travelling and sitting with them might be more than a man can bear first thing in the new year.
Mark, did your letter say how many tickets there were for this game?
D'you reckon there's likely to be tickets left over once the Sunderland-attenders have had their fill?
Ta, Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 17:48:24 GMT
Subject: Re: senility
I predicted 4–1 vs Chelsea (not hard I hear you cry) as can be seen by my astounding record in the predictions league.
I must admit though I had the scorers as Deane 2; Speed 1; Rocky 1 & Casscarino 1 for Chelsea.
(Cocky git or what!!)
S.Marino 0 England 9 I reckon 
Poland 1 Holland 1 
Spurs 1 Leeds 3 (Deane; Rocky; Macca)…if DOL plays Spurs 0 Leeds 3!!
Talk about necks sticking out…
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 93 19:28:21 GMT
Subject: Re: BATTY…*** THE CHAIRMAN REPLIES!!! 
Mark,
If you're seriously trying to arrange a trip I'd be interested in popping up (a good excuse to visit my parents in sunny Harrogate).
Glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 9 Nov 1993 18:17:51–0500
Subject: Gary Kelly in Ireland Squad
According to the trusty old BBC World Service our very own ‘Gazza’ Kelly has been called up into the RoI squad as a replacement for Kevin Moran.
Not bad for someone who hadn't a) played right back or b) been a first team regular until this season.
It'll be interesting to see if he makes it into the team.
I haven't seen the other squads: I assume Macca, Speed, and Dorigo are all in there.
John
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 09:08:08 +0100
Subject: Games
Hi there
What were the result of the following matches:
Coventry — Leeds Leeds — Wimbledon Ipswich — Leeds
Thanks in advance
Mads
From:
Date: 10 Nov 93 09:17:37 GMT+1
Subject: SALE OF DAVID BATTY
Received a letter from our ‘friend’ Mr Howard Wilkinson.
This is what he told me about the Batty sale.
I also asked him if it wouldn ‘t be better to sell David Rocastle instead.
Dear 
I am in receipt of your letter dated 27 October, received by fax, and by now you are no doubt aware of my views on yhe decidion to sell David Batty.
In all my time here I ‘ve had the final say on the many, many, decisions which concerned playing matters.
On this occasion I didn ‘t, because it was felt that other factors were more important.
Those factors related to money, the Chairman ‘s money.
I think you ‘ll agree that his right as to what he does with that money supersedes any thoughts I may have, in the final analysis.
Obviously, I would have preferred to raise money in an alternative manner, but this was not possible.
You can ‘t sell people if there ‘s no-one to buy them.
Having said that, it ‘s now my job to ensure there is no drop in the performance.
I ‘m confident I can do this although it will, obviously, mean extra effort on my part.
I thank you for the interest shown and hope that tis reply answers some of your questions.
I ‘m sure you will understand that some questions, in the interest of other people involved in issues like this, have to remain unanswered.
Absolute trust is a great force for good in life.
Unfortunately it does not seem to carry much weight these days, people only want to trust when it suits them
Yours sincerely
H Wilkinson Manager
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 09:55:04 +0000
Subject: Rantona
I saw the notes on Ceefax etc as well.
One of them said he faced a possible ban from International footie (playing for France I assume, and any matches the scum have in Europe — nyuk, nyuk), the other said he would face a ban from the game — AS A WHOLE.
I suppose over here we were not too aware of his antics when he was playing in france but i suspect UEFA will take all of that into consideration (he's already been banned for 10 months).
Papin was quoted (by the News of the World so it probably aint true) that he would not be surprised if Rantona jacked in football altogether.
Although he is a great talent, and (when he's playing for France) a pleasure to watch, I still hate him.
Whoever you blame on the scum transfer fiasco he came out of it as a two-faced hypocrite.
All that crap about ‘I don't know why I lurv you but I do’ was bollocks 'cos he then went and said the same things to the scum.
It would also be a major knock-back for the scum because, without a doubt, he's been the difference for them scoring vital goals and setting up others.
Ideal scanario: He gets banned for the rest of the season.
Scum flounder hopelessly without him (and can't get a penny for him).
He comes back and joins Dagenham and Redbridge.
As to Whites in national teams, Dorigo is definitely in (btw Batty is on stand-by), so is Kelly, and i'm sure Macca and Speedo must be.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 10:04:43 +0000
Subject: Batty in seven goal thriller
I was disinterestedly listening to the Coca Cola Cup replay between Blackburn and Shrewsbury last night on Radio 5.
The previous game had been 1–1 at Ewok Park and ST had earned a replay at their ground, the director's granny's back garden.
Anyway the game was a stormer, Shrewsbury 3–1 up after half time.
Blackburn managed to equalise in the last five minutes and won it 3–4 in extra time.
The only problem was that some fans broke the granny's fence and scared the cat.
So Batty really has gone up in the world — from 4–3 against the (old, great) Liverpool at Elland Road two years ago to a 4–3 thriller against a club ninth in the fourth division.
I also couldn't hide a snigger when the commentator mentioned Batts' meagre goal rate of one per hundred games.
Dalglish must have been batty, when Shearer is injured, they need midfielders who can score but they bought the one (otherwise brilliant) who can't.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 11:05:08 +0100
Subject: Fat-Frank U21 and more
Frank delivered again for Norway U21 last night as they went out of the european U21 championship with a 3–1 loss.
Frank gave Norway the lead after 11 minutes and Norway had a spell of chances and a goal wrongfully disallowed (attack on keeper according to the ref — but the slow-mo showed he was clearly wrong as Jostein Flo's little brother Tore-Andre outjumped turk goalie for a high ball in the field).
Turkey had strengthened their team with 3 players from their national team — among them star-striker Hakan.
Norway gave away a penalty on a —very—inexperienced push by one of the new players in the team in the area and the turks got two more in the second half.
Franks goal was a very typical Strandli-goal: a long hard and flat pass from our own half — Frank outpacing both the turkish central defenders — running after the ball and placing a flat ball out of reach of the turkish goalie.
The norw. team who looked sure to qualify have vasted it in the last two games by loosing away and have no chance to qualify.
Frank and midfielder Tommy Larsen was the only ones getting good critcis after the game (the fucking norw. keeper looked slow and sort of tired (?) on two of the turkish goals — they should have used another one).
‘Frank S again showed that he has that combination of speed and strength that first team coach Egil Olsen is looking for.
Yesterday it was only Larsen which could match the technique of the turks.
And Strandli was always threatening in his lone attacking role because of his strength and speed’.
Turkey or Poland will play in the U21 champ.ship.
no news on Frank and spanish team Albacete though — they might have postponed it because of Frank's international game last night…
news on Ronny Johnsen (who has been linked with Leeds as a central defender) is that he starts for Norway tonight as the 1 (lone atttacker) in our 4–5-1 formation against Turkey, i think the game will be shown live on SkySports.
Ronny is wanted by 6 or 7 norw. clubs — some want him as a central defender, some as central midfielder, some as a wide midfielder and some as an attacker.
Ronny has great speed (4.79 over 40 meters (with flying start — has to be) and is the fastest player on the national team along with the captain Werder Bremen star Rune Bratseth who also has been clocked in at 4.79).
According to papers we wants to ‘play football and attack — that is the fun of the game’.
This mean that he probably do not wish to play as a central defender in the english premiership — central defenders in england are seldom allowed/seen going forward and ronny feels after playing three reserve games for spurs (which is supposed to be a playing team…) that this kind of futba does not suit him…so i guess he will be staying here — most of the top norw. players just think of one thing now — USA'94 and to be among the 24 that are travelling — and they choose club out from this: ie how much play will i get at my new club — better be going to a low-profile club in the premiership than a high profile club where i might have to sit on the bench (Flo, Nilsen (Sheff Utd), Halle, Pedersen (Oldham), Fjortoft (Swindon)— will gets lot of play this winter — whereas players like Bjornebye (Liverpool), Lydersen,(Arsenal) and Strandli (Leeds) struggle to keep/get places in their teams.
Ronny knows this and i think he will play his football in Norway — where is visible to the national team coach and is 100% sure of not sitting on the bench.
Ronny replaces Swindon-striker Fjortoft for the game tonight — Ronny must have done well in the training sessions (coach Olsen really put some value on how the players perform in training before the games) and Fjortoft which has been even worse for Swindon than Deano for us might have a hard time to get the attacker place back (Fjortoft 0 — Deano 3 — Cole 10 isn't it?).
World-Cup star (BBC Ceefax's words) Lars Bohinen last week signed for Nottingham with one of the most special contracts written.
He has in writing that he is to be used —only—as an offensive midfielder both in games and — in training —.
Lars debuted last weekend with a bang for Forest and was one of the main reasons Forest got their second away-win this season.
Tonight's game against Turkey will not have any influence on USA'94: we are alreay qualified — but a win might take Norway to top of the FIFA ranking and i guess all the players want to show that they can perform even in such a ‘meaningless’ game.
With Turkey using three of their best players in last nights u21 game i think Norway will take this one also — but away games in Turkey is no walk-over…just ask scumites about that;-)
see you guys in a forthnight when i will be at white hart lane for my annual trip to england…(anyone know of any good health club with hidden cameras where they can shoot my ‘beatiful’ body?;-) he, he)
halvard/scandinavian whites
From:
Date: 10 Nov 93 10:27:36 GMT+1
Subject: injury questions
Can anyone answer the following questions:
1.
When will Gordon Strachan be fit?.
We were told 6 weeks on Oct 6th
2.
When will David O ‘Leary be fit?
3.
When will Mark Tinkler be fit?.
He was supposed to be back around X-mas.
Any signs of an earlier recovery??
4.
Has Carl Shutt signed for Birmingham?
If yes — FEE?
5.
Norwegian newspapers had an article two weeks ago about Frank Strandli leaving Elland Road for a Spanish club for a fee stlg500.000 We ‘ve heard nothing since????
6.
Pontins League matchfacts 
7.
Northern Intermediate League matchfacts 
8.
And finially.
If Leeds are going to buy Elland Road from the Council, has there been any talking about private buying shares?
I saw someone who predicted SPURS-LEEDS 2–2.
Is he a Leeds-supporter.
If yes, SHAME ON YOU!!!!!!
Regards Terje
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 11:35:41 +0000
Subject: Howard You Like To Be England Manager:-(
It was good of Howard answering your letter personally.
His final point about trust is fair enough, it sounds like he has had a gutful of Leeds fans berating him for sticking to his guns.
However he must understand the indignity Leeds fans suffered during eight seasons being beaten by the likes of Shrewsbury and even (gulp) Bradford City.
Last season's away form led to flirting with relegation and we went perilously close.
No Leeds fan wants those days to return.
Therefore absolute trust, which we placed eagerly with the likes of Clarkie and as a result had our faces rubbed in the dirt, cannot reasonably be expected.
Forest fans gave it to that slag Clough and in the long run they got a bitter reward.
I still hope he stays though.
I don't fancy having Jack Charlton much.
He seems more interested in fishing than football.
It might work at international level but at club level you need a hardworking manager with a good business head.
Above all Wilko is pro-football which is what counts.
He's too good to go.
Sgt Wilko's Barmy Army
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 11:38:15 GMT
Subject: Re: shame on me
Yeah, I must admit that ‘someone’ was me.
I obviously love to see Leeds win, and just because I've predicted a draw, that does not mean I do not think Leeds are capable of winning.
IMO Whilst I believe Leeds are capable of scoring goals away from home, I do not have a great deal of faith in the team's ability to defend when put under pressure.
Sheringham destroyed Leeds last year in our 4–0 defeat and if he plays, I would regard a 2–2 draw as improvement enough to celebrate.
Also going 10 league games undefeated would match the run we had at the start of the championship year.
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 11:45 GMT
S'funny, but I didnt read his reply that way.
I took that part to mean about trust between him and the board, ie he trusted them to let him have the final say etc etc.
Ditto
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 08:07:06–0600
Subject: scorers to date
Someone asked about Leeds scorers.
These are the goal-getters so far this season.
6
Speed (one in League Cup)
5
McAllister, Wallace
3
Strachan, Deane
1
Rocastle, Fairclough, Newsome
That's all I believe.
Joo
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 14:29:44 +0000
Subject: Another goalscorer 1993–4
Noel Whelan 1 (vs Sunderland, oh well)
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 15:30:38 MET
Subject: Whelan has one me thinks
Joo,
I think Whelan has a goal (from the second leg of the CCC)?
Revised:
James.
From:
Date: 10 Nov 93 14:54:28 GMT+1
Subject: RE: Frank Strandli
Frank Strandli has been talking to Howard Wilkinson about his future at Elland Road.
Strandli is desperate to play first team football again.
If he wants a place in Norway's World Cup squad next summer, he has to play first team football.
Offcourse Howard Wilkinson couldn't guarantee him a place in the first eleven and Mr Wilkinson told Strandli that if he wants to leave Leeds United that's fine with him, but he won't let him go for ‘nothing’.
Frank Strandli played excellent and scored Norway's only goal in their 1–3 (U-21) defeat by Turkee yesterday.
The manager of Turkish side Buraspor, Sepp Piontek, would like to replace his Danish international striker Frank Pingel.
He watched Strandli closely yesterday and said after the match: ‘Strandli is very fast and strong.
A player I would love to see play for Buraspor.’
Is this the end of Frank Strandli's career at Elland Road?
Fighting for a place in the Leeds United line-up must be better and more important than fighting for a place in Norway's World Cup squad.
If Strandli is not includeed in Norway's WC-squad it's no diasaster for him.
We ain't gonna win it anyway.
He's still only 21.
Sooner or later he will get the chance in Norway's line-up, but if he leave Elland Road now he will never ever get the chance of playing for his DREAMTEAM again.
Regards 
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 15:04:32 +0000
Subject: Mackenzie
I taped a Granada special last night about Duncan Mackenzie.
Wicked styles!
Interesting too because he gave his side of the Clough-Leeds debacle.
The way he saw it, the players never wanted Yeugh and were majorly responsible.
He didn't say anything about (well-documented) insults Yeugh directed at the distinguished internationals for no apparent reason — like telling Eddie Gray ‘if you were a racehorse you'd have been shot years ago’ in front of the team — or indeed any of the other eccentric behaviour of the man that got him fired.
He professed to be mates with all the Revie team now as then.
The footage of DM playing was fantastic, amazing goals.
And he was shown wearing a pair of collosal flared jeans that left one simply astonished.
You could have driven an articulated lorry up the leg.
Tim
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 09:05:27–0600
Subject: Whelan
Excuse my ignorance, but living in the ‘plains’ of the US makes it very hard to keep up with English soccer (er, football!) especially Leeds a team that I've benn supporting for close to 20 years now.
My question is this: is the Whelan mentioned by James the same as Ronnie Whelan (formerly) of Liverpool???!!!
Thanx,
Nadim
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 15:20 GMT
Subject: RE: Whelan
No Nadim, Ronnie Whelan is still with Liverpool (although he's out injured again).
Wilko was reported to have been looking at Ronnie earlier this season but nothing came of it.
The Whelan is question is Noel Whelan, a striker who's a product of the youths system.
He looks promising and has been used this season as a replacment for Wallace.
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 10:32:10–0500
Subject: Whelan
No, our Whelan is Noel Whelan, a lad who was playing for the youngsters just last season.
I seem to remember he knocked six past some hapless club last year in one match.
John
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 15:34:44 GMT
Subject: Re: Whelan
Didn't we get Whelan from Auxerre, or am I thinking of somebody else?
I thought we got him and Forrester at the same time — they'd gone to Auxerre straight from the FA School of Excellence or something.
Could be wrong though.
Andy.
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 15:34:35 GMT
Subject: Re: Whelan
Nadim, No, This is Noel Whelan (English), the star Centre forward of last season's youth team that beat scum in the final of the FA Youth Cup.
Ronnie Whelan does have a brother playing in the league of Ireland.
Declan rates him as a very good defender and I'm sure can tell us more.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 15:46 GMT
Subject: Whelan
Ok guys lets get this absolutely straight…
Noel Whelan was/is not exactly a Wallace replacement.
He played the first few premier league games this season instead of Wallace, and had a few rave reports.
He is a tall player.
He wasnt really the star of the youth team last year (certainly not the acclaimed star).
That is Jamie Forrester.
If anyone is a replacement for Wallace it is he (due to him making Strach look TALL).
In fact Forrester was on the bench for saturday.
Its looking good for the future though, as those two look like a good partership with their skills and different heights etc…
Forrester feeding off Whelans flicks etc.
Have they been playing as a strike pair for the reserves??
Anyone have a recent prog to confirm this??
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 93 15:51 GMT
Subject: Whelan (again)
Not quite.
Whelan is an out and out product of the youth system.
Forrester and Kevin Sharp came from the FA School of excellence via a short spell in Auxerre towards the end of the season before last.
they are both yorkshire lads.
They are just as much a product of the youth system as any youngster from the FA School of excellence though — so I reckon were OK to gloat about them in future years:-))
Mark
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 16:05 GMT
Subject: RE: Whelan
Yeah Ronnie's younger brother Paul is the captain of Bohemians, my team in Dublin.
Like Kev says I rate him highly both as a defender and a motivator.
Unfortunately Whelo has been out injured since the season's start about breaking a bone in his foot against of all teams Milwall.
With a bit of luck he'll be back in the next couple of weeks.
Declan
From:
Date: Wed, 10 Nov 1993 11:18:29–0500
Subject: The Reserves
Looking back through the old progs I don't see much sign of Forrester at all!
Is he injured?
F'rinstance, the team against Sunderland reserves was: Lukic, Bowman, Oliver (Harte), Ray Wallace, O'Hara, Couzens, Rocastle (a familiar name that one), Ford, Strandli, Lynam, Sharp with the other sub being O'Shea.
Other names in past reserve teams include Nicholls (wasn't he supposed to be an up and coming star?),
Grant, Smithard, Whelan, Hodge…but no Forrester!
Has anyone got any news??
John
From:
Date: 11 Nov 93 09:15:01 GMT+1
Subject: Match-facts
Can anyone give me matchfacts from these games?
Any signs of early recovery for the injured players?
(Strachan, Tinkler, O ‘Leary)
Has Carl Shutt signed for Birmingham?
Terje
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 10:23:09 GMT
Subject: bits + bobs
There are 2000 tickets for Leeds supporters at Old Scumford.
Shutty has signed for Birmingham (joining Chris Whyte) for 50,000 (I think)
Forrester has not been playing much in the reserves but came straight on to the bench after his injury.
Hamman (sp?) has written a letter to UEFA in support of Cuntona.
Maybe this is the first step to bring the French Meastro to Wimbledon!
His hearing is today — I hope they ban him!
His auto-biography was the subect of an article in one of the sunday rags.
He says that Wilko always talked in riddles with him, became jealous at his popularity and so sold him to the scum so he would appear to be a traitor.
He says all the stuff about storming off to Paris and missing practices were rumours spread by Wilko.
Kelly is in the Irish squad.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 11:06 GMT
Subject: Re:Bits and Botbs
This is a bit of a shocker.
WHY would Hamman possibly do this, and what weight does he think he'll possibly have in Uefa.
Its not exactly as if Wimbledon are an English force — let alone European…
AND what possible support/excuse could he give?
What does he know about Cuntona…or European referees…or anything?
I happen to like Hamman…but I think this is just for publicity or severe delusions of grandeur.
The more I hear of this, the more I reckon there was a battle of wills between them.
Wilko (ex teacher) is known for his deep thought and intellectual ways…and so is cuntona (amonsgt other things).
I can imagine Cuntona getting all indignant during a training session when Wilko was trying to tell him what to do and thinking ‘I am meure cleveurr than heeem’.
And it grew from there.
With him and ‘spit’ theres no contest.
Also, have you noticed how ‘spit’ dare not make cuntona sub????
This incident also shows that the board also were behind Wilko 100% when it came to team matters cos 1) tey allowed him to be sold and 2) for such little money.
Praps they were just getting a little fed up of Wilko selling players for nothing when he decided he didnt want them any more?
Mark (H)
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 11:52:53 GMT
Subject: Next weeks matches
Does anybody know the times & dates of next weeks
England vs SM & Poland vs Holland?
I thought Eng v SM was 16th & Pol vs Hol 17th but I've heard that they've been rescheduled so that they are played at the same time.
Is this true?
If so when?
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 1993 13:14:14 +0100
Subject: results
Cheers
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 14:49:48 MET
Subject: same times or else
Glynn,
Think about it for a minute…
If the matches were played at different times, it would be the cause for the outbreak of WW 111.
It would imply that the team playing second would know *exactly* what they would have to do to qualify.
The same story is being drawn out in group 3 (Republics group) where Spain and Denmark are playing at the same time as the two Irelands are playing.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 15:06:14 MET
Subject: Who are?
Who is this tosser?
Who is ‘spit’–Fergie.
I wonder is Fergie wifes pulling the strings here to keep Cuntona hot bum off the cold subs bench: -0?
Good point I never thought of that before.
How come the board have allowed Cuntona to go for a sing and a prayer?
Some of the guys who are going for 10 million these days wouldn't even tie Cuntonas boots on a bad day.
While I was getting the Irish Times yesterday I happen to see the back page of the Sun;-) where Fergies autobiog is being serialised.
He said that he ‘firmly turned down two separate 10 million pound offers’ for Giggs last year.
It puts the Cuntona transfer in perspective.
You have to be some chancer to turn down 10 million for a player that could burn out from snorting too much junk food in a few years:-)(mixing my puns there, I think).
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 14:56:05 GMT
Subject: Re: same times or else
I agree that it's silly if they weren't played at the same time.
However, they were originally scheduled for different nights, but it has always been possible for this scenario to arrise, so why didn't they just schedule the matches to be played at the same time no matter what?
I suppose TV companies could potentially show both matches if they were on different nights, but if they don't matter who's gonna watch two nights of essentially meaningless football?(this of course is only true of the last couple of rounds of qualification).
Anyway, enough of this…
I hope Kelly plays for the RoI.
I guess he's just what Big Jack needs, a full-back who'll try & get forward, and if they qualify we could see a few Leeds players in the USA even if without England and Scotland.
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 1993 16:09:25 +0100
Subject: Bill Fotherby
Did you know that Fotherby's earnings are based on the amount of money he brings in?
There's an article in today's Yorkshire Post which states that Leeds Utd went surging ahead on the commericial front last year.
The club's accounts were up by 2.2 million pounds on the previous year.
Commercial activities brought in 4.7m and there was a further 2.7m from tv and broad- casting.
This has left Fotherby with 250,535 compared with 143,583 last year.
The club's wages bill was 4.7m.
Match receipts and season tickets brought in 5.7m.
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 16:45:08 +0100
Subject: Re: Who are?
Hammam is on the board for Wimbledon (director me thinks) and he himself was ‘brought to court’(FA) because he had sprayed some bad words in the away teams wardrobe before/after/during a game against Everton (?)— don't remember the details — but a high official in a club doing this should be sacked in my book: even worse i think he did get away with it — a small fee or something but nothing serious.
so as for emotional outbursts and not getting any penalty i guess he knows all albout it and that's why he was asked/spoke to the press about Ooh-Aah's turkish outburst.
talking about Turkey — Norway's world cup team went 2–1 down for Turkey last night and so they deserved.
The turkish team had 8 new players since Norways 3–1 in Oslo and a new manager so i guess the turks has had a shake-out to prepare for the future.
Norway was crap — specially — the defence (which is world class when they care).
Thorstvedt in goal was crap — though both of the turkish goals was big defensive errors from the back four.
But i guess he will be back for the game against us at White Hart Lane.
Ronny Johnsen as sole forward was crap — they all were crap except for Bohinen of Forest…
yeah — cuntona was sold cheap: hey you can get 2.4 mill for Flowers these days…(he's good — but 2.4 mill?)
i will fill in a little on Frank's (at lot has already been said by the new norwegian on the list…) performance later with excerpts from Dagbladet of yesterday.
halvard 
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 1993 16:55:05 +0000
Subject: Another bloody poll
I would like to know what is your favourite ex-Leeds player, that is a player who left Leeds to play for another team.
I don't mean players at the end of distinguished careers who go onto the Vancouver Whitecaps so don't give me Peter Lorimer etc.
I mean players we flogged during the height of their career, whom by rights we should not care about anymore, but who tugs at those little heartstrings still…
Catch my drift?
And I promise I'll count the votes this time, honest.
(No block votes).
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 17:04:54 GMT
Subject: Re: Spurs Game
My Spurs mate ordered the tickets early last week.
He tells me that Spurs have been in touch to say their computer was knackered (bloody things, who wants em?) so there is a delay in sending them out, but we are getting some.
£18.50 a bash we should be in the dug out for that.
My Spurs mate has not been in the Railway Tavern, but has agreed to try it out.
We expect to be there from 12–12.30 assuming the chippy is not to much of a detour first.
Regarding identifying one another, why don't we make up some silly badges or something.
I think personalised shirts, or even any shirts may be asking for trouble if we are going to mingle rather than just get herded in and out of the away enclosure.
I may be being a bit paranoid, but if there is any bother, it will be the ones decked out as Leeds fans that get the trouble.
Especially if they are near me, I will be the first to thump them to maintain my cover:-}.
Yours bravely, Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 93 18:16:33 MET
Subject: I don't Think Kelly will play
My gut feel is that Big Jack *won't* play Kelly.
It is just too important a match to blood a player, who upto now has played only a handful of internationals.
I know how good he is, but it will be some pressure cauldron next Wednesday evening at Windsor and I think Jack will go with the players who have done the job for him before, and once this trial is over and we have qualified:-) he will experiment and experiment and experiment to his hearts content.
I could be wrong, and if Kelly plays I sincerely hope he has a good game for if he doesn't he may not recover from it, as he will always be known for ‘screwing it when the Republic needed a win in Windsor’.
Just my 1/100 of a punt worth.
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 11 Nov 1993 22:36:04–0500
Subject: Chris Fairclough
Out of curiorisity…
Last season it seemed as though Fairclough was one of those being blamed for the porous Leeds defence (without the benefit of TV or live matches I'm going entirely on what I read), and was one of the players stuck with a for sale sign at the end of the season by Wilko.
Yet this season, he's played all but two matches, and since the ‘5 man defence’ appeared when Batty got injured, the reviews I've read have even called him a Batty replacement, and given him a good write-up.
Plus he scores!
So what's up?
Was he crap last season, and now miraculously transformed in his new midfield role?
Is he playing a Batty-esque role?
Is he ‘in’ with Wilko now or what?
What the hell is the midfield formation anyway when it consists of Rocky, Fairclough, Macca and Speed?
Any enlightenment from those who've seen him in action??
John
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 93 09:07:00 GMT
Subject: Re: Another bloody poll
There's only one Tony Currie Kev
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 09:08:10 +0000
Subject: Tim's Poll
I was always a great fan of Sheridan.
When Leeds sold him I thought bollocks, that's that then.
The one player who looked like he would get us out of Div II and we've gone and got rid of him.
Forever doomed to be a ‘sleeping giant’.
When was his last game for us?
He played in the play-off final against Charlton in ‘87 I seem to remember (scored didn't he)?
It was all a bit of a blur that night.
It was the day I had taken my last exam in my finals so I was on a high anyway.
and the possibility of Leeds going up as well!!!
Tchah…
On CEEFAX and TELETEXT it implied that Cuntona got off with the rap.
He'll definitely be playing for the French next week and they wouldn't even confirm that he'd been banned from the scum's next 4 matches in Europe (which ones did they have in mind???????).
Slimey French Greaseball strikes again.
Stu
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 09:13:28 +0000
Subject: Courtney
Courtney ‘Chris’ Fairclough does indeed play a Batty role now in defensive midfield and does it quietly and efficiently.
He was always good.
Last season the whole defence seemed totally up the creek.
They lost their nerve as a group.
Maybe O Leary's been getting the coaching right in that department, or maybe a bit of luck away has steadied their nerve, perhaps a bit of both.
I think it was mainly a right back problem that we had.
Last season definitely took a turn for the better when Kerslake came, and Kelly has made this season's success in no small part.
Wilko was trying all the central defenders last season in right back and none were any good there.
Even Speed wasn't up to it.
Was Whyte hard done by?
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 09:22 GMT
Subject: RE: Another bloody poll
Tim, My favourite ex player has to be John Sheridan.
Great passer, fab.
free take and he can tackle when he wants to.
He'll be missed by Ireland next Wednesday
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 93 10:14:00 GMT
Subject: Re: Another bloody poll
Joe Jordan.
I always liked him…
I guess his leaving coincided with my dad stopping taking me to Elland Road so maybe I'm just been sentimental for the happy days when I could get a parentr to pay for the tickets!!
I guess he wasn't a popular guy at Leeds by ‘leaving under a cloud’.
Still, he gets my vote (good luck at Stoke!!)
glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 10:35:58 GMT
Subject: Re: Another bloody poll
I think I'll have to go for Sheridan too — he was my kind of player, comfortable on the ball, good passer, and took excellent free kicks too.
I suppose it's probably because his time at Leeds coincided with the time when I used to go to see them most frequently.
When I was standing on a cold windy Kop watching us play shite against the likes of Plymouth Argyle, Shez always seemed to make it bearable.
And I did enjoy that volley from just outside the area he scored for Wednesday in the League Cup a few seasons back…now who was that against?
Andy.
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 93 11:50:47 GMT
Subject: tims poll
I'm afraid I have to go for Batts!
BTW I think Kelly has a good chance of playing 'cos Big Jack has a lot of injury problems.
Fairclough is a sort of mid-field sweeper, playing infront of the back four and behind the 3 other mid-fielders.
Whats wrong with Newsome's kindeys?(re: clubcall advert on Ceefax)
Mark (S)
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 14:09:20 GMT+1
Subject: Newsome signs a new contract
Hi
The Programme for the Leeds v Chelsea game had a note to say that Newsome and Wetherall have both signed new 3 year contracts.
Looks like we won't be trying to buy a centre-half for a while.
Jim
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 15:08:00 GMT0BST
Subject:
Hello!
Somebody talk to me.
I've just subscribed — am i doing this right!!
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 09:17:42–0600
Subject: Tim's Poll
As I don't know most of the current players (living in the US for 6 years does that!!!!!!!!!!!)
I have to go with JOE JORDAN.
BTW whatever happened to Trevor Cherry??!!
Nadim
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 93 16:02:57 GMT
Subject: Re: subscribe
Yep you've got through to the Leeds United mail server.
Welcome.
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 16:27:36 +0000
Subject: Newsome We Love You
Damn right!
For once I totally agree with Wilko.
Newsome is just the sort of defender we need if we are to compete at the highest level.
Plus this means my rat gets to keep its name for at least three years.
Unless — nightmare!— Wilko has got him to sign so's he can sell at a higher price to Blackburn…:-(
My Dad told me he saw a headless chicken run round a farmyard once.
Keep those poll entries coming, I want a nice fat emailbag.
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 93 08:30:58 PST
Subject: Vote
Well, chaps it has to be Tony Currie. remember that goal…yes that one that he curled into the corner…who was that against again?
that goal will always stick in my mind as one of my faves…along with the one by Justin Fashanu against Liverpool…but that was for a different team (Norwich).
So, Tony Currie gets my vote.
—Sanjiv
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 93 18:11:16 +0100
Subject: frank gets some big approval
excperts from dagbladet wednesday this week (after norway u21 go 3–1 to turkey)
On the front page: Out with Fjortoft, in with Ronny — BUT STRANDLI WILL BE THE WORLD CUP STRIKER.
(Pictures of Jan Age Fjortoft (Swindon), Ronny Johnsen (clubless — but wanted) and big picture of Frank).
Inside by the sports editor:
lots of stuff about Sorloth (Bursaspor, Turkey), Fjortoft (Swindon) and Johnsen.
‘It's an open battle for the striker place’…
‘The change (Johnsen instead of Fjortoft, my remark) is a signal that even the worlds second best national team must improve to make their mark in the World Cup.
the message is at least understood by Frank Strandli.
Yesterday he played himself to a world cup spot, more consentrated and on the alert then ever.
Before the senior game Strandli is Norway's best striker’.
(well — neither Johnsen nor Fjortoft changed that i think)
Inside article (whole page on Frank):
with header:’ HERE IS YOUR WORLD CUP STRIKER DRILLO’(drillo is norway's boss) and picture of Fat-Frank putting it in (hmm tha ball that eez).
‘Frank S. shaked a little on his head over the result, but was more satisfied than he dared to admit.
His first half was a pearl — even Drillo said that.
And that is much more important than a championship for youth next year.
Frank want to travel with Drillo to the US next year.
To do that he will have to do two things:
get away from Leeds to a place where he can play first team football.
that will happen in a few days.
play well on the U21 team.
that happened yesterday.
…
’‘He's fast and he is strong.
A player i could use in my team’ said Piontek of Strandli after the game’.
(Piontek was coach of denmark in the eigthies when they had their danish dynamite team which impressed in the world cup finals — the team including the likes of in-form Jan Molby, the elder Laudrup brother, Soren Lerby and a very good striker (whose name slips me right now.
Piontek may sell danish international striker Frank Pingel and buy Strandli to Bursaspor, Turkey where he is manager.
Hmm — two norwegian Leeds-rejects in the same club…)
‘In the first half Frank showed why he still is the norwegian attacker who should reach the farthest on the field: He won every single duel in the air, always with at least one turk on the neck.
He ran in every direction and more important: faster than the turks.
He scored.…’
‘After the game he got good critics by senior-manager Drillo himself: Frank was very good.
Fast and strong in the air.
But we must try to get him stable at that level.’
(Drillo seldom speaks of players — the words of Frank is actually quite an achievment for Frank)
so it's just not me guys!!;-)
no news on the sale though — but norw. agent Rune Hauge is working with that.
Hauge is the man who brouht most of the scandivians to england and should be able to fix this (he brought Limpar, Thorstvedt, Strandli, Flo ++)— i guess it's just a question of days now??
Dagbladet yesterday brought a table from the spanish first division (=premier) with albacete listed even though they were not in the top five: ie they listed the top-five teams some ‘…’ and albacete: im quite sure that mean something though nothing more in the papers today.
albacete have lost one and won one since the last time i mailed.
i guess that frank want to leave: not getting any first team play will not give him a world cup spot — and i guess for most players the dream is to —play—in the world cup finals — not sitting on the bench/playing for the reserves for Leeds — even if you are a Leeds fan…
if Frank can get some first team football in spain i guess he feels that it will be better for his career than waiting for a chance at leeds — a chance that much likely will not come up.
(i mean the way he have sticked with specially dino shows us that — dino himself who expressed wishes for playing at the international level himself when he joined leeds — i guess he is a farther away now: the likes of Shearer, Wright (a flop in the internationals), Cole (hey there is one that puts them in the net) and Ferdinand will have no problems keeping him out…)
i just hope that at least one of the ‘british’ teams qualify — but usa94 might take place without all of you guys…but maybe frank will be seen on a telly nearby…
so as much i hate it (i would have loved to see a norwegian playing for leeds — i guess the dream will have to wait) Frank is for sure going.
halvard /scandinavian whites
’
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 17:12:06 +0000
Subject: Tim's poll
I've been wondering all day whether or not to own up to this.
I think it's best just to say it and run.
My vote has to go to Eric Cantona, genius and prize pillock.
Bye, Gav
PS Peter Lorimer should actually be allowed in the poll cos after Leeds he went on to star for Y*rk City.
(Tim, if you still don't believe me, ask Al Doggett!)
From:
Date: Fri, 12 Nov 1993 10:59:06–0800 (PST)
Subject: tims Poll
My Vote goes for Terry Cooper, only the older guys in the group will probably have heard of him, but anyway thats my vote.
Cheers, Tom
From:
Date: Sat, 13 Nov 1993 11:54:16 +0000
Subject: Transfer news
Just a quickie (oo-er); Leeds have signed John Pemberton from Sheff Utd for 250,000.
He is a central defender I think and the Blades bought him for 350,000 from Palace.
Cuntona got a 4-match suspension, and scum got fined for their fans’ behaviour.
And they're not happy.
Stu
From:
Date: Sat, 13 Nov 1993 12:03:33–0500
Subject: John Pemberton
Who is he?
Is he any good?
Is he in a zimmer frame yet (a la DOL) or is he mere strippling?
Is he a good buy?
Will he make the first team or will be another warmer for the subs bench?
Sheff Utd don't exactly have a stunning defensive record this season do they.
John
From:
Date: 14 Nov 93 12:41:52 GMT+1
Subject: Re: Tim's Poll
I'll have to go for the froggy.
Even if I hate him I think he's the most important player Leeds United have had in my time as a Leeds United supporter.
Just see what he's doing for Scum nowadays, it makes me sick!!!!!
My vote goes to Eric Judas Cantona.
From:
Date: Sun, 14 Nov 1993 11:15:33–0600
Subject: Your Team
Hello,
I like to know which players in the premier league you would pick to form a 18 men squad if you were manager of a new team.
The players can be anyone who plays in the English premier league, including foreigners.
So basically your team would have the 11 starters, 1 reserve keeper, and 6 outfield players.
This is not a poll, just a personal interest in how my selected team (not posted here) matches up with yours.
Thanks for your time.
Joo
From:
Date: Sun, 14 Nov 93 18:10:42 GMT
Subject: Re: Your Team
Is this team to play in Europe?…in which case can we have the Frog?(te he he!)
glynn
PS Stoke just won thier first game under Joe Jordan…so what? well I was watching it on telly, had to come to work, & had to find something to do!
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 1993 09:53:02 +0000
Subject: Pemberton
Coca-Cola cup to Blackpool which doesn't exactly fill you with confidence.
As he came from Palace I suppose he was involved in that thrashing they received from the Scousers a bit ago (was it 9–1 or something?).
Stu
P.S. I assume Tertje was only referring to players that have *left* Leeds in his time as a supporter when naming Cuntona as the most important person to have filled a Leeds shirt.
If not, and he's picking the frog out of everyone who has or is still playing for the team, surely Strachan's contribution far outweighs anything done by the Frog.
Without the wee man we wouldn't have got out of Div II (IMO), which in turn means we wouldn't have attracted the likes of Macca and Cuntona, etc.
He has played a lot more than the greasy git, scored more goals, made more important passes, lifted the team when we were down, need I go on?
For that matter, one could argue that Vineyard was equally important —:)
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 10:17:14 GMT
Subject: Re: tims Poll
I thought the remit of the poll was players who were sold while in their prime.
Cooper, Hunter, Bremner, Giles, Clarke and Lorimer were all unloaded when well past their best.
In Lorimer's case, he was bought back because the club went downhill faster than he had.
The players I think are worth considering from my time as a Leeds supporter are
Jordan — My world caved in when he went, basically because he wanted to better himself financially and because he thought Leeds were never going to to be a force under Jimmmy Armfield.
McQueen — Ditto
Currie — Along with the two above were the backbone of Armfield's team.
For 3 years he was Leeds.
Had the same influence as Strach on the team.
Ian Snodin — We nver saw the best of him and got a good price.
Sheridan — The only player worthy of a Leeds shirt during the dark ages.
It was a shame that his patience ran out just as we were getting a team together.
The parting eventually worked out well for us and him.
Hendrie — His contribution during the promotion year was understated.
Could play right-wing or striker.
Seemed an odd move to sell him and then pay out such big amounts for Wallace and Rocky over the next 2 years.
Vinny Jones — Again very influential during the promotion season, Wilko signed him as a notice of intent.
After promotion we needed someonone with a bit more class.
Cantona — We all know about him.
I'd like to say that I was not too sorry to see him go.
He did not gel with Chapman, and was never going to be a direct replacement, so I couldn't see where he was going to fit in long-term.
Changing the shape of the team to accomodate him with Chapman and Wallace was, I'm sure, a contributory factor to the team loosing its way last season at the start of last season.
I had a sneaking feeling he'd do well at Scum, Hughes is the ideal partner for him.
Batty — I think we're all agreed that it was a sad day when he went, but if it enables us to buy the ground back, or strengthen the defence, it may not be so bad.
PS John Pemberton was a right-back in his days at Palace though he may have moved to central defence.
His penetrating run set up the Palace equaliser in the 1990 cup semi-final against scouse.
That's all I remember of him.
it would be sacrilege if he gets the vacant No 4 shirt, they may not be allowed to do that anyway.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 11:20:20 MET
Subject: Strachan is a legend
I fully agree with Stuart that Strachan is the spark that lit the fire.
In years to come Strachans contribution will grow as people begin to look back at where we (Leeds) were before he came, and where/what we are now after 4/5 years of his presence?
He is truly one of the greatest players who has ever donned a Leeds shirt, or ever will.
If anyone is to get a testimonial, from the current team, it should be him.
And if anyone deserves a full house that night it should be as a tribute to all he's done for the club.
The frog was transient — he came, he saw, he spawned, he pissed off.
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 1993 10:45:38 +0000
Subject: My favourite player
Totally.
I thought I probably had misunderstood you.
Anyway, although I worship the ground Strachan dribbles on, he's not my favourite player of all time for Leeds.
The one I voted for in the original poll (I think, it seems ages ago now) was Bremner.
Total Leeds, total footballer.
Gave 110% everytime he played, took shit from no-one, scored vital goals, rallied the troops, gobbed off Sprake, squared up to Dave Mackay, wasn't half bad as a manager.
Woops!
Sorry.
Stuart (not Stewart)
From:
Date: 15 Nov 93 10:50:09 GMT+1
Subject: Re: Your Team
I would have picked these players for the 18 men squad:
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 10:54 GMT
Subject: PEMBERTON
Pemberton played in the cup finals for Wednasday last season and I (not that a stupid girlie would know) thought that he was good.
He is certainly very very fast and Clubcall said that he was 27 and bought by Sheff Utd for 500,000 from Palace.
I think hes a bargain specially as hes good looking to which lets face it is the only way to judge a player anyway.
As for the poll I think Gav is just a little bit biased in his choice of Cuntona, as im sure anyone who has seen him will confirm Gavs evening job is actually as a Cuntona look a like you know posing for pictures for the Sun with an easel and tweeds.
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 11:15:37 GMT
Subject: my team.
My choice of subs may look strange but, I ‘ve tried to cover every position, by picking some players who can play in more than one position.
Other Leeds players I considered were Speed & Wallace, but Townsend & Merson just got the nod.
Kev.
From:
Date: 15 Nov 93 11:24:20 GMT+1
Subject: Re: Stuart's most important player
Dear Stuart.
Yes, I picked the Froggy because I think he was the most important player who's LEFT Leeds United.
I didn't have people playing for Leeds United now in my mind.
Satisfied?
Terje (not Tertje)
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 14:30:01 GMT
Subject: Re: tims Poll
Joo, Tony left Leeds during the summer of 79.
He went to QPR for £400,000 which was not bad for a player pushing 30 in those days.
He had always been slightly prone to drink and gambling.
He was from London and at the time he left claimed that his wife was homesick.
I found this strange as apart from 3 years at Leeds, he had been with Sheffield United for 5 years.
I think he wanted a move to London as a desperate attempt save his marriage.
He spent 4 years or so with QPR and starred in the FA Cup final in 1982.
Eventually his wife left him anyway and the drink and gambling got worse.
I believe he now works in Sheffield at some community centre coaching kids.
Kev.
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 11:59 GMT
Subject: Dodgy claim to fame (was RE:PEMBERTON)
Eric Cantona: All that talent AND good looks?
Friday nights in Oxford can be great if you pick the right pub.
There's one outpost of northern civilization in the heart of the city centre — a fine Sam Smith's pub called the Three Goats Heads.
Last Friday I was there as usual with a few mates.
This is the scene: we are discussing the enticing possibilities of Leeds vs Rangers in the European Cup with an exiled Glaswegian.
A Fat Bloke who supports Man U informs us at length about some 5-year rule under which English Welshmen called Speed are deemed by UEFA to be Not Foreign, a rule which the management of Stuttgart Internazionale are strangely ignorant of.
We engage a party of girls in conversation on the subject, but they turn out to have no interest in football (one is a Tottenham Hotspur supporter), and they leave hurriedly.
Then, unseen at first, a small but subsequently vociferous crowd of lads out on the piss gathers at the corner of the bar.
Sudden strains of ‘Marching On Together’ drift our way.
We join in happily.
Then I step up to the bar to order more beer.
Instantly, without warning or provocation, to a man these visiting Whites look up, point at me, and break very loudly into a repeated chorus of ‘YOU — ARE — CANTONA, SAY YOU ARE CANTONA’.
Before words can be exchanged, however, they sup up and slip off to some other pub.
I get back to my beer, laughing my socks off and feeling dead chuffed.
They had stumbled upon my claim to fame, a gift not given to many.
Unworthy as I am, I look just a bit like Eric.
From a distance, if the light is right, and far, far away from a football pitch.
It started sometime in March, not long after Eric's arrival.
Comments began during his first televised match.
‘Hey!
The new frog striker looks like you, Gav!’
‘Yeah, he does too!
Bloody ‘ell, look at the size of that conk!’
At White Hart Lane, we were fleeced by a tout for tickets in the East Terrace.
Eric was on the bench, the game was a bit grim, but the Leeds were making more noise than the Spurs.
‘Bring him on, bring him on, bring him on’, was the cry.
‘Better get out there and warm up, son’, my mates said, sniggering.
‘Your public awaits.’
As the weeks went by, I naturally began to enjoy this new-found notoriety.
I grew my sideburns again, halfway down the side of my ears.
I practised sticking my chin out and narrowing my eyes suggestively in the mirror.
In a particularly bold move, I decided to shave less often.
And for the first time in my life I found myself appreciating the statuesque Gallic appearance of my hooter.
When I badgered people, they had to admit that yes, I did look a bit like Eric Cantona.
I bought a French team shirt, and wore it at the Liverpool game where we stuffed them 2–2.
On the way out a visiting French person saw me and poked a finger at the shirt.
Visiting French Person: ‘Are you really French?’
Me: ‘No, just slightly Cantonese.’
Even my sister has fallen for it.
One day, waiting in the car in Albion Street to pick up my brother-in-law from work (he looks like Norman Lamont, incidently, but she loves him dearly), she suddenly saw me, her brother who's supposed to be living in exile down south, walking along the road in the company of a glamorous lady.
Then she noticed we had a child with us in a pushchair.
Thoughts of a family scandal crossed her confused mind until she heard us — or rather them — talking fluent French.
The light dawned: it wasn't her pillock of a little brother at all, but La Famille Cantona out doing the shopping.
So here I am, basking ludicrously in the reflected light of Eric's glory.
It opens up a lot of interesting possibilities for the crack, most of which involve adopting a fake French accent.
One in particular which appeals is touring Yorkshire nightclubs with me pretending to be Eric in a posh suit, mumbling inscrutable French-sounding noises and effortlessly impressing the girls.
But this sort of thing would no doubt end up with extended telefotos and tacky headlines in the News of the Screws or somewhere, bringing shame on both La Famille Cantona and the New Improved Leeds alike.
Still, I have plenty of windows in my love schedule right now, so at this stage it shouldn't be completely ruled out.
On match days, there is an obvious problem — Eric is happily chasing about for all to see, so the desired mistaken identity is a non-starter.
Other ploys may be possible, though.
One is hammering on the front door of Elland Road asking to be let in to the VIP suites.
‘Burt eet eez me!
Ah em ze breutheur of Eric Cantona, ‘ere on ‘oliday! ah murst find out why ‘e lurves you.’
If I can keep up the Peter Sellers act long enough without dying of laughing, I might just get meself a few pints out of it.
Perhaps I could be Eric's stunt man, standing in when he turns on the flash dangerous stuff that terrifies the defenders in his wake and makes them have a go like David Burrows did.
If I could just get a role doing some of the falls in the action replays, say, I could save him from horrible injury, or at least the odd booking.
(It so happens falling over is the best aspect of my game.)
Subsequently I'd probably get some personal media exposure — an interview and demonstration on Going Live, perhaps, or a phone call to Danny Baker on Morning Edition.
More likely, though, is my mates shopping me — I'd end up in the back pages of 90 Minutes (‘my mate's sad cos he's convinced he looks like Eric Cantona when in fact he's got a face like an orangutan's bum’) or become the subject of an earnest letter in When Saturday Comes (‘As a Whites fan since before my birth, I am appalled by the recent upsurge of so-called Canto lookalikes, I can no longer walk the streets without being overrun by people with sideburns and spurious French accents’, etc etc.)
The shame of that would be a heavy price to pay.
On temporarily sober reflection, I think I'd better just stay the way I am, and settle for the occasional bursts of adulation down the pub.
To Eric I say a heartfelt merci bien for everything you're doing at Leeds, and for everything you may yet do to help improve my love life.
To the guy who wanders round Elland Road in the snazzy white French away strip, with a number 18 and the letters ‘C A N T O N A’ on the back, could you get in touch?
I'd very much like to borrow that shirt sometime.
Gav — Three Goats Whites, Oxford
(That was then, of course.
Now the merci bien is a little less heartfelt.)
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 1993 15:02:12 GMT0BST
Subject: my 18
This would be my squad of 18:-
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 15:03:21 GMT
well, just thought I would keep you informed of news on the Scottish scene
Rangers failed to win at home again this week.
Raith Rovers are hardly world beaters but then they haf a little help from the referee who gave them a dodgy penalty and turn down two good penalty appeals in the last two minutes.
Gary McAlister was at the match — possible transfer to Rangers??— I wish!!
Trevor francis was also at the game.
Rangers may buy back chris Woods from them as Andy Goram is still out for a while, and Maxwell is shit!!
There is also talk of Trevor buying Gary Stevens.
Personally, I would mind, as Gary has been crap since he came back from injury.
Jimmy Nichol is the manager of Raith Rovers but that could have been his last match in charge as he is one of the favorites for the Northern Ireland match
Sorry folks but I hope Kelly has a stinker if he plays on Wednesday night for Big Jacks team.
Nothing would give me greater pleasure than to see Eire not qualify.
This has probably something to do with the fact that I was born in Belfast and lived there for 18 years.
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 15:04:43 GMT
Does anyone know what other football teams are available through listserv as some of my friends at Uni want to join
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 15:07:36 GMT
I'm coming down to leeds for the Man City match in about 3 weeks time.
Anyone know if there are any Kop tickets left.
I haven't phoned the ticket office yet, but i will be able to book it over credit card when I do.
Colin
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 15:12:44 GMT
Subject: Re: frank gets some big approval
SO if Frank is so keen on playing in USA'94 AND playing for Leeds why doesn't he go on loan to somebody who needs a striker?
There must be plenty of clubs who'd like to take him on loan ‘til the end of the season…probably even in the Premiership (Swindon;-)).
No, I think that Wilko wants rid of him…more cash…happier bankers…and no one will really worry about selling off reserves (unlike Batty or any of the other first team).
IMHO!!!
glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 1993 15:23 GMT
Subject: My 18
My top 18 would be 
Declan
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 93 16:02:48 GMT
Subject: My 18
My best attempt at a sweeper system:(I'd probably replace Walker with the guy who sweeps for Norwich…but I don't know his name!!)
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 15 Nov 1993 16:55:02–0500
Subject: National team news
When someone hears the national team news, could they e-mail me or mail the list, as r.s.s is increasingly poor at giving information like this.
Thanx.
BTW, do any of you locals ever go to youth or reserve matches?
I realize this is probably a more extreme form of masochism, but it'd be interesting in terms of future talent spotting.
(Although it could turn into ‘My lad played a blinder for St Noggins U13 B team yesterday’ I suppose.)
As a final thought, I think it would be worth Leeds's while to have a scout looking over the US collegiate system.
Sure, soccer is not a big game here in terms of TV and newspaper coverage.
However it is very big as a school sport, and very strong at collegiate (=university) level.
The yanks at university back in Cambridge were very skillful (I don't recall how many ever played for the university).
In the UK most university level sports are a joke (execpt the Boat Race, varsity rugby match, certain other games), but in the US college sport is BIG.
Even here in Princeton (only about 7,500 students) the soccer team managed to draw a couple of thousand people to watch their first round end of season game.
Plus women's soccer (if anyone cares) is much stronger here, as is women's rugby!!!
(Another english guy coaches that team over here).
Well, I had to ramble about something — the list has been really quiet the last few days.
Hopefully it'll get noisy when premiership action draws close.
Byee
John
From:
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 93 10:46:30 GMT
Subject: Re: McAllister transfer???
I think you'll find he wants him to be the best player in Scotland and NOT England
Glynn
From:
Date: 16 Nov 93 10:49:04 GMT+1
Subject: Re: McAllister transfer???
This was written by Colin McDonald yesterday.
I just wonder why the hell he would like to see Gary McAllister sign for Rangers?
Look what he's doing for Leeds United nowadays?
I don't think any will argue with me when I say that McAllister, like he's playing now, is the absolutely best midfield player in England.
Can Colin give me the name of one player who's a better midfieldplayer than Macca, ofcourse he can't.
I just can't see the reasons why Colin would like to see Macca sign for Rangers.
If he's not a Leeds United supporter I can understand it.
He must be afraid of Leeds United like they're playing now.
The only way to stop us now is selling our best players.
I surely don't want to see Macca leave Elland Road too, not even for stlg5M.
From:
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 93 13:53:34 MET
Subject: Irish team (Kelly not playing)!
Jack Charlton did what I though he would in picking a tried and trusted (sic) team => no Gary Kelly:
I hope he makes no mistakes and makes does the business tomorrow night.
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 1993 14:43:44 +0000
Subject: Ideal 11
Seaman, G. Kelly, Pig Bruce, McGrath, Dorigo, Rocastle, McAllister, Speed, Pig Giggs, Pig Eric, Shearer
I'm sorry about the three scum players but ability must be recognised.
I noticed a lot of you aren't nominating many Leeds players — are you serious???:-)
Tim
From:
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 1993 15:32:08 +0000
Subject: Macca Swap;-)
Why not trade?
Macca for McCoist.
Jock ‘Nine In A Row’ Stein
From:
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 93 16:02:05 GMT
Subject: England 11
Just got this from a mate who got it from the Arsenal list (!!!)
No Sharpe!!
glynn
From:
Date: Tue, 16 Nov 93 18:55:08 MET
Subject: No Dorigo
Fuck Sharpe — no Dorigo!!!!!
James.
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 93 09:11:05 GMT
Subject: Re: No Dorigo
You actually EXPECTED Turnip to pick Dorigo when Pearce is ‘fit’??
That's almost suggesting the England manager would make a rational decision based on ability and merit!
;-)
What is worrying is that Yoarth said he may not play Speed (but Goss) so with Kelly not playing Macca could be the only Leeds representative playing tonight (I think)…just shows the state of British football managers:-(
Glynn
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 09:19:26 GMT
Subject: Strachan Injury?
I remember seeing Gary Speed on Football Focus before the Chelsea game saying that Strachan should be back from injury ‘soon’.
Does anyone know if he'll be available for the Spurs game?
Also, does anybody have any ideas as to what's going to happen when he does come back?
As I see it, Rocky's been playing in the wide midfield role (more or less a direct replacement for Strach), with Fairclough playing as a direct replacement for Batty, and Macca and Speed in more central roles.
In that case, it's difficult to see how Rocky and Strach could both play without re-organizing the team.
It would be a shame to see Rocky dropped again after apparently playing very well since he came into the side, but at the same time I can't really see him keeping Strach out of the team.
I guess one option would be to bring Strach in for Fairclough, but presumably that would mean Speed (or somebody) playing a more withdrawn role.
I've only been to see one game so far this season, so it's difficult for me to judge, but maybe some of you who've been more often could speculate?
Andy.
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 93 09:37:01 GMT
Subject: Re: No Dorigo
Kelly, right now looks to be the most likely, and Possibly only Leeds player to be going to the world cup.
Who would have put money on that 3 months ago?
England are unlikely to qualify, and Wales in my book have a less than even chance.
Mark Beeney could become Irish by then of course;-) and might go.
Amazing eh?
We'll know more tomorrow.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 10:38:26 +0000
Subject: Rocky/Strach
One possibility would be to ask Rocky to replace Fairclough I suppose.
not sure how this would work but I think there's got to be a place for both Strach and rocky in the team.
Q) Is the Everton match on Sky?
Q) I was only half watching Question of Sport last night (trying to psyche myself up for Wild Palms — you need your brain on full alert to make head or tail of it), but was that Bremner scoring against Celtic in the EC Semi?
If so, was that the first recorded occurrence of the Leeds salute?
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 93 11:12:42 GMT
Subject: Lift?
Is there anybody who is going to Old Trafford on Jan 1st who could give me a lift from the Leeds region??
Has Pemberton actually signed yet (last I heard it was subject to a medical)?
Mark (S)
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 93 11:41:20 GMT
Subject: Re: Rocky/Strach, Salute
On occasions Strach has played on the left — To accomodate Hendrie in the promotion year, and when Batty, Macca had a go at right-back last season.
It works quite well in that he is more at home in wide positions than Speed, but not being left-footed means he cuts back usually.
I suppose when he is fit Wilko has 3 choices.
Speed Macca Fairclough Rocastle Strach Speed Macca Rocastle — my preferred formation.
Speed Macca Fairclough Strach
Is Steve Hodge fit?
If so I'm surprised Wilko has not tried
Hodge Speed Macca Rocky
during Strachan's lay-off.
He obviously rates Fairclough in the defensive mid-field role.
I must admit his ability to get forward unnoticed in the John Wark/Pig Robson style is a bonus.
Yes, that was Billy's goal against Celtic.
I always regarded that as my Birthday present, of course my happy birthday only lasted about anther hour.
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 93 12:19:57 GMT
Subject: Re: No Dorigo
Well I'm going to predict not only that England qualify tonight but also:
Rocky/Dorigo/Deane/Kelly/Speed ALL go to USA (won't all play though!!)
I think that Rocky & Deane will have a good enough rest of season to get then squad places
You heard it here first!!!
I hope ROI qualify as I've got a ticket from a mate for ONE game in Boston…
I suppose ROI would go there if they get through!!
Glynn
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 93 13:38:53 +0100
Subject: my team — the mother of teams (well not quite he he)
ok my team (he, he, he):
all players have played for norway's a-team + marked players are regulars for norway (and i guess fat-frank will be next year)
strength: at the back, substitute Johnsen with Bratseth and that is norway's starting line-up (who let in a total of 2 goals in 4 matches vs England and Holland).
weakness: midfield/up front — Nilsen is a defender and Ingebrigtsen is not playing first team futba for City — he has been rented out to norwegian club rosenborg this summer and is now back in city, trying to get a first team place.
fjortoft has not scored a single goal in the premiership yet (he kept them coming at a very steady rate at rapid vienna (under manager Hans Krankl — one of my favorite strikers — favorite striker of all times has to be Der Bomber, Gerd Muller, who scored something like 60 goals in 50 internationals! did he in fact score against us in our 2–0 defeat vs Bayern Munich?))— i guess Fjortoft has problems adjusting to the english play and swindon is not the best of teams anyway.
and Strandli has scored some — but not this season…
if i can use a div 1 player (bohinen, forest — tech wonder boy with amazing goals and great moves as a speciality — scored the most memorable goal of my life up to date against italy when we beat them at home 2–1 in the EC qual game on june 5th 1991 — world class defender baresi was on his way to the corner flag — outclassed by a bohinen move — when bohinen put the ball under Walter Zenga — i attended the game and had the perfect seat for that goal — hmm — i got a little carried away here, ehh?;-))
thorstvedt-berg, nilsen, pedersen, bjornebye-halle, ingebrigtsen, bohinen, flostrandli, fjortoft would then be my team.
subs: lydersen, johnsen (erland of chelsea — not ronny who was linked with leeds)
the team (hmm i guess without too many familiar names for you guys&girls?) would sure as hell be hard to beat for —any—team — the mix at midfield should be quite good, flo's air dominance, bohinens skills, halles fighting spirits and ingebrigtsens running capacity — this should all blend somehow.
ya' all know how i rate frank — so the weak spot must clearly be fjortoft…
i might use flo at the right side instead of the left for him to win the hard, long balls from left back bjornebye.
flo plays wide midfield on norways national team — but i think he is used mainly as a target man for sheff utd. norw coach drillo wants to try a setup with one ‘Flo’ as both left and right wide midfielder, then trying to hit hard high, crosses from behind towards the ‘towers’at the sides thus giving football a new dimension of play.
the wide midfielders heading the ball instead of crossing it towards goal.
i have not heard of a similar setup at least— the only player who is remincent in norway of flo and almost as good in the air has been out injured this season so the setup has not been tried and maybe never will — at least it shows that coach Egil ‘Drillo’ Olsen —thinks—which might not be said of Mr Turnip.
—i—would just have used three defenders against san marino — something like
Dixon — Walker — Dorigo at the back and brought in a target-man at top — the key to norways big win (10–0) vs san marino was jostein flo: he won every single duel in the air…
pearce is another overrated player — i cant see why he is always prefered for tony — yeah pearce is tough and shoots hard and is a fighting guy — —so what—— dorigo is a much more —international—type — coming forward more often and when in form seems to be a good friend with the ball…
anyway — it's going to be one hell of a night in europe tonight!
see ya', halvard/scand. whites
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 12:38:03 +0000
Subject: The Sprake Question
To the old folks in this list I address the following:
What was wrong with Gary Sprake?
He can't have been so crap otherwise he wouldn't have been picked in such a brilliant side but the mistakes I've seen were just appalling, and in the most important games e.g. the first Chelsea 70 Cup Final game when the ball went right under his body.
Then there was the ball in the own net at Anfield fiasco.
I read somewhere that Charlton chased him round the goal for this, is that true??
Young ‘un Tim (only 31)
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 12:40:34–0500 (EST)
Subject: RE: The Sprake Question
Actually, GAry Sprake was a remarkable goalkeeper.
If you have ever read some of the match reports from games in the 60's you would appreciate his skill.
He was always prone to grotesque mistakes (as listed in the note) BUT he also provided World Class saves regularly, and but for his lapses would probably rank as one of the worlds greats.
I just wonder what happened to him — I alwaysrated him better than Harvey (who was solid rather than inspirational).
Old ‘un Richard (35!)
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 17:52:54 +0000
Subject: Re:The Sprake Question
In the infamous Anfield incident I gather the scousers started to sing ‘Careless Hands’ by Des O'Connor when the gaff occurred.
never heard anything about Charlton chasing him (although on the Video of the FA Cup Final you can see Wor Jackie saying something along the lines of ‘What the f*** was that?’).
Sprake was exceptionally good at pulling off the nearly impossible saves but his mind seemed to wander a bit (perhaps back to the Valleys).
only problem was that these lapses in concentration seemed to conicide with the ball heading towards him, hence the comment ‘and Sprake has let in a sitter’.
Harvey was certainly reliable but I think he was also capable of pulling off the classic save (as in the Leeds-Arsenal Cup final).
The Don admitted that we would have won more if we'd had Harvey in earlier so perhaps that's the most telling point of all.
I seemed to remember harvey having a car crash or something (was this connected with his booze problem?).
Didn't another Scot come in?
Stewart?
Can't remember now really.
Can't even remember if he was any good or not.
Stu
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 13:20:06–0500
Subject: Re: Re:The Sprake Question
Wasn't Dave Stewart for a while regularly trading 1st team positions with David Harvey?
I seem to remember my Panini album once to my horror picturing Stewart rather than Harvey, with the blurb along the lines of ‘looks set to make the 1st team spot his own’ but I don't think that ever happened.
John
From:
Date: Wed, 17 Nov 1993 18:05:36–0500
Subject: Leeds players in the US
Well, it looks like the only Leeds players in the US next year will be Kelly and maybe Beeney, along with ex's like wor Jackie, Sheridan and Irwin.
(Have I missed anyone.)
Oh, and fat Frank I guess.
I have to admit to strange feelings of smugness at Eric ****ona not being there.
Back to the mundane stuff.
Are Strach, DoL, Tinkler and the other casualties fit yet?
Team news for Saturday eagerly awaited.
John
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 1993 09:10:59 +0000
Subject: World Cup Shame
Hope those who were watching the game on BBC1 were as disgusted as I was with Englands performance.
We didn't look loke a team who needed 7 goals to win, quite happy to just knock it around.
So much for a passing game — hoof the ball into the other half and see what happens.
Wright never deserved the four goals he got — he never did anything to get the ball but let it come to him and losing out a few times in the process when the defender took the ball away.
The 10 second goal of SMs was lucky, but thoroughly deserved.
We were playing with so much arrogance that it needed something like that to make us play.
Out of the team, only Platt, Ince and Ripley were worthy of mention.
It only leaves the burning question — what time today will Turnip resign.
I dont think he has done anything for the national game.
We have lacked inspiration and become the predictable and boring team to play.
Lets hope that we get a decent manager…any votes?
I felt sorry for Wales, but why the hell did they let Bodin take the penalty.
Whats wrong with Saunders /Rush /Giggs?
If one of them took it it would have been a goal for certain.
It told you something about the standard of the England game when coverage of the Wales game continued until the end, even though we scored 3 more in that time.
Well thats my 2p worth.
England manager?
Cloughie!
Ade
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 10:28:51 +0100
Subject: WQ highlights
well — a big footballing night last night and some classic stuff to remember:
argentina coming through 1–0 vs australia on an own goal.
france crashing out at almost exactly 90 minutes with a great goal from kostadinov (FC Porto, Portugal)— that was fucking amazing when you think of that they went down to israel also at home in almost the same manner (the other goals in this match was also a joy to watch — canto who said he never play in paris again was seen playing and scoring at least on my telly)
McLoughlin giving Ireland the trip to the USA with his 1–1 equalizer vs Northern Ireland — he came on as a substitute — meaning that Ireland left Denmark at home — same points, same goal difference — but Ireland got more goals
some blunders from big stars:
Koeman for Holland vs Poland — an easy clearance not given — giving the poles the 1–1 goal
Schmeicel — on a trip to nowhere when the cross came in — he was a little obstructed — but for a big guy playing in the english league he should really have no problems with that one.
and finally: Pearce for England — 8.6 seconds (the earliest goal ever given away for England)— a loose backpass minded for Seaman who really had no chance — giving San Marino 1–0 (San Marinos second goal in the WCQ)
hell we said they should play Tony!
halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 10:59:19 MET
Subject: Remember Frank Worthington?
Remember the depressing days (early 1980's) playing in the second division and toiling to beat the likes of Carlisle and Plymouth.
One of the shining lights, for a little while during that period, was Frankie Worthington.
Anyone know where he is now?
I got the impression that he was a bit of a drinking man?
Any ideas?
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 10:12:14 GMT
Subject: Re: Re:The Sprake Question
yes, especially in the 1975 season.
I think Harvey was injured near the start but near the end was kept out by Stewart.I think Stewart played in the ‘75 Euro cup final with Harvey benched!
BTW did you see Wilo ‘touting’ for the England job on sky!
I reckon he is going!!:-(
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 10:24:20 GMT
Subject: Re: Remember Frank Worthington?
There was an article on Frank in one of the papers in the last few days, I'll see if I can dig it out.
What a briliant player?
I heard somewhere that he claimed to sleep with a different woman before every match.
Until he became happily married.
He's still playing non-league football somewhere.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 10:37 GMT
Subject: Fairclough
Please excuse this (and other) untimely replys to posts.
Ive been off and I am presently ploughing through 80 odd messages.
I cant be arsed to check for replys etc:-)
I have to say at this point, in the early days of the list I was vocal in my defence of Fairclough.
Ive always liked him, and said that all he lacked was the domineering touch.
That means hes fine at being the ‘other’ defender.
Also, he is one of the best man-man markers Ive seen…basically give him a job and he'll do it.
He does also score some important goals.
So, there you have it…
I think hes a good defender who was unfortunate last year to take so much stick.
ALL defenders cock up some times.
Although Stuart ‘Mr Inspiration’ Pearce's last night was a classic AND a vindication of my opinion of the overrated, overhyped clumsy wanker.
Not content with missing a penalty in the WC Semi final last time, he has to give the fastest EVER international goal in one of Englands most crucial (potentially) games.
To SAN MARINO.
Nice going Pearce…why dont you just stick to ‘inspiring’ Forests continued decline??
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 1993 10:51:08 +0000
Subject: Meet up at Spurs game
A note for anyone going to the Spurs game on Sat — I think this includes me, Stuart, Charles, Kev, Sunil, Halvard and Paul (another four and we could get a game against the Spurs list).
Our discussions of last week seem to have lead us to the Railway Tavern at 12–12:30.
This is what Sunil had to say about where it is:
That's the British Rail train station, not the Underground.
How do we indenterfy ourselves?
Dunno.
If it helps, I'm reputed to look like the big-nosed frog we love to hate, and I'll probably be wearing my yobby green bomber jacket, or my blue one with WEST VIRGINIA on the back in letters that are visible from Leeds.
Can the rest of you send up clues on how to recognise you too?
And Kev, there's three of us coming from Oxford — if there's two or less of you, shall we meet up at Lewknor and share the car?
Looking forward to meeting up, see yous at the match, Gav
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 10:54 GMT
Subject: Pemberton: Humphries Strikes Back
Ok Ok enough already.
(Read in American accent for full effect)
Pemberton.
Good player.
VERY fast.
F*cking BARGAIN.
1)
Ive said for a while that the missing ingredient in our side FOR THE WAY TEAMS PLAY TODAY is a bit of pace in central defence.
2)
I noticed Pemberton at least a year ago and thought what a good player he was.
He stood out like a sore thumb for Sheff Utd, I think I even remember him from his Palace days.
He reads the game very well, and has played both right and centre back…meaning he can cover the full backs.
Those of you who saved or remember the ‘CRAP’ incident with me and some floozy who supported Sheff Utd but got on the list, will recall that I paid Sheff Utd some compliments…in the form of Hodges, pemberton and Bassett.
3)
Leeds plus Pemberton = Options galore.
Sweeper system…you got it.
Wing Backs…you got it.
Kelly right midfield/striker…you got it.
Bk flamer meal…ooops, sorry.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 12:17:00 +0100
Subject: Re: Meet up at Spurs game
i'll bring my mate with me so then we just miss three? are plans for such a game real?(joke i guess?) if so what kind of footwear should i bring over?
12–12:30 is a little early for me — it's my first time in london so i guess i will go for a sight-seeing or something…except to see me around 13:00–13:30. anyone know if the shops are open in newcastle on sunday? we are going for the newcastle-scousers game.
i guess we'll find it.
OK — im small and dark and somewhat ‘chubby’(at the moment — too manuy pints lately…). does not look like a viking at all— more some kind of far east/portugese bloke — ill be wearing red puma states and probably black levis — if i see leeds-stuff inside i guess i will be unfolding my leeds ‘smiley’ shirt…jacket — dunno — how is the weather over there ?
is this game all-ticket? what are the chances for getting tickets and getting a seat at the away fans end? i do not have a membership-card. i guess i could give it a try (i have other tickets somewhere else)
halvard
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 1993 11:17:12 +0000
Subject: Worthington
Frank was at Elland Road when there was a celebrity penalty shootout with a page 3 girl before the West Ham game.
His flared brown wide-lapelled suit was outrageous, as if the seventies had never been away.
He scored in the shootout, and with the page three girl too from what I could make out.
The kop gave him a huge cheer when he came out.
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 11:50:50 GMT
Subject: Re: Meet up at Spurs game
Well I'll be wearing a distressed leather jacket, black jeans, a new short haircut which makes me look really hard and a large stomach.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 1993 11:59:01 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: Meet up at Spurs game
There should three of us going, so that just leaves 1 more.
Any more volunteers?
We'll be there about 1 o'clock.
OK, I'm dead easy to recognise, as I'm Rodney Wallace colour (Well a lot lighter really, asian rather than black), shortish, thinnish, black leather jacket.
(fair description Tim?).
BTW Halvard, wrap up warm, coz its bloody freezing down here (well in London anyway).
We've not got tickets, Spurs have got some tickets on sale on the day for 12/13 quid for the home end.
I don't rate your chances of getting a ticket for the Leeds end, touts never seem to have them coz of hassles with membership cards.
Are the stewards asking to see membership cards at the turnstiles this year?
Sunil.
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 13:37:01 +0100
Subject: one more?
so sunil brings two more and i one = total of 10. one more volunteer? or we could play with then men just as spain did last night to crunch european champs denmark out?
so who will take contact with the spurs list?
halvard
From:
Date: 18 Nov 93 14:51:12 GMT+1
Subject: Re: McAllister transfer???
I still can't see why you want him to leave?
Please answer the question.
It'll be interesting reading.
Terje
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 15:11 GMT
Subject: Re:McAllister transfer
Speaking for him…from his first post to the list it seems he is a Rangers supporter first and foremost, and I think Leeds are his ‘English’ side he likes.
In fact it may be that Leeds arent even his fave English side.
Anyways, he would therefore like Macca playing for his ‘proper’ side.
I mean, I quite like Parma in Italy (nice kit aswell).
Asprilla is a class player and I would like him playing for Leeds.
So, if I went on a Parma list…
I might say ‘Yes hes good and I want him to play for Leeds’.
I tend to look out for Parmas result, but I support Leeds.
There are a few non-Leeds supporters lurking around on the list I think.
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 93 16:43:18 MET
Subject: Flush them out:-)
Mark,
Us real fans should try and devise a way of flushing them out:-).
Any ideas what really separates the real Leed United fan from the casual fan or even the downright traitor?
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 18 Nov 1993 16:34:44 GMT0BST
Subject: Re: Newcastle-Liverpool
To those of you going to the Newcastle-Liverpool game — no, there aren't many shops and stuff open on a Sunday (apart from MacDonald's, of course)
I don't know if any of you have ever been to Newcastle before—if not, I'd be happy to meet you at the station, or wherever,(as long as it's not too early in the morning!!), take you for a drink, and show you how to get to the ground.
let me know if you fancy it, Cheers, Steve.
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 09:26:16 MET
Subject: Meet at Spurs
Well i will be bringing 4 maybe 5 so that gives us 11 plus 3 subs.
I will be wearing a Knee length leather coat (bloody cold) with a hood and my Leeds away shirt on underneath (Yellow and Blue vertical stripes for those that don't know;-)).
Gav sorry about not sending the TSB and Prog do you want me to bring it tomorrow???
P.S. wil be there at about 12.00–12.30
Paul Cadd
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 10:32:22 +0100
Subject: Re: Meet at Spurs
so will there be a game and if so where and shall i pack my football shoes in my luggage — im leaving home (over here in even colder (-5 C) norway)) in just a couple of hours so it would have been nice to know.
hmm — lots of leather on you english guys;-)
team news anyone?
halvard
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 10:13:27 +0000
Subject: RE: Meet up at Spurs
Err, the reference to playing the Spurs list was just my little joke, I'm afraid, so it's best if you leave your boots behind, Halvard.
However the idea seems to be quite poplier, so maybe one day who knows 
Okay, Paul, bring 'em tomorrow, that'll be great.
I noticed Stuart hasn't written up to say what he looks like, so I'll tell you that he's a cross between Paul Young and Griff Rhys-Jones.
Gav
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 10:26:32 +0000
Subject: Gryff Rhys Jones
This is a complete fabrication.
granted, the picture on my Leeds membership card does, in the wrong light, bear a bit of a resemblance to the bloke (not when he was naked in Wilt I might add).
Just so's you're not disappointed, keep your eyes open for a cross between Mel Gibson and Tom Cruise, with a beer-gut a la Jocky Wilson.
On the Leeds Fashion catwalk I shall be sporting a rather sexy little blue jacket number complete with dried ketchup stain on the left lapel.
Once this becomes off-the-shoulder I shall go to my evening casual wear of a Leeds home strip from a couple of years ago.
Extra delights here must surely be the fact that I have put on a stone since its initial purchase giving that well-fed blimpo look.
From the waist-down I intend to wear a pair of blue jeans with the possible added attraction of whatever I manage to spill down them tonight in the pub.
Stu(d)
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 13:21:04 +0000
Subject: Wilko and England
I was looking at back pages of the tabloids this lunchtime and noticed that Steve Coppell is the favourite now.
(Bad for England — Palace were a horrible team under his rule.
They were an ill-disciplined total longball outfit.)
Of course Taylor is still in there and says he has no intention of resigning unless pushed.
I don't really care who gets it as long as it isn't our mate.
As far as Howard Wilkinson is concerned, Leslie Silver was quoted in the article as saying ‘We would fight like hell to keep him’.
The tabloid report implied that this means contractual obligations would be clung to at all costs.
(Wilko signed a long long term contract a couple of years back.)
Tim
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 13:51 GMT
Subject: Newsome out
I hear that our hero Jon Newsome is out for the game tomorrow ans will be replaced by John Pemberton.
Declan
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 14:09 GMT
Subject: SATURDAY TEAM NEWS
I ve just had a quick look at text and it says that Durie has had a shock recall Sheringham and Dozzel are definatly out and that Kerslake is doubtful.
Strachan is in the squad with rumours of being on the bench and Pemberton is being given his debut cos Jon Newsome is still out.
Also Leslie Silver said in the paper that although he wanted the national team to do well he thought that Leeds winning the title was far more important and that he would fight ‘tooth and nail to keep Howard Wilkinson at Leeds’
Kirsty
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 15:48:40 GMT0BST
Subject: Re:meeting at spurs
Can any of you who are meeting up for the spurs game do me a favour, please?
I'm supposed to me meeting up with halvard on sunday when he comes up to newcastle, but I think he left for england before I had time to mail him my phone number.
If you see him, can you let him know that it's 091 224 1671, and that I should be in tomorrow evening until around 7:30
Also, does anyone have a bet on the football coupons on a Saturday.
More to the point, does anyone have a bet with more success than i do (shouldn't be difficult).
Anyone with any sure-fire tips for tomorrow—let me know.
Thanks, Steve.
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 11:07:27–0500 (EST)
Subject: Re:The Sprake Question
Harvey AND STewart get Full International caps for Scotland (though no many)?
Richard
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 16:15:52 GMT
Subject: Typical
Typical,
where am I now?
London (Brixton infact).
Where am I driving on Saturday?
Newcastle (via Leeds)
Where will I be the week leading upto the Newcastle game?
Newcastle Where will I be driving the day of the game?
Harrogate (near Leeds!)
I only appear to see Leeds at Wembley or mid-week Cup games recently.
Any reserve game at Ellang Road this week?
Glynn
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 1993 11:29:02–0500 (EST)
Subject: Harvey and Stewart
Sorry, last message should have read:—
‘I seem to remeber that Stewart did play in Paris (EC Final 1975 — I mean, I was there!).
They were in and out of the side during the mid-70's but didn't Harvey AND Stewart get Full International caps for Scotland (though not many)?’
Richard
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 16:46:18 GMT
Subject: Squad news
SQUAD NEWS FROM CEEFAX:—
STRACH is on the bench.
PEMBERTON will start instead of NEWSOME who has bruised Kidneys.
Lets hope for another win!
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 16:53:08 GMT
Subject: Re: Harvey and Stewart
I thought Harvey played in the WC finals in 1974 (?).
In fact I thought that most of the Scotland team was made up of Leeds player in the mid-70's…infact that is why I support Scotland & not England (actually because of Lorimer) at fooball.
From:
Date: Fri, 19 Nov 93 17:18:49 GMT
Subject: Re: football (sort of)
Press release…sorta interesting;-)
From:
Date: Sat, 20 Nov 93 17:31:51 MET
Subject: HT -> Tottenham 0–0 Leeds!
Wallace was straight through on goal and missed as did the Tottenham player Barmby in the first half.
James.
From:
Date: Sat, 20 Nov 93 17:44:27 MET
Subject: 10 minutes to go Leeds 1–0 Tottenham -> Deane scored after 53
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 1993 10:15:11 +0000
Subject: saturday
Well, doesn't seem as if anyone else has put up the score but it was Tottenham 1 — Leeds 1.
Deane scored for Leeds, and, it could be argued he scored for Tottenham as well cos I think it was his foot that deflected it past Beaney.
I'll leave others to write a longer report.
For my tuppence worth i agree with Triffic Brooking that it wasn't a back-pass but Beaney should have wellied it up the pitch.
Looking at it again on Match of the Day I think even he realised this cos he didn't protest that much.
Good to see a few from the list, Paul (plus Sticky, who holds the World's record on making a pint last), Sunil (and mates), Halvard (+ 1 — looks like you saw a good ‘un yesterday), Kev and Haitch.
Shame about the tickets though lads.
Did you get in, Sunil?
Stu
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 10:29:02 GMT
Subject: Spurs 1 Leeds 1
Well, the day didn't start so well for our group.
Spurs had sold the tickets my mate had reserved on to someone else.
So after a quick pint with the assembled group members (Gav, Charles, Stuart, Paul) we had to go and queue up.
We got in to an unreserved seating area for 13 quid.
First let me say I thought Leeds played very well.
If that was a true reflection of their form then I think we can have a good shot at a place in Europe.
I don't think there's enough football in the team to win the league.
Leeds started the first half well, with Deane getting a very early chance, Speed got in his way a bit and the header was a typical powder puff in the end.
Who was controlling that bit of cord?
Spurs then started knocking the ball around nicely from the back and succeeded in creating quite a few gaps.
The Spurs twats around us were moaning at their team for playing good football.
The two best chances fell to Barmby (a rebound that Beeney should have held onto in the frist place), and Rod Wallace, who skated past the Spurs defence onto a great through ball from Macca, His first time shot under pressure went just wide.
After half-time, Leeds came out firing.
They din not allow the Spurs defenders so much time on the ball.
From a hurried clearance, I think, Wallace picked up the ball and went past 4 defenders to the bye-line.
The ball went via Dorigo to Deane, whose side-footer went right in the corner.
It looked a scrappy goal, but slightly better once I had seen what really happened on the telly.
Leeds then had more chances, Macca had one touched onto the post, with Wallace's follow-up going just wide.
The best move was a forty yard pass from Macca, touched on by Deane to Wallace, I think ending up with a shot from Rocky.
After about 70 minutes Rocky began to tire.
Consequently Edinburgh and Sedgley put Kelly under pressure on the Leeds right.
Whelan came on for Rocky, and hit the post with his first touch, after Macca had made a lovely run and cut-back.
However, that was to prove costly as from Spurs next attack, Pemberton slid in to intercept a cross from leeds right, the ball came off him awkwardly, Beeney, when under no real threat, handled the ball.
Joe Worrall who had a good game otherwise, decided this was a back pass.
My feeling is that it was a 50–50 decision, not really a back-pass, but the tendency is for those to be given.
Beeney should not have taken the risk.
From the free-kick, Anderton's shot squeezed through a wall which resembled a collander, hit Deane on the way through and rolled in by the near post.
That was it as far as the action went.
It just shows that 1 goal is not enough, especially where leeds are concerned.
Leeds played 5 at the back, and the defence looked good.
(Sheringham would have tested them a bit more).
Pemberton had a good debut in Newsome's position and yes Kirsty he is fast.
Macca was brilliant and Rod Wallace was back to his best.
In fact the whole team played well.
Afterwards we went straight off so I'm sorry i missed Halvard & Sunil.
We did meet up with the Oxford contingent at the Leathern Bottle at Lewknor, just off, junction 6 on M40, worth a visit if you're in that area.
My 2–2 prediction was not too far out was it.
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 1993 11:02:32 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Spurs bits & bobs
Yep, we managed to get in alright, pretty decent seats as well, even though it meant missing out on a few pints and getting there at 1o'clock.
I'm not going to do a match report either, I'll leave that to someone who's a bit more eloquent, and who's got a better memory, I can't even seem to remember what happened 10 mins ago let alone 2 days.
Few points:—
First time ever I've agreed with Wilko taking Rocky off.
It wasn't that he wasn't playing well, it just seemed like he couldn't be arsed chasing back and helping Kelly out, I don't know if he was knackered though.
He got taken off just after their left back got in semi-decent cross.
As soon as Whelan came on, he followed their left back around, but they still managed to get their dodgy free kick from that side.
Pemeberton looks like a good buy, he had an excellent game, and looked quite quick as well(kept pace with Durie, when he was running flat out), also Gary Kelly gets better every time I see him.
It's nice to hear people in the Spurs crowd saying ‘Who's that no 22, he's quite good isn't he?’.
Rod Wallace needs to work on his finishing, how many times does he miss when he's clean through?
I managed to win a couple of quid on Deano to score the first goal, at odds of 7–1.
(Rod to get the first at Everton, and score of 0–2 if anyone wants any tips:-))
Gav really does look like C*ntona, and here's me thinking it was a joke:-)
I don't see the resemblance of Stu and Paul Young though, perhaps I expected someone with Spiky hair & black leather trousers.
Sunil
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 11:29:54 GMT
Subject: Swindon
All,
I know I'm skipping a game (Everton) but…
I'm going to the Swindon match next Saturday & I was wondering if there was any chance of a lift from deepest London?
If not then I'll plead to my wife for the car & I'll be able to offer other people a lift there (but I'll be coming back on Sunday).
Any offers/takers,
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 1993 12:38:16 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Strachan
According to ceefax Strachan is due to make his return tonight against Sheff Wed for the reserves…
Tim…
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 12:47:55 GMT
Subject: Re: SWINDON
Uhmm, Brixton->Leeds via Heston…do every time;-)
A freezing cold mini vs a red escort with matching baby stains…close 
Yeah it's tough…
I've lost my right back place in USA 'cos I'm in England ‘til January…
So we'll decide later in the week.
As I say I'm coming back Sunday (my mothers 60th birthday in Harrogate on Saturday night…infact it's her birthday everywhere but she's in Harrogate) so if I drive you'll have to wait if you want a lift!!!!!
0–1 & 3–0…
Swindon HAVE to improve soon 
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 1993 13:56:19 GMT
Subject: Subs on Saturday?
Anyone know who the other sub was on Saturday (apart from Whelan)?
By the way, I've just been glancing through my fixture list, and it seems to me that the real test of our recent good form will come in December/early January.
We have six really tough games in a row — Norwich, Arsenal, Newcastle, QPR, Scum & Villa — probably six of the best teams around on current form.
Makes it even more vital that we start beating teams like Spurs/Everton etc.
Andy.
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 15:43:32 CET
Subject: Xmas Fixtures
I'll be returning to England this Xmas to visit the folks in Leeds.
Are there any home games in the Xmas/New year period? and can someone give the phone number of the booking office at Elland Road.
Maybe I can make it to my first home game in 15 years!
Cheers
Tim.
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 1993 15:45:54 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: saturday
Has there realy been no postings about saturdays game today? or could there be something wrong at this end?
We wuz robbed!
Rocky's goal was onside!
That was never a freekick!
The referee's a B*$£’ &%!;
Come on folkes, a bus load from the list went to the game, so where's the match report?
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 16:19:46 GMT
Subject: Re: Xmas Fixtures
Home games are:
0532–710710 is the booking office number.
If you do manage to get through, hold on even when the out-of-date recorded ticket info stops.
They talk to you eventually.
Groetjes, Gav
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 16:42:09 GMT
Subject: Re: saturday
Well, Kev wrote a fair bit, and Stu and Sunil chipped in.
Fair summary, that.
One of the hazards of going to games by the bus load is the tendency to drink beer by the gut load beforehand.
I was not quite as attentive to the game as perhaps I might have been:-)
However, I didn't notice anything wrong with the first half goal.
I also thought Mark Beeney was acting within in his rights in picking up Wetherall's bodged interception.
It's obvious that refs and players still need to have this law more clearly defined — that indirect free kick was, in my book, a travesty.
Or have I missed something in the rules?
It was good to meet up with so many others plus mates from the list.
Sunil made a brief, VIP-like appearance, and then had to rush off to get a ticket.
Kev & Co had similar ticketting problems but managed to find time to fit a pint in as well.
Paul Cadd looks like David Batty (before the haircut), and Halvard looks like a bouncer from a Norwegian trawler.
Sound lads one and all, hope we all meet up again soon.
Cheers, Gav
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 93 16:58 GMT
Subject: Spurs match
Agreed 134% (!).
I was happy at the reported performance of the side before MOTD…
(Also note…
NO SCUM MATCH!?!?!??!?!?)…but afterwards I was pissed off.
How can they ‘analyse’ the f*cking match and not even mention Rocky's goal???
What makes it worse was that yesterday Andy Cole scored 2 (out of his 3) goals when he was offside.
At least 1/2 yrd offside, and Rocky was 1/2 yrd ONside.
The sooner we get a 4th official in a booth with a video/replay contraption the better.
I dont give a fuck if a goal is disallowed that was offside if I know 1) That it was offside really and 2) I know that no other side will be allowed an offside goal.
Even if the replays are restricted to goal incidents.
Had we had competent referees/linesman this season we would be up about 6 points…we would also probably have reached the mini-league stage last year cos Strach's goal at Ibrox was another good goal in a very similar position to Rocky's on Saturday.
At least Sky had the decency to show a replay and prove it was onside.
For those who havent got Sky, there was unanimous support for Leeds in the back pass free kick.
We also got unanimous sympathy for pissing on Spurs, but ending up with just a point.
Ditto.
Is someone going to admit I was right in saying pemberton was a BARGAIN:-))
Better than Kernaghan from what Ive seen of him recently.
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 22 Nov 1993 20:54:04 GMT0BST
Subject: ticket info-Newcastle
I know it's a bit early for those of you planning the trip up to Geordieland, but here's the latest ticket info.
anyway I'm not sure when our allocation of tickets goes on sale, but it's only likely to be somewhere between 2–3,000.
However there will also be about another 3,000 home tickets on sale to the general public, so if anyone can't get a ticket for our end and fancies having a go at getting one of these, then here's the deal.
Tickets are available by postal application only, and they will only be dealing with applications between monday 6th, and thursday 9th of December.
Max 2 tickets per application, stlg9 each.
Hope this might be some use, Cheers, Steve.
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 1993 13:05:29 +0100
Subject: Everton — Leeds
Would somebody please mail the result right after the game.
I have a friend who is Everton fan and we have a bet so it's pretty important for me.
Thanks in advance
Mads
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 93 14:16:25 +0100
Subject: on trial
The following was from someone on the League Of Ireland soccer list.
Anybody (Declan?) know anything else on this?
Vin
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 1993 14:41:50 +0100
Subject: O'Leary
David O'Leary was on Sky Sports on Saturday saying that he hopes to back for the New Year.
He said he would love to make the Man Utd game.
Talking about Strachan, O'Leary also said that he should be back in the 1st team in a couple of weeks.
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 1993 13:46 GMT
Subject: RE: on trial
Vin writes,
I don't know whether it's actually correct or not but a number of players in Byrne's team (Shamrock Rovers, a team I dislike nearly as much as the scum) have been linked with moves to Elland Road.
As to the player in question:
Alan Byrne is a central midfield player who plays the same style of game of our recently lost friend DB.
He has a tendancy to get very worked up in games and was sent off about 6 times last season.
He has limited ball control and is not a great passer.
Added to this he is about 24 so he's probably too old.
Declan
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 93 14:19:23 GMT
Subject: Strack
It looks like Strachen came through his reserve game last night 'cos he has been added to tonights squad.
It is important that we get a good result today, four draws out of five is not too hot.
If we win, we could go second.
I'm not going to the Swindon match but will be off to Man City.
Anybody else going so we can orgainse a meet?
Cheers, Mark (S)
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 93 15:39:18 GMT
Subject: Re: Strack
Yep I'm off, got a kop ticket.
As have Stuart, Charles and a couple of friends.
We're also off to the West Ham game on Wed 8th, but Leeds tickets are limited to Sunderland-attenders — AGAIN!
If any Sunderland-attenders aren't going to go and would consider purchasing on behalf (of one or more) of us, please get in touch.
It's that or hacking it with the hammers.
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 93 15:42:07 GMT
Subject: Tonight & Swindon
Hi,
For those of us who can't make Goodison I think R5 has full commentary on the match…infact they interviewed Wilko last night who was saying that he hadn't thought about whether or not anyone could catch Scum, but he was only interested in how many points we could get ‘it's like the Grand National’, he said, ‘plenty of favourites fall the seconf time round’.
And the timeless ‘I don't know anyone who's won the league by Christmas!!!’
Somebody was telling me the Rocky was on R5 the other week & said that when he was with Arsenal & they won the league at Liverpool in the last few minutes, Arsenal were 13 (?) points clear at the new year but still had to come from behind to overtake Liverpool!!!
Also,
Mark, I AM DEFFINATELY NOT DRIVING TO LEEDS ON SATURDAY!!!
my wife decided that she & the kids need the car more that I do!!!(she's a Geordie so obviously she has no underdtanding of the passions od football!!(wor jackie! as her family say alot!)
Sorry!!
I'll probably get the train…but if you DO drive I'd be interested in a lift (even in a cold mini!!)
Glynn
From:
Date: 23 Nov 93 16:06:38 GMT
Subject: Tonight
Tonight i'm off to the leeds /everton match.
Due to JIMBO'S contacts (lad off my course), we are meeting an ex-everton player at the ground called John Bailey (left-back).
We are then off into the players lounge for a few beers beforehand, then a few more after.
Maybe I'll be able to tell Gazza Speed how much i love him.
Jammy barsteward this one, always seems to land on his feet when it involves getting in free to everton away games.
He's also a bit of a technophobe and has been having problems getting on the list.
Could the powers that be, or anyone else who knows, possibly get him on?
Thanks,
Sean.
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 93 16:43:18 GMT
Subject: Everton
Just thought I'd give you all the benefit of my expertise with a 1–1 prediction for tonight's game.
I know Everton are crap, ordinarily I'd have predicted a Leeds win, but with the toffees loosing 3–0 at home on Saturday to QPR they will be doubly determined to get a result of some sort.
I'll settle for a draw as long as we beat City & Swindon at home.
Yours optimistically as ever, Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 93 18:06:17 MET
Subject: I go for a good win
We have a good (enough) record at Everton, so I think we should do the business.
Leeds can usually handle teams who are on a downer when we play them.
So I go for 2–0 with Deane and Wallace getting the prizes!
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 1993 17:18:31 +0000
Subject: Tonight
Is the match on Sky?
Stuart
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 1993 10:27:13–0800 (PST)
Subject: taylor Resigns
Just heard That taylor Resigned, how about a poll of who's likely to succeed him (also Mc's gone as well)
Cheers, Tom
From:
Date: Tue, 23 Nov 1993 18:11:18–0500
Subject: Tuesday's Results
Blackburn 2–1 Coventry Everton 1–1 Leeds
So Blackburn go second.
They didn't give any details about the Leeds match (or I may have missed them as I was simultaneously talking on the phone).
Last year we had an irritating habit of losing; now we seem to be in a nasty spell of drawing matches.
Well done whoever it was who predicted 1–1!
John
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 1993 08:24:32 +0000
Subject: Everton 1 Leeds 1
Was the result.
Leeds went ahead in the second half with a goal by Wallace but their period of domination shortly came to an end and Everton pressed hard before Cottee got the equaliser.
The R5 commentators were complaining about the first half saying how rubbish it was — Mike Ingham, the worst scum lover.
Shame he can't watch the scum every week eh?
The Leeds defence sounded pretty solid.
Pembo had good comments from Jimmy Armfield and scumlover, though he got booked.
Dorigo did the baddest tackle and got away with it only to be booked later.
Blackburn went second instead, beating Coventry 3–1 at Ewok Park.
Batty apparently very influential:-(
Other news, Graham Taylor announced his resignation and was joined by Lawrie MacMenemy last night.
Wilko still the bookie's favourite, but the quote from Graham Kelly the FA Chief was that anyone appointed now is just there as a caretaker, because they want to change things around and take their time now that we have nothing to play for till 1998.
I can't see Wilko quitting Leeds to be anyone's caretaker.
Also there was a bit of annoyance in Bert Millichip's voice mentioning the press speculation over likely successors.
This could count against Wilko too.
Hopefully.
Mike Ingham on R5 is now pushing Keegan.
Keegan!
What did he ever do in international terms?
And he's way too inexperienced at club level as a manager.
I reckon Kendall ‘d be a good choice myself, it ‘d do him good to get away from Everglum.
Plus he was successful managing abroad.
Tim
From: & 82 ;
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 9:57 GMT
Subject: LAST NIGHT
1–1 SOUNDS FAMILIAR ANY OTHER SCORES FROM LAST NIGHT?
ANY ONE ELSE HEARD THE RUMOUR THAT BOBBY ROBSON IS TO GET THE TEMPORARY ENGLAND MANAGEMENT JOB?
R4 THIS MORNING SAYS DON HOWE IS ANOTHER LIKELY CANDIDATE TO TAKE US INTO THE NEW YEAR.
ANDY (JUST GOT THE HAND OF THESE COMPUTER JOBBIES)
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 09:57:53 GMT
Subject: Last night & new managers
Last night was a bit annoying.
If we'd won it was 2nd place.
Now if the results go against us tonight it's down to 8th.
I think Arsenal/QPR & Newcastle can leap us…lets hope Lee can grab a brace & that Swindon can stop the rot vs QPR & ALSO (!!!) the Blades can stuff Kevin ‘cocky twat’ Keegan.
As far as new managers go, I'd have to go for a partnership between Mr. Robson & Mr. Hoddle.
Go forward to good football & pick the players with skill.
Robson's shown he can do it & both he and Hoddle will have ALL the players' respect.
I would go for Hoddle on his own but he's not really got the experience yet.
Anyway, just my 2p worth…all very humble opinions of course!
Glynn
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 11:00:06 GMT
Subject: Another Bloody Draw
Another draw, we are going to have to get some wins.
Hopefully, we should get 6 points from our next two games.
Although we have been playing teams which have been going through crap periods, I think this has worked against us as all the opposition players and fans etc have been desperate for some sort of result.
In view of this maybe 11 games unbeaten is a good run (where as 24/33 points is not so good).
I hope Swindon don't break their duck on saturday.
BTW Speed has been having very quiet games recently.
I can excuse him for yesterday as he had to leave at the start of the second half to appear on Question of Sport:-).
He wasn't quiet on that and got a lot of questions right.
I don't think I've heard him speak before, hes got a great Yorkshire accent for a Welsh lad.
Mark S
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 12:06:54 GMT
Subject: Rangers or leeds
It appears that my letter concerning Macca for Rangers has caused a bit of a rumpus.
Well, to clarify, I have a season ticket for Ibrox and I also ‘support’ leeds united, but since I see Rangers play every week, I would probably class them as my number one team — this does not mean I dont like Leeds — its all a matter of prioritising the teams.
Anyway, since Gordon ‘I always wanted to play for Rangers ‘Durie has just signed I dont suppose Rangers can afford anyone else
Col
From:
Date: 24 Nov 93 13:17:31 GMT
Subject: Speedy
promising commentators career ahead, with that little resume on the man u v blackburn game at the end of last season.
Some of you thought that you had problems with the R5 commentators…you were lucky, I had to put up with norman hunter on BBC radio Leeds.
No one comes near him for stating the bloody obvious.
Sean.
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 16:42:37 GMT
Subject: Re: Everton
Nah!
I gave up backing horses years ago.
I often thought I could win money on predicting results/scores, but a/ You'd never win much without risking an awful lot and b/ I reckon the odds are fixed even more in the bookies favour on footy, than with GGs.
However, I'll stick me neck out and go for Leeds 3 Swindon 1 (pen probably) just to spoil my record;-].
First Goal — Gary Speed, I'll check on the odds bfore Saturday as well:-).
Kev.
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 18:21:28 GMT
Subject: fantasy football
Has anyone ever had a go at one of these ‘Fantasy football leagues’.
I know it's a bit like football for train-spotters, but to a senile old git like me it could be kinda fun.
I was toying with the idea of running one amongst us Leeds fans over the net, but I would just like to know if anyone's even been in one before, and what it is like.
I may look into the cost, work involved and practicalities of doing it mainly electronically as well as whether it is worth starting it at this stage of the season.
depending on what sort of response I get.
Of course the numbers would be limited, and it may turn out to be a load of crap what does anyone think?
Graham Taylor.
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 10:46:20 PST
Subject: Re: fantasy football
I played in one at the previous place I worked.
It was pretty cool, certainly better than working.
We had imaginary teams made up of real players, so if all your players scored a total of 4 goals and your goalie let in 1 goal the score for your team was 4–1.
The only goalie I had was Bobby ‘Tailor's Dummy’ Mimms so I didn't get to see 4–1 scorelines too often.
Anyway if it gets started (in whatever form) count me in.
Later Dudes,
Simon.
From:
Date: Wed, 24 Nov 93 18:49:52 GMT
Subject: Re: fantasy football
I think it'd be a LOT of work to run one…unless you could get those involved to keep track of thier own scores & just send them to you for ‘validation’ & keeping the table upto date.
You could also keep traack of who was in whoose team…& all transfers could be done via you.
I think it'll be hard work…
glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 10:08:39 MET
Subject: Re: fantasy football
That was my gut reaction too — you would need to be someone who is used to dealing with a lot of facts and figures, or have a load of programming utilities sitting in the background to keep track.
There is one taking place at the moment involving Internal Digital (DEC) employees and there seems to be a lot of traffic and interest in it, though I don't have time for that one.
Another question: could one be bothered maintaining the fantasy league for the year if one took on the responsibility?
It's not that easy to back out once it gets started up!
Good to see United taken down a peg or two last evening, though it was nausating hearing that swarmy bastard Armfield and his accomplice talking about the scum in such glowing terms.
You would think that Ipswich came to United to be happy going home losing only 2–0.
Fair play Ipswich, you showed that the Shittes can be stopped — pity about you lack of firepower though to put them away altogether.
Surprise seeing Aston Villa losing at home and Swindon beating supposedly one of the teams in form, QPR.
Maybe not the pushovers we though they'd be come Saturday.
Be careful lads not to let this one slip away!
James.
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 1993 09:55:14 +0000
Subject: Stormin' Norman
Whereas back in 1972, no one came near him, or else…
Tim
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 10:32 GMT
Subject: About Last Night
Demi Moore wasnt playing…
But some results/comments from last night and the Everton game.
Scum drew 0–0 with Ipswich.
The Beeb were obviously suffering withdrawal symptoms as Scum werent on Manc of the Day — So I reckon they arranged a ‘sportsnight’ specially last night.
From the little I saw of the game Ipswich seemed quite content with standing inside their own penalty box and only closing down people when they got within 2 yards of it.
Swindon BEAT QPR!
Hahahaha.
And, listen to this, Swindon HAD A MAN SENT OFF…after only 18 MINUTES.
AND it wasnt a penalty.
They are definately due a penalty now — thats one whole game without one.
Aston Villa lost 2–0 at home to SOUTHAMPTON.
Arsenal drew 0–0 (Quel suprise).
And Newcastle beat Sheff Utd 4–0…to go above us.
So, last nights results were pretty kind on the whole.
makes it more annoying in one sense that we wasted the chance to make ground on everyone.
They showed the Leeds goals.
Correct me if Im wrong, but didnt R5 imply from their commentry/report that 1) Rods' goal was deflected horrendously past Southall and 2) Their goal was due to good play and a flash of inspiration by Snodin??
Well, from what I saw Rods' goal was a very good goal — driven into the corner, and their goal was a short corner kick which was hit hopefully into the box…everyone was running out (as you do) but Wetherall had done extremely well and was covering the cross perfectly as a couple of Everton players lurked hopefully near the far post.
Wetherall then stumbled and fell over on the appalling pitch in the centre of the 6 yard box (as he was correctly keeping his eye on the incoming ball).
This left 3 or 4 Everton players with a free attempt at goal…which they almost contrived to cock up.
In other words bad luck.
Oh well.
Kev, that fantasy football stuff sounds quite good.
Certainly better that work.
Im off to USA next week — so dont start it before I get back (20th Dec).
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 11:28:48 GMT
Subject: Re: fantasy football
Sounds feasable, I think the official FFL send out weekly stats to the league secretaries, so there would be no need for any research.
Does that run by e-mail then.
I reckon the hardest part would be getting it going, distributing preliminary material, and conducting the pre-season auction.
esp via e-mail.
Once it is running, I'm sure I could delegate parts of it, such as transfers to someone else.
How many teams have there been in the leagues anyone has played in?
I was thinking of limiting it to 12.
That way there would be plenty of decent players for each team and it would only take me a couple of hours per week to sort out.
If I did this, I would probably use the official FFL kit, which would cost real money and may involve sending some stuff by post.
Oh yeah! and all you non train-spotters need't worry, I'll set up an alias list.
(not half as fancy as Gav's listserver) for FF traffic.
PS.
Did anyone see the Leeds — Everton goals on the telly, It looked like somebody (Pemberton?) was covering the cross quite comfortably and then slipped.
Wallace's goal looked like it might have got a deflection.
Where do they pu the cameras at Goodison?
In the dug-out!
The BBC should not bother with them, the perspective is always F****** appalling.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 1993 12:09:47 +0000 (GMT)
Subject: Re: fantasy football
A couple of us from work are in the 90 Minutes Magazine one.
This works slightly differently from the one Kev's suggesting, coz we didn't have to go through auctions and all that, we were just given a list of players with their prices, and given 20 million to spend.
This means that people end up with some of the same players, but I don't think there's many teams that end up identical (I mean there are 7000 odd teams in this one).
I think an auction would be a much better idea though if its on a smaller scale.
I could probably dig up some of the rules for the 90 Mins one if anyone is really interested.
Sunil
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 12:54 GMT
Subject: email footy
Ok, it seems quite a few people are into this fantasy soccer thing.
Apart from the 90mins one Sunil mentioned didnt one of the tabloids have an ad on Monday to start something like that up?
I reckon we can come up with our own rules, pilfered from all of the others to suit our needs.
The ‘new’ one in the tabloid seemed fairly straightforward — except that if we are to check our own stats every week — it could get quite difficult if players from lower divisions are involved…if you dont get a sunday paper or a monday paper you are shagged basically.
And what if someone misses one weeks papers???
Its gonna be mighty difficult to find out info from past weeks.
Sorry if Im blathering…
Im going by what ‘games’ I know of.
Ie you choose a few players and you work out your result depending upon how those players did on saturday.
Thats fine for attackers, but defenders is another matter.
If anyone is into rolling dice I have a nice idea.
— You choose your 4 defenders.
You choose a monday paper which gives marks out of 10.
You add up the total marks given to your players, divide by x — then roll a dice that number of times and take the highest number rolled…
So, your defenders could play crap individually and yet you still manage to ‘scum’ a good result.
Better individual performances = more chance for a good team performance.
Just an idea…probably shite…
Ill leave it to you old ‘uns to sort out:-)
Mark
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 1993 13:14:46 +0000
Subject: fantasy island
Do you get other aspects of footie in fantasy football, like crowd trouble and travelling firms?
If so I'd like to put my name down for West Ham's lot, they're a bit tasty.
The Leeds Service Crew are all retired these days, reclining in the West Stand and checking the papers for their shares.
Anyway I think it might be a giggle, especially if we keep it to ourselves.
I can't see the joy in competing in a league of 7000.
Tim Kennedy (a very sad trainspotting type indeed)
From:
Date: 25 Nov 93 13:24:09 GMT
Subject: Re: fantasy football
Has anyone ever had a go at one of these ‘Fantasy football leagues’.
I know it's a bit like football for train-spotters, but to a senile old git like me it could be kinda fun.
We had one of those leagues at uni last year and it was immensely popular to the extent that they banned it because the memory banks of the system were chock a block with it and it kept causing the system to crash.
It was good whilst we had it though…
Sean.
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 1993 13:56:56 GMT
Subject: Re: email footy
I seem to remember hearing that the ‘proper’ fantasy leagues give you some sort of bonus points if your defenders kept a clean sheet.
Not sure how it works though.
Andy K.
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 14:18:57 GMT
Subject: fantasy
OK I've got mail addresses etc of all who are interested in this so far.
I will look into some rules etc over the next couple of weeks and see what proposals I can come up with.
Meanwhile if anyone can send me a set of rules for fantasy games they are involved in or know about, I will take them into consideration.
Perhaps sending them direct to me will save the listserver from getting clogged up with train spotting messages.
I will post to whole group again when I have something definite to say.
Kev.
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 15:24:30 GMT
Subject: Re: email footy
As far as defenders go…
I thought that the R5 Fantasy league did something like a point for each goal the attackers sides scored
AND
minus a point for each goal the defenders had scored against them
I guess you have a 4 4 2 formation with the midfielders counting as both attackers and defenders
Just a suggestion…
I also think restricting it to just Premiership players is a good idea
Glynn
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 1993 15:50:44 +0000
Subject: RE: fantasy island
I don't recall the chap you mentioned.
I have to emphasise I have the CHARACTERISTICS of train spotters, not a penchant for the hobby itself.
All footy fans have the potential for trainspotterism, as soon as they start collecting the endless cack churned out by their beloved club, any posters, articles etc.
Soon they become obsessed with Thursday night reserve games featuring their fave crap defender who was tragically dropped in preference to some bought-in journeyman, etc.
Duane Dibbley, Duke of Dork.
From:
Date: Thu, 25 Nov 93 16:19:43 GMT
Subject: Re: email footy
Sorry this really is my last fantasy posting for a while, the R5 FFL gives
Goal Scorer 3pts Assist 1pt Conceeded — 1 for defenders & keeper.
Clean Sheet +4 for defenders & Keeper.
It is restricted to Premiership players, and has various rules on transfers, squad sizes, positions etc
On the basis of that Leeds as a fantasy team would have got 138 points so far this season.
Whatever that means???
Kev.
From:
Date: Fri, 26 Nov 1993 09:23:20 +0000
Subject: Eddie Gray
I'm not posting this to annoy our pet ‘Gers fan, but the continuing series concerning old golden football heroes on Granada Yesterday's Heroes, featured Leeds United and Scotland's own Eddie Gray.
The footage was all stuff you have seen from the 70 FA Cup, Burnley goals, etc.
At the end Eddie was asked (now) what team he'd have liked to have played for if not Leeds and he said he'd always followed Celtic's results.
He said he'd been at Parkhead recently (his son is in the reserves) and Billy Bremner had been there.
Bremner bought a signed Celtic jersey according to Ed.
I was a bit disappointed to hear this, I'd have loved to have heard him say (on a channel largely watched by scum)‘I only ever wanted to play for Leeds’.
Also they asked him about some people rating him better than Best.
He said he had the same ability as Wino but pointed out that he (Gray) was injured at 16 and never fully recovered, so his potential would have been even greater than it turned out.
He said he never reached more than 85% fitness after the injury.
The first goal he scored in the famous Burnley game was really something special, he lobs the goalie from miles out.
Then he really took the piss out of the Chelsea defence in the 70 Cup Final.
Shame he didn't put one more of his many chances away.
Tim
From:
Date: 26 Nov 93 12:24:28 GMT
Subject: united insight
I thought that I'd let all you people who aren't fortunate enough to get the yorkshire evening post (YEP) know what's going on in their weekly United Insight column.
Gary Speed is now top of the list for the number of letters sent in asking for signed photos since batty left, closely followed by Macca, Strach and Deane.
United's general manager Alan Roberts has been selected as one of four regional directors for the 1996 european championship.
(responsible for the games at elland rd & st james' park)
Pemberton only 2 bookings away from suspension after coming to leeds with 8 points (One of the bookings being against leeds at elland rd) and picking up bookings in his first two games.
Wilko came top by miles in a phone in vote of who YEP readers wanted to see as the new england manager (2nd coppell, 3rd keegan, 4th Atkinson, 5th Gerry Francis, 6th screaming lord such)
The new ticket office opens in the east stand on monday so no more getting piss wet through queueing up by the back of the west stand (except for home match days).
They're also planning to show videos of past leeds games when there are big queues to keep us amused.
(Open 9:30am-4:00pm mon-fri, 9:30–12:00 Saturdays when no home game)
I guess that most of that is old hat to most of you but I'm sure it will be of some use to somebody somewhere…
Sean.
From:
Date: Fri, 26 Nov 1993 17:33:13 GMT0BST
Subject: What's the betting?
I agree with Kev — I reckon 3–1 is a good bet for tomorrow.But one word of warning…years of painful experience has taught me one golden rule in football betting — NEVER back your own team — there's nothing more guaranteed to jinx them.
On the other hand, I've got nothing at all against backing the scum.That way, if they lose and the bet doesn't come up, you're still happy anyway because they've been beaten, and if they are going to win, you might as well make some money out of it.
Here's hoping I'll be a millionaire by this time tomorrow, Steve.
From:
Date: Sun, 28 Nov 93 11:26:26 GMT
Subject: rocky going
Leeds won yesterday 3–0.
With all three goals in the last ten minutes.
Deane 80, Wallace 86, Speed 87.
All three goals were created by Strachan who played a whole game.
The team was:-Beeny, Kelly, Fairclough, Wetherall, Pemberton (Forrester 80), Dorigo, Strachan, Macca, Speed, Wallce and Deane.
However the bad news is that because Rocky was dropped for the game (not even on the bench) he ‘walked out’ of the club on Friday night.
He hit out at Wilko for the first time (‘is there a law against me and Gorden Strachen playing in the same team’) and admitted that he was unsure of his future at Leeds but will not ask for a transfer.
This sounds like a beg for someone to come in for him and I reckon Wilko's phone will soon be ringing and he is on the way out.
Bad news.
Mark S.
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 12:52:55 GMT
Subject: Rocky's down and out
Congratulations to Mr Howard Bloody Wilkinson, not only has he presided over the transfer of David Batty, the sale of the League to the scum but he now seems intent on pissing off Rocky.
What the fuck is he doing?
Whilst it is undeniable that Strach is a great player he is approaching his 37th birthday — how much longer can he keep it going.
Rocky is the future of the club along with Macca and Speed if he can't hold on to him what ganrantee can he offer us that he won't unload Macca and gazza soon!
All is can say is that I hope England get him, with any luck we'll be saddled with a manager that appreciates Rocky's talent.
Even turniphead won't have got rid of Batty, Scumtona and Rocky — is Wilko a twat or what.
Yours, exceedingly disgruntled and pissed off
Chris
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 13:11 GMT
Subject: Rocky etc
The current situation with Rocky is unfortunate.
I dont think anyone would argue that Strach shouldnt be in the first team.
Ive been saying recently we needed his inspiration to drag some wins out of the draws weve been getting.
I think he confirmed this on saturday.
The question is, can rocky and Strach both play in the same side??
I can fully understand him being pissed off.
We had 4 class midfielders, one was sold and now we play with just 3.
Then again I think to enable Speed and Macca to get forward we need a holding midfield player.
A defending midfield player.
Fairclough has fulfilled this role quite admirably.
I wouldnt be happy with Rocky there.
If I had to pick one of the midfielders to go there it would be Speed…but I think we would then lose something going forward.
Also his stamina is quite poor.
Strachan had been out weeks, and yet came back and lasted 90 mins.
Not only that he was fit enough to still influence the game dramatically.
People whove seen the previous few matches all seemed to agree Rocky faded badly and as a result was exposing Kelly a little too much.
I wouldnt be particularly happy if Rocky was sold, one major reason being that I dont think we need any more players right now.
Pemberton has added pace at the back, Wallace and Deane are hitting form (as I predicted they would).
Strach may be 37, but who gives a shit really?
He is lasting as good as, if not better than the rest of the side.
He would be the first name on my team sheet for as long as he continues to keep fit.
So, the question isnt Rocky vs Strach, but Rocky vs Fairclough OR Speed/Macca.
Its all about balance.
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 1993 13:28:35 GMT
Subject: Re: Rocky's down and out
Hmmmm, at the risk of seeming boring and conservative, I have to say that I have a certain amount of sympathy with Wilko over this one.
I'd suspected that Rocky would struggle to retain his place once Strach came back, as to play both of them at once would presumably mean abandoning the ‘Batty role’— I can't see either Speed or Macca being dropped.
At the moment I don't have sufficient faith in our central defence to feel comfortable about losing the defensive midfielder.
Point taken, and I really feel sorry for Rocky at the moment, and hope he doesn't leave, but I think with a player like Strachan at the club, who I believe is one of the best players in the Premier League at the moment, I think it would be foolish to leave him out.
And what's the alternative?
Andy K.
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 1993 13:40:07 +0000
Subject: Guardian assesses Rocastle
The Guardian report on the Swindon game praises Strachan at length and goes on to critically assess Rocky in the light of his lack of match fitness and his attitude.
The way it is put is that Rocky is full off self-doubt and introspection and Wilko has every reason to sideline him.
‘The First Law of Sport: Look doubtfully upon the man who talks of himself in the third person’.
(Never heard this one before).
He has been a fixture in the past six games but those games were often disappointing draws.
I think I'll have to go along with Wilko on this one.
He knows the background that we don't.
And anyway, can you imagine any other manager taking over now at Leeds?
He's built us up from the ruins of 1987.
He has angered us a few times, Sheridan, Vinny, Eric, Batty all gone but we're still up there, second in the league.
Any dissent at the club will only harm our chances.
The scum are rampant (although they owe it all to ooh-ah).
Loyalty can do great things, to quote the man himself.
Tim
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 16:47 GMT
Subject: Wilko replies to Rocky statement
On teletext theres a quote from Wilko re: Rocastle's statement.
It went something along the lines of…
‘If Rocastle feels he has no future at Leeds he can obviously ask for a transfer’
Its quite possible this was taken out of context by teletext — they often do — especially in this case where the press have been trying to stir up a rift for well over a year.
I think some people on the list have access to news agency files, can someone maybe dig out the actual conversation/interview and put it into context…or do the news agencies just hold quotes like this??
If Rocky asks for a transfer that means no signing on fee with any transfer of course!
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 1993 16:55:47 GMT0BST
Subject: Rocky
Rocky may well be full of self-doubt and introspection, but what else can anyone expect?
I don't know what he has to do to be able to get a proper chance.
The way he's been treated since he came to Elland Road would be enough to do anyone's confidence in.
At the same time I think some people are going well over the top in slagging off Wilko.
Sure, he's made some mistakes, but after everything he's done for us in recent years he must be allowed the odd cock-up.
By the way, I know things have been a bit strained at Elland Road in recent weeks, but did the last record to be played before the team came out on saturday REALLY have to be Bruce Springsteen singing ‘Glory days — well, they pass you by…’
Steve.
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 17:15:36 GMT
Subject: Swindon & Rocky
I haven't read any match report yet…so I thought I'd have a go at a quick one & include a few comments about Rocky as well.
Ok, lets get a few things cleared up straight away.
Swindon have two features in thier play which make them popular with other teams 1) they try and play entertaining football from the back and 2)(most importantly) they're shit!
Thier fans have a reasonable sense of humour (I suppose they have to!) for example when confronted with the chant ‘going down, going down etc’ they immediately replied with ‘so are we…’.
Which although I've heard before does say something about them…also, I met a few of them on the train up from London…
I asked if they were going to win and they replied ‘No’ that was all ‘No’…
Nothing about ‘turning corners’, or any other lovely cliches just ‘no’…but they still came AND out sang Leeds much of the time.
That said, Leeds started well, flicking the ball about running into space and getting pretty much encamped in the Swindon half.
BUT there were very few chances (Wallace (?) had a close range effort saved).
Then it all started to get VERY scrappy…the flicks kept coming but there was nobody running one to them.
Gradually Swindon started to move forward…they had a few corners but never really threatened.
One problem was Beeny's insistence on clearing EVERY ball down the right toward Strachan.
Speed neveer saw the ball.
Half time came and the fans artound me were a bit pissed off because a) Leeds weren't actually playing all that well and b) Rocky was nowhere to be seen (ironic when you consider it was his picture on the front of the program along with an interview where he said Wilko came to him & said ‘you're in the team, just go do it’— or something like that-).
Then came half two.
It started pretty much the same as the first…
Leeds aggressive but a bit too much pace and not enough skill (Rocky?).
But then suddenly Wallace played through…brought down just on the right of the area.
Swindon guys booked.
Free-kick Dorigo along the ground through the wall…keeper blocks it…in goes Deane…down goes the keeper oohhh.
Unlucky.
That was pretty much the excitement for the next 20 mins.
Chants of ‘what the f*** is going on’ were started but never really took off (but nearly!).
Anyway, Swindon started to get a bit more of the ball…
Leeds fans started to look a bit more worried…they had 4–5 shots from the edge of the area…fortunately they are so crap not one crossed the line inside the penalty area!
Then after about 70mins the head of steam started…
Leeds were throwing men forward and actually looking threatening.
The first goal came from a cross from the left.
It went straight across the area where Deane wellied in from about 6yds.
He looked so f'ing pleased to score it wasn't true!!.
That was that really…open flood gates…goal 2…ball over the top for Wallace who went from 25 yds into the right of te area and finished absolutely brilliantly…goal 3 corner from right Strachan talking to the kop asking where to place it…hits it long…comes back to him he hits it it bobbles out to the left edge of the area where Speed hits it along the ground.
Wallace alos missed an absolute sitter when Dorigo came storming through (maybe should have gome alone) pushed the ball to Wallce 8yds out where he simply missed the ball.
In the end Leeds could have had 4–5…if they'd scored in the first half it could have been 10!!
Swindon WILL get clobbered by somebody.
As far as the performance went…well, individually Macca played really well with a few lovely cross field balls.
Pemberton is quick and soild.
Deane worked hard.
Wallace looked pretty sharp.
Strachan did play well, no doubt, but not ABSOLUTELY BRILLIANT.
He made the goals and rang like mad…but I didn't think he was controlling the game as I've heard implied.
He may have lasted the full 90 mins…but the opposition weren't making life that difficult for him!!
Infact, the team display didn't match the individual effort (make sense?) perhaps they were to complacent about Swindon…who knows…still 3–0 => 3 points and 2nd place.
What the f*** eh?
About Rocky.
Drop Fairclough.
Keep Strachan wide right.
Put Speed left & leave Rocky & Macca in the middle.
This will be a good combo', especially when DOL returns.
DOL, Pemberton, Kelly & Dorigo are a fine back 4.
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 17:15:03 GMT
Subject: Rocky horror show
Although I agree that Strachan has proved in the past he is a class player and that Leeds would be foolish to consider selling Rocastle, I believe that the future of the Leeds team lies in the younger midfield combination of Rocky, Macca, Speed and Fairclough.
In the games I have seen (somewhat limited this year due to my location) Strachan seems to overshadow Macca and as a result his (Macca's) performance falls below the high standards he has produced recently.
As for consistantly producing the goods, look what happened last year — what was he doing then?
Alright he was carrying an injury but surely the onus of the team should not rest on a single player — and besides what was he doing for the first 80 minutes on Saturday.
I think Leeds function as a better team without him playing, when he does play I get the feeling that the other players sit back and wait for him to produce the move that will lead to the scores.
So what we must consider is that whether a team performance is more important than an individual's performance don't forget that it is easy (relatively) to mark him out of a game compared to marking 11 men out off game.
Besides what happens if Rocky goes and then Strach gets injured, who do we have as cover in the midfield — Hodge, he's hardly played much first team footballer and his whilst his goal scoring skills are fine he is not in the same class as Rocky or Strachan.
My preferance would be to play either Strachan and Rocky together with Speed in the Batty role, this would give him the opportunity to go forward if required plus utilise his good ball winning skills or if i had to choose between the two I would pick Rocky providing he was fit.
Having said all this I can see Wilko selling him almost imediately — this was his reaction when Scumtona started making waves last year — nearly a year to the day when he sold the scum the league.
Wilko for England — please!
CHris
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 18:44:20 MET
Subject: Match report?
Anyone with a report?
I saw the three goals but wasn't very impressed overall.
Speeds goal in particular was a quite poorly taken effort for someone that is supposed to be able to used both feet.
Wallace and Deane seem to be sparking a bit though.
But having to wait until the 80th minute to score, isn't good in my books.
Thank god I wasn't listening to Radio 5, else I'd probably not have any fingernails left with worry that they wouldn't put even one past Swindon.
What about the other 80 minutes?
Hit the post, penalties turned down…
The only bright spots seem to be Strach's comeback and a 3–0 win.
Roll on Man.
City.
They should *really* be lambs to the slaughter.
I still remember losing 4–0 the year we won the league.
I was in a car with my wife-to-be and we turned on the radio (I turned on the radio really — My wife couldn't care if Leeds went bankrupt tomorrow) to find out that Leeds were 3–0 down with 15 minutes to go.
My wife got scared as I went from a nice healthy rosy red colour to sheet white in a few seconds:-(.
Thankfully, the week after we whooped Chelsea to get back on the rails to that now famous title finale (famous for us anyhow — right?):-).
James.
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 18:07:28 GMT
Subject: Re: Wilko replies to Rocky statement
You just think Wilko wants rid of him now don't you???
Well, I guess he got a reasonable one when he came here…
The problem now is Wilko could probaly sell Rocky dirt cheap and claim that he ‘just had to get rid of a winging player for the good of the club's morale’.
It makes you sick…this'll be 2 world class midfiled players in 2 months.
Pretty impressive…by June Newsome could be captain;-(
Glynn
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 18:27 GMT
Subject: Rocky Horror Show
Define ‘future’.
You mean short/mid.
Thats the worst possible thing to do.
Whats most important is NOW.
A secondary consideration is long term.
You must ALWAYS pick your best side.
You just CANNOT afford to pick an inferior side so it will gel, or possibly get better together.
What happens if one of the players gets injured, or transferred??
Teams should be subject to EVOLUTION, not REVOLUTION.
How anyone can argue with Wilko's choice is simply beyond me.
He is the BEST at evolving a side.
Look how he blooded Speed and Batty…he didnt chuck them in and hope for the best.
Hes doing the same now with Whelan and Forrester etc.
I agree Macca seems to step out of the limelight somewhat…but AS LONG AS WE WIN WHO CARES?
We know for a fact if/when Strach isnt playing Macca picks his game up again.
So whats the problem?
I dont know, I wasnt there.
When Strach was out injured last year, what happened??
Some amazing recovery of form by Leeds?
Nope.
Just think what *might* have happened if Strach was out all season.
Anybody who knows anything about football knows confidence is of paramount importance.
Individually and as a team.
When you are carrying an injury its very difficult.
Thats complete tosh.
I cannot believe how anyone could say that.
The team plays better with Strachan out!!!
So, explain why in the previous 6 games we had only won 1.
Maybe because we settled for a point that late in the game??
Maybe Strachan has other ideas.
As well as Macca plays, he cannot influence the side as much as Strach.
This will probably develop as he matures.
Strachan is a World Class player.
Lets not forget that fact.
Oh yes.
Thats how easy it is.
So why dont/cant sides do that??
He makes the TEAM play better as well.
He certainly gets more out of Kelly than Rocastle did.
Look this is getting silly.
Nobody will ever tell me Strachan shouldnt be 1st name on the team sheet when hes playing as he is. theres no point arguing the toss because you obviously feel different.
All Ill say is I suggest you get hold of a video of any match hes in, and try and concentrate on him.
He leads by example.
Hes 37 for christs sake and yet hes always getting back to defend.
Hes always encouraging the team.
Also notice the running off the ball, notice the bringing others into play.
I could go on but I wont.
Suffice to say that not only are Leeds a better side when hes in it, but his influence will rub off onto all the players at Leeds, young and old.
He is a shining example of the best of football.
How many times has Rocastle played for England?
I feel much more sorry for Hodge.
He has always produced the goods when hes come on.
In an ideal world Id have him playing aswell.
If I had to choose itd be strachan every time.
one little word…consistency.
Another little word…balance.
I think Wilko knows what hes doing.
Its very difficult to maintain a class squad and keep people happy.
Cantona couldnt deal with it.
At the end of the day the team comes first.
Wilko picks what HE considers is the best side.
You trust the judgement of a man whos been proven right over the last 5 years.
This is a wind up isnt it!
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 18:42 GMT
Subject: Rocky/Wilko rift
Lets not get carried away with this alleged rift.
Its completely out of character for Rocky to have said this…probably some 3rd rate hack cornered him just after he'd learnt hed been dropped.
I must say his comments seemed fair enough to me.
Id be pissed off too.
However, Wilko's ‘reply’ looks like its been taken out of context to me.
Its as if he was ranting and raving when he said it.
Just imagine him saying that to a reporter trying to dig up more dirt…trying to stir it up a bit.
Wilko then replies in a calm voice with what hes said.
In other words ‘if he thought he wasnt part of the future plans Id have told him so and he would have asked for a transfer…has he??
In that case shut the f*ck up and go report on something else’.
So this statement could be him trying to play down the incident…remember there were a few incidents where cuntona was reported to have stormed off to france.
Wilko didnt offload him immediately…it took a lot more hassle before he went ahead.
Wilko is a sensible bloke.
Im perfectly sure he understands Rocky's frustrations.
With any luck they will meet and get this sorted once and for all.
What galls the most is not having him on the subs bench.
For this match (in particular) its silly to have him on the bench.
Youd want a striker or 2.
For an away match it might be a bit different…
Mark
From:
Date: Mon, 29 Nov 93 19:55:37 MET
Subject: Batty world class — No!
I have my doubts that Batty will ever be world class, that aside I cannot understand why Wilko cannot sit down with the side he's got and bang something out to keep both Strachan and Rocastle in the side.
Wilko isn't the hottest with player relations sometimes.
All in all, Rocastle has gotten a raw deal from Leeds.
Where will it end he's thinking, and he could be right.
I'd say there was at least 4/5 clubs on the phone this morning, including Blackburn, as they were about to swoop down on Sharpe for 3.5 M until he re-signed late last week.
Anything less that 2 million won't be accepted I hope?
James.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 93 09:57:36 GMT
Subject: Technology
I may be a little bit behind the times, but over the last couple of days I've been experimenting with voice mail.
It might be a laugh if we some of us could communicate like this too.
For the purposes of technical research of course;-).
My dim-shit understanding is that anyone who uses a sun openWindows mailtool can send or receive mail in this way quite simply.
I think the sendmail mailer is capable of dealing wth all the addressing necessary.
As voice mails tend to be pretty large files, I don't think Gav would be too happy if we started using his listserver for singing telegrams, but the odd voice mail between us might be fun.
It may make spotting each other at games easier too (cluthing at straws here to try and justify it).
There are ways of converting the voice stuff into a more standardised format, so that it can be heard by different systems, but I've not learnt how to do that yet.
Kev.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 09:58:40 +0000
Subject: Swindon/Rocky…
Faced with the prospect of watching a fat geordie sweating himself to death on a sofa or driving down the A1 to Elland Road I chose the latter and watched the Swindon game.
Thanks to the person who wrote a report) I'm amazed that you could find much to write about).
The match was crap apart from the last 15 minutes or so.
It seemed that Leeds (perhaps sparked by the ‘What the f***is going on chant’ from the Kop) decided to step up a gear and put Swindon to the sword.
Once the second goal went in it was shooting practise with wallace missing an open goal from about 5 yards out.
Forrester looked good when he came on, he even tried an overhead shot which got an ‘oo-er, Forrester’.
Felt a bit sorry for Swindon as they weren't that bad (in comparison) but sod ‘em, we need all the points we can get if we stand any chance of catching the scum.
OK, the Rocky incident.
It was great to see Strach back (got a big cheer from the ground) and he was the best Leeds player on the pitch I would say.
But there were quite a few grumblings that Rocky wasn't even on the bench.
That seemed cruel beyond belief, he should have been there instead of Hodge.
If you want a person to be dropped I suggest Speed.
He ball-watched most of the game, gave away loads of ball possession, infuriated the crowd.
OK he scored but by then it was shooting practise, as I said.
Stuart
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 93 10:57:13 GMT
Subject: saturday meet?
Anybody going to the Man.
City match on Saturday and fancy meeting somewhere?
We usually go to the Imperial.
Its a bit naff but close to the ground and good for parking.
Interested?
The Imperial is marked with an X, If you were starting form the shop turn left down Elland Road and keep going straight (uphill) for quite a way before you reach a T junction.
Turn right (steeper uphill) and the pub is on the left at the brow of the hill.
There is usually plenty of places to park near here too.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 93 11:45:03 GMT
Subject: Re: saturday meet?
Yes, yes.
Naff??
Not at all.The large fish tank is set into the back wall most tastefully.
The only really naff thing about it is that they serve John Smith's bitter, but their Guinness was great, so no probs.
Yep.
How do we all recognise each other?
Gav
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 13:09:57 +0100
Subject: rocky
OK, this is supposedly what what said yesterday:—
(excuse the control characters)
David Rocastle's future at Leeds was in doubt today after his rift with manager Howard Wilkinson deepened.
The former Arsenal and England midfielder, who has failed to win a regular first team place during his 16 months at Elland Road, complained bitterly at the weekend after being dropped for the home game against Swindon.
Gordon Strachan's return after injury left no place for Rocastle who was not even named among the substitutes.
Today Wilkinson hit back, explaining that he had picked the best team for the job and claiming his selection was vindicated by a 3–0 win.
And he said if Rocastle felt he had no future at Leeds he should ask for a transfer.
Wilkinson added: ‘No-one can be guaranteed a place.
When David Rocastle signed a long contract he knew that.
If he seriously thinks he has no future at Leeds United then he has the right to move.
He only has to ask.
‘From what I read, though, he isn't going to do that.
If he wants to talk to me about his future then he should do it to my face.’
This is courtesy of the Press Association so you may have already read this in your papers.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 12:10:23 GMT
Subject: Whatever happened to…?
Just to change the subject from the Rocky debate for a while, does anybody know what ever happened to Aidan Butterworth?
He was a striker we had during the 80's sometime — I think it was before we got relegated.
He scored quite a few goals, I remember one in particular against Arsenal in some cup game in the dying seconds of extra time (there was still long enough for Arsenal to equalise though).
Then he seemed to disappear, I'm sure I heard about him playing for some other club once, but can't remember who.
Any ideas?
Andy K.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 13:11:22 GMT+0100
Subject: Frigaard
I thought I'd let you know that Leeds supposedly made a bid for Norwegian striker Geir Frigaard last week.
On the radio there was an interview with him where ha said he had turned the offer down to stay in his club here in Norway one more year to develop himself.
I don't know that much about him but I think he is 21(22) years old, has no international matches on any level, has played for Kongsvinger the last year (an ordinary club in our top division).
He was a lot in the news this autumn as he made a lot of goals both in the league as well as in the UEFA-cup.
And even though he didn't become topscorer in the league (he scored 12–13 in 22 matches) he grabbed 5 or 6 in 4 matches in the E-cup against a swedish team and Juventus.
At the same time he supposedly played really well in these matches and got an offer from Juve to stay with them for a few weeks this winter.
You might ask yourselves why I bother writing this, but I get kind of worried when I hear such news.
What on earth does Leeds need this guy for, I mean they already got Frank S. who I rate a much better player?
So can anyone please fill me in on anything I've missed out on regarding injuries/transfers on the Leeds strikers.
Jo
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 14:51:22 +0100
Subject: elland road
I have just been to get tickets for the Arsenal game.
I am very impressed with the new ticket office.
I don't know how many of you have ever been to get tickets at Elland Road but you were advised to take a flask and sandwiches and
wet weather gear if it was in winter.
The new ticket office is in the new East Stand.
There is a huge video screen playing past matches and you can get a drink and something to eat if you want to!
Yes I know I'm going overboard but I was impressed.
Its got to be the best ticket office going.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 14:20:43 +0000
Subject: The Strange Tale Of Aidan B.
Aidan Butterworth jacked in football altogether saying he was disillusioned with the game in 1984.
He went into further education and I don't know what he did after that, except the Complete Record says he played for Doncaster and non- league Guiseley in the late 80s.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 08:40:19–0600
Subject: Chappy
Last night's premier league match:
S'oton 0–2 West Ham
Chappy scored for West Ham again.
How many has he got for West Ham already?
West Ham on a mini-revival, the win moves them into 10th place, I believe.
Joo
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 1993 17:08:20 GMT0BST
Subject: Lukic
In the paper the other day it said that Leeds were interested in one of the goalkeepers from the lower divisions — Beresford (from Burnley, I think).
Probably just paper talk, but if there is anything in it, then Lukic's days could be numbered.
It might not be such a bad thing — if we can get decent cover for Beeney at a cheap price, we should still be able to get a decent fee for Lukic.
Anyone know anything about this Beresford?
Steve.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 93 18:05:07 GMT
Subject: Rocky vs Bullwinkle
By future I mean a couple of seasons from now, the current season although not a write off by any means has lost a lot of meaning the league appears once again to be going to the scum and we're out of the League cup thingy.
It is at that time I would expect Leeds to be consistently playing and competing in the highest echelons of the leagues and cups — a bit like the scum are doing now (the Gala-whatever-rice defeat excepted).
In a couple of seasons the younger players in the side should have come on considerably and be contributing regularly — it is then players like Rocky would come into their own, providing the guidance and experience that people like Strach have been doing.
You must at least conceede that Strach is not going to be able to keep performing at this level indefinitely.
Thus while it is important to always play you're best side AND in our case this must involve finishing high enough up the table to get a place in europe, we must keep players like Rocky and continue to play them in the first team.
Batty and Speed although not finished products were reasonably good players when Wilko arrived and Bremnar was fairly consistently playing them in the first team.
It's therefore to give too much credit to Wilko on their developement although their play did improve greatly under his guidance.
As for Forrester, Whelan, Bowman etc I got the impression that it was more desparation that made him turn to the younger players, granted their performances were top notch but I think the injury situation had more to do with it than Wilko's judgement, after all where are they now???
If Ferguson can regularly play Giggs, Sharpe et al why can't Wilko give Whelan a go in midfield consistently given the current Rocky/Wilko disagreement?
I think in the cases where we drew the game looking at the performances of the strikers who missed relatively easy chances and hit the bar as well as a couple of defensive lapses cost us the wins — the midfield performed well a created the chances.
Also every team needs a bit of luck — the Spurs game is a prime example didn't we hit the post twice and conceede a dubious free kick which gave them their goal!
I seem to remember Kelly having a pretty effective game against Chelsea and Rocky for that matter.
If he was given a chance consistently then I would think that an effective patnership would develope and greatly improve Rocky's playing — something that no second team football can do — not to mention improving his confidence.
OK fair enough we disagree — perharps we could compromise that he should in future include both players at least in the squad if not the team.
In that way Rocky would get chance to play and develope, Strachan would be able to run rings round the opposition and maybe we get get to beat the scum for a change.
I hate to keep bringing them up, but somehow the scum have managed to keep a large squad of mainly international players together.
If we don't challenge this group then we could be faced with the most unpaletteable thought of having an AC Milan type situation in the UK.
I wouldn't call last season debacle making the right decisions, my own personal opinion of him is that he was the right manager to get us out of the second divsion, but I feel that given the players and money avail able to him he maybe could have done better.
I know this will be unpopular especially as he has won the League but I just feel he doesn't handle ALL his players well.
No — perhaps not, I'll reserve my views on his ability to manage after we've played Arsenil again and the big match on New Years day.
Chris.
From:
Date: Tue, 30 Nov 93 22:20:03 MET
Subject: Saturday Meet
I don't know if the Guiness is as good at the Imperial anymore as the pub has changed hands!!!.
I stopped going there a season ago too difficult to get a drink.
We normally go to the Adelphi next to Tetleys brewery and the train station in town.
(only 3 quid in a cab to the ground, leave at twenty to three and still get in with time to spare) 3 bars not four deep at the bar don't have to wait to be served and VERY good food.
Anyone interested??
Paul Cadd