

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES SPEECH
As part of the work on the BBC's case for renewing our Charter, I led a Task Force looking at our representation of communities.
As soon as we removed ourselves from eyries at Television Centre and Broadcasting House, people began saying to us that the key subject we had to look at was one of portrayal and representation on air.
The common message, from many of the women or members of ethnic communities we spoke to, was, their need to be seen on the television screen or heard on the radio.
And where they were seen or heard, to be treated and reflected as a person first — and as a black person, an Asian person, a woman or someone with a disability second or not at all.
This is very important to the BBC.
We aim to make and broadcast programmes that accurately reflect all parts of society and appeal to all communities in a fair way.
If we get the right balance and range of people working for the BBC it will change and broaden the agenda of our programmes.
That is far easier to achieve in a workforce that seeks to represent the whole of society.
There will be more arguments about what goes into programmes — more antennae into various parts of the community under-reported at present— less consensus about what is news.
That is why we need more women in position of authority and influence within News and Current Affairs.
I do believe more women would broaden the agenda.
But this isn't going to happen through a magical revolution.
It will take time and we need to introduce some practical initiatives to help what is fundamentally a change in attitude, to take place.
One of the things we intend to do is issue new, revised guidelines on portrayal.
They will say that we have a responsibility to serve all sections of society and to produce programmes that reflect and represent the composition of the nation accurately.
That means our discussion programmes, for example, should not simply consist of white able-bodied men.
Our new guidelines will also say that we must be careful to ensure our programmes do not perpetuate myths, reinforce stereotypes or cause offence to particular groups or minorities.
In terms of our city coverage for example, we always seem to talk to men with red, blue or black braces — yet there are plenty of expert women too.
In addition, we have to be very careful about terminology and language.
This does not mean that we shall shy away from tackling difficult subjects that may cause offence.
But we should know why we are doing so and be clear about the reasons why.
We are also planning to help tackle the question of portrayal by establishing a database of all contributors to News and Current Affairs.
Most programmes run such a contact list at present.
But by pooling them we can find out whether women are fairly represented.
In those areas where they are not, we will seek out people to put on the database.
Once this is established we will then begin monitoring the portrayal of women on our programmes.
We are actively trying to improve the number of women and members of the ethnic communities who are reporters and presenters.
Anna Ford has often said that she believed that a woman should have had a role on our Election Night programmes.
I hope that next time we will have a woman in a major role.
We are also trying to make News and Current Affairs a better place to work by providing more flexible ways of working.
We already encourage job-shares, part-time working and career breaks and we are introducing home working.
And we are encouraging managers to be sympathetic to the sudden disruption of working hours that can be caused to a parent of either sex responsible for children.
To back this up we provide subsidised nurseries and a dependent care allowance to those whose hours change at short notice.
We are also looking at the possibility of introducing emergency childcare but financial assistance for this is taxable.
We need to move away from the idea that ‘they’— women, people from ethnic minorities and the disabled — are a problem.
This is not proving easy.
For example, a belief in a more consensual empowering style of management, consulting staff on policy as well as day-to-day issues, being receptive to ideas, requires courage.
Some, used to a more old-fashioned top down managerial style are cynical about such an approach.
We need a change in culture.
We've got to recognise that many women in our organisation, for example, perceive a glass ceiling.
Whatever we say we believe in, is not being enacted in practice.
There is no easy answer but I believe that we can make the environment we work in fairer to women; to all minority groups.
It will only happen if we all treat it as a priority.
RTS SPEECH 13TH OCTOBER
There is no escaping from the debate about the BBC.
But no matter how great the differences are between the various views about the way the BBC should go, I am sure a great deal unites us.
And it is some of those shared beliefs and concerns that I intend to address this evening:
the values and role of good journalism
the impact of current pressures within the broadcasting environment on those values, and the way they are leading to a parting of the ways and, most particularly,
the BBC's response to those pressures and the new broadcasting environment.
In my own area, I am sure we would all agree about the sort of journalism we all aspire to.
Good journalism is underpinned by certain qualities or values.
It must be accurate and truthful.
It must be based on observation and enquiry in the field.
It must seek out and test views.
It must be impartial and objective.
It must make sense of events as they happen and in their immediate aftermath.
It must be fearless too.
We all know the importance of television and radio journalism.
Our audiences are clear that we are the most trusted source of information and news in Britain.
We have seen over the summer the impact that pictures, in particular, can have — scenes of prison camps in the former Yugoslavia, of ‘ethnic cleansing’, of the random bombardment of bread queues or of people burying their dead.
All of those very directly led to action by governments.
I remember specifically the French Minister for Humanitarian Affairs, Dr. Bernard Kouchner, who said over the summer, ‘The enemy of oppression is photography, the camera, the press, and information’.
He was speaking about Yugoslavia — but he could have been talking about the appalling scenes in Somalia or other parts of Africa.
Our job is to bring an understanding of these events to our viewers and listeners.
I am very proud, very proud indeed, of what BBC journalists have done in the former Yugoslavia.
But I hope you will join me tonight in saluting ALL the correspondents and crews — from the BBC, ITN, BSkyB and other broadcasters here and abroad as well as those from newspapers and agencies like Visnews — join me in saluting those who risk their lives in appalling circumstances to tell the world the truth about what was Yugoslavia.
First-hand reporting is a critical duty.
It was not just economic weakness that led to the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe.
It was also the availability of free information on radio and television, in particular.
Good independent journalism underpins a free, democratic society.
Fast, accurate information is the lifeblood of the economy, of politics, and of society in a way never seen before.
Good journalism can also expose wrongdoing, evil and corruption.
Good journalism can also stimulate change or action from politicians and from society at large.
We can all recall instances of that — whether it be the famines in Ethiopia or the prison camps in Bosnia.
The underpinning of all good journalism is a devotion to objectivity and impartiality.
That means a positive spirit of enquiry.
Journalists with no axe to grind, no message to put across, no prejudice to bear, positively seeking after the truth.
It's an invigorating concept because it involves going out and searching for new stories, new voices, new views, the articulate in the community as well as those who have no voice.
It involves questioning and challenging and testing all views — those that represent the status quo— as well as those clamouring for change.
To do all this all broadcast journalists must have the opportunity — the outlets — they must have the resources, the money, the infrastructure, and the equipment.
And there must be the willingness to give professional journalists the confidence to tackle the sort of journalism we need to sustain our democracy.
Now we might all share those values and aspirations and I believe we do.
But I fear we are now being pulled apart — by commercial pressures and by the changes forced upon the broadcasting environment.
We've struggled against a background of the Charter Review in the BBC to match ourselves to the changing needs of the audience.
Those outside the BBC are struggling to find their place and role in the world of profit.
We do not know what a lightly regulated market will bring.
But I fear that the differences between us will grow.
In New York last week, with tens of channels at my disposal — I found it difficult to get a satisfying service of news from around the world.
The public service broadcasters and the commercial broadcasters increasingly have different objectives.
I fear we are at a parting of the ways.
Let me apply this thought to our journalism.
I am sure we will all continue to report the major stories around the world.
But I fear that the scale of respective commitment may begin to differ.
Will others choose to keep up a continuous presence in covering Yugoslavia in the way that we have over the past year?
Goodness knows it is difficult enough for the BBC to carry on, week in, week out, reporting from Bosnia.
But what must it be like for other organisations who are now having to make money out of news.
It may be that part of our role in the future — to use Michael Grade's phrase — will be to keep everyone else honest — to make sure there is a commitment to telling those major stories that matter.
The BBC recognises the public appetite for serious information.
Others may increasingly take a different approach.
It's worth saying that the BBC's vision of our journalism is also based on research about what our audience wants.
I did a lot of listening to focus groups in the middle of September.
These were groups of eight or ten people in someone's sitting room.
One message came through loud and clear.
Tell us about things that matter.
Tell us about things that are significant.
They DID want to know about Yugoslavia.
They did want to know about Somalia.
They did want to know about Europe.
They did want to know about the recession.
Tell us more about the world — tell us more about our country, they said.
So our job is to ensure our journalism is wide-ranging — in terms of where we have correspondents at home and abroad — in terms of the subjects we cover — in terms of the diversity of voice and views we broadcast.
That also means encouraging originality.
It means broadening our agenda and questioning the decisions on which it is based, the reasons we go for one story and exclude others.
Why do we pick some wars to cover — and not others.
When we concentrate on one disaster, one famine, are others going on that we should be covering.
Do we over-report certain stories at the expense of others?
No broadcaster for example has a particularly good record of consistently covering Germany.
We're there for the Na-Nazi riots — but for too much of the time we're not.
You can make the same arguments about certain stories at home.
Although there is some coverage of what appears to be routine violence on estates up and down the country — for example, on Today and This Week recently — this is one area we all under — report.
We must guard — especially at times of cost-cutting — against a bias in favour of those stories that we all agree are big.
We must ensure we have money and people to cover those stories that are significant, but may be less dramatic.
A bias, if I may coin a phrase, against the obvious.
That is why we have got to aim to have programmes that cherish diversity and originality.
On the spot news from all over the world and this country — weekly programmes tackling a wide range of issues and stories with originality — and a wide range of programme formats to appeal to a wider audience.
That's why, for example, we aim to continue our investment in business programming — and indeed expand it.
I notice that business programming has all but disappeared from ITV and Channel 4.
That's why we will continue to build up our network of bureaux — this year in Rio and Frankfurt — next year in Africa.
All of this to ensure we expand our range as a newsgatherer.
Financing all this requires change and new ways of working.
But unlike change and efficiency in commercial organisations this is change and efficiency to serve the viewer and listener, not the shareholder.
That is why, for example, we are committed to bi-media working and multi-skilling.
We must embrace change in the way we do things, to get better value for money to go to more places and cover more stories.
That is why in a fortnight's time we will have at Westminster and at Broadcasting House the first fully digital editing equipment for radio in Europe.
That is why we are now operating a fully bimedia newsgathering operation.
This is being pragmatically run — many stories need someone for radio and someone for Television.
But some do not.
The results of this policy are clear each day on Radio and Television: correspondents have more outlets for their wares — we can cover a wider range of stories — and we can spare people to work off rota on stories that will break new fresh ground.
All of this comes down to one simple phrase: working more efficiently so we can do more and do it better.
This is vital for the sort of journalism we want to deliver.
Let me turn now to another way in which the BBC is responding to viewers' and listeners' needs in the current broadcasting environment — and a response that may be increasingly difficult for those facing commercial pressures to match.
We are committed to giving our viewers and listeners context — to give them the where-with-all to make sense of the world.
Time and time again the need for this was stressed by the audience focus groups: ‘explain things to us’ we were told.
Anyone watching our programmes over the past few years knows the importance we attach to this.
It is answering a direct need of the audience.
It's easier now: I remember when I was first in the TV newsroom, the foreign round-up as it was called went from pictures of policemen in Peru beating demonstrators, to a volcano erupting in the Philippines, to a hurricane in the Caribbean, to more police beating up more people somewhere else.
What the audience made of it I don't know.
Well, we're different now: fewer items, more context.
And there's been no rush to the off switch.
We're providing a service that is, to use the d-word,distinctively BBC — and the audience like it.
We are building on this.
In the last year we have been developing an occasional series to respond to this demand — the Survivors' Guide.
This series has answered the detailed questions people are asking about the Health Service, about Yugoslavia and so on.
And it gets a good audience.
We're looking at new programmes — again to answer the needs of our audience.
Why don't you ever go back to places that were in the news, we are asked.
We're looking at a programme to do that.
Why don't you do a programme that looks at ‘the story so far’.
We're piloting that too.
In addition we will continue to mount major specials to ensure the big issues of the day are thoroughly explained and debated.
One of the major achievements, to my mind, of bringing News and Current Affairs together in the BBC was combining the skills of the two former disparate areas to mount major special programming.
We saw it the last time in action on the weekend of the French vote on Maastricht — harnessing all our resources to serve the viewer and listener in a way no-one else can.
But I would like to be more ambitious: we will harness all the BBC's skills across radio and TV, the regions and World Service to mount such major specials.
There is another area in which our ways are beginning to part and that is weekly journalism — current affairs.
The differences here are becoming greater and greater.
When I look at what the new people in charge of Channel 3 are saying about Current Affairs, I am depressed.
Paul Jackson, for example, the Director of Programmes for Carlton Television, said a little while ago ‘those who argue for Current Affairs to stay in peak time are just not accepting things as they are.
You may not like it but under the new licences, ITV is mandated to be a popular channel that gets an audience, earns revenue and sustains business.
What a depressing prospect for programmes with such reputations as ‘World in Action’ and ‘This Week’.
Ray Fitzwalter wrote in ‘The Guardian’ recently, ‘the drift towards a narrower range has already begun.
Some Drama and Current Affairs is now really entertainment presented as Drama and Current Affairs’.
It is simply not good enough for people to argue, as I have heard, that viewers will be able to see Current Affairs outside the peak time.
Viewers have a right to expect serious events, serious issues, serious journalism to be tackled at length in primetime — and that is what the BBC is committed to doing.
Sadly, it would appear we may be alone.
We need questioning, wide ranging and diverse Current Affairs programmes.
They have a vital role to ensure all the major strands of thought, of opinion, of policy are fairly covered.
These programmes need to question and push forward the agenda of the news programmes.
Current Affairs programmes must be committed to revelation — and original journalism.
I mentioned the word revelation just then.
And let me say something about that.
Frankly, it is a travesty of the truth that the BBC in the past four or five years has in some way been tamed.
There are no political conspiracies.
We are not cowed.
We produce more original journalism than any other broadcaster.
And so we should.
We make more programmes — 110 hours of radio and television journalism each week.
It's not surprising that we are criticised sometimes but I suspect our critics can't keep pace.
Perhaps that is why they are silent about the programmes which dilute, in fact wash away their conspiracy arguments.
Just look at the record in the last two years alone.
For example— Panorama on Robert Maxwell was the only piece of journalism to take on the subject — and at considerable risk.
Panorama on the Cardiff Three revealed the irregularities of the police approach to the murder investigation.
Panorama also exposed the failure of Upjohn to reveal the damaging side effects of the world's most popular sleeping pill — Halcyon.
An Assignment special on Japan exposed the Japanese government's moral ambivalence to its war crimes, while Public Eye revealed that there was no conspiracy in removing Stalker.
And no-one has covered Northern Ireland as thoroughly as we have: Panorama's Dirty War examined the way British intelligence ran agent Brian Nelson; Lethal Force tested the suspicion that men who could have been captured or wanted to surrender had been shot dead whilst a special on the Guildford Four broke new ground, exposing the role of the DPP's office in withholding crucial evidence.
That is a record that is second to none.
We are committed to putting money and people into the sort of programmes that take a long time to make.
The sort of programmes that involve the risk that they may not work at all.
We believe that it is our duty to provide time, money and journalists for investigations of policy, people or institutions on behalf of the public.
We will do so and remain steadfastly independent of pressure from whatever quarter.
We will do so knowing that whatever we do, whatever normal editorial decisions we make may be misinterpreted.
We have always been committed to programmes of investigation…and we always will be in the future.
But our ambition is bigger than that.
Our ambition is also to ensure that the big questions and the difficult questions are asked across a range of issues.
No-one could say that our news programmes, for example, have been weak-kneed in their coverage over the past eighteen months of the NHS or the recession in the UK economy.
It matters to me greatly that we have a reputation for taking these big issues and dealing with them with independence and rigour.
Before I finish I would like to take this opportunity to say a few words about our commitment to Continuous News.
For me this is the most exciting development of them all and it is something I've believed in for many years.
The World Service Television News is leading the way as the provider of the BBC News to an international marketplace.
It is so important for us and for Britain that our voice is heard worldwide.
The progress in achieving this aim is astonishing — and News and Current Affairs is working closely with Bush House to make sure we build on that success.
Here, we're talking to potential partners to run a 24 Hour News Service on satellite — but the key part of our strategy is the All News Network on radio.
I have no doubt it is a significant part of our future.
It is there, right in the centre of the Charter Review document — for these two broad reasons.
First, the news will be there when our audience wants it — to cover major events when they happen — or give an up-date on whatever is new that hour.
People now expect to be in touch when they want.
Our research shows that.
I believe many people increasingly want their news when it is convenient for them — when they get in from work, when they've picked up the children from school, when they take a break from their work, or finish a meeting, when they arrive in a hotel.
That is the way of the future.
This is very difficult to do when you don't have a network up and running all the time.
There have been delays in giving major new stories — both in terms of news flashes — and in terms of giving the full report and context.
It is difficult to break in to existing programmes.
So you had to wait for full details of John Major's new cabinet earlier this year.
You had to wait for the flash and details of the changes in interest rates on Black Wednesday — a day of vital interest for small businessmen and mortgage holders up and down the country.
With a rolling network we would have been there live to provide them with information of direct concern to all their lives — people, incidentally, who could not afford to pay for a service from any other source.
But this network will not just serve the big occasions.
It will also provide a ‘dip in service’ for those who wish to catch up on the headlines, the business needs, the travel, the weather and other key information each hour.
But there's another reason why continuous news is at the heart of the information part of the Charter Review document.
A fundamental principle of our case is that the BBC must be the guarantor of the national debate.
We must ensure the British public is brought up-to-date with the issues, events, stories of our time.
This is a vital role for the BBC in the democratic process — in the informing of the public — in the education of the nation.
We are better placed than anyone to do it.
We have got the infrastructure, we have got the people and the trust.
We could cover more stories than anyone else on more subjects and issues and from more places.
Across the BBC — harnessing all of the BBC — we have a huge richness of talent that is second-to-none.
I want listeners in this country to hear the best of the World Service.
I want listeners up and down the country to hear the best of our local radio and regional journalism.
I want them to hear ‘live’— the major debates in Parliament — the select committees, major press conferences.
I want them to hear more about the world — Europe, South East Asia, the developing world.
As well as more about the environment, developments in medicine, science and technology.
The list of important yet under-reported subjects could go on.
Presenters and journalists like John Humphrys, James Naughtie, Nick Clarke and Brian Redhead will front the programmes.
We will use existing, successful programmes like ‘From Our Own Correspondent’, but increase their range so that they cover home stories as well.
Business coverage will be expanded.
We will have three half-hour business programmes a day — as well as business updates every hour.
But we will focus not just on the City but also training investment and industry.
We will have our own style of sports journalism — and news about the arts with items throughout the day.
All our specialist correspondents will be contributing background features and we will run letters from around the world — for example, from Bridget Kendall in Moscow, James Miles in Beijing, William Horsley in Bonn.
We will run Survivors' Guides to topical issues — such as the Maastricht Treaty — as well as a special programme on Europe each week of the year.
A number of our highly successful programmes currently only run for twenty weeks a year, such as‘In Business’ and ‘Europhile’— and we will now expand their run for the entire year.
The number of documentary programmes — compared with what is currently carried on Radio 4 will treble.
And we will ensure that 10% of our weekly journalism on the new channel will come from independents.
The regions will contribute stories from around the country each day.
And most important of all, we will use the best of the World Service programmes like ‘Newshour’— to enable people here to hear what is currently only available abroad.
This will not be a service of repetition or speculation.
It will be a service of richness and originality.
I understand the fears, worries and concerns of those who have launched the Save Radio 4 on Long Wave campaign.
Radio 4 is a very precious asset of the BBC.
Even a change in its schedule brings controversy.
A little while ago, its Controller, Michael Green, moved Woman's Hour from 2 o'clock in the afternoon to 10.30 in the morning.
An enormous public storm ensued — both internally and externally.
But he stuck to his guns.
And the audience for Woman's Hour is now larger than it was.
We've gone back and looked at the correspondence we've had about the News Network.
And we've found that so far, we've had one thousand letters of concern since the network was announced.
Since the campaign was launched on ‘Feedback’, the BBC has received thirty-nine critical calls.
Compare that to one day recently when there were more than seventy calls about a schedule change.
Of course we take all of these worries seriously — but I want you to get the scale of the complaints in perspective.
Now if you read what is written about this change you'd think the BBC was about to axe Radio 4.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
All the main news and current affairs programmes from Today through to the Midnight News will be on both frequencies.
And the BBC's engineers are working flat out to ensure that the reception of Radio 4 on FM — is the same as for Radio 1, Radio 2 and Radio 3 — that's over 98% of the UK.
The engineers are also looking at the possibility of transmission by satellite for Europe and remote parts of the UK.
There are clear signs that the BBC will not be allowed to go on simulcasting.
That's why you can no longer get Radio 2 or Radio 3 on medium wave.
We've not been told yet — but we don't believe it will be possible to simulcast Radio 4 on long wave and FM beyond the mid-nineties.
So a News Network gives us a chance to extend CHOICE for all our listeners.
And make use of long wave.
We all have very short memories, and so have probably forgotten how Rolling News emerged.
At the end of the Gulf War, many many people wrote in to the BBC saying, ‘why aren't you keeping going’.
‘What will we do without you’?
Many commentators wrote in similar fashion — saying this service was the epitome of what the BBC should be doing.
Gillian Reynolds, one of the most respected commentators on radio, wrote: ‘It has clarity, ease, strength, assurance and bite.
It feels like an all-news network should: instant, informed, urgent without being hysterical.
If the BBC had been planning it for years, it could not have had more authority’.
Two months later she said: ‘I keep trying to remember that the Government policy on broadcasting is ‘quality, competition, choice’.
The only addition to the crowded airwaves in the past year to have significantly demonstrated all three has been Radio 4 News FM.
And now’, she wrote, ‘alas, it's gone’.
John Cunningham in ‘The Guardian’, referring to coverage of the mortar bomb attack on Whitehall wrote: ‘Whitehall's scariest 60 minutes proved to be one of radio's finest hours, effortlessly making the case for an all news channel’.
While the ‘Last Word’ column in The Independent on Sunday stated: ‘Last night the service went off air because the BBC cannot afford the annual budget of £5m and is pursuing a policy of cost cutting.
The corporation is missing an opportunity here’.
After this praise we examined the response of the audience.
There were one and a half million new listeners brought to Radio 4 by the News Network.
And they were younger listeners too.
Those, like me, who championed the News Network asked whether we could afford to lose one and a half million new listeners.
But we asked another question of the core audience to Radio 4 during the Gulf War coverage.
We asked whether splitting LW and FM suited people or not.
The research shows that 85% of those asked felt that the split between LW and FM had either suited them well or had not affected them.
15% said they were badly affected — and of those, roughly one half said their main problem was that they found it difficult to pick up their usual programmes on LW.
Only 1% of all those questioned said they were unhappy because they had difficulty receiving the service on FM.
Finally our research has examined experience across the Atlantic.
There are two main conclusions.
First, the News and Newstalk formula in the US is extremely popular.
It is now the fifth most listened to form of radio — and it is increasing its share of total listening.
The second finding looks at the impact that CNN has had on the viewing of news.
If you look at the amount of viewing of news people do throughout the day — then CNN has a reach comparable of those of the big networks.
In other words, people dip into continuous news services and use it when they want.
That's what they'll do with the Radio News Network.
Finally, our researchers carried out a survey about the sort of services the audience wanted the BBC to provide.
One quarter — 25% — said they'd listen to a Radio News Network.
38% said the country should have it.
And that's before they could hear it.
It came fourth of the BBC's network options — after Radio 1, Radio 4 and Radio 2.
These findings are backed up by the ‘panel’ research I mentioned earlier.
There is a substantial latent demand for the Radio News Network.
We have to listen to these views as well as to those who complain.
But let me return to my main theme.
Much of what I have said tonight points towards a parting of the ways.
There is only one direction for the BBC's journalism.
But I hope that by pursuing that course we can also help others set high standards — help others win the argument for paying for good journalism: for supporting good journalism; for scheduling good journalism.
The BBC may sometimes infuriate, anger, concern or annoy.
It will also inform, educate, surprise, inspire trust and show authority.
But without us there are only two losers: British journalism and the British public.
SPEECH TO VOICE OF LISTENER AND VIEWER 26.11.92
May I start by saying how pleased I am that you have recognised Michael Buerk, Alistair Cooke and the Today programme team.
They are a first-rate journalists and have done outstanding work.
I believe they represent the very best of the BBC's tradition in journalism and I am so pleased that you have chosen to honour them.
Thank you.
As you know, the BBC has an hour and a half ago published its contribution to the debate on the future of the BBC.
We believe there are two fundamental principles embodied in the case for public service broadcasting — as it affects our journalism: First, that the BBC should extend choice for all viewers and listeners — providing them with distinctive, high quality services and also programmes which others will not provide.
And second — that the BBC has a role to provide a comprehensive news and information service of richness and originality .
That's why the provision of services of Continuous News on television and radio is so important for the BBC.
We must ensure the British public is brought up-to-date with the issues, events, stories of our time.
This is a vital role for the BBC in the democratic process — in the informing of the public — in the education of the nation.
We want listeners in this country to be able to hear the best of the World Service.
We want listeners up and down the country to have the opportunity to hear the best of our local radio and regional journalism.
We want them to have available, ‘live’ where possible — the major debates in Parliament — the select committees, major press conferences.
We want them to have the choice of hearing more about the world — Europe, South East Asia, the developing world.
As well as more about the environment, developments in medicine, science and technology if they wish.
I believe we are better placed in the BBC than anyone to do it.
We have got the infrastructure, we have got the people and the trust.
We could cover more stories than anyone else on more subjects and issues, and from more places.
Across the BBC — harnessing all of the BBC — we have a huge richness of talent that is second-to-none.
It is through a Radio News Network that we can provide this service and extend the choice of listening available to all.
The question that has kept coming over the past weeks is: what will this new network sound like — what will it offer?
It will offer the spine of News and Current Affairs programmes so appreciated by the Radio 4 audience: Today, The World At One, PM, the 6 O'Clock News and The World Tonight will be there, on both networks.
But between those known landmarks will be a choice of routes.
The Radio 4 mix on one frequency and news-based programmes on the other.
The listeners will have the opportunity to hear on the news network — major bulletins on the hour, and summaries on the half hour, three business programmes a day and regular updates on sport, weather, travel and business.
We also aim to give more range and greater depth to our journalism.
At present, we cover a narrow agenda.
Narrowed by the constraints of time.
To give you some idea of difference between the number of stories News and Current Affairs on Radio 4 can offer now, and say, what your papers carry: we had a look at one 24 hour period at the beginning of the month.
We dealt with 38 stories from the Financial World Tonight through Today, The World at One to the 6 O'Clock bulletin.
About half were home and half foreign.
The Guardian had 75 stories.
The Telegraph had 73 news stories plus their business coverage.
The broadsheets all covered about twice as many stories overall than all our Radio 4 news put together.
Let me tell you of some of the important stories that I believe we have covered inadequately — and in some cases not at all.
For example— the major seminar last week in Edinburgh in the lessons of the child abuse cases in Orkney and Cleveland.
Another example — we have not examined how the government's funding is affecting housing trusts, or its impact on the local housing market.
We have not described properly the impact of refugees from Bosnia who have already arrived in the United Kingdom — local councils for Birmingham and Norwich are having difficulty in finding money to house them.
I asked Joshua Rozenberg, our Legal Affairs correspondent, whether there were things from his area he felt we should have covered.
He mentioned the Environmental Law Foundation, specifically set up to assist citizens to protect their interests in securing a better environment — I would have thought a lot of people would have been interested in that.
He also mentioned the work of the Centre for Dispute Resolution — a way of resolving disputes on a whole range of issues that avoids people having to go to court.
Again, something which affects a great number of people.
I asked our education correspondent, Mike Baker, to list some of the topics he felt that with more space they could cover properly.
He pointed out how we almost never cover vocational education, further education, youth training, the role of the 300,000 school governors, links between schools and business or the role of higher education.
We have not dealt with the reasons why The Head Teachers' Association called for the teaching of modern foreign languages in primary schools.
We have not dealt with a report from the Advisory Centre for Education saying that the number of complaints from parents who had not got their first choice of school had doubled.
We have not covered the fact that Hillingdon has become the first education authority in the country to have 75% of its secondary schools opted out.
I could go on.
These are all issues that are of great importance and interest to this country.
Part of our case for the Radio News Network is that we must do better about telling our country about itself, not just in terms of law or education but also in terms of science, technology, medicine, the environment and an area where I personally have a great commitment — and that is coverage of business and our economy on which all our futures depend.
We need to report the world better too.
Terrible things are happening in Germany that we need to explain to our listeners.
Significant developments are taking place in Europe that, given the space, we can inform people about in a much more systematic and thorough way.
But beyond Europe we need to ensure that we are telling people about, for example, the problems of sub-Saharan Africa.
About, for example, the rise of the economies of South East Asia.
About, for example, the internal problems in what was the Soviet Union, a story we began some years ago, but are now in danger of leaving hanging in the air.
We can employ our talent around the world to give us news across a much wider perspective.
Why do we have just Alastair's Letter from America: why not have letters from Moscow, from Paris, from Tokyo, from Peking.
Seasoned reporters such as Bridget Kendall, Stephen Jessel, William Horsley and Philip Short have much much more to offer.
In recent weeks our Moscow correspondent could have reported on why the voters in Lithuania had rejected Lansbergis and what the implications were for the prospects of democracy in Russia as well as Lithuania.
Now she says she can't get beyond the facts and maybe one follow-up question.
Domestic radio (in contrast to the World Service) barely touched on the run up to the cancellation of Yeltsin's trip to Japan, so when it happened we didn't know why, we didn't know how important it was.
The BBC has unrivalled resources to deploy on a News Network: the expertise of our correspondents around the world, and in the nations and regions of the United Kingdom, the experience and quality of the World Service.
A Radio News Network will offer the space to answer not just the whats but the whys of contemporary events.
We will also be able to illuminate the heart of the democratic process in a way not possible at present.
The News Network will offer in-depth coverage of Parliament.
Apart from regular ‘live’ weekday broadcasts from the House, the network will have the flexibility to give the big Parliamentary occasion its due.
Far from hearing only half-an-hour from Michael Heseltine's statement on the pit closures, a news network would have carried it at length.
The Network will have, as one of its strengths, the ability to carry ‘live’ events that now generate maybe only a package on a bulletin or a two-way interview on PM: press Conferences and select committees.
We should broadcast more of the Select Committees — for example, the hearings looking at coal and energy policy and examining the economy,…the possibility of hearing the Chancellor cross-questioned by the finance committee is the essence of public service broadcasting.
Through this the public will be better informed.
The European Parliament and Commission, where so many decisions affecting our audience's lives are made, are further prime candidates for coverage.
The Synod of the Church of England is another body that deserves broader live coverage.
This will not be a service of repetition or speculation.
It will be a service of richness and originality.
Now, some people argue that you could do this using Radio 4 at present.
But the range and breadth of coverage I have been talking about cannot be done within the existing confines of Radio 4.
You cannot break into existing well-loved programmes to deliver up-to-the-minute news.
And, our research shows that the audience wants their news to be there when they want it — to cover major events when they happen — or to give an update on whatever is new that hour.
People now expect to be in touch when they want.
I believe many people increasingly want their news when it is convenient for them — when they get in from work, when they've picked up the children from school, when they take a break from their work, or finish a meeting, when they arrive at a hotel.
That is the way of the future.
This is very difficult to do when you don't have a network up and running all the time.
Now if you read what is written about this change you'd think the BBC was about to axe Radio 4.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
All the main news and current affairs programmes from Today through to the Midnight News will be on both frequencies.
And the BBC's engineers are working flat out to ensure that the reception of Radio 4 on FM is the same as for Radio 1, Radio 2 and Radio 3 — that's over 98% of the UK.
The engineers are also looking at the possibility of transmission by satellite for Europe and remote parts of the UK.
At the end of the Gulf War, many many people wrote in to the BBC saying, ‘why aren't you keeping going’.
‘What will we do without you’?
We were sent hundreds of letters of thanks like this one from an eminent diplomat, Sir Ashley Clarke:
I would very much hope that the BBC will be enabled to continue such a service in the future not only monitoring post war circumstances in the Gulf but in discussing the tortuous approach to European Community integration in 1992.
Or this letter from another listener:
This innovation has reinforced my belief that a constant news service is needed even at times of no national crisis.
After this praise we examined the response of the audience.
There were one-and-a-half million new listeners brought to Radio 4 by the News Network.
And many of these were younger listeners too.
Those, like me, who championed the News Network asked whether we could afford to lose one-and-a-half million new listeners.
We also examined experience across the Atlantic.
There are two main conclusions.
First, the News and Newstalk formula in the US is extremely popular.
It is now the fifth most listened to form of radio — and it is increasing its share of total listening.
Second, in America people dip into continuous news services and use them when they want.
That's what they'll do with the Radio News Network.
Finally, our researchers carried out a survey about the sort of services the audience wanted the BBC to provide.
One quarter — 25% — said they'd listen to a Radio News Network.
38% said the country should have it.
And that's before they could hear it.
It came fourth of the BBC's network options — after Radio 1, Radio 4 and Radio 2.
In short, this work shows there is a substantial latent demand for the Radio News Network.
We have to listen to these views as well as to the views of those who have reservations.
When I was in the United States at the end of the Presidential election campaign, I watched live on television and in full the final rallies of Ross Perot, George Bush and Bill Clinton.
It was uninterrupted.
I could make up my own mind.
And that's part of what we want to offer on this news network.
Your chance to make up your own mind about what key decision makers are saying by listening to them in full.
I believe it would be a great service to our democracy.
Ross Perot in his closing speech made an interesting and related point.
He said, ‘the media, the advertisers, the politicians told you, the American people that you had a attention span of between three and four minutes.
Yet 32 million of you watched me talking directly to you for half-an-hour in prime time’.
And he had a point.
In the complex world in which we live people need information to make sense of the world.
That is what this new network is about — live events, expert commentary, a wider range of stories told — and in more depth.
We have to explain the world to Britain — and the various parts of the United Kingdom to itself.
We need to examine the issues that bind and divide this country.
We need to ensure, for the health of this country, that a wide range of voice and view is heard by allowing proper national debate about the issues that bind us as well as the issues that divide us.
This will help sustain the identity of our nation.
A proper purpose, I believe, for a public service broadcaster.