

KIRSTY YOUNG
But first this lunchtime, Lou Macari has been officially welcomed to Celtic Park.
Three weeks after Liam Brady resigned as manager, the club has formally named his successor.
ANGUS SIMPSON
Within the last hour, chairman Kevin Kelly has introduced the former Parkhead player he hopes can turn the club around.
Our sports correspondent Jim Delahunt reports from Celtic Park.
JIM DELAHUNT/Sports Correspondent; 18SECS
LOU MACARI/Manager, Celtic FC; 35SECS
SCOTTISH CUP FINAL/1972; 51SECS APPROX
Hundreds of oil jobs will go at the UIE yard at Clydebank unless new orders are won quickly.
UIE has lost a vital contract for BP's Andrew field to an english yard.
There's better news for work starved Highlands Fabricators at Nigg.
The Cromarty Firth yard will build the Andrew jacket next year.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
Clydebank; 1sec
JOE McLEANEY/Union Convener; 27sec
Some news in brief now — two men have been found dead in Glasgow in separate incidents.
The body of twenty-seven year old Robert McGuire was disovered by his sister in his home in Roseberry Street.
And twenty-four year old Robert Dickson from Dormonside Road was found dead by friends in a house in Whinhill Road.
Police believe both deaths may be drugs related.
Police in Lothian are hunting a man who attempted to abduct a young woman in Musselburgh.
The twenty-nine year old victim was standing at a bus stop on Haddington Road when a car pulled up and the driver asked for directions.
As she leaned into the car, the attacker grabbed her and tried to pull her into the vehicle.
The woman managed to fight him off and the car sped away with its passenger door flapping open.
The attacker is described as around thirty, with dark hair and a thick moustache.
He was driving a brown or maroon saloon.
Tourism bosses are trying to boost Scotland's image as a holiday destination for Americans.
Visitors from the US and Canada are high spenders and are currently worth more than one hundred million pounds to the Scottish economy every year.
At a conference in Glasgow, delegates will be told there's now a network of over one thousand American travel agents dedicated to promoting Scottish holidays.
A new logo will be unveiled, and tourism marketing experts will look at ways of encouraging more Americans to see what Scotland has to offer.
There will be more news and features in a moment, but first the weather with Lloyd.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Well, it was a rather dull start in the south of the area, but it was unbroken sunshine for Fife and Central regions.
On to the afternoon and clearer skies will continue to push across much of central and southern Scotland, so a very pleasant afternoon in store for most places.
Winds will remain light and variable, and this will allow all that sunshine to warm the air nicely, temperatures getting up to a comfortable ten or eleven celsius, that's fifty or fifty fahrenheit.
It'll remain dry tonight, with some cloud around, especially in the east.
The west will get mist and fog patches to make up.
Temperatures will fall to around five celsius, forty one fahrenheit in the east, but where the cloud breaks in the west, perhaps getting as low as one celsius, thirty four fahrenheit, with a frost possible in some of the more sheltered areas.
And the outlook for tomorrow's much the same: cloud in the east, sunny spells in the west.
An Edinburgh man, who suffers chronic heart problems, is claiming he was forced by hospital staff to walk over six miles home at one O'clock in the morning.
Peter Watt had been taken to Edinburgh Royal Infirmary by ambulance on Thursday at the request of his doctor.
Mr Watt is complaining that staff ignored his protests that he was still in severe pain, and that he had no money for a taxi.
John Macgill reports.
PETER WATT; 18 secs
Library Pictures; 33 secs
Time for another sparkling commercial break now, but stay with us because still to come…
Fancy a weekend with the rich and famous?
Today Katie Wood joins the huntin', shootin', fishin' fraternity in the wilds of Scotland.
But coming up first, Alison MacDonald continues her adventures with the kids in buggy land.
And we'll see if Edinburgh's kinder to kids than Glasgow.
That's in a couple of minutes.
See you then.
Welcome back.
Now yesterday Alison MacDonald looked at the lot of parents struggling around Glasgow in the first of her series on child friendly Scotland.
Today she's been looking to see what steps are being taken in the nation's capital, to try and make life easier.
MARJORY KENNY/Edinburgh District Council; 0:11
DEREK PRESTON/‘Klownz’; 1:21
HAMISH McGREGOR/Fat Sams Pizza Pie Factory; 4:01
ALISON MacDONALD/Scotland Today; 5:17
And, as well as that final report from Alison, our weekly phone-in tomorrow will also be on the subject of child care.
A chance for you to air your views and put them to a Government spokesperson.
But more on that later.
Now, just because it's Wednesday, it's time to get travelling.
Kirsty.
Last week it was the delights of Tuscany.
This week we've sent Katie Wood to the far North to a place just outside Wick.
Now it may be a six hour drive from the Central Belt and a short one hour Loganair flight from Edinburgh but as you'll see Katie's destination is the last word in luxury.
It was good enough for Phillip Schofield's wedding but what did our intrepid travel correspondent think of Ackergill Tower.
JOHN BANNISTER/Owner, Ackergill Tower
And if you want any information on Katie's very special break there, you can phone for a copy of our fact sheet.
The number's oh-four-one or oh-three-one, two-two-six, four-seven-four-seven.
That's oh-four-one or oh-three-one, two-two-six, four-seven-four-seven.
On to the newsroom now and Shereen's there to tell us what's happening at six thirty.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London now.
John Suchet's at the 5.40 desk.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
And that's it from us for today.
Tomorrow should be Call Kaye but this week Kaye's taking a break and so we'll have —
Call Kirsty.
And the subject, as we mentioned earlier, will be this alleged child friendly society of ours.
Tying in with Alison MacDonald's reports, we've invited Conservative MP Phil Gallie to defend the Government's record on child care and provision in the 90s.
So, if you think the Government isn't doing enough, or if you believe the responsibility lies fairly and squarely with parents and commercial interests — whatever you think — you can put your point to Mr Gallie tomorrow.
The number to call is 0500 404 000.
The lines will be open from 12.30.
And your calls are free.
So, join us at five to one tomorrow for that and much more.
But for now, from all of us on the lunchtime team, good afternoon.
We've had an amazing response to our search for a cure for the chronic skin complaint psoriasis.
You may remember seeing Katrina Hunter and the remarkable progress she made with a herbal cream from the borders.
Well Zoe Muir decided to catch up on the progress of our other volunteer, Katy Clark.
Katy chose to turn to the mysterious art of chinese herbal medicine.
But is it working?
KATY CLARK; 1'17’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 2'20’
Glasgow's labour councillors are meeting this afternoon in the wake of the row over the council's decision to allow a Sinn Fein member to speak in the city.
Although the matter of Thursday's meeting is not on the official agenda, the council's freedom of speech policy may be called into question.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
VIV LUMSDEN
Eleven people have been taken to hospital after a fire on the Glasgow underground.
Fumes filled the station at Cowcaddens after a cable fire this afternoon.
Earlier in the day passengers were forced to walk through an underground tunnel after a train partially derailed.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
Div Commander JOHN WILLIAMSON/Strathclyde Fire Brigade; 27secs
LORRAINE DAVIDSON/Scotland Today; 48secs
SHEREEN NANJIANI
Hundreds of oil jobs will go at UIE in Clydebank unless new orders are won quickly.
The yard has lost a vital contract for BP's Andrew field.
And firms in the CBI have endorsed much of the criticism levelled at the local enterprise companies in a report out today.
With a round up of the business news, here's Alan Saunby.
Clydebank; 1sec
JOE McCLEANEY/Yard Convenor; 27sec
JOHN WARD/Chairman, CBI Scotland; 1min 27sec
Labour's new Scottish spokesman George Robertson has made his debut in the Commons by calling Scottish Secretary Ian Lang a pick pocket.
The exchange took place during Scottish Question time.
Our political correspondent Fiona Ross is at Westminster and she joins us live.
FIONA ROSS/Scotland Today/LIVE
IAN LANG MP/Scottish Secretary; 3 secs
GEORGE ROBERSTON MP/Shadow Scottish Secretary; 20 secs
FIONA ROSS/Scotland Today/LIVE
This is Scotland Today.
Still to come on tonight's programme.
Race row in Central Region.
Council say they'll beat the British National Party.
Episcopalians in a moral dilemma over the appointment of woman priests.
And we meet the couple whose wedding literally started on the rocks.
Leslie Hinds, the leader of Edinburgh District Council, is at the centre of a jobs for the girls row.
Questions have been raised following new developments over the Tommy Sheppard saga, the council official who's paid to do nothing.
With the details James Matthews.
Edinburgh; 0:02
Councillor GEOFF MAUDSLEY/Conservative, Edinburgh District; 38
Councillor LESLIE HINDS/Leader, Edinburgh District; 46
Councillors in Central Region are being asked to make a pledge to fight racism.
It follows claims by the right-wing British National Party that they've launched a recruitment drive in the area.
Aileen Taylor reports.
RICHARD CADETTE/Falkirk Football Club; 17secs
Councillor CHORRIE McCHORD/Leader, Central Region; 44secs
AILEEN TAYLOR/Scotland Today; 1:05
Scottish Television's Head of Programmes, David Scott, has announced that he'll be leaving the company in January.
He joined the company in 1986 from BBC Scotland to restructure its news and current affairs output.
In the run-up to the 1991 ITV franchise auction he took charge of all regional production.
Scottish Television's Managing Director Gus Macdonald said Mr Scott had done an outstanding job in strengthening the news and current affairs programming.
His shrewd insights on all Scottish issues would be greatly missed.
HIV patients in Glasgow face a bleak future, according to a new study.
The AIDS Control Act Report predicts the number of HIV sufferers who become desperately ill will soar in the next two years.
And a growing proportion of those suffering severe illness will be drug injectors.
This from Linda Kennedy.
S-AIDS 
JOHN CAMERON/Ruchill Hospital; 0:38
PAUL TRAYNOR/Scottish Aids Monitor; 0:58 (OUT BY 1:03)
Last year the Church of England voted to ordain women priests.
The decision caused uproar, with thousands of Anglicans threatening to leave the church.
Next year, Scotland's third largest denomination, the Scottish Episcopal Church is certain to make the same decision.
In his last State of Grace feature, Ronnie Convery looks at the internal strife such a move would cause among Scotland's fifty thousand Episcopalians.
Kilmacolm; 3 secs
Reverend ERIC LINDSAY/Rector, St Fillan's; 35 secs
Very Reverend PETER FRANCIS/Provost, St Mary's Cathedral; 1 min 48 secs
RONNIE CONVERY/Scotland Today; 3 mins 18 secs
Tayside north Tory MP Bill Walker says more defence cuts could close Rosyth naval base and leave the future of the dockyard in serious doubt.
He wants the government to leave defence spending alone.
Our Parliamentary reporter Rae Stewart sends this.
BILL WALKER MP/Conservative, Tayside North; 16 secs
JIM DELAHUNT
Lou Macari signed a three year contract with Celtic this afternoon then told Scotland Today he would walk away if he couldn't bring success to the club in that time.
By next May when the league and cup medals are being handed out, Celtic will have gone five years without a trophy.
In nine years as a manager in in England, Macari has brought success to Swindon, Birmingham and Stoke City.
He took Swindon from the fourth to the second within three years of arriving in nineteen eighty four.
He then won at Wembley with Birmingham, before repeating the cup winning feat with Stoke AND leading the club out of division two.
Macari will bring at least two of his Stoke City backroom staff to Parkhead, but he has said that Frank Connor will be retained.
Macari WILL be at Ibrox on Saturday but Connor will pick the team.
CELTIC 6 HIBS 1/Scottish Cup Final/1972; 7secs
LOU MACARI/Manager, Celtic FC; 27secs
KEVIN KELLY/Chairman, Celtic FC; 1min20secs
A dramatic rescue operation has brought joy to a young Kirkcaldy couple.
Twenty one year old Simon Matthews was trapped for nearly four hours on rocks by the sea.
But instead of panicking, he proposed to his girlfriend, who sat with him throughout the ordeal.
Emma Simpson has the story.
Kirkcaldy; 0:03secs
SIMON MATTHEWS; 0:23secs
ANN STEVENS; 0:51secs
Now for a roundup of the main news stories tonight.
Gordon Chapman's here to interpret for the deaf.
Eleven people were taken to hospital after a fire on the Glasgow underground at Cowcaddens.
And earlier passengers escaped along an underground tunnel after a derailment.
11 PEOPLE IN HOSPITAL AFTER FIRE/ON UNDERGROUND.
EARLIER PASSENGERS/ESCAPE ALONG TUNNEL AFTER DERAILMENT
Hundreds of oil jobs will be lost at UIE in Clydebank unless new orders are won quickly.
The yard has lost a vital contract for BP's Andrew field.
HUNDREDS OF OIL JOBS WILL BE LOST/ATUIE IN CLYDEBANK UNLESS/NEW ORDERS ARE WON QUICKLY
Labour's new Scottish spokesman George Robertson has made his debut in the Commons by calling Scottish Secretary Ian Lang a pick pocket.
LABOUR'S NEW SCOTTISH SPOKESMAN MAKES/DEBUT IN COMMONS BY CALLING/SCOTTISH SECRETARY A ‘PICK POCKET’
That's how the news looked in Scotland today.
There'll be a further update at ten thirty.
We'll be back tomorrow with bulletins throughout the day, and our main news programmes at lunchtime and six thirty.
Join us if you can.
Till tomorrow, from all of us here, goodnight.
A man who was caught in possession of a stolen famous painting has been jailed for eighteen months at the High Court in Edinburgh.
Thirty year old John Forbes of Wheatfield Street, Gorgie, in Edinburgh, was found guilty of reset by majority verdict.
The painting, called VE Day, by the English artist LS Lowry is worth about two hundred thousand pounds.
It was found in a cardboard folder in the back of the accused's car.
The painting went missing from Glasgow's Kelvingrove Art Gallery in March last year.
Two men have been found dead in Glasgow in separate incidents.
The body of twenty seven year old Robert McGuire was discovered by his sister at his home in Roseberry Street in the Toryglen district of the city.
Twenty four year old Robert Dickson's body was found by friends in a house in Whinhill Road in Pollok.
It's thought both deaths may be drug-related.
Campaigners against a proposed waste disposal complex in Renfrew are hopeful tonight that they may be within sight of winning their battle.
That follows the news today that Caird, the company planning to build the controversial incinerator, have made a large pre-tax loss in the first half of this year.
The company were more than twenty five million pounds in the red for the first six months of nineteen ninety three.
A spokesman for Caird said the group were reviewing projects including the Renfrew site in Scotland.
HIV patients in Glasgow face a bleak future, according to a new survey.
The AIDS Control Act Report predicts HIV sufferers who become desperately ill will soar in the next two years 
HIV PATIENTS FACE BLEAK FUTURE SAYS/REPORT.
PREDICTION OF MASSIVE INCREASE/IN THOSE BECOMING VERY ILL
ANGUS SIMPSON
But first, the future of the troubled Monktonhall colliery near Edinburgh looks set to be sealed with an announcement this lunchtime.
The consortium of former mineworkers who run the pit are expected to reveal details of an offer for the colliery.
The redundant pitmen each pledged ten thousand pounds of their own money to try to turn their dream of running their own business into reality.
Now, as John Macgill reports, the money they invested, and perhaps even their jobs, could be at stake.
KIRSTY YOUNG
Two hundred electronics jobs will be lost at Conner Peripherals in Irvine when manufacturing ends in Scotland.
The workers will be made redundant just before Christmas.
The American owned company is mothballing the plant and at the moment don't have to repay the millions of pounds of grant aid its received.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
Irvine; 1sec
GRAHAM STEVEN/Managing Director; 20sec
TONY RICKETTS/Irvine Development Corporation; 34sec
ALAN SAUNBY/Scotland Today; 57sec
Some news in brief— detectives in Bellshill are hunting two men who attacked and robbed a pensioner in her own home after posing as policemen.
The bogus officers, who were dressed in full police uniform, tied the sixty year old woman up after she let them into her house in Jerviston Street, New Stevenson around eight o'clock last night.
The robbers then made off with cash and jewellery.
A Glasgow man is being treated for gunshot wounds to his leg after he was attacked by three men in the Saracen area of the city late last night.
Twenty-six year old Steven Hogg from Bilsland Drive was approached by three men, one armed with a shotgun, while walking near his home.
Two hundred pensioners in Edinburgh are being taught safety skills at classes in the capital this week.
The police are joining forces with colleagues from the fire and ambulance services in the first ‘Safer Seniors’ campaign.
Groups from day centres for the elderly are being given advice on simple first aid and avoiding bogus workmen, along with tips on road and fire safety.
We'll have more news and features later, but now it's that time again: weather; Lloyd.
The two are synonymous.
Onto today then and it was a cloudy scene in most parts this morning.
And that cloud brought a little drizzle, mostly on the east coast, the only sunshine this morning stayed in the west.
And that's really the story for this afternoon, with sunshine in short supply.
It may make an appearance further north but the light rain will persist, especially over high ground.
And it'll be a cool afternoon, temperatures around nine degrees celsius, that's forty eight fahrenheit, with light winds coming in from the east.
Overnight it'll stay cloudy, and should be dry in most parts, except again for the odd shower over high ground.
But at least that cloud means it'll be milder than it's been recently, with overnight temperatures up above freezing, about three degrees celsius, that's thirty seven fahrenheit.
Last night parents in the North of Scotland gathered to protest at the decision by Dornoch Academy to opt out of local authority control.
It's the first school in Scotland to receive permission from the government to become self-governing and has raised deep concerns in the local community.
Tonight there'll be another public meeting on the same subject, this time in Paisley.
Parents at the Grammar School are to be balloted next month on opting out, but as Mark Smith now reports it's a school that's no stranger to the political battlefield.
Paisley; 1
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 21
RICHARD McANENEY/School Board Chairman; 51
DAVID REID/School Board Member; 1.40
We'll take the break now but stay tuned and stand by your phones because coming up…
Who'll look after the kids?
Alison MacDonald on the perennial problem of child care.
What do you think?
Is child care the Government's responsibility?
You can phone now on o-five-hundred, four-o-four, treble zero to put your views to Tory MP Phil Gallie.
So, how will Mr Gallie defend the Government's record?
Join us in just over a minute and a half to find out.
And get on those phones now.
See you soon.
Hello again.
Now at a time when the rest of Europe is moving towards providing all sorts of extra services for parents and children, we in Scotland seem to be going backwards.
In the last of her special reports on child friendly Scotland, Alison MacDonald's been looking at how we're doing on providing the basics like nursery places.
AILEEN MURPHY; 0:34
BRONWEN COHEN/Children in Scotland; 1:11-1:16
MAIRI CAIRNS/One Plus; 2:30
So, that wraps up Alison's reports.
Looks like it's over to the Government, Kirsty.
Well, in recent months the goverment has made some strong statements about the importance of the family, Keneth Clark is one of the the latest goverment ministers to come out against nursery education for all…so does fellow Scots tory Phil Gallie agree?
The Ayrshire Tory MP is well known for his un-compromising attitude on a variety of topics — nows our chance to find out what he's got to say about child-care provision and your chance to tackle him on the governments record to date.
Phil Gallie joins us live now from Westminster.
If you want to talk him the number's o-five-hundred, four-o-four, treble zero.
KIRSTY + PHIL GALLIE EX LONDON 
PHIL GALLIE MP/Conservative, Ayr
KIRSTY + PHIL EX LONDON + PHONES 
JANET/Glasgow
SANDRA/Symington
CAMERON/Houston
DIANE/Glasgow
JOANNE/Erskine
We're off to the Newsroom now.
Shereen's there.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London now.
Julia Sommerville's at the 5.40 desk.
JULIA SOMMERVILLE/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
That's just about it from us for today — but do allow lunchtime Scotland Today to brighten up Friday for you.
Yes, tomorrow promises to be an extremely ‘bright’ programme.
Bryan Burnett's been getting chatty with that showbiz legend Cilla Black.
And John Millar will reveal all — well, a bit— about bad boy turned good guy Christian Slater and his latest movie True Romance.
And for those for whom the name means nothing, Christian Slater was the embittered young Will Scarlet in Robin Hood Prince of Thieves.
Show-off.
So, join us at five to one tomorrow for that plus a round-up of all the news in Scotland.
But for now, from all of us on the lunchtime team, good afternoon.
We've had an amazing response to our search for a cure for the chronic skin complaint psoriasis.
You may remember seeing Katrina Hunter and the remarkable progress she made with a herbal cream from the borders.
Well Zoe Muir decided to catch up on the progress of our other volunteer, Katy Clark.
Katy chose to turn to the mysterious art of chinese herbal medicine.
But is it working?
KATY CLARK; 1'17’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 2'20’
SHEREEN NANJIANI
First tonight.
Two leading QCs have joined the fight to free a man who maintains he was wrongly convicted of murdering a schoolgirl.
MPs Menzies Campbell and Nicholas Fairbairn support a Commons motion to be put down tonight.
It asserts there is ‘reasonable doubt’ on the conviction of Johnstone man
Raymond Gilmour who was convicted in nineteen eighty two of the rape and murder of sixteen year old Pamela Hastie.
VIV LUMSDEN
Gilmour says a confession was beaten out of him by police.
The Scottish Secretary Ian Lang is considering new evidence in the case.
His decision on whether to release Gilmour will come next month.
Linda Kennedy has this.
S-GILMOUR 
ENA GILMOUR; 0:13
GORDON McMASTER MP/Labour, Paisley South; 0:58
GORDON RITCHIE/Lawyer; 1:26 (out by 1:34)
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 1:35
S-MONKTON 8
The miners at Monktonhall Colliery in Midlothian are being told their future depends solely on accepting a takeover offer from an English mining company.
Each worker put ten thousand pounds of his own money into the venture.
The consortium leaders say the best they can hope for is getting back half their money but many of the miners look set to reject the offer.
John Macgill reports.
JACKIE AITCHISON/Chairman, Monktonhall Mineworkers; 26 secs
IAN JONES/Chief Executive, Quayle Munro; 1 min 01
JOHN MACGILL/Scotland Today; 1 min 28
A political row has blown up over public grants to an american firm which is ending production in Scotland.
Two hundred electronics jobs will be lost at Conner Peripherals in Irvine just before Christmas.
The plant opened just three years ago and Conner hasn't been asked to repay the millions of pounds of grant aid its received.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
Irvine; 1sec
GRAHAM STEVEN/Managing Director; 25sec
BRIAN DONOHOE MP/Labour, Cunninghame South; 51sec
TONY RICKETS/Irvine Development Corporation; 1min 14sec
You're watching Scotland Today.
Still to come on tonight's programme.
Company puts back controversial plan for waste incinerator.
They're still wrong.
Police dismiss changes to Sheehy report.
And looking for a solution to the growing problem of homelessness.
But before that.
An Ayrshire man is considering legal action against Crosshouse Hospital after his wife died following a routine operation.
A Sheriff has severely criticised the treatment of Maybole woman Annie Jackson after her operation there last March.
Aileen Taylor reports.
Maybole; 1sec
WILLIAM JACKSON/Husband; 12secs (out by 16secs)
AILEEN TAYLOR/Scotland Today; 18secs
The controversial Tory MP Sir Nicholas Fairbairn has joined the debate about anonymity in rape cases.
The former solicitor general said that woman who bring false charges should be named.
Our Parliamentary reporter Rae Stewart sends this.
Sir NICHOLAS FAIRBAIRN QC MP/Conservative Perth and Kinross; 14 secs
MARIA FYFE MP/Labour Scottish Spokeswoman; 55 secs
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today; 1min 06 secs
Detectives in Bellshill are hunting two men who attacked and robbed a pensioner in her own home after posing as policemen.
New Stevenston
The incident took place at a house on Jerviston Street in New Stevenson at around eight o'clock last night.
The bogus officers, who were dressed in full police uniform, tied the sixty year old up before making off with cash and jewellery.
The two German tourists who fell to their deaths while on holiday on Skye have been cremated at a ceremony in Perth.
Twenty-five year-old Linda Bohlen and her twenty-four year-old boyfriend Stefan Mohr, both from the Hannover area, disappeared last month.
The minister who conducted the service said the two Germans had been drawn to the Scottish mountains like a magnet.
The families of the two tourists were too upset to attend the service.
Mourners included family friends living in Scotland and German diplomats.
Plans to build a toxic waste incinerator in Renfrew appear to be in jeopardy.
The company wanting to build the plant has reported massive pre-tax losses.
As Ronnie Convery found out, local activists hope to capitalise on the company's financial problems to kill off the incinerator plan.
Renfrew; 3secs
FOSTER EVANS/Clydeside Against Pollution; 23 secs
RONNIE CONVERY/Scotland Today; 1min 20
The Edinburgh council official who's paid for doing nothing will have to wait another month, before a decision is made on his future.
Tommy Sheppard's fate was discussed at a meeting of Edinburgh District Councillors.
But they postponed any decision for at least a month.
The Policy and Resources Committee decided to wait until the end of an appeal by Richard Shield, the man who was sacked for recruiting Tommy Sheppard.
Mr. Sheppard was hired as a contracts officer three months ago, but was told to go on leave after complaints about the selection process.
Government plans to restructure the police force will do nothing for morale, and will not improve the service according to the Scottish Police Federation.
Home Secretary, Michael Howard, told MPs today that he was scrapping the ranks of Deputy Chief Constable, Chief Superintendent and Chief Inspector.
He also said senior ranks would be employed on fixed term contracts, and their pay would be performance related.
This report from our political correspondent, Fiona Ross.
MICHAEL HOWARD MP/Home Secretary; 0:19
DOUGLAS KEIL/Scottish Police Federation; 0:39
A national charity is claiming that many of the four thousand young Scots who become homeless this year will have spent time in care.
Shelter's latest research shows that social work departments have had responsibility at some time for the lives of more than a third of all homeless people.
The figures were revealed at a conference in Edinburgh, highlighting the problems facing young people in care.
Emma Simpson reports.
JUNIOR; 0:15secs
ELAINE CAMPBELL/Edinburgh Council for the Single Homeless; 0:42secs
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; 1:03secs
MICHAEL THAIN/Shelter; 1:31secs
Library Pictures; 1; 53secs
AIDS figures released today by the Scottish Office show that in September there were sixteen new cases of the disease in Scotland bringing the cumulative total to four hundred and thirty-eight.
The figures also show that a further seventeen AIDS deaths were reported last month, bringing the total for the year so far to three hundred and one.
The Scottish Office says forty-five per cent of the cases are related to homosexual activity and thirty-two per cent to intravenous drug abuse.
Last night parents in the North of Scotland gathered to protest at the decision by Dornoch Academy to opt out of local authority control.
It's the first school in Scotland to receive permission from the government to become self-governing and has raised deep concerns in the local community.
Tonight there'll be another public meeting on the same subject, this time in Paisley.
Parents at the Grammar School are to be balloted next month on opting out, but as Mark Smith now reports it's a school that's no stranger to the political battlefield.
Paisley; 1
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 21
RICHARD McANENEY/School Board Chairman; 51
DAVID REID/School Board member; 1.40
JIM DELAHUNT
Hearts have tonight asked two of their longest serving players to help raise the money required to redevelop Tynecastle.
The players will form part of a six man committee set up to oversee the Subscription Scheme which chairman Wallace Mercer hopes will entice fans to help pay for the renovations.
Hearts skipper Craig Levein and midfielder Gary Mackay are the players who've agreed to join two members of the supporters federation, one from the shareholders association and chairman Alex Kitson on the committee.
Gary Mackay said tonight: A refurbished Tynecastle is the players' preferred option.
Craig and I will do everything we can to ensure the Subscriptions Scheme's success.
Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer this week scrapped plans to buy the stadium himself and lease it back to Hearts.
The subscription scheme is the alternative.
Committee chairman Alex Kitson is a former deputy general secretary of the transport and general workers' union and now chairs Lothian Regional Transport.
He started the first Hearts' supporters club in nineteen forty six.
ALEX KITSON/Chairman, Tynecastle Subscription Scheme; 2secs
Hearts go to Easter Road on Saturday where they'll find at least one new face in the Hibs directors box.
Businessman Ian Brennan was added to the Hibs board today taking their directorial strength up to six.
The Old Firm meet at Ibrox with Rangers striker
Mark Hateley seemingly well on the road to recovery after picking up an injury against Hibs last Sunday.
Celtic's new manager Lou Macari will work with the players at Seamill tomorrow although he'll leave team selection to Frank Connor in the meantime.
In the semi-finals of the B and Q Cup, Falkirk will face Meadowbank and Ayr United will play St Mirren.
The final will be played on Sunday November the fifth.
Richard Cadette score a hat-trick for Falkkirk last night as they defeated Dundfermline by four goals to one.
A transfer tribunal has ordered Preston to pay Tranmere thirty five thousand pounds for goalkeeper Steve Woods.
Clydbeank aren't very happy about the decision.
And finally tonight, if you're going to the dogs at Armadale, Eubank runs in the fifth and Madonna goes in the tenth.
Nut the big showdown is in race two, a dog called McCoist runs off scratch with another pooch called Macari getting a two yard start.
Must be something to do with the age difference.
We move on now to the closing headlines.
Gordon Chapman is here to interpret for the deaf.
Two leading QCs have joined the fight to free Raymond Gilmour the man who maintains he was wrongly convicted of murdering Johnstone schoolgirl Pamela Hastie.
TWO LEADING QCs JOIN FIGHT TO FREE MAN/WHO MAINTAINS HE WAS WRONGLY CONVICTED OF/MURDERING SCHOOLGIRL PAMELA HASTIE
Miners at Monktonhall Colliery are being told their future depends solely on accepting takeover by an English mining company.
Many of the miners look set to reject the offer.
MONKTONHALL MINERS TOLD FUTURE DEPENDS/SOLELY ON ACCEPTING TAKEOVER FROM/ENGLISH COMPANY
A political storm has blown up over public grants to American firm Conner Peripherals in Irvine which is ending Scottish production.
POLITICAL STORM OVER PUBLIC GRANTS/TO U.S. FIRM WHICH IS ENDING/SCOTTISH PRODUCTION
An Ayrshire man is considering legal action against Crosshouse Hospital after his wife died following a routine operation there.
AYRSHIRE MAN CONSIDERS LEGAL ACTION/AFTER WIFE DIES IN CROSSHOUSE HOSPITAL/FOLLOWING ROUTINE OPERATION
The former Solicitor General has joined the debate over anonymity in rape cases.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn says that women who bring false charges should be named.
FORMER SOLICITOR GENERAL SIR NICHOLAS/FAIRBAIRN SAYS WOMEN WHO BRING FALSE/RAPE CHARGES SHOULD BE NAMED
That's how the news looked in Scotland today.
There'll be a further update at ten thirty.
We'll be back tomorrow with bulletins throughout the day, and our main news programmes at lunchtime and six thirty.
Join us if you can.
Till tomorrow, from all of us here, goodnight.
S-RECHEM
The Stirlingshire farmer who claims that toxic emissions were responsible for him having to destroy his entire dairy herd was told in court today that he and his wife were to blame.
At the High Court in London, Andrew Graham and his wife Irene are battling for compensation from waste disposers Rechem International.
In an opening speech for the defence the devastation of their herd was blamed on a mountain of debt and overfeeding.
The hearing continues.
KIRSTY YOUNG
But first this lunchtime, a woman who plotted the murder of her husband has walked free from the High Court in Edinburgh.
Morag Taylor from Polmont was given community service.
ANGUS SIMPSON
She and her lover had paid a hitman to commit the murder.
Despite her attempts to have him killed, husband George Taylor pleaded with the Judge that his wife be spared a jail sentence.
James Matthews reports.
Edinburgh; 0:02
MORAG TAYLOR; 1:05
A murder hunt has been launched after a man was shot dead in Scappa Street in Glasgow this morning.
Henry McKechnie was killed shortly before two o'clock in the close outside his home.
A motive for the killing of the father-of-four has yet to be established, although police have not ruled out a drugs link.
Linda Kennedy has this.
L-SHOOTING 
Chief Insp JIMMY LINDSAY/Strathclyde Police; 0:17
VIOLET McCARDLE; 0:52 (OUT BY 0:57)
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 0:58
Scottish Television have appointed Blair Jenkins to a new post of Head of Regional Broadcasting.
Thirty six year old Mr Jenkins is currently editor of news and current affairs at Scottish.
His appointment marks a restructuring of the company's Broadcasting division.
Mr Jenkins will have responsibility for regional programming as well as scheduling, marketing and ITV network matters.
One of the oldest fire engines in the world has gone on display in Edinburgh today, alongside it's newest counterpart to mark the seventy fifth anniversary of the founding of an organisation that helps fire services across the world.
The Edinburgh based Institution of Fire Engineers specialises in developing fire engines and safety equipment.
Well more news and features to follow but first weather predictions from our resident guru Lloyd Quinan.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Yet another cloudy start to the day — but at least it's been mostly dry.
And there'll be little change this afternoon, although in Argyll and the Western Isles, it will become a little brighter, if not exactly sunny,
Again, temperatures will be near or just below the seasonal norm, around nine or ten celsius, forty eight to fifty fahrenheit, the east coast staying a bit colder due to the light easterly breeze.
The cloudy conditions will persist through the evening and overnight with just the occasional spot of drizzle, mainly over the hills.
Temperatures overnight will hold at around four or five celsius, forty one fahrenheit in general, but there will be some ground frost in sheltered parts of Argyll.
And, there may be just a teeny bit more in the way of sunshine for the weekend.
So, don't say I'm not good to you.
Next week sees the start of a major inquiry into the hundreds of deaths in Glasgow caused by drugs.
The city has one of the highest proportion of drug deaths in Britain; a committee of MP's heard recently that drug overdoses were the single biggest killer among the city's young.
The fatal accident inquiry at Glasgow Sheriff Court will examine four deaths from last year, picked to represent a cross-section of all the fatalities.
Mark Smith reports.
Govan; 8
JANET GRABHAM; 20
Dr LAWRENCE GRUER/Drugs specialist; 56
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 1.20
Mark Smith's report.
If you or someone you know is involved with drugs and you want advice, you can call our Action Line.
The number to phone is 041 or 031 226 4747.
We'll we have to stop now for a full ninety five seconds, but stay tuned cos coming up in part two…
We name our very own Accidental Hero in the latest lunchtime competition.
Cilla Black and Bryan Burnett enjoy a lorra lorra laughs together.
But coming up first, Christian Slater reveals all about True Romance and tights.
So all that and more, please come back after the break!
See you then.
Welcome back.
Now, when Robin Hood, Prince of Thieves came out, Kevin Costner was the one your mother fancied, and Christian Slater was the one all the teenagers went for.
Probably because for a while he was meant to be a wild child around the Hollywood hills.
Now he's playing up to that image in True Romance, a Bonny and Clyde type movie involving drugs, car chases and a beautiful woman.
Our showbiz correspondent, the Daily Record's John Millar, spoke to Christian about his checkered past, but first a clip.
TRUE ROMANCE/Morgan Creek-Warner Bros; 2sec
Now, this week Brian Burnett's been uncharacteristically reticent about his celebrity musical interview.
It's just not like him.
No.
All he would tell us was: she's female; a huge star; and she also sings.
Brian, put us out of our misery.
And after he'd climbed down from Cloud Nine, Brian told me to remind you that Cilla's new album Through the Years, which does indeed feature duets with Barry Manilow, Cliff Richard and Dusty Springfield, is in the shops now.
The guy's besotted with Cilla.
Now, finally, who is lunchtime Scotland Today's very own Accidental Hero?
Faithful viewers will recall that last Friday we invited you to nominate the person you thought truly deserved a hero's luxury weekend in London.
The occasion was the video launch of the Dustin Hoffman movie Accidental Hero which tells the story of how one man clambered from seedy obscurity to achieve great things.
Well, the letters flooded in as ever and after much tears and heartache we've come up with the winner.
It's eleven year old Damien Cowan from Livingston.
Now it was his aunt Elizabeth who nominated him, mostly because she says he's a great, considerate wee boy.
But in the last few months he's had a lot to cope with following the death of his best friend in a road accident.
She says the whole family were devastated especially Damien, but he's struggled to hide his grief well.
So we think he deserves to be our hero.
Damien and a companion of his choice can now head off for a fabulous hero's weekend in London.
Two nights at a top hotel, dinner at one of the capital's best restaurants, chauffeured driven car for the Saturday evening and rail travel thrown in.
And by way of compensation, we've got five copies of the video for the runners-up, who are:
David Burley from Denny, Douglas Latto from Dunoon, Margaret Tolland from Kilwinning, J. MacDougall from Glasgow and J Wilson from Falkirk.
Thanks to all of you who wrote in.
And if you didn't win, better luck next time.
We'll time to find out what's coming up on the six thirty edition of the show.
And just because it's Friday and there's a lot of sport around, it's Jim Delahunt we join in the Newsroom.
JIM DELAHUNT/Sports Correspondent/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London.
John Suchet's at the 5.40 desk.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
And so another week is brought to an end.
Did you enjoy it Angus?
I've enjoyed it so much I might even come back for more on Monday.
Could that be something to do with the fact that Carol Smillie will be here?
I fear so.
But as well as Carol with her pick of the best winter coats around, next week we'll also have Katie Wood in Legoland and the hysterically funny Kevin Kline in conversation with Mr Showbiz John Millar.
And that's not the half of it.
We'll be back on Monday at five to one to get started on all of that.
Join us then.
But for now, from everyone on the lunchtime team, have a good Hallowe'en, good afternoon.
We've had an amazing response to our search for a cure for the chronic skin complaint psoriasis.
You may remember seeing Katrina Hunter and the remarkable progress she made with a herbal cream from the borders.
Well Zoe Muir decided to catch up on the progress of our other volunteer, Katy Clark.
Katy chose to turn to the mysterious art of chinese herbal medicine.
But is it working?
KATY CLARK; 1'17’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 2'20’
VIV LUMSDEN
First tonight.
The Stirlingshire woman who plotted to kill her husband has told Scotland Today of her regret.
Morag Taylor says she's back together with the man she wanted dead.
She says she hopes they can put the whole affair behind them.
KIRSTY YOUNG
Morag Taylor and her lover paid a hitman to have her husband, George, killed.
But today she walked free from the High Court in Edinburgh after being given community service.
Her husband had begged the Judge to spare her a jail sentence.
James Matthews reports.
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today; 1:12
MORAG TAYLOR; 1:41
A major fraud squad inquiry is underway after the death of a union official involved in the Piper Alpha hardship fund.
It follows a suicide in Glasgow last night.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
Detectives say the murder of a Glasgow man outside his home this morning was a one-off killing.
But they admit they're baffled by the shooting of thirty-five-year-old Henry McKechnie in the close leading to his home in Scapa Street.
One area not being ruled out, however, is a link with drugs.
Linda Kennedy has this.
Chief Inspector JIMMY LINDSAY/Strathclyde Police; 0:16
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 1:27
You're watching Scotland Today.
Coming later on this evening's programme.
A community pays its final tribute to Joe Grimmond.
The stand-off continues in opting out school row.
And Mercer says one point seven million isn't enough for my share of Hearts.
First though.
On Monday a major inquiry begins into the devastating loss of life caused by drugs in Glasgow.
Drug overdoses have become the single biggest killer among the city's young people.
Hundreds have died.
The fatal accident inquiry at Glasgow Sheriff Court will examine four deaths from last year, picked to represent a cross-section of all the fatalities.
Mark Smith discovered the heartache and horror behind the scourge of the city.
Govan; 0:08
JANET GRABHAM; 0:20
Dr LAWRENCE GRUER/Drugs specialist; 0:56
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 1:20
Mark Smith's report.
If you or someone you know is involved with drugs and you want advice, you can call our Action Line.
The number to phone is oh four one or oh three one, two two six, four seven four seven.
The funeral's taken place in Orkney of the former Liberal leader, Lord Grimond, who died earlier this week at the age of eighty.
As Jo Grimond he was MP for Orkney and Shetland for thirty-three years and was seen as the last traditional Liberal.
Mike Edwards reports.
Local authority leaders have been warned by the Scottish Secretary that the government is determined to keep public spending under control.
At a meeting in Edinburgh COSLA leaders said they needed an extra seven point three per cent on top of the five point two billion pounds local councils spent last year.
Scottish Sectretary, Ian lang, told them that he couldn't meet their demand, although he won't know how much money will be allocated to councils until the budget at the end of November.
Voluntary groups from all over Scotland have been meeting in Edinburgh to decide how to help children and families infected with HIV.
It's now estimated that five hundred children in Lothian Region alone are affected by HIV and AIDS.
As Emma Simpson now reports, agencies are now seeking ways to raise awareness of this highly sensitive problem.
September; 0:04secs
SARAH MORTON/Children in Scotland; 0:36secs
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; 0:52secs
Both sides of the arguement at the latest Scottish school to be at the centre of opting out plans are standing firm following a heated public meeting.
An action group opposing the move for Paisley Grammar school has now been set up.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
JOHN McEWAN/Parents Action Committee; 40secs
Councillor BRIAN OLDREY/Strathclyde Education Committee; 1:10secs
Scottish Television have appointed Blair Jenkins to a new post of Head of Regional Broadcasting.
Thirty six year old Mr Jenkins is currently editor of news and current affairs at Scottish.
He'll have responsibility for regional programming as well as scheduling, marketing and ITV network matters.
JIM DELAHUNT
No prizes for guessing the big sporting event of the weekend.
Ibrox stadium the arena, Rangers and Celtic supplying the gladiators and somewhere between three o'clock and twenty to five, some football to take everyone's minds off the various sideshows.
The biggest distraction of all, the arrival of Celtic's new manager Lou Macari.
He worked with the players at Seamill today and will be with Frank Connor in the dressing room tomorrow.
At Ibrox, Rangers have just re-placed the League Cup in the trophy room and have no intention of allowing Macari or anyone else to interrupt their return to top form.
Walter Smith will have to accomodate both of last week's goalscorers McCoist and Durrant.
A problem any other manager would be delighted to have.
Injury doubt, Mark Hateley will also play, as Rangers begin to take on a menacing look again.
For Celtic and Macari, a vital game tomorrow in advance of Tuesday's flight to Lisbon for the second leg UEFA Cup tie.
For Rangers the chance to open up a four point gap on Celtic before the end of October.
TONY MOWBRAY/Celtic FC; 43secs
FRANK CONNOR; 1min19secs
LOU MACARI/Manager, Celtic FC; 2min3secs
ALLY McCOIST/Rangers FC; 2min54secs
Ashley Grimes and Peter Henderson have joined Lou Macari's backroom staff at Celtic.
Stoke assistant Chic Bates could follow next week.
In the Edinburgh derby, Hibs are trying to break an eighteen match run without a victory, stretching back to January nineteen eighty-nine.
The Easter Road club haven't even scored against Hearts in their last five games and they'll almost certainly face the new Hearts strikeforce of Mo Johnston and John Robertson tomorrow.
Elsewhere, its Aberdeen against Dundee, Dundee United versus St Johnstone, Motherwell playing Kilmarnock and Partick against Raith Rovers.
On the eve of the Edinburgh derby, the Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer has rejected a long awaited bid for his seventy five percent stake in the club.
Mercer's says the offer from a consortium of Edinburgh businessmen wouldn't even be enough to buy Hearts' most valuable asset, international defender Alan McLaren.
Mercer's being offered one point seven million pounds for his shares.
He says that's simply unnacceptable.
John Macgill sends this report.
CHRIS ROBINSON/New Hearts Consortium; 24 secs
WALLACE MERCER/Chairman, Heart of Midlothian; 49 to 52 secs or 1.01 to 1.04
Wallace Mercer holding out for a better offer.
And just when you thought it was safe to go out for the evening, let me remind you that Scotsport Extra Time is back after a week off.
Ten thirty tonight on this channel.
I'll see you on Monday.
The world-famous pecussionist Evelyn Glennie came face to face with the musicians of the future today.
She was in East Kilbride to give a masterclass to promising young players.
We sent our own promising young player, Ronnie Convery, along to find out more.
East Kilbride; 3 secs
JAMES McPARTLAND/St Aidan's School, Wishaw; 21 secs
EVELYN GLENNIE; 38 secs
RONNIE CONVERY/Scotland Today; 1.02 FOR FOUR SECONDS ONLY!
One of the oldest fire engines in the world has gone on display in Edinburgh today, alongside it's newest counterpart to mark the seventy fifth anniversary of the founding of an organisation that helps fire services across the world.
The Edinburgh based Institution of Fire Engineers specialises in developing fire engines and safety equipment.
The display can be seen at Edinburgh's Museum of Fire in Lauriston Place, weekdays only from nine am to four thirty pm.
Time now for a recap of today's main news stoires.
Gordon Chapman is here to interpret for the deaf.
A woman who plotted to kill her husband walked free from court and is back together with the man she wanted dead.
She says she hopes they can put the whole affair behind them.
WOMAN WHO PLOTTED TO KILL HER HUSBAND/WALKS FREE FROM COURT AND IS BACK/WITH MAN SHE WANTED DEAD
A major fraud squad inquiry is underway following the death of a union official involved in the Piper Alpha hardship fund.
MAJOR FRAUD SQUAD INQUIRY UNDERWAY/AFTER DEATH OF UNION OFFICIAL INVOLVED/IN PIPER ALPHA HARDSHIP FUND
Detectives say the murder of a Glasgow man outside his home was a one-off killing.
But they admit they're baffled about the reason for the shooting.
DETECTIVES ADMIT THEY'RE BAFFLED/BY MURDER OF GLASGOW MAN OUTSIDE HIS/HOME IN SCAPA STREET THIS MORNING
The funeral's taken place in Orkney of the former Liberal leader, Lord Grimond, who died earlier this week at the age of eighty.
FUNERAL HELD IN ORKNEY OF/FORMER LIBERAL LEADER LORD GRIMOND/WHO DIED ON SUNDAY, AGED 80
And that brings us to the end of another week on Scotland Today.
There's a chance to catch up with the latest Scottish news in our evening bulletin.
Tonight, it's at half past eleven.
If there's something you think should be in the news, you can phone us on 041 332 7000, leaving your name, number and a brief message.
Meanwhile, the message from all of us here is — have a good evening and a great weekend.
Goodnight.
ANGUS SIMPSON
But first this lunchtime, a mother has told of her anguish as she struggled to deal with her daughter's drug addiction.
Margaret Elder was giving evidence on the first day of the fatal accident inquiry into drugs deaths in Glasgow.
KIRSTY YOUNG
Her daughter Margaret McGarry died in January last year after collapsing with a needle stuck in her arm.
Mark Smith was in court to hear her testimony.
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today;
We can join reporter Mark Smith live now outside the Sheriff Court in the city centre.
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today/LIVE
The daughter of murdered Glasgow pensioner Agnes Law has described the killer as’ a monster who must be caught.’
Mrs Law's body was found in her Springburn home exactly two weeks ago.
Meanwhile detectives have revealed that robbery was the motive for the crime.
And they say the sixty-two year old widow died for the sake of a few pounds.
Geoff Brown reports.
MARY HUGHES/Daughter; 15 SECS
GEOFF BROWN/Scotland Today; 28 SECS
Det Chief Inspector KERR NELSON/Strathclyde Police; 37 SECS
Some news in brief now — Labour's new Scottish spokesman, George Robertson, has stamped his authority on the job, introducing his new front bench team, and announcing his plan to involve back benchers in the political process.
The team is as before — Henry McLeish as deputy, with Maria Fyfe, and John McFall, plus Gordon McMaster as Scottish whip.
Mr Robertson is also setting up task forces of back bench MPs to discuss policy.
Over the coming months Labour will be concentrating on the cost of local government reform, and mobilising support, from all parties, against the Conservatives' plans.
A new team to co-ordinate organs for transplant operations in Scotland starts work today.
Until now several teams in different parts of the country have been responsible for organ co-ordination.
The move follows the recommendations of a report from the Royal College of Surgeons.
In future all organs recovered in Scotland will be used here except in cases where no-one is waiting for an operation, when the organs will be used elsewhere in Britain.
Well more news and features to follow but first the weather and Lloyd.
Enough chat, onto today and it was a cloudy, rather dreary morning, hardly a break in the cloud anywhere.
With that came a few showers, mostly on the east coast.
and we better get used to all that because it's not going to change this afternoon.
Cloud still the dominant feature, not a great start to the month I'm afraid.
Thers's a a slight chance of some sunshine in the west, but nothing spectacular.
Temperatures will level off at a cool eight or nine degrees celsius, that's forty six to forty eight fahrenheit- although it is Novemver, still cool for the time of year.
The light breeze wont shift the cloud, which'll hang around well into the evening.
Again the only break could be in the west, but at least it will be a dry night in most areas.
The cloud does have some benefit at least.
Overnight temperatures will keep up, no lower than around five or six degrees celsius, that's forty one to forty three fahrenheit.
It couild be a degree or two lower further inland, but stll a mild night, with a very light breeze from the south west.
We've had an amazing response to our search for a cure for the chronic skin complaint psoriasis.
You may remember seeing Katrina Hunter and the remarkable progress she made with a herbal cream from the borders.
Well Zoe Muir decided to catch up on the progress of our other volunteer, Katy Clark.
Katy chose to turn to the mysterious art of chinese herbal medicine.
But is it working?
KATY CLARK; 1'17’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 2'20’
Zoe will continue to monitor the progress of both our psoriasis sufferers over the coming months and keep us up to date with how they're doing.
Break time now, but straighten those ties and get on your good frock because…
Monday's fashion day and Carol Smillie's here to tell us what's hot this winter.
From fake fur to fun hats, Carol shows us what to wear and how to wear it.
But coming up first, the women returners revisited.
Kaye Adams finds out how our would-be managers are getting on.
And Carol Smillie live in the studio.
What a deal.
Join us in just over a minute or a half for that and more.
See you then.
Is there anyone out there who enjoys going for interviews?
Depends on who's doing the interview, Angus.
We're talking job interviews.
Is it true you've got just three minutes to impress and is it a skill that can be learned.
Our group of women training to return to management have been finding out 
KAYE ADAMS/Scotland Today; 58secs
HEATHER McNALLY/Trainer; 1min 48
MARIE-CLAIRE CURLEY; 2min 29
Now, this is the point where things start to hot up.
Because Carol Smillie's here with her fashionable guide to staying warm this winter.
And I understand bedsocks and long johns do not figure in your plans, Carol?
HANDOVER TO CAROL
Only if they carry an Armani label, Angus.
This week I've been concentrating on the serious matter of the winter wardrobe.
For most of us in Scotland, that means a good warm coat and this year, we are spoilt for choice.
The military style great coat, which we featured a couple of weeks ago, is probably THE single item fashion victims are queueing up for.
But there's also a flock of socially acceptable fake fur out there.
And then, of course, there's the tricky matter of accessorising.
No problem.
Just look at this.
And if you want the details of the clothes featured there, there is of course a number to call.
It's 041 or 031 226 4747.
And that'll get you your very own personal copy of our Scotland Today Fact Sheet.
Time to find out what's on the six thirty menu.
Shereen's there.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London.
John Suchet's at the 5.40 desk.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
That brings us to the end of another major televisual event.
Tomorrow, of course, Kathleen Long joins us for the Phone the Doc slot.
And bravely once again she's opted for an open surgery.
So, if there's anything of a medical nature you'd like to put to Kathleen, tomorrow's your big chance.
The liens will be open to Kathleen from 12.30 tomorrow.
The number, as ever, 0500 404 000 and it's all absolutely free.
Also tomorrow, reporter Zoe Muir will be investigating the issue of women and low pay.
Are women being exploited by a system which sees them as easy targets?
We kick off with all that at five to one tomorrow.
In the meantime, if you've got a story you think we should be investigating, why not give us a call on the news line.
The number's 041 332 7000.
Yes, even if it's just to say hello.
We'll be back tomorrow, but for now, from all of us on the lunchtime team, good afternoon.
SHEREEN NANJIANI;
First tonight.
A leading Scottish judge has accused police officers of telling lies in court to secure convictions.
In a remarkable attack on police forces in Scotland and elsewhere Lord McCluskey says that officers 7manufacture false confessions, plant evidence, and committ perjury.
This evening the Scottish Police Federation has denounced Lord McCluskey's comments as irresponsible.
James Matthews reports.
Lord McCLUSKEY; 21
DOUGLAS KEIL/Scottish Police Federation; 1:16
VIV LUMSDEN
A drugs squad detective has told a fatal accidnet inquiry that the high level of drugs deaths in Glasgow was caused by drugs barons deliberately distributing high purity heroin onto the city streets.
Detective Inspector Alan Brown said it had been done to create more addicts but resulted in a trebling of the number of fatalities.
Mark Smith reports.
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 36
ROSE HENDERSON/Association of Family Support Groups; 1.37
As the fatal accident inquiry gets underway, a leading academic has called for a dramatic change in the attitude of the government and courts towards Scotland's drug users.
Professor John Davies, of Strathclyde University, claims more young drug users are having their lives wrecked by the courts than by the drugs themselves.
John Macgill reports.
Professor JOHN DAVIES/Psychology, Strathclyde University; 21 secs
WILLIE GARRIOCK/North Edinburgh Drug Advice Centre; 50 secs
JOHN; 1 min 15 secs
If you or someone you know has a problem with drugs, you can get help and advice from trained councillors.
They're waiting to take your callsat the Scotland Today Action line on oh four one or oh three one, two two six, four seven four seven.
That's oh four one or oh three one, two two six, four seven four seven.
You're watching Scotland Today.
Coming next on the programme.
A family plead.
Help find killer of our mum.
A sign of the times.
The small businesses facing financial ruin.
And a life below stairs is opened up to the public.
Detectives investigating the murder of Glasgow pensioner Agnes Law have revealed that she was killed for the few pounds she had in her house.
They say a small amount of money is all that seems to be missing from the Springburn flat where Mrs Law's body was discovered exactly two weeks ago.
Meanwhile two members of the dead woman's family have appealed to the public for help in catching her killer.
Geoff Brown reports.
MARY HUGHES/Daughter; 18 SECS
MICHAEL LAW/Son; 60 SECS
GEOFF BROWN/Scotland Today; 1:11
Det Chief Inspector KERR NELSON/Strathclyde Police; 1:26
Geoff Brown's report.
As you've just heard the motive behind the killing of Agnes Law was robbery.
Increasingly, it's the reason for many violent attacks.
This evening we begin a major three part investigation into crime in Scotland.
This week Scotland Today's Bernard Ponsonby will be analysing the law and order debate and talking to the police, the victims and the offenders.
Tonight he starts his series of reports with a look at how to combat crime.
Superintendent DONALD REID/Strathclyde Police; 1:11
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today/Coatbridge; 1:55
JOHN MITCHELL; 2:17
JOYCE CUMMINGS; 2:23
IRENE BROWN; 2:36
SANDRA CUMMINGS; 3:03
There's further detail on the General Accident/System three poll in tomorrow's Herald.
And on this programme tomorrow evening, Bernard looks at the work of the police and asks how effective they are in combatting crime.
Labour's new Scottish leader, George Robertson MP, is to try and encourage rebel Tories to join the fight against local government reform.
Introducing his Scottish front bench team today, Mr Robertson also made it clear that he wants all forty-nine Scottish Labour MPs to be involved in developing policy and strategy.
This report from our Political Correspondent, Fiona Ross.
FIONA ROSS/Scotland Today; 0:29
GEORGE ROBERTSON MP/Shadow Scottish Secretary; 0:43
Slow payment of debts means Scotland's small businesses are owed nearly FIVE BILLION pounds on any given day.
And the result of that, according to the Forum of Private Business, can be that they go to the wall, taking hundreds of jobs with them.
New legislation to allow them to claim interest against late payments could come into effect soon.
But will it solve the problem?
Mike Edwards reports.
JIM GORIE/Forum of Private Business; 31 secs
ALAN HODGINS/Painting Contractor; 1 min 13 secs
Ad lib into sport
JIM DELAHUNT
First tonight, Rangers have confirmed that Spurs chairman Alan Sugar telephoned last week to offer Scotland striker Gordon Durie for one point two five million pounds.
Manager Ossie Ardiles wants to unload the player after a bust up and as Durie has been a Rangers target in the past, the offer was made.
Rangers have told Spurs they might be interested in a player swop deal but they wont pay cash.
There's no shortage of midweek action with Premier football at Firhill and Tynecastle, B and Q Cup semi-finals, Celtic in Lisbon and Torino at Pittodrie.
Celtic take a one nil lead to Portugal tomorrow, brimful of confidence after Saturday's events at Ibrox.
As Celtic fly out, Torino fly in, two-one losers to Cagliari yesterday, and only one ahead of Aberdeen who have those two away goals.
Both of our European survivors in winning form and both captains optimistic about their respective prospects.
ALEX McLEISH/Aberdeen captain; 33secs
PAUL McSTAY/Celtic captain; 2mins6secs
Hibs face a real test of character at Firhill tomorrow after Hearts knocked them off the top of the table.
A fly on the dressing room wall suggests Alex Miller was furious with his players' performance but the trip to Glasgow gives them a chance to atone.
As for Hearts, they play Rangers at Tynecastle on Wednesday and a win there would see Sandy Clark's side elevated from ninth to joint third in the table in just two games, AND keep Rangers four points behind new league leaders Aberdeen.
Ad lib out sport.
One of Edinburgh's most unusual houses has opened to the public, for the first time in nearly twenty years.
The Cove in Gilmerton has aroused widespread interest from local historians.
Today though it was the residents' chance to view the house for themselves.
Emma Simpson joined them.
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; 0:01secs
Reverend DONALD SKINNER/Gilmerton Parish Church; 0:48secs
SHEILA SMITH/Local Resident; 1:22
Time now for a recap of this evening's main new stories.
TBA is with me to interpret for the deaf.
A top Scottish judge is accusing police officers of lying in court to secure convictions.
Lord McLuskey says they manufacture false confessions, plant evidence and commit perjury.
TOP SCOTTISH JUDGE ACCUSES POLICE/OFFICERS OF LYING IN COURT TO/SECURE CONVICTIONS
A drugs squad detective has told a fatal accident inquiry that Glasgow's high drugs death toll was caused by drugs barons distributing high purity heroin.
DRUGS SQUAD DETECTIVES TELL INQUIRY THAT/HIGH DRUGS DEATH TOLL CAUSED BY/DISTRIBUTION OF HIGH PURITY HEROIN
A leading academic is calling for a dramatic change in the attitude of the government and courts towards Scotland's drug users.
LEADING ACADEMIC CALLS FOR DRAMATIC/CHANGE IN ATTITIDE OF GOVERNMENT AND/COURTS TOWARDS DRUG USERS
And that's how the news looks tonight.
Later on this channel, you'll get an update on all the stories making the headlines in Scotland — that's at eleven o'clock.
If you can't get enough news, we have bulletins regularly throughout each day, starting at six fifteen in the morning, with the main programmes at five to one and six thirty.
Join us again tomorrow if you can.
Till, then from all the team, goodnight.
KIRSTY YOUNG
But first this lunchtime, the trial has begun at the High court in Glasgow of two youths accused of murdering the Edinburgh student Paul Sheldon.
SHEREEN NANJIANI
David Bobby and Paul Archibald are charged with repeatedly stabbing the twenty year old with a knife at the city's Whitlehouse Loan in february this year.
The two nineteen year olds deny the charges.
Emma Simpson reports.
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; 15secs
Workers at Rosyth Royal Dockyard have been told that jobs could be cut by a third over the next twelve years.
Management is holding a series of meetings with workers today.
They've told them that fourteen hundred jobs could go under plans for privatisation.
James Matthews reports.
Dunfermline; 2 sex
We can go over live now to our reporter James Matthews.
He's outside the Carnegie Hall in Dunfermline.
JAMES + GUEST EX LINK 
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today/LIVE
ALLAN SMITH/Managing Director
Siome news in brief— the fatal accident inquiry into drug deaths in Glasgow has just ended with the sheriff telling the parents of the victim that while he understood their feelings of helplessness and grief, it wasn't his function to hold the general inquiry into the misuse of drugs.
He recorded a formal verdict on all four deaths which had been selected as a representative sample of the seventy-three who died from drugs last year.
Earlier a drugs worker had given evidence relating to general drugs policies but Sheriff Archibald Bell QC said it wasn't the court's job to listen to critisism of government agencies, local authorities or individuals who weren't represented.
Plans have been unveiled for the biggest ever shake up of medical care in Lothian.
A vast new Royal infirmary costing one hundred and forty million pounds is to be built on the Southern outskirts of the capital, to open in eight years time.
A further sixty million pounds will be spent on expanding and upgrading the Western General.
Several hospitals in the city centre, including the historic Infirmary building will close.
Sixty nine women at the centre of a cervical cancer scare have still to be traced.
Twenty thousand women had their tests rechecked when it was disclosed mistakes were made in the labs at Inverclyde Hospital in Greenock over a five year period.
Scottish Office minister Allan Stewart said most of the women who have still to be contacted are now thought to be living in the United States.
Glasgow's Lord Provost, Robert Innes, officially launched the Scottish Poppy Appeal in George Square this morning.
To mark the occasion he presented poppies to representatives of the armed forces and the Earl Haig Fund.
Six hundred and thirty balloons were released at the ceremony — one for every ten people the fund helped last year.
Well more news and features to follow but first the weather and Lloyd.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Well, it was another cloudy, grey start to that day, but it WAS dry and mild, temperatures no lower than five celsius.
And there won't be much change this afternoon, with the full blanket of cloud still shrouding the country.
There is a very small chance of the odd glimpse of the sun in Argyll.
The cloud will also stop temperatures rising much above nine celsius, forty eight fahrenheit, and it'll feel quite raw with a freshening south east wind.
The dry, cloudy weather will still be with us at the start of the night, but some patchy, light rain will creep into the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway by the end of the night.
Temperatures will be much the same as last night — five celsius, forty one fahrenheit, but it'll feel chillier in a brisk southeasterly breeze.
If you're a hairdresser, a secretary or a cleaner…the chances are, you're probably also a woman.
But what's certain is that if you're in that type of job you will be amongst the lowest paid workers in Scotland.
Seventy per cent of working women are paid less than what's estimated to be a ‘living wage’.
But why is that?
Zoe Muir examines the problem and asks is it going to get worse?
USHA BROWN/Scottish Low Pay Unit; 59’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 1/22’
MARY PATERSON; 1'51’
If you too believe you're being exploited and don't get a decent wage why not give us a call and tell us about it.
SCOTLAND TODAY NEWS LINE/041 332 7000
You can reach us on the newsline number oh-four-one three-three-two seven thousand.
We'll take a breather now but still to come…
Got cash to spare?
Trinkets and baubles go on show at Scotland's finest jewellery exhibition.
But coming up first it's open surgery with Dr Kathleen Long.
Call her free about your health worries on 0500-404-000.
And it'a a short break today, so be back in a minute or you'll miss it!
See you soon.
Welcome back.
It's tuesday and so Dr Kathleen Long's here with us for an open surgery.
Your calls are free of course and the number to ring is oh five hundred four oh four treble zero.
KRSTY + KATHLEEN CHAT 
Dr KATHLEEN LONG
PHONE THE DOC/0500 404 000
KIRSTY + KATHLEEN + PHONES 
ELAINE/Edinburgh
ELIZABETH/Glasgow
LINZIE/Edinburgh
ISABEL/Edinburgh
JANE/Edinburgh
ISABEL/Glasgow
If you're interested in either the design or purchase of jewellery then a unique opportunity has come to Glasgow this week.
Scotland's leading jewellers, Edinburgh based Hamilton and Inches, have brought a huge selection of the finest examples of their work to the west end's Devonshire Gardens.
The exhibition's open to all, but it didn't take much to persuade Scotland Today's Patsi MacKenzie to wander along for a preview.
JULIA OGILVY/Managing Director; 26secs
LEO DE VROOMEN/Jewellery Designer; 1min 16secs
Time to cross to the newsroom for a look at the 6:30 line-up.
Viv's there.
VIV LUMSDEN/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London.
Nicholas Owen's at the 5.40 desk.
NICHOLAS OWEN/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
That's the end.
Nearly.
Just the statutory plug for tomorrow's show — and it's calling all those amongst you who have ever tangled with the plastic interlocking brick and failed to construct anything — yes, Katie's off to Legoland in Denmark.
Not being an expert herself in the art of model construction, the kids went too — and we'll get their verdict on the home of Lego tomorrow.
For that plus all the news you'd expect from your favourite lunchtime show, join Angus, Lloyd and me tomorrow at five past one.
But for now, good afternoon.
VIV LUMSDEN
First tonight.
Angry parents have condemned the fatal accident inquiry into drugs deaths in Glasgow as a waste of time.
They were speaking as it came to an end after just six hours of evidence.
The inquiry focussed on the deaths of four young addicts picked as a cross section of the scores who've died in recent years.
SHEREEN NANJIANI
Sheriff Archibald Bell recorded formal verdicts in each case and made no recommendations.
The inquiry had heard forensic details of each individual death but as Mark Smith reports the parents had hoped for a great deal more.
MARGARET CROOKS/Mother of drugs victim; 1
WILLIAM McKENZIE/Father of drugs victim; 1.04
ISOBEL McKENZIE/Mother of drugs victim; 1.20 to 1.23
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 1.25
MAXINE RICHARDS/Drugs worker; 1.52
The brother of the murdered Edinburgh student Paul Sheldon has been describing how he tried to save his life.
He was giving evidence at the trial of two nineteen year olds Paul Archibald and David Bobby, who're accused of killing Mr Sheldon in a stabbing incident in the city earlier this year.
From the High Court in Glasgow, Emma Simpson reports.
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; 0:31secs
A two hundred million pound blue print for the future of health care in and around Edinburgh has been unveiled by Lothian Health Board.
Included in the plan is a massive new Royal Infirmary on the outskirts of the capital.
John Macgill is at the current Royal Infirmary and joins us now.
JOHN MACGILL/Scotland Today/LIVE;
The building of a replacement for this historic one hundred and fourteen year old hospital is part of an eight year grand plan which will also see the upgrading and expansion of the Western General and St Johns Hospital in Livingston.
But there's a downside.
As well as this building, four other hospitals will close.
Dr LINDSAY BURLEY/Planning Director, Lothian Health; 26 secs
Dr JOHN BAYNHAM/Chairman, Lothian Health; 38 secs
KEN SEAWARD/Area Officer, UNISON; 1 min 13 secs
ALISTAIR DARLING MP/Labour, Edinburgh Central; 1 min 36 secs
JOHN CHAT WITH HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATOR 
JOE OWENS/General Manager;
Your watching Scotland Today.
Still to come this evening.
Patrolling our streets.
How effective is today's policing?
Only a phone call away.
The Samaritans who're always available.
And the men from Torino planning an Italian job.
A twenty one year old year Hamilton man's been charged with making a series of phone calls which put people in a state of fear and alarm.
Francis Auld didn't appear at the town's sheriff court today, and his case was continued without plea.
From the court Geoff Brown reports.
Rosyth Royal Dockyard is preparing to cut its workforce by a third.
Workers have been told that, in the coming years, more than a thousand workers will lose their jobs.
The news was delivered in a series of briefings by the Dockyard's management.
James Matthews reports.
Dunfermline; 0:02
DAVID BATTY/Director, Rosyth Royal Dockyard; 22 **Brief cap gan**
BRIAN NEGUS/Union Convener, Rosyth Royal Dockyard; 1:05
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today; 1:20
Lothian councillors have unveiled their revised plans for a system of so called Greenways to overcome 
Edinburgh
Edinburgh's daily traffic snarl-ups.
Under the scheme five main roads fanning out from the centre: Leith Walk, and Lanark, Calder, Corstorphine and Morningside Roads will become clearways with all parking banned during peak periods.
The original proposals were changed after over five hundred objections were lodged, mainly from traders worried that people would be scared away from some out-of-town shopping areas.
Ninety four per cent of Scots want to see more Police on the beat.
That's one of the findings of a new law and order survey which comes a week after Home Secretary Michael Howard rejected most of the proposals of the Sheehy inquiry into pay and conditions.
But what is morale like in today's force.
In the second of his special reports into the crime debate, Bernard Ponsonby looks at the state of Scotland's police and their ability to combat crime.
Pollok; 0:01
PC MARK SWEENEY/Strathclyde Police; 0:20
DOUGLAS KEIL/Scottish Police Federation; 1:41
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today; 2:41
There are of course further details of the General Accident, System Three poll in tomorrow's Herald newspaper.
And on this programme tomorrow evening, Bernard talks to the victims of crime and the offenders.
His report includes an interview with one man who's spent more than half his adult life in prison.
JIM DELAHUNT
The latest on Celtic and Aberdeen's European ties coming up, but first tonight.
Rangers manager Walter Smith has decided to keep faith with goalkeeper Ally Maxwell for tomorrow's Premier league game at Tynecastle.
There had been speculation that
Maxwell would carry the can for Saturday's defeat by Celtic when a dropped cross allowed John Collins to equalise and a missed punch led to Brian O'Neill's injury time winner.
Rangers assistant manager Archie Knox said tonight that Maxwell would definitely be in goal against Hearts tomorrow.
Lou Macari and Frank Connor will keep Paul Byrne, Pat Bonner and Tony Mowbray as their three foreigners in tomorrow's team to face Sporting Lisbon.
The Celtic party left for Portugal with morale at a seasonal high.
The Macari honeymoon period is in full swing and there's a determination and self-belief about the players which hasn't been visible for some time.
PAT BONNER; 30secs
GERRY CREANEY; 44secs
CHARLIE NICHOLAS; 1min1secs
LOU MACARI/Manager, Celtic FC; 1min24secs
Celtic goalkeeper Pat Bonner is in the Irish squad for the World Cup tie in Belfast two weeks tonight.
No surprises there, but unconfirmed reports tonight suggest the match could be switched to Old Trafford due to the obvious security risk.
Neither Belfast or Dublin could confirm the reports but FIFA are discussing the problem today and a statement is expected tomorrow.
Italian giants Torino have arrived in Aberdeen, ready to defend their three-two lead at Pittodrie tomorrow night.
The Italians lost in the league on Sunday but they're still confident of progressing to the quarter finals of the Cup winners' cup by holding on to their one goal advantage.
Aberdeen; 1secs
CAGLIARI 2 TORINO 1/Sunday; 22secs
RENATO ZACCARELLI/General Manager, Torino; 44secs
WILLIE MILLER/Manager, Aberdeen FC; 1min5secs
I'l be back with more on those European ties tomorrow but remember three important matches tonight.
In the Premier league;
Partick Thistle versus Hibs and in the semi-finals of the B and Q Cup; Ayr United against St Mirren and Falkirk against Meadowbank Thistle; Results on the late news.
There's been a disturbing rise in the number of men committing suicide under the age of twenty five.
The figures have been released on the day the Samaritans mark forty years of listening to the nation's problems.
And to commemorate their anniversary, the charity has opened a new office in Glasgow.
Ronnie Convery reports.
JOAN/Chair, Glasgow Samaritans; 29 secs
And if you want to get in touch with the Samaritans, that Glasgow number again is oh four one, two four eight, four four eight oh.
031 225 3333
The Samaritans' Edinburgh office is on oh three one, two two five, double three double three.
Glasgow's Lord Provost, Robert Innes, officially launched the Scottish Poppy Appeal in George Square this morning.
To mark the occasion he presented poppies to representatives of the armed forces and the Earl Haig Fund.
Six hundred and thirty balloons were released at the ceremony — one for every ten people the fund helped last year.
Time now for a recap of this evening's main news stories.
Karen Fraser is here to interpret for the deaf.
The inquiry into four Glasgow drugs deaths has been condemned by parents of victims.
It ended after just six hours of evidence with the Sheriff making no recommendations.
CONDEMNATION OF INQUIRY INTO DRUGS DEATHS/WHICH ENDS AFTER SIX HOURS OF EVIDENCE/WITH SHERIFF MAKING NO RECOMMENDATION
A man has been telling a court how he tried to save the life of his brother.
Peter Sheldon was giving evidence at the trial of two nineteen year olds accused of killing Edinburgh student Paul Sheldon.
MAN TELLS COURT HOW HE TRIED TO SAVE HIS/BROTHER.
PETER SHELDON GIVING EVIDENCE AT/TRIAL OF TWO ACCUSED OF KILLING
A two hundred million pound blue print for the future of health care in and around Edinburgh has been unveiled.
It includes a massive new Royal Infirmary on the city outskirts.
200 MILLION BLUE PRINT FOR FUTURE OF/HEALTH CARE AROUND EDINBURGH UNVEILED.
/IT INCLUDES NEW ROYAL INFIRMARY
And that brings us to the end of Scotland Today for this evening.
Our late bulletin tonight is at half past ten.
We've got a number you can call to leave details of any news stories you'd like to see covered on our programme.
SCOTLAND TODAY NEWSLINE/041 332 7000
It's 041 332 SEVEN THOUSAND.
But, for the moment, from the six thirty team, Goodnight.
A twenty-three year old woman has been accused of causing the death of another woman by driving dangerously at speeds of up to 90 miles an hour with her one-year-old daughter on her lap.
Nurgis Tara Shafiq of Baliol Street, Charing Cross, in Glasgow, appeared at Dumfries Sheriff Court.
It's alleged that she drove recklessly, causing the car to strike the verge and overturn, d causing the death of a passenger.
No plea or declaration was made and the case was continued.
SHEREEN NANJIANI
First tonight.
The trial of two blackmailers who preyed on homosexuals, by threatening to publicise their activities unless they handed over money, has ended sensationally, with the two accused admitting they carried out the crimes.
KIRSTY YOUNG
After more than a week of evidence, twenty seven year old Daniel Ahearn changed his plea on charges of assault and robbery and attempted extortion.
His co-accused twenty two year old Brian Purdie admitted a charge of extortion.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
LORRAINE DAVIDSON/Scotland Today; 23secs
Detective Sergeant JOE CAHILL/Strathclyde Police; 1:02secs
BRIAN McKENNA/Glasgow City Liaison Group; 1:32secs
A little girl has been scarred for life in a tragic playpark accident.
An investigation is underway into how six year old Keri Blair suffered acid burns while playing on a chute.
Other children are now being banned by their parents from going to the park in Bannockburn.
This report from Colin Barr.
Bannockburn; 2secs
COLIN BARR/Scotland Today; 10secs
KERI BLAIR; 26secs
ALEXIS STEVENSON/Keri's Mother; 42secs
You're watching Scotland Today.
Still to come on the programme
Inverclyde hospital to adopt key changes to cervical smear tests.
What does the future hold for caring for the elderly.
And a colourful contribution to the Scottish fashion scene.
Detectives investigating the murder of Glasgow pensioner Agnes Law say they still haven't found a motive for the crime.
But it's now known that Mrs Law was last seen alive just after lunchtime on Sunday.
Her body was discovered the following day when her home help raised the alarm.
Geoff Brown reports.
Det Chief Inspector KERR NELSON/Strathclyde Police; 35 SECS
GEOFF BROWN/Scotland Today; 1:08
Chief Supt COLIN MCLEAN/Strathclyde Police; 1:43
Argyll and Clyde Health Board have adopted ten key recommendations of a task force into the provision of cervical smear services at the Inverclyde Royal Hospital.
And they have asked the Royal College of Surgeons for an independent report into the provision of surgical services at the hospital.
Bernard Ponsonby reports.
MALCOLM JONES/Argyll and Clyde Health Board; 0:44
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today; 1:11
The first sea-going cutter built at Rosyth Naval Dockyard has been launched by the Princess Royal.
Her visit follows the announcement just two days ago that the dockyard is to be privatised.
The local community is still coming to terms with the loss of the Trident contract four months ago.
But amid certain pessimism, local people regard events like today's launch as small signs of hope.
Linda Kennedy has this.
S-ROSYTH 
Rosyth; 0:02
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 00:57
PETER DUNN/Fife Chamber of Commerce; 1:31
A masked raider whose disguise left something to be desired has been jailed.
The High Court in Glasgow heard that Bernard Fielding, who's thirty four, carried out a series of robberies at Labrokes betting shops in Springburn.
On his third raid Fielding wore a sock over his head.
But it had a hole in it and he was recognised by the staff.
He fled empty handed after striking a security guard on the head.
Lord Mclean sentenced Fielding to six years in prison.
The polls closed for Labour's shadow cabinet elections at five o'clock tonight, with Scots figuring prominently in the race for places.
There's been recent criticism that too many Scots are in the present team.
Will there be an anti-Scottish backlash from Labour MPs south of the border?
Our Parliamentary reporter Rae Stewart's been trying to find out.
TOM CLARKE MP/Shadow Scottish Secretary; 33sex
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today; 1.09sex
And we hope to bring you the results of the elctions in our late eveing update after news at ten.
Meanwhile, immediately after this programme, Scottish Questions addresses the issue of whether there are too many Scots likely to feature in the new team.
Every country in Europe's got one except Britain.
But from tomorrow the House of Commons should open the way for the first national lottery, making money for sport, the arts and charities.
It's a simple idea which should channel hundreds of millions of pounds into worthwhile causes.
But as Mark Smith reports some believe it could do more harm than good.
BRIAN WILSON MP/Labour, Cunninghame North; 30
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 46
JIM MORRIS/SSPCA Chief Executive; 1.27
JIM DELAHUNT
First tonight…
Celtic's twelve day chase after former player Lou Macari could be about to reach a conclusion.
Direcors will make an announcement after tonight's game with Sporting Lisbon, but I understand the club's financial director
David Smith has spent today thrashing out compensation terms with Stoke chairman Peter Coates.
Its the first time the two men have met for a week and the outcome is that
Macari will finally be allowed to listen to Celtic's offer of the manager's job sometime tomorrow.
The two clubs have obviously sorted out the wide gap between their respective ideas of the compensation Stoke should receive and it's now become clear that Macari will be allowed to negotiate his new terms WITH Stoke City's approval.
Celtic have just kicked off their first leg UEFA Cup tie against Sporting Lisbon at Parkhead…
The news from Italy where Aberdeen face Torino later tonight is that
Jim Bett will not make the Dons line-up.
He appears to have been ruled out although Eoin Jess WILL lead the attack despite Italian media suggestions that he'll be left out.
For Torino, Carbone, the man who scored a hat-trick against our under twenty ones last week, will start on the bench.
As the second round of European matches gets into full swing tonight, Rangers can only sit back and watch after tumbling out to a last minute goal from Levski Sofia.
Rangers' target instead, the league cup final against Hibs, but for everyone at Ibrox, thoughts of what might have been.
WALTER SMITH/Manager, Rangers FC; 2secs
A new world record price has been paid for a football medal at an auction in Glasgow.
The nineteen seventy seven European cup medal won by Liverpool's Ray Kennedy was sold by Christies for sixteen thousand pounds.
The medal was bought by Players Union chief Gordon Taylor out of union funds.
It'll join other purchases in a new museum in Manchester.
Kennedy put up a variety of items for auction, the whole collection bringing in over eighty-eight thousand pounds.
The former Arsenal and Liverpool star suffers from parkinson's disease and the sale of his football memorabilia will net him more than seventy three thousand pounds after deductions.
HANDS TO KIRSTY
Making money from looking after the elderly has never been more difficult.
Changes in Government legislation have cut profit margins in residential and nursing homes.
Critics of the Government say some homes could be forced out of business.
Tonight in the last of his special series, Stephen Jardine looks at caring for the elderly in the years ahead.
MAUREEN O'NEILL/Age Concern Scotland; 0:40
MARGARET LINSELL/Nursing Home General Manager; 1:27
Stephen Jardine's final report on residential homes for the elderly.
Tomorrow Aileen Taylor begins a two part investigation into a problem many of us have encountered.
Just what do you do when the neighbours become difficult to live with.
Find out tomorow evening.
A high tech fashion firm promising higher quality and snappier designs is about to create fifty jobs in an Ayrshire unemployment blackspot.
Altamira Colour based at Kilwinning aims to build the most advanced textile dyeing plant in Europe.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
ELIE CHILTON/Managing Director; 40sec
KEVIN LYON/Invest in Industry Group; 1min 13sec
BRIAN KERR/Scottish Enterprise; 1min 29sec
Now a recap of tonight's main news stories with Karen Fraser joining me to interpret for the deaf.
Two men have admitted extorting homosexuals by threatening to publicise their activities unless they handed over cash.
They changed their pleas mid-way through a trial at Glasgow Sheriff Court.
TWO MEN ADMIT EXTORTING HOMOSEXUALS/MID-WAY THROUGH TRIAL AT/GLASGOW SHERIFF COURT
A young Bannockburn girl's been scarred for life in a tragic playpark accident.
Six year-old Keri Blair slid down a chute which had been covered in acid.
A YOUNG BANNOCKBURN GIRL'S BEEN/SCARRED FOR LIFE AFTER SLIDING/ONTO ACID ON A PLAYPARK CHUTE
Detectives investigating the murder of Glasgow pensioner Agnes Law say they still haven't found a motive for the crime.
DETECTIVES SAY THEY HAVEN'T FOUND/A MOTIVE FOR MURDER OF/GLASGOW PENSIONER AGNES LAW
Argyll and Clyde Health Board have adopted ten recommendations of a task force on the provision of cervical certology services at the Inverclyde Royal Hospital.
ARGYLL AND CLYDE HEALTH BOARD ADOPT/PROPOSALS ON CERVICAL SERVICES AT/INVERCLYDE ROYAL HOSPITAL
Voting in Labour's shadow cabinet elections has closed, with Scots figuring prominently in the race for places.
POLLS HAVE CLOSED IN LABOUR'S/SHADOW CABINET ELECTIONS WITH SCOTS/HIGH IN RACE FOR PLACES
And that's Scotland today this Wednesday evening.
Nicky Docherty will have another update after News at Ten.
I'll be back with the lunchtime programme at five to one tomorrow when Kaye Adams will be taking your calls on diets- are they really necessary?
Call kaye on 0500 404 treble zero.
The lines will be open from twelve thirty tomorrow.
From all of us on the six thirty team have a good evening.
Goodnight.
ANGUS SIMPSON
A Glasgow man who blackmailed gay businessmen by threatening to expose their homosexuality, has been jailed for a total of four and half years at the city's sheriff court.
Twenty seven year old Daniel Ahearn was told by Sheriff Susan Raeburn that the case was one of the worst she'd heard.
KIRSTY YOUNG
A co-accused, twenty two year old Brian Purdie, was ordered to carry out two hundred hours community service after admitting attempted extortion.
From the court, Geoff Brown reports.
GEOFF BROWN/Scotland Today; 4 SECS
A man's been jailed at the High Court in Edinburgh for raping a prostitute at knifepoint.
Joseph Pritchard was told he'd subjected his victim to a terrifying attack.
The woman only escaped after she hid in a ditch.
James Matthews reports.
Leith; 0:02
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today; 14
The people of East Kilbride are celebrating a major victory against plans by an American owned company to build a tyre recycling plant in the new town.
East Kilbride development corporation has this morning rejected the planning application by Elm Energy in the face of strong public opposition.
Claire Dean reports.
East Kilbride; 2secs
DOUGLAS MOLLOY/East Kilbride Against Tyre Burning; 30secs
CLAIRE DEAN/Scotland Today; 53secs
Some news in brief now — there have been two more suspected drugs deaths in Glasgow.
The latest incidents come just hours after yesterday's fatal accident inquiry into the upsurge of drug deaths in the city.
Twenty seven year old James Jack was found dead at his home in Stirlingfauld Place last night.
And in a separate incident a twenty three year old — whose name hasn't been released — was found dead in a hotel room in Queen's Drive this morning.
Meanwhile police have arrested a twenty four year old man in Glasgow's Milton area in connection with alleged possession of drugs.
He's expected to appear in court later today.
The trial at the High court in Glasgow of the two youths accused of murdering Edinburgh student Paul Sheldon has been adjourned.
The court heard that defence council Neil Murray QC was unwell.
It's hoped that the trial will resume tomorrow.
The general manager of Greater Glasgow Health Board, Laurence Peterkin, has been sacked.
In a Board statement issued less than an hour ago, it was announced that Mr Peterkin's contract had been terminated, to take effect immediately.
His job is to be advertised.
Hailed as a trouble-shooter, sixty-two year old Mr Peterken joined the board six years ago.
Within his first year he was implementing cuts of twenty million pounds.
Scotland's salmon farmers will warn of a severe crisis facing their industry when they meet Scottish Office Minister Sir Hector Munro later today.
Industry leaders say two salmon farms had to call in the receivers last week and others will have to follow suit unless the European Union takes action.
At this afternoon's meeting the government will hear calls for concerted action against Norway which produces as much salmon as the rest of Europe put together.
Doctors across Scotland are reporting an increase in the number of flu cases with some Glasgow practices dealing with what they term ‘an epidemic’.
An outbreak of Beijing flu had been expected, and many patients had been immunised early.
The first Scottish outbreak was two weeks ago in Aberdeen.
But doctors didn't anticipate another strain of the virus which has affected many children.
Those at risk are being urged to have the vaccine as soon as possible.
Time as ever to turn our attentions to weather with the very lovely Lloyd Quinan.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Looking back at the start of the day — cloudy again, folks, as if you needed reminding.
But the north west and the west coast did get some sunny spells, while the rest of the country had to contend with some patchy rain.
The cloud will continue to spread north this afternoon with that rain following on to most parts before dark.
Most of the rain will be light and patchy, though, and generally it'll be rather hazy with increasing hill fog.
The temperature will only rise a little this afternoon — we can expect around nine or ten degrees celsius, that's about forty eight fahrenheit, but there will be a few spots in the east that will get a degree or two higher.
The wind will remain a moderate southeasterly.
Most places will start the night with more patchy rain, but as the night wears on, this will die out from most southern and eastern parts, with a few clear spells developing.
And that will lead to a few mist patches later on.
So look out for those, you early morning drivers.
And, finally, the better news: tomorrow will be quite a bright day.
So, don't say I'm not generous.
Well it's time for an unscheduled visit to one of our healthy lifestyle volunteers.
It's now been seven and a half weeks since our five guinea pigs began their search for a healthy lifestyle.
Twenty eight year old Susan Magill has been trying a homoeopathic approach to help her improve her diet and lose weight.
But, as Zoe Muir now reports, Susan is not finding her wheat-free diet easy to follow.
SUSAN MAGILL; 1’
Dr SHEILA GIBSON/Homoeopathic Doctor; 1'32’
Well I must admit that I think I'd find it a real struggle to cut wheat out of my diet.
Me too, but good luck for the time being Susan.
We'll catch up with her continued efforts in a few weeks time when Zoe Muir reviews the progress of all our healthy lifestylers as they hit the three month mark.
Time for a break now, but lots more to come.
What to do with the kids for holidays next year?
Why not Legoland — Katie Wood did and she had a very constructive time.
But first, would your baby buggy pass an MOT test?
Lothian Region investigate safety.
All that and more so join us in sixty five seconds time!
Too quick even for a channel click really!
See you soon.
Welcome back.
Safety experts believe that as many as half of Scottish children being pushed about in buggies may be at risk.
They claim that by the time a pushchair is passed on to a second or third child it's brakes are often defective.
It might even collapse with the child still inside.
Now Lothian Region's trading standards department is launching a week of free testing of baby prams and pushchairs, to mark National Consumer Week which starts on Monday.
John Macgill has been finding out about Scotland's first pushchair M.O.Ts.
MIKE DREWRY/Lothian Trading Standards Director; 23 secs
JIM BENNETT/Head of Safety, Trading Standards; 57 secs
JOHN MACGILL/Scotland Today; 1 min 29 secs
Now it's time for travel.
Last week Katie Wood was living in the lap of luxury up in Wick.
This week she's off on her foreign travels again, destination Scandanavia to look at the secrets behind one of the world's favourite toys.
These have been around so long even I played with them when I was a boy and I'll bet Kirsty did too.
Well, we won't go into that just yet.
That would give the game away.
Let's just say we had a box of them in our house too.
So let's not keep you in suspense and join Katie prior to her departure from a surprising location for international flight.
ANNEMARIE KVIST/Press Officer Legoland; 3:36
Now, if you want details of Katie's Legoland adventure, there is that old familiar number to call for a copy of our fact sheet.
It's 041 or 031 226 4747.
That's 041 or 031 226 4747.
Time to cross to the newsroom for a look at the 6:30 line-up.
Shereen's there.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London.
John Suchet's at the 5.40 desk.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
And sadly that's it for another day, but we couldn't go without dropping a few titbits about tomorrow's show.
He makes the plugs so subliminal doesn't he!
Anyway tomorrow being thursday is call Kaye day, and the topic is Glasgay.
The city is currently staging it's first ever lesbian and gay festival with events like plays, cabaret and films.
It's organisers say it's for everyone and it's receiving public funding.
But it's already created quite a bit of controversy.
Do you think specific arts events should receive public funding, or are you unhappy about gay sexuality being publicised.
One of the co-directors of the event, Dominic d'Angelo will be with Kaye in the studio to take your calls.
The number as always is oh five hundred four oh four triple zero, and calls are free.
So join us for that and loads of other goodies tomorrow.
Until then, goodbye.
SHEREEN NANJIANI
First, Glasgow's spiralling drugs problem has grabbed the headlines tonight.
In separate incidents across the city two more young men were found dead and a man was arrested in connection with alleged possession of heroin.
VIV LUMSDEN
Meanwhile, detectives hunting the killer of a man gunned down outside his home in Lambhill last week say they believe the victim may have been involved in a battle to control the area's drugs supply.
These latest incidents have led to further calls from politicians for a full public inquiry into the growing dreugs menace in Glasgow.
Our reporter Claire Dean has the details.
Glasgow;
Det Chief Insp JIMMY LINDSAY/Strathclyde Police; 27secs
Det Supt KEVIN ORR/Strathclyde Police Drugs Squad; 1min29secs
CLAIRE DEAN/Scotland Today; 1min50secs
JOHN McFALL MP/Labour, Home Affairs Spokesman; 2mins1sec
Glasgow's Health chief has been sacked in a row over a newspaper article.
A particularly blunt statement, issued today, said —‘The Greater Glasgow Health Board has terminated the contract of its General Manager, Laurence Peterkin, forthwith.’
This report from our political correspondent, Fiona Ross.
Library pictures; 0:48
FIONA ROSS/Scotland Today; 1:06
This is Scotland Today.
Still to come on tonight's programme.
East Kilbride celebrates as tyre plant proposal given the thumbs down.
The Italians in determined mood as Aberdeen get ready for European showdown.
And vaccine supplies start to run dry as the flu outbreak reaches epidemic proportions.
A Glasgow man's been jailed for a total of four and a half years for blackmailing gay businessmen.
Twenty seven year old Daniel Ahearn threatened to expose their homosexuality if they didn't pay up.
Another man, twenty two year old Brian Purdie was ordered to carry out two hundred hours community service.
He admitted attempted extortion.
Sheriff Susan Raeburn QC said the case was one of the worst she'd heard.
Geoff Brown reports.
GEOFF BROWN/Scotland Today; 5 SECS
Supt JIM CRAWFORD/Strathclyde Police; 27 SECS
BRIAN McKENNA/Glasgow Liason Group; 1:14
The prosecution system should be more sensitive to the victims of crime when proceeding with cases.
That's the plea from those who have suffered as a result of having to come to terms with criminal behaviour.
Tonight in his final report into crime in Scotland, Bernard Ponsonby talks to the victims and the offenders.
He hears from one individual who has spent most of his adult life in prison.
But first he spoke to one Glasgow woman whose life was turned upside down when her brother was murdered.
PAT STRAIN; 0:26
CHRIS; 1:16
JEANE FREEMAN/Director, APEX Trust; 2:15
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today/GLASGOW; 2:39
MARGARET DEVENNEY/Families of Murdered Children; 2:57
And we can join our reporter Bernard Ponsonby who is in the Newsroom.
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
And still with crime, a former Scotland hockey player has been jailed for her part in armed raids on shops in Glasgow.
The High Court heard how twenty five year old Nancy Conway, from Old Caley Road in Irvine, teamed up with thirty nine year old escaped convict William Marshall, to rob chemist shops and off-licences.
Conway carried a Ghurka knife in her belt while Marshall pretended to have a shotgun and threatened staff with a scythe and carving knife.
Conway admitted two robberies and one attempted robbery.
Marshall has been transferred to Carstairs State Hospital for observation.
He admitted escaping from prison along with three charges of armed robbery and one of attempted robbery.
The people of East Kilbride are celebrating a major victory against an American owned company which wanted to build a tyre recycling plant in the new town.
East Kilbride development corporation has rejected the planning application by Elm Energy following strong public opposition.
East Kilbride; 2secs
DOUGLAS MOLLOY/East Kilbride Against Tyre Burning; 30secs
Scotland's salmon farmers have warned of a severe crisis facing their industry following a meeting with Scottish Office Minister Sir Hector Munro.
Industry leaders say two salmon farms had to call in the receivers last week and others will have to follow suit unless the European Union takes action.
At this afternoon's meeting the government heard calls for concerted action against Norway which produces as much salmon as the rest of Europe put together.
The residents of a small Lanarkshire village have blocked a main road in a protest against essential repair work, which they say will isolate them completely.
The Westcoast mainline railway runs through the village of Elvanfoot, and locals say the work which Scotrail needs to carry out on a bridge will cut off them off entirely.
Derl McCrudden reports.
Elvanfoot; 1 secs
DAVID BARCLAY/Resident; 37 secs for FOUR
DERL McCRUDDEN/Scotland Today; 51 secs
JIM DELAHUNT
Aberdeen first off tonight at seven thirty, Celtic half an hour later in Lisbon.
The cup winners cup tie at Pittodrie a sell-out as you would expect as Aberdeen try to capitalise on those two away goals in Turin.
They're still a goal behind, but with
Duncan Shearer and Mixu Paateleinen expected to lead the attack alongside Eoin Jess, the home fans should be in for an exciting ninety minutes.
Torino know that one goal will be enough for Aberdeen but despite continued poor league form and tonight's absence of main striker Carlos Aguilera, the Italians still consider themselves favourites.
EMILIANO MONDONICO/Torino coach; 24secs
BRUNO LONGHI/Italian TV commentator; 54secs
Five thousand Celtic fans will watch their team defend a single goal lead over Sporting Lisbon thanks to Gerry Creaney's first half strike at Parkhead.
Lou Macari is apparently considering leaving out striker Charlie Nicholas in favour of an extra midfielder Brian O'Neil.
That would leave Gerry Creaney up front on his own although Paul Byrne would be expected to push up wide on the right.
Paul Cooney is in Lisbon for the match.
He's just sent this report.
And Celtic's Pat Bonner will be playing for Ireland in Belfast after all in a fortnight.
The Northern authorities confirmed tonight they wouldn't be switching the tie despite the obvious security risk.
Several Manchester United players likely to be involved as well and they're into the second half of their second leg European cup tie in Turkey.
Three-three at Old Trafford; commentators, Denis Law and Alan Parry.
And the latest score from Turkey…
Last but not least tonight, the big Premier league game at Tynecastle, Hearts against Rangers.
John Brown back for Rangers, Mo Johnston's first home game for Hearts and exclusive pictures on this programme tomorrow night.
Have you been struck down with flu this year?
If you have, then join the club.
Thousands of us have been laid low already with a flu virus which has surprised the experts by the speed with which it's hit Scotland.
And the demand for vaccines has started to strain supplies.
Dr KATHLEEN LONG; 25’
GRAEME MILLAR/Scottish Pharmaceutical Council; 1:33
Time for a recap of tonight's main stories with Karen Fraser joining me to interpret for the deaf.
Two more drugs related deaths in Glasgow and the arrest of a man in connection with alleged heroin possession has led to further calls for a public inquiry into the city's drugs problem.
TWO MORE DRUGS RELATED DEATHS AND ARREST/IN CONNECTION WITH ALLEGED POSSESSION/BRINGS MORE CALLS FOR FULL INQUIRY
Glasgow's Health chief has been sacked in a row over a newspaper article.
A health board statement said the contract of Laurence Peterken had been ‘terminated forthwith’.
GLASGOW HEALTH CHIEF SACKED/IN ROW OVER NEWSPAPER ARTICLE
A Glasgow man's been jailed for four and a half years for blackmailing gay businessmen.
Daniel Ahearn threatened to expose their homosexuality if they didn't pay up.
GLASGOW MAN JAILED FOR BLACKMAILING/BUSINESSMEN.
HE THREATENED TO EXPOSE/THEIR HOMOSEXUALITY IF THEY DIDN'T PAY
The people of East Kilbride are celebrating a major victory against an American owned company which wanted to build a tyre recycling plant in the new town.
PEOPLE OF EAST KILBRIDE CELEBRATE/MAJOR VICTORY AGAINST TYRE/RECYCLING PLANT
Medical experts are surprised at the speed at which the latest flu virus has caught on in Scotland.
And the demand for vaccine has started to put a strain on supplies.
MEDICAL EXPERTS SURPRISED AT SPEED/'FLU' VIRUS HAS CAUGHT ON IN SCOTLAND.
/STRAIN ON VACCINE SUPPLY
And that's just about it for this evening's edition of Scotland Today.
You can of course get another update by joining Nicky Docherty at ten thirty following news at ten.
Tomorrow, we begin an investigation into pollution.
Is it the hidden urban curse?
In his first report, Mike Edwards asks just how safe is the air we breath.
That's tomorrow evening.
But from all of us on the six thirty team this evening, have a very good night.
Goodnight.
Armed raiders who forced their way into a couple's new home told them:Sorry we've got the wrong house.
Edinburgh Sheriff Court was told how Glynis Hatcher and Kenneth McCormack had just moved into the flat in Niddrie.
The gang, armed with a pick axe handle and sledge hammer, demanded: If you don't give us James you'll regret it.
When Mr McCormack said he didn't know anyone called James the men apologised and left.
In court 23 year old Colin Longmuir admitted causing a breach of the peace at the couples home, and was jailed for three months.
Glasgow is planning to become the first Scottish city to ban the consumption of alcohol in the street.
Council lawyers are currently drafting a scheme based on a new bye-law which will give police the power to arrest anyone drinking in public places.
A representative of the licencing board said that there's widespread support in Glasgow for the proposal.
KIRSTY YOUNG
But first this lunchtime, the High Court in Glasgow has heard how the brother of murdered Edinburgh student Paul Sheldon had a flashback of the incident which helped him to identify one of the alleged attackers.
ANGUS SIMPSON
Peter Sheldon was giving evidence at the Trial of Paul Archibald and David Bobby accused of murdering the student at the City's Whitehouse Loan in February this year.
Both youths deny the charges.
From the court Emma Simpson reports.
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; at 16 secs.
One in every hundred Scottish schoolgirls under sixteen is becoming pregnant, because they don't trust their GP.
The British Medical Association says many teenagers fear that if they consult their Doctor on family planning matters, their parents will find out.
The BMA has has today urged GP's to get the message across to youngsters, that they can be consulted in confidence.
James Matthews reports.
Doctor ANNA GLASIER/Head of Family Planning Services, Lothian; 24
Doctor VIVIENNE NATHANSON/Scottish Secretary, BMA; 41
A part of one of Scotland's most historic regiments this afternoon marched off the parade ground for the last time.
The second battalion of the Scots Guards made their final appearance at Edinburgh's Dreghorn barracks.
Tomorrow they'll cease to exist.
John Macgill reports.
Major MUNRO DAVIDSON/Quartermaster, Scots Guards; 27 sex
Police in Lothian are increasingly concerned about the safety of a fifteen year old girl who's been missing for ten days.
Lorna Dempsey was last seen getting onto a bus in Bathgate on the evening of the twenty fourth of October.
She was heading for Edinburgh but never turned up.
She's described as five foot three, with blonde permed hair, slim build and green eyes.
Anyone with information on the girl's whereabouts is asked to contact the police.
A fishing boat has sunk overnight in the north sea.
Two crew members of the Glenmore were winched to safety by helicopter shortly before their vessel went down.
Another fishing boat tried to tow the Glenmore back to port in rough seas, but it finally sank ninety miles east of Orkney.
Time for a bit of a news breather now and what better temporary diversion than the weather.
Lloyd!
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Indeed it was a very misty and cloudy start, but the sun did break through in the west, the east getting some rain as well as the grey stuff.
Looking ahead to the afternoon, and most of western and central Scotland should see some more of the sun, but for the east coast, it'll continue rather cloudy and misty.
With that glimpse of sunshine, temperatures will rise — to a stunning thirteen celsius, fifty five fahrenheit, in the sunnier parts of northern Argyll.
And even in the cloudier east, it won't be too bad — eleven celsius, fifty two fahrenheit.
Winds will be generally light from the south.
It'll remain rather cloudy in the east tonight, with some drizzly rain at times.
However, the west will be mainly dry with broken cloud, again becoming rather misty with fog in places.
A mild night just about everywhere, with temperatures no lower than nine celsius, forty eight fahrenheit, with those fairly light winds tending to turn more south easterly.
And the prospects for tomorrow: cloudy with a spot of rain in the east, but brighter in the west with some sunny spells.
Why is that getting pregnant and asking for maternity leave can be seen as a crime?
Despite having thousands of years to get it right, many employers still deny their female staff time for one of the most natural of human experiences.But now a new EC directive is set to come into force to improve maternity leave rights.
But how much will it help?
Zoe Muir reports.
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 14’
MOIRA BAYNE; 33’
MORAG ALEXANDER; 2'16’
Well that's part one done and dusted.
But up and coming in part two we have.
Should public money be supporting Glasgow's first ever lesbian and gay arts festival?
What do you think?
Call Kaye with your views on oh five hundred four oh four treble zero.
But first, conference hears call to improve educational lot of kids in care.
Dare you miss it?
I think not!
See you in just over a minute.
Welcome back.
Child care experts have gathered from throughout Scotland to discuss what can be done to improve the educational record of children in care.
Four out of every five currently leave school with no qualifications, making it all the more difficult for them to adapt to adult life.
From the conference in Perth Mark Smith reports.
HUGH MacKINTOSH/Barnardos Scotland; 22
Fingers at the ready.
Time to get calling Kaye about Glasgay.
Yes, about nineteen thousand pounds of public money is going into Glasgay, Scotland's first ever cultural festival run by Gays and Lesbians.
And it's causing a bit of a stir.
Some people feel it's not an appropriate use of the cash, that Gay and Lesbian art shouldn't be given such a high profile.
What do you think?
Here in the studio with me is one of the organisers, Dominic D'Angelo, and he'll be helping take your calls.
So give us a ring on 0500 404 000.
It won't cost you a penny.
First off though our reporter Fiona Mcbride has been finding out a bit more about Glasgay.
CALL KAYE/0500 404 000
Councillor JOHN YOUNG/Glasgow City Council; 21secs
BOB PALMER/Director of Performing Arts; 58secs
JAN SUTHERLAND/Glasgow Sculptor; 1min 21secs
FIONA McBRIDE/Scotland Today; 1min 57secs
KAYE + GUESTS + PHONES 
DOMINIC d'ANGELO/Co-Director, Glasgay
STEVEN/East Kilbride
CHRISTINE/Edinburgh
JAMES/Barrhead
STEWART/Cambuslang
CATRIONA/Glasgow
RICHARD/Gorebridge
PAUL/East Kilbride
Looking ahead to tonight's edition of Scotland Today now, let's cross to the newsroom.
Shereen what's on the menu tonight.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Moving on to London.
John Suchet's at ITN's 5.40 desk.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
Well that's thursday behind us and there's now only one day separating us from the weekend.
But we're not complacent.
No not us!
We've a star studded line-up tomorrow.
Kevin Kline's been chatting to John Miller about working with a great actor — himself!
In his latest film scintillatingly entitled ‘Dave’, he plays a duel role as US president and an ordinary Joe — or should I say Dave — picked out to help the country in crisis.
And Bryan Burnett's doned his cork hat to hear about life down under from the Aussie band Midnight Oil.
So all that plus him and me.
Be here at five to one or Gus will want to know why!
That's right!
But bye for now.
SHEREEN NANJIANI
First tonight, Lothian detectives are becoming increasingly concerned for the safety of a fifteen year old Bathgate girl.
Lorna Dempsey was last seen eleven days ago.
It's more than two years since schoolgirl Vicky Hamilton disappeared from the same area.
She has never been found.
Geoff Brown has this report.
CATHERINE PEAT/Lorna's mother; 31 SECS
GEOFF BROWN/Scotland Today; 49 SECS
Det Chief Inspector DOUGIE WATSON/Lothian and Borders Police; 1:12
MARK SMITH
Two workmen were taken to Glasgow Royal Infirmary this afternoon suffering from serious injuries after a scaffolding collapse in the City Centre.
John Dunlop from Springburn and John Rodgers from Lenzie were working on the scaffolding in Albion Street when the incident occurred.
Bernard Ponsonby has this report.
Glasgow;
JOHN DIVERS/Eyewitness; 0:16
Asst Divisional Officer SCOTT LEE/Strathclyde Fire Brigade; 0:39
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today; 1:00
A key witness at the Paul Sheldon murder trial pointed at his two alleged attackers in Court today but admitted he'd failed to recognise them in police identity parades.
Thomas Cole was giving evidence in the case against the two youths accused of murdering the Edinburgh student in February this year.
Paul Archibald and David Bobby deny the charges.
Emma Simpson has this report from the High Court in Glasgow.
EMMA SIMPSON/Scotland Today; 0:13secs
This is Scotland Today.
Still to come on tonight's programme.
A rise in teenage preganancies because of a crisis of confidence in the medical profession.
Shedding some light on protest over VAT on fuel.
And the Scots Guards on parade for the last time.
G.P.'s are being told to DO MORE to reduce teenage pregnancies in Scotland.
The British Medical Association says one in a hundred schoolgirls under sixteen is becoming pregnant.
And youngsters are reluctant to consult their family doctor on contraception because they don't trust them.
G.P.'s are now being told to get the message across: that they can be consulted in confidence.
James Matthews reports.
Dr ANNA GLASIER/Head of Family Planning Services, Lothian;
Dr VIVIENNE NATHANSON/Scottish Secretary, BMA;
A publishing company, financed by Edinburgh District Council and the Wester Hailes Partnership in Edinburgh has collapsed with debts which are thought to run to over a quarter of a million pounds.
‘Commpress’ which publishes magazines and newpapers for councils across Scotland, has called in the receivers.
Other casualties will include the match programme for Hibs football club.
Edinburgh council alone is thought to be owed one hundred thousand pounds.
In a statement issued this evening the council says ‘It is unfortunate that the council appears likely to lose its investment’.
They say Commpress is simply another victim of the recssion.
An employee has told Scotland Today that he and his colleagues will now be demanding an inquiry into the collapse.
The head of the NHS in Scotland is to investigate the sudden sacking of Laurence Peterken — the General Manager of Greater Glasgow Health Board.
Mr Peterkin was fired yesterday, without explanation, while attending a conference in London.
A spokesman for the Scottish Office said that although it's really a matter for the Health Board, Mr Peterken, under his contract has the right of appeal to the Scottish Secretary.
The former General Manager has already consulted Glasgow lawyer Ross Harper and is considering his position.
Thirty thousand civil servants will stop work tommorrow across Scotland in protest against plans to privatise their jobs.
The one day strike will close many government offices causing massive disruption.
Prison officers will be on strike across Scotland for the first time in their history.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
Paisley; 1sec
MICHAEL McCANN/Civil and Public Services Association; 37sec
WILLIAM WALDEGRAVE MP/Minister for Citizen's Charter; 1min 06sec
ALAN SAUNBY/Scotland Today; 1min 35sec
Hundreds of people have this evening spelled out a seasonal warning to the government: NO V.A.T. on domestic fuel.
The campaigners' angry words were formed by torches, lights and sparklers.
The demonstration in Glasgow's George Square was the first of two protest events building up to tomorrow's Guy Fawkes celebrations.
Linda Kennedy has this.
S-WARMTH 
DAMIAN KILLEEN/Right to Warmth; 0:17
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 1:03
It's all around us, it's vitally important for the sustenance of life, yet it's almost totally taken for granted.
It's mainly made-up of Oxygen but other gases contribute to its formation.
We're talking of course about the air we breathe.
But just how clean is it?
How do we know that what we're drawing into our lungs isn't doing us harm.
In the first of a two-part report, Mike Edwards looks at the problem of pollution — often dubbed the urban curse.
MIKE EDWARDS/Scotland Today; 30 secs (NOT BEFORE)
Dr GRAHAM WATT/Public Health Dept Glasgow University; 45 secs
Councillor ALEC MOSSON/Glasgow City Council; 1 min 33 secs
BRIAN KELLY/Director of Environmental Health; 2 mins 40secs
And tomorrow night, in the second part of his report, Mike will be looking at other sources and results of urban pollution, including waste chemicals, emissions from smokestacks and noise.
Part of one of Scotland's most historic regiments has marched off the parade ground for the last time.
One of the two batallions making up the Scots Guards is disbanded next month.
John Macgill was at Edinburgh's Dreghorn barracks to see the flags come down.
Edinburgh; start
Brigadier KIM ROSS; 41 secs
Major MUNRO DAVIDSON/Quartermaster, Scots Guards; 59 secs
A busy night of football last night and here with all the details is our very own sports correspondent Jim Delahunt.
JIM DELAHUNT
Celtic manager Lou Macari arrived back from Lisbon fully convinced of the need for new players at Celtic Park.
The new manager wasn't having a go at the players who'd lost two-nil to Sporting.
It was more a case of realising that Celtic's squad lacked the strength in depth required for a successful European campaign and to mount a sustainable challenge on the domestic front.
Macari may find he has to sell before he can buy, so rebuilding could be a lengthy process.
Coming up, the Horge Cadette double which sank Celtic and Benito Carbonne's almost single handed demolition of Aberdeen.
LOU MACARI/Manager, Celtic FC; 50secs
BBC/Pictures; 1min18secs
Rangers and Hearts fought out a two-two draw at Tynecastle last night, a match played on a pitch almost waterlogged after an all day downpour.
One casualty, Hearts skipper
Craig Levein.
He was carried off after a fifty fifty tackle with Stuart McCall.
Nothing broken, but heavy bruising means he's almost certain to miss Hearts' next game.
The draw left both clubs on fifteen points, three behind league leaders Aberdeen.
Rangers now face the potentially hazardous trip to Kilmarnock on Saturday with Hearts at home to Dundee United.
Partick Thistle have announced plans for a new six thousand seater stand costing two point three million pounds.
The eventual aim is for Firhill to have a capacity sixteen thousand seats.
And, Fir Park Motherwell is to be the venue for the B and Q Cup final on Sunday December the twelfth.
St Mirren versus Falkirk, kick-off two-thirty.
Join me tomorrow for the Friday football round-up plus the story which has rocked the junior game to its foundations.
Representatives of the cream of Scotland's film and television industry are gathering in a Glasgow hotel at the moment for the Scottish version of the Academy awards.
The Princess Royal will be attending the event and as usual Scottish Television figures prominently in the nominations.
Time now for a recap of tonight's main headlines with Karen Fraser interpreting for the deaf.
Lothian detectives are becoming increasingly concerned for the safety of fifteen year old Bathgate girl Lorna Dempsey.
She was last seen eleven days ago.
LOTHIAN DETECTIVES BECOME INCREASINGLY/CONCERNED FOR SAFETY OF 15-YEAR-OLD/LORNA DEMPSEY FROM BATHGATE
Two workmen have been injured in a scaffolding collapse in Glasgow's Albion Street.
Paramedics and firecrews lowered the men sixty feet to safety.
2 MEN INJURED IN SCAFFOLDING COLLAPSE/IN GLASGOW'S ALBION STREET.
PARAMEDICS/AND FIREFIGHTERS RESCUE THEM
G.P.'s are being told to do more to reduce teenage pregnancies.
The British Medical Association says one in a hundred schoolgirls under sixteen is becoming pregnant.
BMA TELLS GPs TO DO MORE TO REDUCE/TEENAGE PREGNANCIES.
ONE PER CENT OF/UNDER-16 SCHOOLGIRLS BECOMING PREGNANT
Hundreds of people campaigning against VAT on dometic fuel have been protesting in a torchlit demonstration in Glasgow's George Square.
HUNDREDS CAMPAIGN AGAINST VAT ON/DOMESTIC FUEL IN TORCHLIT DEMONSTRATION/IN GLASGOW'S GEORGE SQUARE
That's it so far today.
We'll have an update for you at ten thirty and all the overnight stories in our bulletins tomorrow morning from six fifteen onwards.
In tomorrow's lunchtime Scotland Today Kevin Kline talks about stardom and fatherhood, and Shereen, Kirsty and Jim will be back at six thirty with the most watched news programme in Scotland.
Make sure to join them then.
Good Evening.
Shadow Scottish Secretary George Robertson has written to the Prime Minister saying that Scots would be outraged if Northern Ireland got elected an Assembly and Scotland didn't.
The possibility of an Assembly emerged during peace talks about the Province.
Our parliamentary correspondent Rae Stewart reports.
GEORGE ROBERTSON MP/Shadow Scottish Secretary; 22 secs
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today; 55 secs
Glenlight Shipping, the company which operates puffers all-over the west coast has been awarded an extension to its tarriff reduction subsidy.
The extension means the company will be able to continue trading until the end of the year at least.
A spokesman for Glenlight said without the subsidy a sixty-six per cent increase in freight charges would have been passed on to clients from tomorrow.
Five hundred white collar staff at Yarrow shipbuilders on the Clyde have begun an indefinite strike over pay.
Talks broke down around lunchtime after the technical and clerical staff rejected a one point eight percent increase and an offer of profit related pay.
A spokesman said the dispute could be extremely damaging to the warship builder but the offer was final.
Fifteen hundred manual workers will have to decide whether to cross picket lines tomorrow morning.
Preparations for bonfire night have taken on an extra sparkle at one Kincardine school.
Pupils at Lathallan school have had a burning interest in their new headmaster…for they've discovered his family's explosive past.
Here's Mike Higgins.
PHILIP FAWKES/Headmaster; at 31 secs
KIRSTY YOUNG
But first this lunchtime, an Ayrshire widow, who's suing Imperial Tobacco after her husband contracted terminal lung cancer, has been refused legal aid to fund her historic damages action.
KAYE ADAMS
But the case, which is halfway through, will be continuing because Margaret McTear's lawyers are offering their services free.
Geoff Brown reports.
CAMERON FYFE/Solicitor; 40 SECS
Scotland's last remaining independent whisky firm, Invergorden, has lost its battle for survival.
American owned rival Whyte and Mackay made its long awaited swoop this morning and now owns around fifty five percent of the Leith based company.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
Now some news in brief.One person has died in a fire at a house in the Govan area of Glasgow.
Firefighters were called out at about seven thirty this morning.
Investigators are still at the scene in Woodside Road, trying to establish the cause of the blaze.
Police say it may have been unoccupied, and no-one else is thought to have been injured.
Former Scottish High Court judge,
Lord Dervaird, has won an apology and undisclosed damages over allegations in the Sun newspaper that he resigned and fled to Cyprus in the wake of an alleged gay legal ring scandal.
Libel lawyer Peter Carter-Ruck said the holiday Lord Dervaird took with his wife was totally unconnected to his retirement.
The newspaper published an apology and agreed a sum to compensate for the distress caused to Lord Dervaird and his family.
More news and features to come but first the weather with Lloyd.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
This morning, most areas had a bright start — apart from a few showers in the east.
That fine weather will contin ue this afternoon, with plenty of sunshine, although the east coast again could be in for the odd shower.
It'll feel very cold in the fresh, northerly wind, the temperatures reaching eleven celsius, fifty two fahreneheit at best.
Another clear night in store — good for star gazing — with some patchy cloud on both coasts.
And it's going to be a cold night, temperatures falling below freezing — as low as minus three celsius, twenty seven fahrenheit.
The story for tomorrow's the same — dry and bright, plenty of sunshine.
Fine autumnal weather, in fact, Kirsty.
How many of you have lost weight, reached a plateau and before you know it you're back where you started?
Well today's healthy lifestyle volunteer believes she's beaten this weighty problem.
As Zoe Muir found out Jackie Berwick has lost almost a stone in three and a half weeks.
JACQUELINE BERWICK; 15’
DEREK BRYANT/Fiance; 1'24’
A happy woman there.
And tomorrow, Zoe completes her updates with a look at how peer pressure is working for our Weightwatcher.
Now, while you're off checking the Yellow Pages for Hypnotherapists, we'll take a very short break, but be back in one and half minutes because still to come…
That old cowboy John Millar reaches the end of his very own Wild West adventure.
But before that, back to the subject of dieting: social grace or psychological torture.
What do you think?
You can call me — free — now on oh-five-hundred, four-oh-four, treble zero with your opinions on the world of the bodily challenged.
And doesn't that mean all of us?
Well, that's what we're going to find out.
In just over a minute.
See you then.
Hello again.
Now I don't want to spoil your lunch here but we're talking about dieting.
This week, Zoe Muir has been updating us on the progress of our five Lunchtime dieters who have each been trying a different method of losing weight.
It really is a multi-million pound industry…convincing people they could look better just a few pounds or stones lighter and this is how to do it.
But are we allowing ourselves to be carried away by false vanity?
Shouldn't we learn to love ourselves the way we are?
Maybe you think that by running a dieting series Lunchtime Scotland Today is re-inforcing stereo-type images of the perfect body.
You tell us what you think.
The number is 0500 404 000.
Calls are free.
With me in the studio is journalist, Dorothy Grace Elder who sixteen months ago weighed in at fourteen and a half and was perfectly happy with it.
Now, as you can see, she's a shadow of her former self.
In fact we have some documentary evidence
This is Dorothy on a rival programme three years ago looking rather different.
And I must point out Dorothy actually volunteered this piece of film.
DOROTHY GRACE-ELDER/Journalist;
CALL KAYE/0500 404 000
KAYE + DOROTHY + PHONES 
VI/Dalgety Bay
RAE/Cumbernauld
ALISON/Ayr
ELIZABETH/Methil
JACQUELINE/Cumbernauld
PAUL/Edinburgh
MARY/Motherwell
LOUISE/Edinburgh
Now, for the final time we're heading way out west with the man who's given a whole new meaning to the term ‘cowboy’— John Millar of the Daily Record.
Sadly, his trail through some of the locations for classic moments of westerns past and present reaches the end of the road today.
But, at last, John gets himself a horse.
And once again, if you want details of how you can follow the wild west trail, we have the number.All the information's on our fact sheet.
Just dial oh-four-one or oh-three-one, two-two-six, four-seven-four-seven to get your own personal, entirely free copy.
The action switches now to the newsroom.
Shereen's there with a look ahead to the 6.30 edition of Scotland Today.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
L-ITN 51
Moving swiftly on to London and the ITN Newsdesk.
John Suchet's there with news of the 5.40.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
That's just about it for today — tomorrow's another glittering showbiz Friday here on lunchtime and we've got Wesley Snipes, Right Said Fred and Mary Chapin Carpenter lined up to dazzle and delight you.
And don't forget the news — there'll be plenty of that.
But we won't have you, Kirsty?
No.
But we are reliably informed that Angus will be back on his feet and more importantly that seat tomorrow.
So be here tomorrow at five to one for the Kaye and Angus Lunchtime Show.
For now, from everyone on the lunchtime team, good afternoon.
The younger generation know her as everybody's mum in Blind Date and Surprise Surprise.
Many are unware that she was topping the charts with the Beatles and the Rolling Stones way before the platform had made a come back.
But Cilla Black's not back.
She's never been away.
Fiona McBride reports.
A mass meeting of sacked Timex workers in Dundee has decided NOT to rebel against last week's peace deal and accept that their fight against the company is over.
Last Week;
Last week, workers accused union officals of blackmailing them into accepting a package which would give each former employee a week's wages for every year of service.
Today rebels attempted to persuade one hundred and forty workers who'd not yet signed the agreement to battle on, but they failed in their bid to stop them from signing the deal.
First tonight.
One of the shortest reigns in Scottish political history has come to an abdrupt end.
Tom Clarke has been removed from his position as the Shadow Scottish Secretary.
In his place, the MP for Hamilton, George Robertson, who yesterday was voted on to the shadow cabinet for the first time.
The change made by John Smith had been widely anticipated.
Our Political Reporter Rae Stewart has been following events.
We join him live at Westminster.
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today/LIVE
TOM CLARKE/Former Shadow Scottish Secretary
KIRSTY YOUNG
Tom Clarke was only Shadow Scottish Secretary for one year.
His leadership was regarded by many as ineffective.
Party activists believe his successor George Robertson, will bring a tougher approach to the number one job in Scottish Labour politics.
Bernard Ponsonby reports on Mr Clarke's often turbulent year.
JOHANN LAMONT/Chairperson, Labour Party in Scotland; 0:36
BERNARD PONSONBY/Scotland Today; 1:16
SHEREEN NANJIANI
The bodies of two young people, believed to be a missing German couple, have been found on Skye.
Police in Portree say the bodies were discovered earlier this afternoon following a search of the Trotternish ridge by an RAF helicopter.
The bodies have not yet been identified, but it's thought they're Linda Bohlen and Stefan Mohr who've been missing since the end of September.
Mike Edwards reports.
Scotland's last remaining independent whisky firm, Invergordon, has lost it's battle for survival.
American owned rival Whyte and Mackay made its long awaited swoop this morning and now has control of the Leith based company — making the combined group the third biggest scotch whisky firm.
However White and Mackay has ruled out any major job losses from the takeover.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
MICHAEL LUNN/Chairman; 48sec
ALAN SAUNBY/Scotland Today; 1min 23sec
You're watching Scotland Today.
Still to come on the programme.
Legal firm to pay for widow's fight against tobacco firm.
How to stay warm AND save money this winter.
And facing up to the Italian job, Aberdeen reflect on what might have been.
But first, we're returning to our top story.
Tom Clarke has been replaced by Hamilton MP George Robertson as the new Shadow Scottish Secretary.
Mr Robertson is with our Parliamentary Reporter Rae Stewart in London.
GEORGE ROBERTSON MP/Shadow Scottish Secretary
The Ayrshire widow suing a Tobacco giant on behalf of her husband who died from lung cancer earlier this year says she's amazed and delighted that her lawyers have agreed to work for nothing.
Margaret McTear was refused legal aid for the case but as Mark Smith reports her legal team are now banking on winning to recoup their costs.
CAMERON FYFE/Lawyer; 35
MARGARET McTEAR; 47
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 1.15
Thw former Scottish High Court judge,
Lord Dervaird, has won an apology and undisclosed damages over allegations in the Sun newspaper that he resigned and fled to Cyprus in the wake of an alleged gay legal ring scandal.
His lawyer, Peter Carter-Ruck, said the holiday Lord Dervaird took with his wife was totally unconnected to his retirement.
The newspaper published an apology and agreed a sum to compensate for the distress caused to Lord Dervaird and his family.
The sacked Timex workforce have finally accepted that their nine month battle with the American corporation is over.
Dundee
The majority are signing undertakings to cease action against the company in return for payments ranging from five hundred to five thousand pounds.
A boycott campaign aimed at hitting Timex products is set to be wound up.
But it seems a small number of former workers may still fight on in industrial tribunals.
A forty-nine year old man has appeared in private at Glasgow Sheriff Court accused of abducting a seven year old boy.
Govan
It's alleged to have happened in Govan last Sunday.
James Dunlop of Mosspark Oval, Mosspark in Glasgow, is also accused of lewd and libidinous practices involving two children.
Dunlop was remanded in custody for further inquiries.
You're probably putting your feet up after a hard day, looking forward to a quiet evening in, perhaps?
Or are you just gritting your teeth waiting for the neighbours to turn the stereo on full blast or start a spot of DIY?
Problem neighbours can turn your home from a heaven to a hell.
Tonight Aileen Taylor begins a two part investigation into the problem.
Great Yarmouth; 1sec
Disguised/Voice; 41secs
AILEEN TAYLOR/Scotland Today; 1:20
BRIAN KELLY/Environmental Health Director; 1:43
STEPHEN HAROLD/Environmental Health Officer; 2:36
If you have a problem with noisy neighbours you can get advice from your council environmental health department.
Tomorrow Aileen goes to Mossend in Lanarkshire where some residents have been involved in a ten-year long row with travelling people who live on their doorstep.
A director of a bust timeshare firm has admitted breaching strict consumer protection laws.
Fifty year old Alexander Blackwood from Edinburgh was the company secretary at Omni International Management Limited which went into liquidation earlier this month.
Blackwood was charged with giving a false description of a so-called ‘Home Entertainment Centre’.
According to company literature sent out to people in Edinburgh, the centre consisted of a three-stem candelabra, a flower vase, a three leaf tray, a three piece cruet, and a cake pallet knife.
The case has been continued till November the eleventh.
KIRSTY HANDS TO JIM
JIM DELAHUNT
Aberdeen arrived back from Turin this afternoon, knowing they'd taken a major step towards the quarter finals of the Cup Winners Cup.
A late goal from substitute Carlos Aguilera gave Torino a three-two victory but Aberdeen's two away goals have certainly rattled the Italians.
Celtic travel to Lisbon with a single goal advantage, thanks in the main to Gerry Creaney and Pat Bonner.
Sporting's failure to score at Parkhead improving Celtic's prospects of progression immensely.
Not such a happy chappy, Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson.
Two-nil up at home one minute; scraping a three-three draw the next.
Rangers paid a heavy price for a similar gaols leak in the last round and now only a win in Turkey can take United through.
BBC/Pictures; 2secs (FOR SEVEN)
Today; 42secs
WILLIE MILLER/Manager, Aberdeen FC; 51secs
BBC/Pictures; 1min28secs (FOR SEVEN)
The European return games the week after next, but next Wednesday the B and Q Cup quarter finals get the stage to themselves.
The two surviving second division clubs have been drawn together so either Meadowbank or Montrose will make the last four.
Airdrie face St Mirren, Falkirk play Dunfermline and Ayr United drawn against Clydebank.
A group of concerned Hearts supporters have tonight launched a campaign called Hands Off Tynecastle.
Next Thursday's club E.G.M will debate a plan for chairman Wallace Mercer to buy the ground and lease it back to the club.
The presure group wants the e.g.m.
cancelled.
Golf now and Scotland's Colin Montgomerie has qualified for tomorrow's second round of the Toyota World Matchplay after beating Japan's Yoshinori Mizumaki at the thirty seventh hole.
Peter Baker, John Daly and Sevvy Ballesteros are all out; Pavin, Elkington and Frost joining Monty in the last eight.
BBC/Pictures; 1secs (FOR SEVEN)
Montgomerie was one down after thirty five and needed this putt at the final hole to have a chance of saving the match.
The big Scot clearly relieved to hole out.
At the first extra hole, Montgomerie holed out again and then stood back to watch his rival fail to draw level.
In tomorrow's quarter final, Montgomnerie will face the german Bernhard Langer one of four players not required to take part in today's opening battles.
JIM HANDS BACK TO SHEREEN.
Are your fuel bills too high?
They could be slashed by up to one hundred pounds a year if you introduce some simple energy-saving measures.
A new advice centre opened in Edinburgh today, where energy advisers will tell you how to save money.
This from Linda Kennedy.
S-ENERGY 
LILIAN TERVET; 0:27
BOB BARNHAM/Energy Adviser; 0:54
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 1:12
And there's a number you can call for energy advice.
It's oh three one, treble five, four double oh eight.
Again, that's oh three one, treble five, four double oh eight.
ENERGY ADVICE LINE/031 555 4008
Now another look at today's main news stories with Karen Fraser joining me to interpret for the deaf.
George Robertson, the MP for Hamilton, has been appointed the new Shadow Scottish Secretary.
It follows his good showing in Labour's shadow cabinet elections yesterday.
HAMILTON MP GEORGE ROBERTSON NAMED/NEW SHADOW SCOTTISH SECRETARY/TO REPLACE TOM CLARKE
The bodies of two young people, believed to be those of missing German student Linda Bohlen and her boyfriend, have been found on Skye.
The couple went missing last month.
TWO BODIES DISCOVERED ON SKYE/BELIEVED TO BE THOSE OF GERMAN/STUDENTS MISSING SINCE LAST MONTH
Scotland's last independent whisky company Invergordon has been taken over by American rivals Whyte and Mackay.
The company have ruled out major job losses from the Scottish operation.
SCOTLAND'S LAST INDEPENDENT WHISKY/COMPANY INVERGORDON HAS BEEN TAKEN/OVER BY AMERICANS WHYTE AND MACKAY
The widow of Alfred McTear, who died before completing his legal battle against a tobacco company, says she's amazed her lawyers have agreed to continue the case free of charge.
LEGAL TEAM WORKING FOR ALFRED McTEAR'S/WIDOW WILL CONTINUE BATTLE AGAINST/TOBACCO COMPANY FREE OF CHARGE
And that's Scotland Today for this evening.
We'll have another update for you after News at Ten.
Tomorrow on the Lunchtime programme Bryan Burnett will be talking to the shy and retiring Right Said Fred.
That's at five to one.
But from the shy and retiring six thirty team have a good evening.
Goodnight.
ANGUS SIMPSON
An Asian man who was forced to wed a local girl in Pakistan had his arranged marriage annulled at the Court of Session in Edinburgh today.
Mohammed Khalil can now start divorce proceedings against another Asian women whom he subsequently married in Scotland.
KAYE ADAMS
The bizarre case is the latest in a series of actions involving Asians trying annul arranged marriages.
Linda Kennedy sends this report
L-MARRIAGE 
MOHAMMED KHALIL; 0:12
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 0:21
A convicted armed robber has gone to the High Court in Edinburgh to ask that special legal powers be used to re-examine his case.
Stephen Windsor is challenging his conviction for armed robbery and attempted murder.
James Matthews reports.
Edinburgh; 2sec
STEPHEN WINDSOR; 27-35sec
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today; 42sec
Post mortem examinations are being carried out on the two bodies found yesterday at the foot of a mountain ridge on the Isle of Skye.
It's believed the bodies are those of
Linda Bohlen and Stephan Mohr, two German tourists who've missing since the start of September.
A formal identification had still to be carried out.
More news and features to come but first the weather with Lloyd.
Onto today then and there was a bit of cloud around earlier on, concentrated in the north and west.
But most areas did avoid the rain apart from a few spots of rain over the islands.
And that's really the scene for this afternoon, with the best of any sunshine being over the Lothians and the south, and still the chance of a shower in the north west.
Temperatures will hover around eight to ten degrees celsius, thats forty six to fifty fahrenheit with only a moderate breeze.
The rain in the west will continue into the evening but most other parts should stay dry, with only a little cloud and mist in the east towards morning.
That cloud in the west will keep temperatures around five or six degrees celsius, that's forty three fahrenheit, but elsewhere the clear skies mean a cold night, with ground frost in most areas by midnight.
Slimming clubs are one of the best established ways of losing weight.
We've all seen those photographs of dieters who can now slip into just one leg of their trousers after losing five stone.
Fifty two year old Agnes Smith doesn't need to lose anything like that amount, but as part of our search for a healthy lifestyle she's agreed to try this form of group therapy.
Zoe Muir went along to find out how the weightwatching is going.
AGNES SMITH; 23’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today
It's breaktime now, but still to come…
A chance to win the latest Dustin Hoffman video and a weekend in London for an unsung hero — or heroine — in your life.
Bryan Burnett reflects on the success of the sexy trio Right Said Fred.
But first, Wesley Snipes tells us about his co-starring role with Sean Connery in the film Rising Sun.
So much to see so little time!
But join us in ninety seconds and we'll have a crack at it.
Welcome back.
He's mean, he's moody and probably the coolest thing on the screen since James Dean thought, ‘I wonder what it would look like if I pulled my collar up like this’.
Who are we talking about, no not Angus, the man is Wesley Snipe, currently trying to out cool co-star Sean Connery in the hit movie Rising Sun.
Our very own Rising Sun, John Millar of the Daily Record, fresh from his series on the wild, well slightly angry west, caught up with Wesley for a lesson in absolute hipness, but first, let's see old Wes in action 
RISING SUN/20th Century Fox; 5-10sec
Right Said Fred and I have a lot in common- they work out regularly, are super fit and have great bodies.
They're also seriously bald.
Anyway, in a showbiz double whammy the boys with the buttocks have been talking to Bryan Burnett.
And he's also managed to sneak in some live music from Mary Chapin Carpenter, who's been touring Scotland this week and is about to hit the big time.
BUMPED/Tug Records; 21-28 sec
I'M TOO SEXY/Tug Records; 2min09-15
HE THINKS HE'LL KEEP HER/Columbia Promotions (UK); 3min23-28
Now, competition time once again— and this time we're looking for heroes.
We're marking the release on video this week of the Dustin Hoffman movie Accidental Hero, which tells the story of a small-time petty thief's rise from sleazy obscurity to fortitude and heroic deeds.
It also stars Geena Davis and Andy Garcia — here's a flavour of the sort of thing we're talking about.
ACCIDENTAL HERO/Columbia Tri-Star Home Video; 2sec
Now, we've got ten copies of the video to give away to the runners'-up, but the star prize is a weekend fit for a hero — or heroine — in London.
It includes two nights in a luxury hotel, with breakfast, dinner at one of the capital's top restaurants — with a chauffeur driven car for the evening thrown in.
AND you'll get return rail travel from your home in the UK.
And all you have to do is write and tell us why someone you know — one of life's unsung heroes — deserves this special treat.
It may be that he or she has been working quietly away in the background or it could be a single, dramatic act of true heroism in harrowing circumstances that we hear about but often goes unrewarded.
Well, now's your chance to offer that reward — a real Accidental Hero weekend.
Get your entries to us as soon as possible.
The address is ‘Accidental Hero’ Weekend, Scottish Television, Cowcaddens, Glasgow, G2 3PR.
There's just one condition, you have to be able to take the break before the beginning of December.
Now over to the Newsroom to find out what's happening at 6:30.
Stephen is there.
STEPHEN JARDINE/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
L-ITN 51
Moving swiftly on to London and the ITN Newsdesk.
John Suchet's there with news of the 5.40.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
Well that's it for another week, and what a short week it was!
You know it's much better watching this from home than here!
It's much better doing it when you're not here too!
Anyway next week's show is already packed with goodies.
I'll be catching up on the progress of our women in management.
We'll have three special reports on how child friendly we are and we'll be announcing our Games Test winners.
All that plus fashion, travel and the Lunchtime doctor.
Dare you miss it!
But for now, goodbye and have a great weekend.
Goodbye.
STEPHEN JARDINE;
First tonight.
An Asian man who was forced to wed a girl in Pakistan has had his arranged marriage annulled at the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
Mohammed Khalil's case is the most extraordinary in the series of recent court actions by Asians seeking to end their marriages.
SHEREEN NANJIANI;
Mr Khalil is now free to start divorce proceedings against a woman whom he subsequently married in Scotland.
But Asian community leaders are upset by the case.
They claim most young Asians are happy with arranged marriages.
Linda Kennedy has this.
MOHAMMED KHALIL; 0:14 (OUT BY 0:23)
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 0:24
CAMERON FYFE/Lawyer; 1:27 (OUT BY 1:33)
BASHIR MAAN/Strathclyde Community Relations; 1:42
Claims of restrictive practices in Scotland's property market have been made by the Office of Fair Trading.
Court action is being taken against the Aberdeen Solicitors Property Centre, and a similar move is being considered against its Edinburgh counterpart.
The outcome could change the way YOU'RE allowed to sell your house.
James Matthews has the details.
Edinburgh; 0:02
NIGEL GRIFFITHS MP/Labour, Consumer Affairs; 43
GEORGE CLARK/Chairman, ESPC; 1:05
You're watching Scotland Today.
Still to come on the programme.
How housing repairs are causing a stir in Dumbarton.
British Aerospace workers fear new deal could cause problems for Prestwick.
And the boxer hoping to wrest a world title from Scotland.
Council tenants in Dumbarton are calling for an independent inquiry into the running of the housing repairs department which is facing a cash crisis and a huge backlog of work.
It's heading for a two and a half million pound overspend while having to deal with more than nine thousand repairs.
Two senior officials have been suspended on full pay pending a second internal inquiry.
But Scotland Today can reveal that the council IS considering bringing in external auditors to find out what went wrong.
Mark Smith reports.
BEATRICE GALLACHER; 31
MARK SMITH/Scotland Today; 59
JOHN HAGGERTY/Dumbarton Tenants' Federation; 1.25
Provost PAT O'NEILL/Dumbarton District Council; 1.44
Post mortem examinations are being carried out on the two bodies found yesterday at the foot of a mountain ridge on the Isle of Skye.
It's believed the bodies are those of
Linda Bohlen and Stephan Mohr, two German tourists who've missing since the start of September.
A formal identification had still to be carried out.
Workers at British Aerospace fear a proposed deal with Indonesia could threaten more jobs at Prestwick.
The Indonesian Government claims agreement is near on a joint venture, involving the marketing of a new sixty four seat airliner along with Jetstream.
Our business correspondent Alan Saunby says the deal puts a question mark over a similar turbo prop planned to be built at the Ayrshire plant.
Here's his report.
Prestwick; 1sec
GEORGE FOULKES MP/Labour, Carrick Cumnock & Doon; 26sec
PHIL GALLIE MP/Conservative, Ayr; 1min
PETER BLACK/British Aerospace; 1min 11sec
ALAN SAUNBY/Scotland Today
An Edinburgh man who's fought for eight years to overturn a conviction for armed robbery says he's prepared to go the European Court of Human Rights.
Stephen Windsor was speaking after he'd asked judges at the High Court in Edinburgh to use special powers to allow new evidence to be heard.
The judges today reserved judgement.
Windsor says if he fails in Edinburgh he will take his battle overseas.
James Matthews reports.
STEPHEN WINDSOR; 33
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today; 40
A one and a half million pound extension to the Gaelic College on Skye has been officially opened.
The extension was opened by Scottish Office minister Lord James Douglas Hamilton this afternoon.
Scottish Television invested three hundred thousand pounds in the extension to the college, which is expected to play a vital part in the future of the gaelic language and culture.
Ten new jobs will be created over the next two years.
Skye
Well its time now for sport with football and boxing news, here's Jim Delahunt.
JIM DELAHUNT
First tonight, Hearts manager Sandy Clark has cleared the way for Justin Fashanu to join Dundee United.
Clark says the player can speak to United and he won't stand in his way if Fashanu can agree terms.
Fashanu is still included in Hearts squad to face Partick Thistle tomorrow and may partner Mo Johnston for the first and last time as John Robertson is almost certainly out.
Aberdeen, Dundee United, Dundee, Kilmarnock and St Johnstone Raith the other Premier matches tomorrow but on Sunday, all roads lead to Celtic Park, the first ever league cup final between Rangers and Hibs.
It's a competition Rangers have dominated in recent years but the holders' last defeat in any domestic cup match was inflicted BY Hibs two years ago, the year they won the cup at Hampden.
Alex Miller takes his squad to a secret hideaway tonight, with two of his most important players, Steven Tweed and Darren Jackson safely passed fit for selection.
1991; 14secs
ALEX MILLER/Manager, Hibernian FC; 31secs
August; 1min8secs
MICHAEL O'NEILL/Hibernian FC; 1min19secs
1987; 1min46secs
JIM LEIGHTON/Hibernian FC; 2mins6secs
Rangers' early season form has been less than inspiring but manager Walter Smith has put most of the team's problems down to so many personnel changes caused by a succession of injuries.
Only in the club's last two league games have the players shown anything like their best form, although the league cup quarter and semi-finals against Aberdeen and Celtic have been exceptions.
The team is gradually beginning to take ona more familiar look although Duncan Ferguson, John Brown and Andy Goram are still on the sidelines.
Last year's unstoppable strikeforce of Mark Hateley and Ally McCoist will team up for only the third time this season, Hateley with a ten goal start on his partner.
GARY STEVENS/Rangers FC; 25secs
ALLY MAXWELL/Rangers FC; 1min4secs
WALTER SMITH/Manager, Rangers FC; 1min24secs
On to golf now and Colin Montgomerie has reached the last four of the Toyota World Matchplay at Wentworth.
BBC/Pictures; 2secs (for seven)
Montgomerie beat Bernhard Langer six and four today and tomorrow he'll face America's Corey Pavin.
The other semi-final is between England's Nick Faldo and South African David Frost.
Boxing now and the South African who'll be fighting for Paul Weir's world mini-flyweight title on Monday has arrived in Scotland.
Lindi Memani from the city of East London in the Cape province has won his last twelve fights in a twenty four bout career showing only three defeats.
Before he'd even put the head down after a long flight to Glasgow, Lindi was expressing his confidence about Monday's outcome.
LINDI MEMANI/South Africa; 2secs
And just to correct Lindi's manager who intervened there, Paul Weir HAS only had six pro-fights, not eight.
Good luck to Paul from all of us.
Join me on Monday for reflections on the league cup final, plus exclusive action from tomorrow's four premier league games, including Mo Johnston's debut for Hearts against Partick Thistle.
Getting on with the neighbours is something the lucky ones among us can take for granted.
But what can you do if you're not living in harmony with them?
Aileen Taylor has the second part of her investigation into warring neighbours.
Mossend; 1sec
ALEX CLYDE/Mossend Resident; 41secs
ROSE McPHEE/Traveller; 1:20
ANN McPHEE/Traveller; 1:47
SUZIE SCOTT/Glasgow University; 2:15
Now another look at today's main news stories with Karen Fraser joining me to interpret for the deaf.
An Asian man who was forced to wed a girl in Pakistan has had his arranged marriage annulled at the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
SCOTTISH COURT ANNULS ARANGED MARRIAGE/OF ASIAN MAN WHO WAS FORCED TO/WED A GIRL IN PAKISTAN
Scotland's property market is to be the subject of court proceedings.
The Office of Fair Trading is taking action against the Aberdeen Solicitors Property Centre and possibly its Edinburgh counterpart.
SCOTLAND'S PROPERTY MARKET IS/TO BE THE SUBJECT OF COURT ACTION/AIMED AT CURBING RESTRICTIVE PRACTICES
Post mortem examinations are being carried out on the two bodies found yesterday on Skye.
It's thought they're two missing German tourists.
POST MORTEM EXAMINATIONS/ARE BEING CARRIED OUT ON TWO BODIES/FOUND YESTERDAY ON SKYE
British Aerospace workers fear a proposed deal with Indonesia to market a new airliner could threaten more jobs at Prestwick.
BRITISH AEROSPACE WORKERS FEAR/A PROPOSED DEAL WITH INDONESIA/COULD THREATEN MORE PRESTWICK JOBS
And finally, police in Edinburgh are urgently following leads on a major force operation…
They're searching for police dogs.
Lothian and Borders are facing a shortage of dogs to train in police work so they've issued an urgent appeal for information on suitable animals in the Edinbugh area.
They've issued a description of suspects who may be suitable.
They'd like to see any
German Shepherds, between eight and eighteen months old, of changeable address.
Anyone with any information on suitable dogs should contact police in Edinburgh as soon as possible.
And that's it for another week but don't forget the late news at eleven thirty.
Next week on the programme we'll be looking at the position of religion in Scotland.
Ronnie Convery's the reporter on the State of Grace.
Don't forget to put your clocks back tomorrow night.
Scotland Today is back at the same time on Monday.
Until then from everyone here, have a very good evening and a good weekend, goodbye.
A convicted murderer is on the run tonight after escaping from his escort during a trip to Edinburgh.
David Stobbs, who's forty three, was serving a life sentence at Saughton Prison in the capital for murder, rape, assault and robbery.
He absconded at four o'clock this afternoon and police have warned the public not to approach him.
KAYE ADAMS
But first this lunchtime, the man who shot dead a German tourist in Stranraer in July has been jailed for life.
At the High Court in Glasgow, the judge recommended that fifty three year old James Boyce serve a minimum of twenty years.
ANGUS SIMPSON
Boyce, who comes from Rutherglen, pled guilty to the murder of Thomas Boedeker.
Mr Boedeker's wife and daughter were also seriously injured in the shooting.
This report comes from Linda Kennedy.
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 0:08
The former leader of the Liberal Party, Lord Grimond, has died in Orkney at the age of 80.
He was elected to parliament as MP for Orkney and Shetland in 1950, and led the Liberal Party from 1956 till 1967.
Lord Grimond, known to everyone as Jo, left the Commons ten years ago, but continued in the House of Lords as a life peer.
Our political correspondent Fiona Ross, looks back at his career.
1985; 0:24
Sir RUSSELL JOHNSTON MP/Former Liberal Party; 0:40
Plans by Hibs football club for a twenty thousand seater stadium are likely to move a step nearer being realised this week.
A report to Midlothian's planning committee recommends the proposal gets the go ahead.
Lorraine Davidson has more details.
A-HIBS
Some news in brief now — around two hundred and fifty people were evacuated from a Glasgow nightclub when a fire ripped through the basement of the building in the early hours of the morning.
Amateur/Video
The blaze at The Tunnel Disco in Mitchell Street broke out shortly after midnight.
Emergency services managed to clear all the disco goers from the building and no-one was injured.
The extent of the damage is not yet known.
It's thought the blaze may have been caused by a spark from a firework used in a stage act getting into the air heating system.
Police in Paisley are investigating two late night incidents which left two men seriously injured.
Just before midnight, thirty-seven year old Neil McDonagh, from the town's Glasgow Road was admitted to Glasgow Royal Infirmary suffering from a gunshot wound.
Four hours later, thirty-seven year old James Wandrum from Barrochen Crescent, arrived at the Royal Alexandra Hospital with serious stab wounds.
His condition is said to be giving cause for concern.
Detectives believe the attacks may be linked and are appealing anyone with information to cotact them.
Glasgow companies are being coaxed into a greener approach to business today as the Made from Recycle ‘93 conference gets underway.
The conference aims to encourage firms to be more environmentally friendly, by highlighting potential business opportunites within Scotland.
Leading international companies are discussing the latest recycling technology, showing what can be done with a few old bottles…and a little imagination.
Time for the weather.
What's it looking like today Lloyd?
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
It was a dry start to the day everywhere and quite sunny too, apart from some patchy fog in the Edinburgh area.
Looking ahead to the afternoon and evening, and the good news is that it will stay dry everywhere.
The bad news is that sunshine will be in short supply for the west coast, but there will be good sunny spells over central and eastern Scotland.
As far as temperatures are concerned the brighter eastern areas will do better.
Edinburgh for example will reach thirteen degrees celcius that's fifty five farenheit.
And it's more likely that the cloudier west coast will only struggle to ten celcius, that's fifty farenheit.
But winds everywhere will remain light.
Tonight the dry weather will continue with still quite a bit of cloud, particularly over western Scotland.
Clear skies are most likely in the east.
And under those clear skies there will be a touch of frost with temperatures dropping to minus one celcius, that's thirty farenheit in old money.
But it'll hold up just above freezing in the west.
Welcome back.
With the school break behind us, we get back to our class of would-be Women Returners and week three of their management training course.
The subject they're tackling in this report is one that makes the blood run cold in most people's veins…including mine.
LISEANNE RICHARDSON/Trainer; 38SECS
RUTH PORTER; 1min 10secs
SUSAN MOFFAT; 1min 45secs
FRANCES SIBBET; 1min 50secs
And, of course, I'll continue to shadow those poor women next week.
And, yes, with the camera in tow, I'm afraid, ladies.
Now, just before we take the break, the results of last week's Games Test competition.
You'll remember we were offering five copies each of the latest Sega and Super Nintendo Tips Books to the first people to tell us the name of the hero in Rocket Knight Adventures.
The answer, of course, was SPARKSTER.
And the winners, who'll be receiving their books shortly, are: David Sheridan of Dumbarton; Michael Lamb of Balornock in Glasgow; Kieran Gosney of Edinburgh; Donna Kelly of Glasgow;
George Simpson (no relation) of Rutherglen; Alex Bruce of Paisley; Calum Smith of Campbeltown; Craig Wilkie of Blantyre; K. McKenna of Airdrie and David Campbell of Alloa.
Congratulations to you all.
Commiserations to those who didn't win or who, in fact, got it wrong!
It's breaktime now, but still to come…
Wet Wet Wet — the Scottish super band release their first single in two years — we'll be there.
Moving back in time, the King lives on.
But in Prestwick?
But coming up first, fashion goes to bed as carol Smillie takes her pick of the pyjamas.
So just enough time to catch your breath before we start again.
See you in a minute and a half.
Now, Monday's fashion; the clocks have gone back; and, naturally, Carol Smillie's attentions have turned to bed.
And, of course, being a conscientious, highly professional fashion correspondent, that means what we wear in bed.
Doesn't it, Carol?
If you want any details about Carol's nightwear feature, there's the usual number to call for a copy of our Fact Sheet.
It's 041 or 031 226 4747.
Now, there's something been going on in Argyle Street in Glasgow this lunchtime which has attracted the interest of more than a few people hereabouts.
It involved one of the biggest names in the rock world.
So, we sent one of the biggest names in television, that well known pop picker Viv Lumsden to investigate.
And that's when she bumped into a couple of famous faces.
MARTI PELLOW/Wet Wet Wet
GRAEME CLARK/Wet Wet Wet
Now, from rock nineteen ninety three style, let us move slowly back into the mists of time and a real rave from the grave: Elvis.
Yes, the hot news this lunchtime is that the King is alive in Prestwick.
Get those blue suede shoes moving and get down there fast, we told reporter Aileen Taylor.
Prestwick; 1sec
PETE FRAME/Harp Rock Plaques; 29SECS
DJ FONTANA; 54secs
Time to go to the newsroom for a preview of the 6.30 edition of Scotland Today.
I understand there's a fairly important sports story around — Jim delahunt's the guy to tell us about it.
JIM DELAHUNT/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London now.
John Suchet's at the 5.40 desk.
JOHN SUCHET/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
And that brings us to the end of another hectic half hour.
Tomorrow, of course, is
Phone the Doc day and the subject, in this, the first dark week of winter, is chest problems.
You can phone Doctor Kathleen Long with your questions on 0500 404 000.
The lines open up at 12.30.
And Kirsty's also back tomorrow, so a break for my able assistant here —
Do join Kirsty, Lloyd, Kathleen Long and me for more of the same but different at five to one tomorrow.
But for now, from all of us on the team, good afternoon.
We've had an amazing response to our search for a cure for the chronic skin complaint psoriasis.
You may remember seeing Katrina Hunter and the remarkable progress she made with a herbal cream from the borders.
Well Zoe Muir decided to catch up on the progress of our other volunteer, Katy Clark.
Katy chose to turn to the mysterious art of chinese herbal medicine.
But is it working?
KATY CLARK; 1'17’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 2'20’
VIV LUMSDEN
First tonight.
A callous gunman who shot a German tourist dead and then shot and stabbed other members of the family has been jailed for life.
The High Court in Glasgow heard that James Boyce from Rutherglen attacked the family in Stranraer in July.
Boyce admitted murdering Thomas Boedecker and attempting to murder his wife, daughter and son.
The judge Lord Cullen told Boyce he was a danger to the public and sentenced him to a minimum of twenty years.
Linda Kennedy has this report.
MARK SMITH
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 0:19
Edinburgh District Council is facing legal action over the official who's paid four hundred pounds a week to do nothing.
Scotland Today has obtained a confidential report that warns councillors they could be sued for damages.
It's the latest twist in the saga involving council official Tommy Sheppard.
He was employed three months ago but then told to stay away, on full salary.
James Matthews reports.
Councillor DAPHNE SLEIGH/Conservative Leader, Edinburgh District; 1:03
ANDY CARRUTHERS/Branch Secretary, UNISON; 1:27
Councillor LESLIE HINDS/Leader, Edinburgh District; 1:45
Your watching Scotland Today.
Coming next on this evening's programme.
Tributes to Joe Grimond the saviour of modern liberalism.
A world champion confident of holding on to his crown.
And paying tribute to the fleeting visit of a legend.
The former leader of the Liberal Party, Lord Grimond, has died in hospital on Orkney at the age of eighty.
He was Liberal Leader twice: from nineteen fifty six till nineteen sixty seven, and again for two months in nineteen seventy six, after the resignation of Jeremy Thorpe.
He was the MP for Orkney and Shetland for thirty three years, but when he gave up his seat in nineteen eighty three, he continued to put the Liberal case in the House of Lords.
Our political correspondent, Fiona Ross looks back at the career of Jo Grimond.
1985; 0:16
Sir RUSSELL JOHNSTON MP/Former Scottish Liberal Leader; 0:42
Sir DAVID STEEL MP/Former Liberal Leader; 1:34
21 October 1993; 1:45
The Director of Scotrail says a report recommending electrification of the main Edinburgh Glasgow line will be released next month.
Consultants claim it could double services between Queen Street and Waverley stations with a train leaving every fifteen minutes.
Whether it will go ahead will be a test of the new Railtrak authority set up to control investment in the railways after privatisation.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
CYRIL BLEASDALE/Scotrail Director; 35sec
PHIL McGARRY/Rail Union; 1min 18sec
And our parliamentary reporter Rae Stewart will be reporting on that Save Our Railways lobby at the Commons tomorrow.
Hospitals are treating more patients and waiting lists are shortening, according to the latest Scottish health statistics.
In the year to the end of June there was an eleven per cent increase in the number of outpatients seen and a smaller rise in the number of patients treated in hospital wards.
The long term waiting list is also down to five thousand four hundred, that's the number of people who've been waiting a year or more, a third of them for plastic surgery.
Around two hundred and fifty people were evacuated from a Glasgow nightclub when a fire ripped through the basement of the building in the early hours of the morning.
Amateur/Video
The blaze at The Tunnel Disco in Mitchell Street broke out shortly after midnight.
Emergency services managed to clear all the disco goers from the building and no-one was injured.
The extent of the damage is not yet known.
It's thought the blaze may have been caused by a spark from a firework used in a stage act getting into the air heating system.
There was a time when most Scots regarded themselves as members of one or other of the main Christian denominations.
But if recent membership figures are to be believed, Christianity is increasingly becoming a minority activity.
Ronnie Convery's been taking the spiritual temperature of the nation's main churches.
In the first of his ‘State of Grace’ reports he looks at the current crises in the Kirk.
Rev SANDY McDONALD/Department of Ministry
Kilbarchan
Rev ANDREW McLELLAN/St Andrew's and St George's
RONNIE CONVERY/Scotland Today
In tomorrow's report Ronnie will be examining the internal tensions within the Catholic Church, fifteen years to the month since the election of Pope John Paul the second.
JIM DELAHUNT
The top sports story tonight…
Hearts chairman, Wallace Mercer has abandoned his proposal to buy the club's ground at Tynecastle and lease it back to the club.
He's promising instead to unveil a subscription scheme for supporters to help pay for ground improvements demanded by the Taylor report.
Mr Mercer's opponents say the climbdown has left his credibility in tatters.
This from John Macgill.
WALLACE MERCER/Chairman, Heart of Midlothian; 24 secs
ROBIN BEITH/Federation of Hearts Supporters Clubs; 35 secs
CHRIS McLEAN/Hands Off Tynecastle Campaign; 1 min 32 secs
JOHN MACGILL/Scotland Today; 1 min 48 secs
Lou Macari is now expected to take over at Celtic on Wednesday as the two parties continue to discuss Macari's wish to nominate his own assistant.
The choice seems to be between Stoke backroom staff Chic Bates and Peter Henderson.
Celtic's players have their minds on Saturday's Old Firm league match at Ibrox.
Rangers start the game two points ahead, and, one trophy up already after yesterday's two-one win over Hibs.
Ally McCoist's winning goal spectacular enough, but coming up in a moment, exclusive pictures of Duncan Shearer's equally magnificent strike for Aberdeen against Dundee United.
Coming up, highlights from all four Premier games plus Airdrie versus Falkirk.
The action begins at Firhill.
Firhill; 10secs
Dens Park; 32secs
McDiarmid Park; 52secs
Pittodrie; 1min16secs
BBC Pictures; 2mins10secs (FOR SEVEN)
Scotland's only world boxing champion makes his first defence of the WBO mini-flyweight title in Glasgow tonight.
Paul Weir won the title in May when he stopped the Mexican Hernando Martinez at the Scottish Exhibition Centre in only his sixth professional fight.
Tonight's opponent is the unrated South African Lindi Memani, unbeaten in his last twelve fights and only defeated in three out of twenty four.
Weir is hoping to defend this belt before trying to win two more world titles at light flyweight and flyweight.
Ad lib out sport
And Monday's sports spot takes us to another look at the main news stories.
TBA is with me to interpret for the deaf.
James Boyce, the Rutherglen man who murdered a German tourist in Stranraer, then shot and stabbed other members of the man's family, has been jailed for life.
MAN WHO MURDERED/GERMAN TOURIST IN STRANRAER/JAILED FOR LIFE
Edinburgh District Council faces legal action over an official who's paid to do nothing.
He was employed three months ago then told to stay away, on full pay.
EDINBURGH DISTRICT COUNCIL/FACES LEGAL ACTION/OVER OFFICIAL PAID TO DO NOTHING
Politicians have been paying tribute to the former leader of the Liberal Party, Lord Grimond, who died in hospital on Orkney aged eighty.
POLITICIANS PAY TRIBUTE TO FORMER/LIBERAL LEADER LORD GRIMOND/WHO HAS DIED AGED 80
A report recommending electrification of the main Edinburgh-Glasgow railway will be released next month.
Consultants claim it could double services between the trwo cities.
REPORT RECOMMENDING ELECTRIFYING/OF MAIN EDINBURGH-GLASGOW RAILWAY/TO BE RELEASED NEXT MONTH
Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer has abandoned his plan to buy the club's ground and lease it back to them.
He's promising to unveil a subscription scheme to help pay for ground improvements.
MERCER ABANDONS PLAN TO BUY CLUB'S /GROUND THEN LEASE IT BACK/WILL UNVEIL SUBCRIPTION SCHEME
And finally this evening.
You may not think of Prestwick Airport as a great landmark in rock n roll history but it was where Elvis Presley made his one and only visit to Britain.
Thirty-three years on, his fans gathered there to mark the occasion, and Aileen Taylor was with them.
Prestwick; 1sec
PETE FRAME/Harp Rock Plaques; 7secs (out by 13secs)
D J FONTANA/Elvis' Drummer; 26secs
TOMMY TRUESDALE/Entertainer; 48secs (out by 54secs)
And that's it for the first six thirty show of this week.
But don't forget there's a news update with Nicky Docherty at eleven o clock.
If you've a story you think other people would be interested in hearing aboutwhy not phone our newsline.
You can do that on oh four one, three three two, seven thousand, that's oh four one, three three two, seven thousand.
But for now from all the team, have a very good evening.
Goodnight.
ANGUS SIMPSON
But first this lunchtime, Prince Charles has chosen Glasgow to launch an outspoken attack on the evils of urban deprivation and poverty.
He says they've led to racial tension, crime and drug abuse.
And he's warning if this isn't tackled now, we are creating a lethal cocktail which will result in a spiral of despair.
KIRSTY YOUNG
The Prince of Wales is speaking at a housing conference in Glasgow.
He's still at the city centre hotel at the moment, but we can go over now to our political correspondent Fiona Ross who was in the audience.
Fiona, what's the Prince been saying.
FIONA ROSS/Political Correspondent/LIVE
He seemed to have a solid grasp of what it's really like to live in one of these estates.
A senior legal figure has made a strong attack on Government policy towards Scotland's justice system.
Lord Emslie, who was Scotland's senior judge before retiring four years ago, has criticised the appointment of temporary High Court judges.
He says it's a cheap and nasty way of administering justice in this country.
James Matthews reports.
Lord EMSLIE/Former Lord Justice-General; 29
Some news in brief now — an English High Court judge is this afternoon visiting a farm at the centre of attempts to sue chemicals firm Re-Chem.
Mister Justice Forbes is hearing a claim that the Re-Chem toxic waste incinerator at Denny in Stirlingshire contaminated farmland nearby, and meant a dairy herd had to be slaughtered.
A local farmer is seeking nearly three quarters of a million pounds in compensation.
A forty-six year old man is in custody in connection with the death of a Shotts man in the early hours of yesterday morning.
Fifty-eight year old Daniel Brady from Northfield Avenue was admitted to the Southern General suffering from head injuries, but died last night.
Crime in Strathclyde has fallen for the ninth consecutive month.
Figures out today show a drop of thirty-five per cent in the number of murders.
Attempted murders are down twenty-one per cent.
There were thirteen per cent fewer serious assaults.
And robbery is down by twenty-four per cent.
There will be more news and features in a moment, but first the weather with Lloyd.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Looking back at this morning — any early mist patches soon cleared and although it was a dry staert everywhere, it has remained cloudy.
And there's not much change in prospect — that cloudy but dry theme continuing this afternoon.
But, and I'm not promising, the sun might break through in a few favoured spots.
Temperatures will be a little below the seasonal norm, but winds will remain very light, so it should feel quite pleasant.
Tonight, once again, mostly cloudy but the rain staying away.
However, a few clear intervals may develop, allowing some patchy mist and perhaps a touch of ground frost during the early hours.
Tonight winds will be calm inland but a light southerly breeze over the Clyde estuary and the Argyll coast will keep temperatures there around five celsius, that's forty one fahrenheit.
But in sheltered glens it'll be nearer one celsius, thirty four fahrenheit.
And that's as good as I can make it, Kirsty.
A special London-bound train left Glasgow early this morning.
On board were hundreds of campaigners heading for a national demonstration against the government's rail privatisation plans.
The train, hired by the rail unions, called at Edinburgh and several English station en route to the capital, picking up hundreds more supporters of the Save Our Railways campaign.
Claire Dean reports.
L-RAIL 
Glasgow; 2secs
BRIAN WILSON MP/Labour, Transport Spokesman; 34secs (out by 43secs)
We'll take a quick break here, but man the phones because coming up…
With winter now officially here, the medical phone-in turns its attentions to chest problems.
And you can phone Dr Kathleen Long now on oh-five-hundred, four-oh-four, treble zero.
But coming up first, the trials and tribulations of moving around with kids.
Alison MacDonald asks why.
And we hope she also gets some answers.
We'll find out after the break.
See you in a couple of minutes.
Hello again.
Now, children.
Not a subject I'm personally qualified to comment on, but even I am aware of the practical difficulties involved in moving small children about this planet.
But you'd know more about that than me, Angus.
Only too well, Kirsty.
And so I'm delighted that this week, reporter Alison MacDonald's looking at our so-called child friendly society.
In the first of three special reports, Alison — a non-parent, I might add — has been discovering the ‘delights’ of travelling with a buggy.
LYNNE MacMILLAN; 1:37
BOB TASKER/Access Manager, Scotrail; 1:56
ALISON MacDONALD/Scotland Today;
BILL NEISH/Glasgow City Centre Association; 3:40
And as Alison said there, tomorrow she'll be moving on to Edinburgh to find out the score there for parents, children and those dreaded buggies.
Now, time to move on to the Doctor's phone in with Kathleen Long.
And as half of Scotland appears to have coughed and spluttered its way through October we're looking for your calls on chest complaints this tuesday.
The number to call is o-five-hundred, four-o-four, treble zero, lines are open now, and calls are free.
Dr KATHLEEN LONG
KIRSTY + KATHLEEN + PHONES 
DAVID/Ayr
RENA/Glasgow
DAVID/Glasgow
CHRIS/Airdrie
VALERIE/Motherwell
LINDA/Glasgow
KIRSTY/KATHLEEN CHAT RE NEXT WEEK
On to the newsroom now and Viv's there to tell us what's happening at six thirty.
VIV LUMSDEN/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
Onto ITN in London now.
Nicholas Owen's at the 5.40 desk.
NICHOLAS OWEN/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
And that brings us to the end of another fun half hour — tomorrow Katie Wood will be showing us how the other half relax when she mixes with the toffs on a country house weekend near John O'Groats.
At least she won't get a tan there.
And also tomorrow, Alison MacDonald will continue her investigation into the tricky relationship between society and young children.
In the meantime, we want to hear from you.
If you haven't yet given us a call on the News Line, please do — remember, we're interested in your stories.
So if you've got an issue you think we should be investigating, phone oh-four-one, three-three-two, seven thousand, and tell us about it.
We'll be back tomorrow at five to one, join us then, but for now, from everyone on the lunchtime team, good afternoon.
We've had an amazing response to our search for a cure for the chronic skin complaint psoriasis.
You may remember seeing Katrina Hunter and the remarkable progress she made with a herbal cream from the borders.
Well Zoe Muir decided to catch up on the progress of our other volunteer, Katy Clark.
Katy chose to turn to the mysterious art of chinese herbal medicine.
But is it working?
KATY CLARK; 1'17’
ZOE MUIR/Scotland Today; 2'20’
SHEREEN NANJIANI
First tonight, a bitter row has broken out over plans for a Sinn Fein councillor to address a public meeting in Glasgow this week — despite calls for him to be banned following the weekend atrocity in Belfast.
Although the Government have already banned Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams from travelling to the Commons to address MPs Glasgow district council says it won't stop Thursdays meeting because the city has a policy of freedom of speech.
We can now join our reporter Lorraine Davidson at the city chambers.
Tory councillors here are angry that a member of Sinn Fein is being allowed a platform in the city — they say the move is highly offensive to everyone in Glasgow.
But the convenor of the arts and culture committee says the meeting will go ahead.
LORRAINE DAVIDSON/Scotland Today/LIVE;
Councillor BILL AITKEN/Glasgow District Council; 41secs
Councillor TOMMY DINGWALL/Convener Arts & Culture Committee; 1:26secs
VIV LUMSDEN
Prince Charles has accused the planners, architects and developers who designed our sprawling housing estates of mixing a lethal cocktail of despair.
The Prince chose a conference in Glasgow to highlight the problems of urban deprivation which he says have led to people living in impersonal, soulless areas, alienated from the rest of society.
This report from our political correspondent, Fiona Ross.
FIONA ROSS/Scotland Today; 1:32
This is Scotland Today.
Still to come on tonight's programme.
Scottish economy on the up say CBI but more jobs set to go.
Rail workers rally in London in protest about privatisation plans.
And the Rechem case comes to Scotland as the Judge sees for himself the former factory.
The Government has been told that its appointment of temporary judges in Scotland's courts could lead to miscarriages of justice.
The stark warning has come from Lord Emslie, one of the country's most respected legal figures and, until recently, Scotland's most senior judge.
He calls the temporary appointments a ‘cheap and nasty’ practise, with grave implications.
James Matthews reports.
Library Pictures; 25
LORD EMSLIE/Former Lord-Justice General; 38
KENNETH PRITCHARD/Secretary, Law Society; 1:46
JAMES MATTHEWS/Scotland Today; 2:02
Scottish firms expect to boost output and create more jobs according to the latest survey from the CBI.
The strong recovery in manufacturing comes at a time when it appears to have stalled in the rest of the UK.
Nevertheless hundreds of electronics workers in Irvine fear american bosses will order the closure of their plant soon.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
JOHN WARD/Chairman, CBI Scotland; 46sec
Irvine; 1min 04sec
ALAN SAUNBY/Scotland Today; 1min 45sec
Scottish prison officers are to strike for the first time in their history on November the fifth.
They're protesting at the government's proposals to allow private firms to tender for prison work.
The Scottish Prison Officers Association say it's a move towards privatisation.
Officers expect to strike for only a few hours, and Association leaders will meet later this week to finalise the details.
Computer staff at the Royal Bank of Scotland have voted overwhelmingly in favour of a series of one day strikes.If they decide to take industrial action it will result in the shutdown of the Bank's computer system and the closure of their Cashline network.
The ballot came as a result of threats of compulsory redundancies.
A spokesman for the union said that if negotiations failed, there would be no alternative to strike action.If the strike goes ahead it will be the first ever nationwide strike to take place in The Royal Bank of Scotland.
Marion McManus, the wife of television actor, Mark McManus, died today in Glasgow after a long fight against cancer.
She was forty.
The couple married in 1986 having worked together on the television series, Taggart, on which she was a wardrobe assistant.
Scottish Television's Controller of Drama, Robert Love praised her for her bravery and praised her husband for the tremendous support he had given her.
The battle for the hearts and minds of Scotland's Catholics is the subject of tonight's feature on Christianity in Scotland.
Pope John Paul the second has won wide acclaim from outside his own Church for his firm leadership style.
But, as Ronnie Convery found out, within the Church itself he's under fire from some liberal Catholics who say he's turning the clock back.
RONNIE CONVERY/Scotland Today; 26 secs
Glasgow 1982; 54 secs (for three seconds)
RENNIE McOWAN/Catholic writer; 1min 17 secs
Right Rev JOSEPH DEVINE/RC Bishop of Motherwell; 2mins 33 secs
Scots protesting at rail privatisation went to London today to tell MP's that jobs and services are in danger.
The Railways Bill is due to reach its final stage in the commons next week.
From London, our Parliamentary Reporter, Rae Stewart, sends this.
SUSAN ROBINSON/Stewardess, Intercity; 0:23 OUT 0:28
JIMMY KNAPP/General Secretary, RMT; 0:36
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today; 1:03
An English High Court Judge today took the highly unusual step of bringing his Court to Scotland.
Mr Justice Forbes is examining claims by a Stirlingshire farmer that the former Re-Chem Toxic Waste Incinerator was responsible for him having to destroy of his entire dairy herd.
John Macgill reports.
Bonnybridge; start
JOHN MACGILL/Scotland Today/DENNY; 36 secs (out by 42)
A forty year old Glasgow widower who admitted sex offences against children has been sent to jail for five years.
The High Court in Edinburgh heard how Alan Smith had preyed on youngsters for more than a decade.
He admitted sex offences with three young girls and a boy at differet houses in Glasgow.
The offences came to light when one of the children told a teacher about her ordeal after breaking down following a television programme about child abuse.
And now some news just in.
Labour's new Shadow Scottish Secretary George Robertson will have the same shadow team as predecessor Tom Clarke.
That means Henry McLeish, John McFall and Maria Fyfe all retain their existing jobs.
However there's no place for Paisley North MP Irene Adams despite her polling eighty eight votes in last weeks shadow cabinet elections.
JIM DELAHUNT
Paul Weir woke up this morning, still mini-flyweight champion of the world, but already thinking of giving up the title.
That's the price he'll have to pay as he progresses onwards and upwards through boxing's weight divisions.
Next stop, hopefully, the light flyweight title held by Dickie Camacho.
Once that's secured and defended at least once, Weir wants to go for the flyweight title, held until recently by Pat Clinton.
Manager Tommy Gilmour will fly to Puerto Rico in three weeks to try and bring the Camacho fight to Glasgow in January, giving Weir almost three months to get over his first ever cut in one hundred and sixty seven fights as both amateur and professional.
BBC/Pictures; 12secs (FOR SEVEN)
PAUL WEIR/WBO Mini-flyweight Champion; 35secs
MZI MNUNGI/Lindi Memani's manager; 1min12secs
WEIR v MARTINEZ/May 1993; 1min45secs
TOMMY GILMOUR/Paul Weir's manager; 2min5secs
CLINTON v MATLALA/May 1993; 2mins22secs
Two of the semi-finalists in the B and Q Cup will be decided tonight when Airdrie face St Mirren and Ayr UNited play Clydebank.
The other two quarters take place tomorrow.
Less well publicised perhaps, the four nations women's indoor soccer fives to be held in Glasgow next month.
There are actually five teams taking part; Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Northern Ireland and current European champions Norway.
The tournament takes place at the kelvin hall on Sunday November fourteenth.
Finally tonight, Celtic WILL introduce
Lou Macari as their new manager tomorrow.
The club has officially confirmed the appointment nineteen days after Liam Brady resigned the position.
Full details on that story tomorrow night.
Time now for a recap of tonight's main headlines with TBA interpreting for the deaf.
A bitter row has broken out over plans for a Sinn Fein councillor to address a public meeting in Glasgow despite calls for him to be banned, following Saturday's massacre in Belfast.
BITTER ROW ERUPTS OVER PLANS FOR/SINN FEIN COUNCILLOR/TO ADDRESS MEETING IN GLASGOW
Prince Charles has accused the planners, architects and developers who designed sprawling housing estates of mixing a lethal cocktail of despair.
PRINCE CHARLES ACCUSES ARCHITECTS/WHO DESIGNED HOUSING ESTATES OF/MIXING LETHAL COCKTAIL OF DESPAIR
The Government has been told by the former Lord-Justice General that its appointment of temporary judges in Scotland's courts could lead to miscarriages of justice.
GOVERNMENT TOLD THAT APPOINTMENT OF/TEMPORARY JUDGES COULD LEAD TO/MISCARRIAGES OF JUSTICE
Scots protesting at rail privatisation went to London today to tell MP's that jobs and services are in danger.
The Railways Bill reaches its final stage in the commons next week.
SCOTS CAMPAIGNING AGAINST/RAIL PRIVATISATION TELL MPs THAT/JOBS AND SERVICES ARE IN DANGER
And that's Scotland Today this Tuesday evening.
Nicky Docherty will have another update after News at Ten.
Tomorrow Ronnie Convery will have the last of his special reports looking at the state of Christianity in Scotland.
He'll be focussing on the battle over women priests in the Episcopalian Church.
That's tomorrow but for now, from all of us here have a good evening.
Goodnight.
Ronnie Convery there.
And tomorrow in the final part of State of Grace, Ronnie will be turning his attention to the battle over women priests currently dividing the Scottish Episcopal Church.
An English High Court Judge has come to Scotland to gather his evidence amidst claims that the former Re-Chem Toxic Waste Incinerator, in Stirlingshire, was responsible the death of a herd of cows.
ENGLISH HIGH COURT JUDGE IN SCOTLAND/GATHERING EVIDENCE AMIDST CLAIMS/OF CATTLE KILLED BY TOXIC WASTE
Welcome back.
Every year hundreds of folk fascinated by Scotland's ancient heritage gather for a week-long celebration of all things Gaelic.
It's called the Mod, of course, and this year the itinerant festival has come to rest in none other than Airdrie.
We sent reporter Patsi Mackenzie to find out how the Gaelic's going down in the heart of Lanarkshire.
Patsi, by the way, is fluent in Gaelic.
DONALD MacRITCHIE/President, An Comunn Gaidhealach; 45
If you're thinking of going along to join in the fun, there's something going on every day and evening until next Friday night.
Now, still on showbiz.
He became a household name as the foil for a dodgy second-hand car salesman, before graduating into an on/off love affair with Jan Francis.
And let's not forget a few failed attempts at making it in the movies along the way.
Now though, in the great tradition of comic actors, he wants to be taken seriously.
Dennis Waterman is set to hit our screens once more as an ex-SAS soldier in the political thriller, Circle of Deceit.
Not only does he get a chance to ‘spread’ his thespian wings, he'll earn Hollywood brownie points for sporting a natty Harrison Ford-style beard.
John Millar, of the Daily Record, went along to meet him.
DENNIS WATERMAN; 14SECS
Now, if the phrase heavy rock means nothing more than a pile of boulders, then you may fear that what follows is not your cup of tea.
But if, like me, you really dig heavy rock, then you will thrill with me as Brian Burnett gets close to The Almighty.
Time to go to the newsroom for a preview of the 6.30 Scotland Today.
Shereen's there.
SHEREEN NANJIANI/Scotland Today/NEWSROOM
On to London and the ITN Newsdesk.
Nicholas Owen's there with news of the 5.40.
NICHOLAS OWEN/ITN Newsroom/LONDON
That's it from us for another week.
Kirsty will be back on Monday — if we can get Kaye out of her seat.
Because next week's the October school holiday we're making an extra special effort for those of more tender years — the highlights include the return for one week only of my very own Video Games Test and, of course, an exciting competition to go with that.
Plus a special three-part report from our showbiz correspondent John Millar of Daily Record fame.
John, it seems, is something of a Wild West buff and, on our behalf, he's been following the trail of some of the locations from classic moments of Western movie history.
So, from Tuesday through to Thursday, he'll take us from the Blackhills of Dakota, through Dances with Wolves country to the scene of Custer's legendary last stand.
You'll watch, won't you, Kaye?
I can hardly wait — I hear some of John's outfits are quite stunning.
But that and much, much more all in store next week.
For this week, from everyone on the lunchtime team, good afternoon and have a great weekend.
The younger generation know her as everybody's mum in Blind Date and Surprise Surprise.
Many are unware that she was topping the charts with the Beatles and the Rolling Stones way before the platform had made a come back.
But Cilla Black's not back.
She's never been away.
Fiona McBride reports.
KAYE ADAMS
But first this lunchtime, unions and management at the Jetstream factory in Prestwick are on a collision course over compulsory redundancies.
ANGUS SIMPSON
The company says it doesn't expect enough volunteers to come forward to cover the six hundred job losses announced yesterday but union policy is firmly against enforced lay-offs.
Here's Mark Smith.
Prestwick; 1
The government is this lunchtime expected to announce the third wave of Scottish hospitals to be given self governing status.
This batch is expected to include all the main hospitals in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Lanarkshire and Central region.
The government's already allowed seventeen hospitals to opt out of the control of their local health boards.
Today's announcement could mean some of those health boards won't be running any of the hospitals in their area.
John Macgill reports.
JOHN MACGILL/Scotland Today/EDINBURGH; 38 secs
Scottish variety performers gathered to pay their last respects at Andy Stewart's funeral this morning.
The fifty nine year old singer who'd been dogged by ill health died at his home in Arbroath on Monday.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
Some news in brief— the Polmont housewife who plotted to kill her husband has again appeared in court.
The case against Morag Taylor has been continued at the High Court in Edinburgh.
She's admitted conspiring with her former lover to have her husband murdered.
She was joined in court today BY her husband George, seen here in the white jacket.
Two weeks ago, he begged the Judge to show his wife mercy.
Police in Edinburgh have issued descriptions of two men they're anxious to trace.
The first is a prisoner on the run, after escaping from Edinburgh Sheriff Court this morning.
The Police have warned that he should not be approached.
The prisoner, who isn't being identified, is thirty years-old.
He's described as slim, with long black hair, and was wearing a green combat jacket and jeans.
Police are appealing for anyone with any information to contact them.
And in the second incident, they're also hunting a man who robbed a woman at gunpoint last night.
She was close to her home in Iona street when the man threatened her with a handgun, and then made off with a small sum of money.
He's five feet nine inches tall, slim, with dirty blond hair in a centre parting, and he has a cold sore on his top lip.
Police are appealing for anyone who was in the area at the time of the attack to come forward.
More news and features to come but first the weather with Lloyd.
LLOYD QUINAN/Scotland Today Weather
Looking back to the start of the day, cold and frosty just about says it all.
And although just about everywhere's seen a good deal of sunshine, it has continued to feel pretty chilly.
But it has been generally dry, apart from the odd sleet or hail shower on the west coast and parts of Argyll.
The sun will continue to shine across the region this afternoon.
But there'll still be one or two wintry showers around, especially along the Mull of Kintyre.
Top temperatures will reahc just seven to nine celsius, that's forty five to forty eight fahrenheit, and there'll be a moderate northwesterly wind.
This evening will again start dry, but overnight the westerly winds will bring wintry showers inland into parts of Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway and a few right through to the Forth and Clyde valley.
So by morning there could be a dusting of snow in many places and also some icy patches on the roads.
So, if you're planning to be out and about tonight, take care.
Temperatures will fall to around minus two or three celsius, that's twenty seven fahrenheit, but a degree or so higher along the coast.
And that bleak, midwintry oulook is set to continue over the weekend, I'm afraid.
Kaye.
Scottish aid workers are airlifting urgent medical supplies to help ease the suffering of a sick Bosnian man in the former Yugoslavia.
The aid package is being rushed out ahead of a relief lorry convoy leaving Scotland on Monday.
Aileen Taylor reports.
Glasgow; isec
JULIA BUTLER/Scottish Bosnia Relief; 24secs
JULIE MILLAR/Scottish Bosnia Relief; 39secs
MAGNUS MacFARLANE BARROW/Scottish Bosnia Relief; 1:02
Time to pause and draw breath for a glittering second half which will include…
Dennis Waterman talking about his latest attempt to flee the Cockney stereotype.
Brian Burnett getting heavy with The Almighty — and he's not talking religion.
But coming up first…the Mod comes to Airdrie — how will Airdrieonians cope?
So it's ceud mille failte (???) in just over a minute.
And I'll welcome you back then too.
SHEREEN NANJIANI
First tonight.
A controversial religious cult is trying to recruit in Scotland's universities.
Student leaders say they fear that young people could be brainwashed by the organisation.
VIV LUMSDEN
The Edinburgh Christian Church preaches extreme beliefs, and has links with a an English-based church which is currently under investigation by the charities commission.
They became involved after some of the cult's former members attempted suicide.
Linda Kennedy has this exclusive story.
Edinburgh; 0:02
NEIL McINTOSH/Napier student newspaper; 0:12 (out by 0:21)
CRAIG McGILL/Student; 0:22 (out by 0:32)
MARK LYNAS/Student; 0:45 (out by 0:56)
ANDREW BROUGHTON/Edinburgh Christian Church; 1:15
DAVE FISHER/Student; 1:38 (out by 1:45)
LINDA KENNEDY/Scotland Today; 1:55
A dairy farmer from Stirlingshire has begun a million pound action against a chemical company he claims ruined his herd.
Andrew Graham says a toxic waste incinerator owned by Re-Chem, was responsible for poisoning cattle on two of his farms.
Rae Stewart reports.
ANTON BATES/Andrew Graham's solicitor; 20sex
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today/LONDON; 50sex
Your watching Scotland Today.
coming later in the programme.
New ideas to tackle the growing problem of drugs.
The Government confirms it's selling off Rosyth dockyard.
And celebrating fifty years of feeding the nation's appetite.
Police in Govan in Glasgow are hunting a man who attempted to abduct a seven year old boy as he played near his home in Govan.
The child was lured into a car but managed to escape a short time later.
Residents in the area say they fear the man could strike again.
Lorraine Davidson reports.
JOHN MCARTHUR; 23secs
LORRAINE DAVIDSON/Scotland Today; 34secs
Sergeant CAMPBELL CORRIGAN/Strathclyde Police; 1:06secs
Scotland's drug problem is getting worse.
The man leading the latest inquiry into drug-taking says it confirms our reputation as a nation of substance-abusers.
MP Willie McKelvey says Scotland's drug problem is bigger than many Scots care to admit.
James Matthews reports.
Edinburgh; 0:02
DAVID MAIN/Former drug addict; 14 **Out on 17**
WILLIE McKELVEY MP/Chairman, Scottish Affairs Committee; 53
Professor MARTIN PLANT/Researcher; 1:25
MPs in Ayrshire are demanding a meeting with the Prime Minister to lobby for fair treatment for the British Aerospace plant at Prestwick.
They claim foreign governments pay massive subsidies to their aerospace industries and the unequal competition threatens the Jetstream factory's future.
Our Business Correspondent Alan Saunby reports.
Prestwick; 1sec
PHIL GALLIE MP/Conservative MP; 23sec
GEORGE BELL/Convenor; 45sec
PETER BLACK/Jetstream Spokesman; 1min 05sec
ROBBIE MANN/Staff Unions; 1min 33sec
The Ayrshire MPs were in Prestwick before returning south for the new parliamentary session which began this afternoon.
Our Commons reporter Rae Stewart, refreshed by a short break from the Palace of Westminster, was there as the opening salvos were fired.
We join him live now from London.
Rae.
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today/LIVE;
Well Shereen.
It was straight down to business here.
The defence secretary Malcolm Rifkind wasted no time in announcing that the Rosyth Dockyard in Fife will be sold to a private company next year.
It's one of a number of measures designed to cut defence spending.
MALCOLM RIFKIND/Defence Secretary;
RAE STEWART/Scotland Today/LIVE;
Ferguson Shipbuilders at Port Glasgow, which was rescued from closure three years ago, has launched the first of two ferries for the Red Funnel line.
Port Glasgow
The eight million pound Red Falcon was completed on schedule by the two hundred and twenty strong workforce.
Caledonian Macbrayne has signed a contract for a new fifteen million pound ferry which will create up to seventy new jobs.
Orders won since September nineteen eighty nine are in excess of sixty five million pounds and the company says its in a good position to take advantage of an anticipated upturn in work in the mid nineties.
How would you feel about living out your life in an old folks home?.
More Scots than ever before are now living in residential accomodation for the elderly.
But many still fear and dislike the idea of ending up in a home.
Tonight Scotland Today's Stephen Jardine begins a special three part series looking at what the cynics call…the granny farms.
STEPHEN JARDINE/Scotland Today; 0:48
AUSTIN LAFFERTY/Nursing Homes Association; 1:56
Tomorrow, Stephen will investigating what happens when things go wrong and the old folks home becomes a cruel and frightening prison for the residents.
He'll also be examining new efforts to stop mistreatment taking place.
JIM DELAHUNT
Lou Macari took charge of training at Stoke City this morning then set about dismissing claims that he was on the verge of taking over at Celtic.
Macari said reports of him spending the weekend talking to Celtic director David Smith were ‘pure rubbish,’ and that he'd still not seen or spoken to anyone from Celtic Park.
Stoke themselves have had no contact from celtic since last Wednesday when compensation talks broke down.
Stoke are still demanding half a million pounds with Celtic offering eighty-five thousand.
The club wanted Macari in place for Wednesday's UEFA Cup tie against Sporting Lisbon but it seems only a resignation letter from the Stoke City manager will pave the way for a speedy conclusion to what's becoming a long drawn out affair.
With macari's arrival on hold again, Frank Connor will take the players to Seamill tomorrow to concentrate on the European business in hand.
A draw with Hibs on Saturday kept both clubs happy, with Hibs now free to focus on Sunday's league Cup final against Rangers.
KEVIN McALLISTER/Hibernian FC; 33secs
Off the field, Celtic are playing down weekend speculation that they're about to announce the first instalment of finance for the Cambuslang stadium development.
Its understood that announcement is not as imminent as has been suggested.
A former Parkhead captain in the news, Arbroath manager Danny McGrain.
He's been fined three hundred pounds and banned from the dugout for a year for verbally abusing referee Sandy Roy during a recent match.
Also tonight, Celtic's UEFA Cup opponents Sporting Lisbon have just touched down in Glasgow to begin preparations for their UEFA Cup tie at Parkhead.
The Portuguese club managed by former England boss Bobby Robson and with that game kicking off at six forty-five on Wednesday, we'll havce a full preview on the programme tomorrow night.
The Women's Royal Voluntary Service is appealling for more people to help them with their meals on wheels service.
It's fifty years since they delivered their first hot lunch.
Since then the service has grown and grown.
Aileen Taylor reports.
Glasgow; 1sec
AGNES NILSON/Pensioner; 24secs
JENNY MARTIN/Pensioner; 56secs
KATE MITCHELL/Pensioner; 1:09
MORAG MacKENZIE/Women's Royal Voluntary Service; 1:26
Let's move on to a recap of tonight's main stories.
Karen Fraser is here to interpret for the deaf.
An investigation has been launched into a religious cult trying to recruit in Scotland's universities.
Student leaders say they fear the organisation could brainwash young people.
CONTROVERSIAL RELIGIOUS CULT PROBED/AFTER UNIVERSITY GROUPS EXPRESS/FEARS ABOUT RECRUITMENT
A Scottish dairy farmer has begun his million pound legal action against a chemical company.
Andrew Graham claims a waste incinerator owned by Re-chem ruined his cattle.
SCOTTISH FARMER BEGINS CASE/AGAINST CHEMICAL COMPANY, RE-CHEM, /FOR RUINING HIS HERD
Police in Govan are hunting a man who attempted to abduct a seven year old boy as he played outside his house.
Residents in the area fear the man could strike again.
POLICE HUNT LAUNCHED/AFTER ATTEMPTED ABDUCTION/OF SEVEN YEAR OLD GOVAN BOY
The MP leading an inquiry into drugs abuse in Scotland claims the situation is getting worse.
William McKelvey says many Scots refuse to accept the scale of the problem.
MP HEADING DRUG INQUIRY/CLAIMS SCOTLAND'S DRUG PROBLEM/IS GETTING WORSE
MP's in Ayrshire are calling for a meeting with Prime Minister, John Major.
They're demanding fair treatment for Prestwick's British Aerospace plant.
AYRSHIRE MP'S CALLING FOR/MEETING WITH PRIME MINISTER/OVER PRESTWICK'S JETSTREAM FACTORY
And that's about it for tonight.
Except to remind you that we have a late summary of today's main news at eleven o'clock.
And to remind you to call our newsline if there's something you think our viewers should know about.
Call us on o-four-one, three-three-two, seven thousand and tell us the gist of the story.
Meanwhile, on behalf of the six thirty team, have a good evening.
Goodnight.
Twenty two men have appeared at Selkirk Sheriff court today charged with stealing a bus in the borders village of Stow.
It's alleged the men, from Gorebridge and Dalkeith, drove the vehicle away in the early hours of Sunday morning without permission.
Four of the men face further charges ranging from breaching bail orders to resisting arrest.
All twenty two pleaded not guilty to the charges and were released on bail.