

SAFRANE: RENAULT'S SOPHISTICATED ALL-NEW EXECUTIVE EXPRESS
Driving pleasure allied to the highest levels of passenger comfort provide Safrane — Renault's new executive challenger with the credentials for a major assault on the UK market.
On sale in the UK from early 1993, Safrane represents an £800 million investment by Renault to produce a spacious and refined large hatchback to replace the Renault 25.
Sleek exterior styling and a smooth underbody ensure excellent aerodynamics — a Cd of between 0.28 and 0.30 depending on derivative.
The use of a new computer-controlled suspension system on top-line models further improves air-flow at motorway speeds and enhances Safrane's roadholding and handling.
Utilising transverse engines and a front-wheel-drive layout, the Safrane provides maximum cabin space in a compact package.
Re-designed suspension both front and rear, together with pendulum engine mounts ensure a smooth and quiet ride for Safrane's occupants.
New compact five-speed manual and four-speed automatic gearboxes are mated to either a 135bhp multivalve 2-litre engine or the smooth and powerful 170bhp 3-litre V6 unit.
Three-way catalytic converters are standard on all models.
Inside, Safrane's occupants are cosseted in a spacious and comfortable environment with a specially designed dashboard which ‘opens out’ towards the passengers and flows into the doors.
Fully equipped
Equipment levels are high with ABS braking standard on all models along with variable power-assisted steering, multi-function trip computer, fully-adjustable seating position, all-round electric windows, air conditioning with controls for driver and passenger, remote-control central door locking, a six-speaker hi-fi system and an anti-theft alarm system.
Top of the range RXE V6 versions add computer-controlled suspension, alloy wheels and electrically operated seats and steering adjustment.
Safety and environmental concerns were also paramount in the design of Safrane, which passes strict impact testing, features side-impact bars and has all major parts marked for easy recycling.
Says Renault UK's Managing Director,:
‘We believe Safrane has the ability to make great inroads for our company in the vital fleet and business sectors.
The design, innovative features and quality of Safrane make this an executive car of which we are very proud, and one which will open up new areas of the UK car market for Renault.’
At launch, three versions of Safrane will be offered in the UK:
Safrane RT manual
(1995cc, 135bhp)
£18,500
Safrane RT automatic
(1995cc, 135bhp)
£19,250
Safrane RXE automatic
(2975cc, 170bhp)
£25,650
All Safranes come protected by an eight-year anti-corrosion warranty and a 12-month unlimited mileage mechanical warranty with RAC membership.
MARKETPLACE
Aimed primarily at the fleet and business sectors of the market, Safrane replaces the Renault 25 which was first introduced in March 1984.
Sales for the Renault 25 in this eight-year period have exceeded 750,000 across Europe, with almost 60,000 registered in the UK.
Now, its replacement, Safrane, will compete head-on in the executive segment with rivals such as the Ford Granada, Rover 800, BMW 5-series and the Volvo 850.
Around 8% of UK sales come from this executive sector with by far the great majority in the under 2-litre category (70%) owing to current taxation rules.
Two-thirds of buyers choose saloon bodystyles with the remaining one-third opting for a hatchback.
Customer Profile
Research shows that buyers of this type of vehicle are heavily weighted towards the 35–54 age group (65% of sales) compared with only 11% below 34 years of age.
As might be expected, 88% are male, married (85%) and work in professional occupations as directors or senior executives.
Average household size amongst buyers is 3.3 with 47% having two children or more.
Customer clinics have shown that executive car buyers are looking for the following factors: durability, style, comfort, performance and interior space.
For most purchasers, price is of less importance in this sector.
In particular, 81% of those questioned during a Safrane customer clinic cited driving pleasure as being an important factor with comfort mentioned by 78%.
Build quality and handling followed closely behind with scores of 68% and 63% respectively.
Says Renault UK's Marketing Director,: ‘We have closely analysed the executive sector to find out where our strengths and weaknesses lie and formulate exactly what buyers in this sector demand from their cars.
‘We believe that Safrane with its elegant exterior styling, welcoming interior and combination of driving pleasure and safety will open up new doors for Renault in this sector.
‘With its comprehensive specification and competitive pricing, Safrane will pitch Renault at the head of the volume executive sector for the first time.’
SAFRANE — RENAULT'S INVESTMENT IN PRODUCTION
Simplified production processes and increased quality standards are the result of a major investment by Renault in the Safrane project at its factory in Sandouville, France.
For the first time during final assembly, individual workshops prepare sub-assemblies for one aspect of the car, i.e. driving position, engine and chassis, glazing, seats, bumpers etc.
Each is then installed in the vehicle in a single robotized operation.
Benefits of the system include a shortening of the production line by 400 metres and a saving in manufacturing time of 24% (down to 26 hours for Safrane, as opposed to 34 hours for the Renault 25).
Component stocks have also been reduced by 50%.
Of the total £800 million invested in Safrane, almost half was spent at the Sandouville factory with the number of robots increased four-fold to a total of 108.
Production capacity for the factory is 500 Safranes per day.
SAFRANE — THE TECHNICAL DETAILS
DESIGN
The stylish lines of the new Safrane, designed in-house at Renault, represent a ‘two-and-a-half-box’ saloon design incorporating a versatile hatchback layout rather than the traditional executive sector ‘three-box design’.
Externally, Safrane is slightly larger than the Renault 25 that it replaces, gaining 28mm in height, 12mm in width and 21mm in overall length.
Despite an increase in frontal area of 0.14m, the overall drag coefficient of Safrane is still excellent ranging from 0.28 to 0.30 depending on model.
This has been achieved with close attention to aerodynamics of the whole vehicle with careful control of cooling airflow and a smooth floorpan with integrated exhaust system and fuel tank.
THE ENGINES
Initially the Safrane will be offered with two different engine options in the UK.
2-litre
To compete in the all-important fleet market, sub-2-litre category lead-in versions of Safrane utilise the multivalve, 1995cc, four-cylinder engine first introduced on the Renault 25 in July 1989.
Developing 135 bhp at 6,000 rpm and peak torque of 125 lb-ft at 4,500 rpm, the three-valve-per-cylinder unit is flexible enough to have 120 lb-ft of torque available from as low as 2,400 rpm.
The 12-valve head, with two inlet and one exhaust valve per cylinder sits atop a light-alloy cylinder block with the valves themselves operated by rockers from a single overhead camshaft.
The engine is also fitted with cylinder-by-cylinder knock sensing, feeding information to the engine management computer, which controls both ignition and fuel injection systems.
Air-jet inlet
A brand-new development for the Safrane is an air-jet inlet system which improves low-speed operation and stabilises idling of multivalve engines.
This works by increasing combustion speed during idling and low-load conditions by ‘spinning’ the flame front by means of an air-jet that is tangential to the combustion chamber.
Benefits of this system include an improvement in urban fuel economy of between 8 and 14 per cent, remarkably stable idling with a reduction from 900 rpm to 825 rpm and a consequent gain in comfort and also a reduction in pollution brought about by the lower fuel consumption.
In performance terms, the 2-litre unit powers Safrane to a top speed of 125 mph and a 0–62 mph acceleration time of 11.2 seconds.
3-litre
The flagship Safrane model is powered by a normally aspirated development of the well-proven PRV V6 engine which, in this latest 3-litre form, drives the A610 Turbo sports coupe introduced earlier this year.
With a total capacity of 2,975cc, the all-alloy, fuel-injected power unit produces a healthy 170 bhp at 5,500 rpm and peak torque of 173 lb-ft at 4,500 rpm.
With its single overhead-camshaft-per-cylinder-bank this 90-degree V6 is equipped with a balancer shaft above the forward cylinder head, and its four-bearing crankshaft has offset crankpins to permit regular firing intervals and consequent smooth operation.
Again, a full engine management system monitors performance and controls the fuel injection and ignition systems.
In Safrane, the engine has been deliberately tuned to favour torque output with the result that it can deliver 115 lb-ft from 1,500 rpm upwards — so producing an extremely flexible power curve.
Performance is impressive with the V6 Safrane posting a top speed of 132 mph and 0–62 mph acceleration time of 10.2 seconds.
TRANSMISSIONS
Manual
The whole Safrane range benefits from new gearboxes, headed by the five-speed manual PK1-type transmission fitted to the 2-litre Safrane RT.
The new design results from the transition to transverse engines on the Safrane, necessitating a very compact gearbox layout.
The new ‘box had to be capable of handling the torque of the highest performance versions whilst still fitting into a very small space.
Precious centimetres have been saved with the adoption of a completely new 3-shaft layout.
Instead of being ranged on a single secondary shaft, the floating pinions are divided between two secondary shafts both of which are in permanent contact with the differential crown wheel.
Again in the interests of compactness, a single pinion on the primary shaft simultaneously drives the fourth gear pinion on the upper secondary shaft and the fifth gear pinion on the lower secondary.
The reverse gear shaft is installed overhung in the gearbox casing.
Thanks to the new layout the overall length of the gearbox is just 352mm.
Other features of the new unit are:
a two cable gearshift linkage (one for selection and the other for shifting) which improves comfort thanks to its precision, lightness and lack of vibration
synchromesh on reverse gear
large diameter gears which enable loads to be carried across three teeth at a time, reducing both noise and friction
less maintenance: lubricated for life, no cable adjustment needed
Automatic
Available as an option on 2-litre models and standard on V6 engined Safranes, is a development of the electronic 4-speed automatic gearbox utilised to great effect on the Renault 25.
Amongst the advantages of this AD8-style box are:
no upshift in the event of ‘instant lift-off’
smooth shifting action
two operating modes: normal and sport
mechanical lock-up on 3rd and 4th ratios to improve fuel economy
The new gearbox, which uses software developed for Safrane makes for even greater comfort of use.
The control unit works in conjunction with the engine management system to momentarily reduce torque and stop the air conditioning compressor while 
SUSPENSION, STEERING AND BRAKES
Safrane has been designed around an extremely  rigid and safe bodyshell, featuring a platform in which the engine is installed transversely and which carries front and rear subframes to ease installation of different mechanical units such as suspension arms.
Safrane's front and rear suspension are based on the MacPherson principle and benefit from programmed movement.
At the front, the two body attachment points of the L-shaped lower arm are situated within the front sub-frame.
This innovation permits a longer arm and makes for better control of front suspension movement.
At the rear, the suspension is of multiple-link design with programmed geometry, with two transverse links and one radius arm as well as the MacPherson strut member.
Renault engineers have also carefully developed the rear suspension on Safrane to provide predictable handling even when sideways cornering forces are involved.
In fact these forces are utilised to create a small corrective steering effect via programmed deflection of the geometry (up to 1.5 degrees).
This overcomes any tendency for Safrane to oversteer — the most destabilising condition for the majority of drivers.
Roll angles and braking forces also cause a controlled toe-in of the rear wheels for improved stability.
Consequently, in extremis, Safrane will understeer — and so be more reassuring.
In addition, the rear suspension allows longitudinal rearward wheel travel in order to reduce tyre thump on poor road surfaces.
This movement does not affect parallel tracking of the wheels but results in lower noise levels and reduced vibration.
Computer-controlled suspension
All V6-powered Safranes come equipped with Renault's computer controlled suspension (optional on 2-litre versions) which endows the car with ‘active aerodynamics’ by lowering the body by 15mm at motorway speeds.
Two other main benefits of the CCS are:
automatic variable damping with three settings (comfort, normal and sport)
permanent self-levelling
The system comprises dampers capable of reacting to three separate settings, which are installed together with air springs which work in parallel with the main wheel springs.
The pressure of the air springs is adjusted constantly by the computer via one inflation solenoid valve per spring and a single deflation valve to maintain body level at all times.
The twin-tube dampers are also controlled by the system's computer to select one of three characteristics: comfort, normal or sport.
This last setting can also be manually selected by the driver.
Whatever the load, the body remains level and the ride height is then set at one of the three positions:
normal position: corresponds to the ride height of the car with conventional suspension and when half-laden
the lowered position: ride height reduced by 15mm at motorway speeds to make the car more aerodynamic.
It returns to normal setting below 50 mph or if the computer decides that road conditions have become too rough
the high position: increase in ride height of 30 mm which can be selected by the driver to cope with abnormal conditions such as snow/flooding etc.
The CCS computer gathers its information from various sources including steering, brake and engine sensors and accelerometers.
Brakes
All Safrane models offered in the UK come with the second generation Bosch 4-channel ABS braking system fitted as standard with ventilated front and solid rear discs.
Steering, wheels and tyres
Power-assisted steering fitted as standard to all Safrane models is a speed-sensitive system that ‘weights up’ as road speed increases to provide more feedback to the driver.
Two-litre manual models are fitted with 6’ steel wheels and 195/60 R15 tyres.
These are changed to 195/65 R15 ones on the automatic version.
Stylish 6.5’ alloy wheels are standard on the V6 version shod with 195/65 R15 tyres.
INTERIOR
The interior design of the Safrane presents a totally different picture to that of its predecessor — the Renault 25 — and presents an altogether more welcoming environment than that of its main rivals.
Instead of turning the controls and instruments towards the driver, Renault's stylists have opened the entire dashboard up to the occupants.
This theme is carried further by the soft and rounded lines of the whole cabin — characterised by the blending together of the dash and door panels.
Careful choice of colour schemes conveys a further sense of warmth.
Above all, the occupants are cosseted in a very spacious cabin even bigger than that of the Renault 25, itself a benchmark in the class.
Rear seat passengers also gain with more kneeroom (+35 mm), headroom (+30 mm) and elbow room (+20 mm).
Clever design also ensures that the Safrane offers 10% more basic luggage space than the Renault 25 at 17 cubic feet.
The versatility of the hatchback rear door, low loading sill and split rear seat add to Safrane's ease-of-use and load-carrying flexibility.
Comfort and quietness were the two main design parameters for the cockpit and these are evident in the following features:
a heating and ventilation system that includes separate heating controls for left and right-hand sides of the cabin, with ducting for back-seat passengers 
a driver's seat that is adjustable in five directions (reach, height, lumbar support, backrest, and headrest angles) and has a centre elbow rest.
Steering is also adjustable (electronically on the RXEV6) for reach
a passenger seat with a ‘relax’ setting in which the cushion reclines along with the backrest to provide optimum comfort
rear seats with adjustable headrests and optional electrical adjustment
Interior quietness is aided by:
the pendulum-type mounting of engine and transmission assembly
the stiffness of the structure and use of a dashboard support beam
the ducting of some electrical wiring through wheel arches to avoid cutting holes in the bulkhead
the isolation of the front subframe from the body by ‘silentbloc’ mountings
the isolation of the suspension mountings
Driving position layout
Work carried out in the area of ergonomics takes account of the fact that most drivers only have a few tenths of a second to give an order or read information.
Safrane's controls have been located as high as possible on the dashboard and in logical groupings.
Amongst the main design features are:
Renault's unique fingertip, remote-control hi-fi system
all electrical functions for the rear seat occupants (seats, windows, cigar lighter etc.) can be immobilised via a single switch in the driver's door
switches outside the driver's normal field of vision are specially shaped for easy recognition
information relating to the radio, time and outside temperature are located high on the dashboard to avoid the driver's eyes straying from the road
warning lights do not appear on the dashboard unless they are actually needed, thereby giving priority to essential information such as vehicle speed, engine speed and fuel.
A voice synthesiser gives further audible warnings.
EQUIPMENT
For a car in this market sector, Safrane is extremely well-equipped.
Please see separate section for full listings.
Amongst standard fittings on the 2-litre version are: tinted glass, electrically-operated & heated door mirrors, rear courtesy lights, air conditioning, electric front and rear windows, remote-control central locking, 4×6 Watt hi-fi with fingertip remote control, anti-theft alarm system, speed-sensitive power steering and Bosch ABS braking.
The V6 model adds: alloy wheels, metallic paint, electrically adjustable steering column, wood veneer interior trim, 4×20 watt hi-fi with RDS, 4-speed automatic gearbox, electrically demisted windscreen, heated front seats, computer controlled suspension, cruise control and electric adjustment of both front and rear seats.
Options including leather upholstery, ergomatic adjustment of front seats via inflatable pockets and a CD player can be specified to individualise Safrane.
SAFETY
Safrane's design has been optimised to provide the best in passenger protection and the car has also been crash tested at 35 mph into an oblique barrier rather than the standard 30 mph ‘head-on’ impact test.
This calls upon the car's structure to dissipate an extra 34% of impact energy and represents a much more realistic test.
Safrane passed these tests with flying colours due to the following safety-related design elements:
front chassis members designed to deform progressively
side impact door beams
the computer-designed floor-pan has been constructed to ‘channel’ deformation in order to protect the passengers 
the front A pillars are joined by a transverse beam which supports the dashboard and helps preserve the interior space
the heavy engine components are positioned low-down so they pass beneath the cabin in the event of a severe frontal impact
the front seat belts are height adjustable while the lap belt is attached to the seat to provide the best protection, whatever the seat angle
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
Renault set up the first European organisation to collect and recycle certain car parts which had not previously been dealt with.
This scheme, piloted in Germany and the Tours region of France is being extended to cover the entire European network.
In 1992, various specialised companies processed over 8,000 tons of plastic bumpers, 700,000 batteries, 50,000 catalytic converter housings, 3 million litres of solvent and 70,000 tons of old oil.
At the same, time experiments in the dismantling and recycling of wrecks continues with the aim of developing methods and economically viable ways of recycling the majority of components.
Safrane benefits from the marking of most of its plastic parts for recycling with materials specially chosen for their suitability.
Already the vehicle contains a high proportion of recycled metal (steel and aluminium), with zinc only used where absolutely necessary.
Brake linings are asbestos free and all CFC's have been removed from plastic foam and will be replaced as soon as possible in air conditioning systems.
Finally, solvent emission from all paint processes are already being reduced pending the introduction of a water-based paint process.
All Safranes are fitted with three-way catalytic converters as standard.
AFTER SALES — PEACE OF MIND
To reassure the owner, Renault has fitted the Safrane with several methods of anti-theft protection.
All locks, both door and ignition, are equipped with drill proof barrels and all models are fitted with an electronic anti-theft alarm which prevents starting unless the locks have been operated by the infra-red remote control.
In addition all windows are security-etched.
For the protection and longevity of the bodywork, Safrane is even better protected than the Renault 25 with 52% of its body steel pre-protected by galvanisation or electro-zinc plating.
The engine compartment is completely wax protected and the whole car has three layers of paint rather than two.
Further peace of mind is provided by Renault's eight-year anti-corrosion warranty which is in addition to the one year/unlimited mileage warranty with free RAC membership.
Servicing costs are kept to a minimum as Safrane requires no initial service at 1,000 miles.
Minor services are at 6,000 miles, with major service intervals at 36,000 miles.