

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Since 1979 Scotch Whisky has steadily lost market share.
At the same time, the market share enjoyed by wine has increased very substantially (60%).
Scotch Whisky's decline has now accelerated to the extent that sales in the UK are collapsing at the rate of 1 million cases per annum.
2.
Total per capita consumption of alcoholic drinks has been more or less constant for a decade.
Against this background, Scotch Whisky has to compete against strong and growing competition from an increasingly wide range of drinks products.
3.
The Association has been given to understand that successive Chancellors have set different rates of tax for the different categories of alcoholic drink in order to preserve flexibility to respond to changing market circumstances.
It is an undeniable fact that the massive changes in the domestic market have not been reflected in drinks tax policy.
4.
Measured on a per degree of alcohol basis, spirits remain subject to much heavier taxation than beers and wines.
The Treasury's own demand equations demonstrate that spirits are price sensitive; hence, the high incidence of tax in the price has a serious adverse impact on sales.
5.
There is clear evidence that tax induced price competition adversely affects spirits market share, both in the UK and in major EC markets.
6.
The EC is now the major market for Scotch Whisky, taking 39% of all exports.
Despite the July 1992 ECOFIN agreement, tax discrimination against Scotch Whisky remains widespread throughout the EC.
Other Member States cannot be expected to recognise the impact of tax distortions unless the major spirits producer, the UK, acts to put its own house in order.
Until it does so, the Government cannot defend the Scotch Whisky Industry's legitimate interests.
7.
Time for reform is long overdue.
Given the present serious market situation and the fact that revenue from spirits is falling in real terms, the Chancellor must act now to remove or reduce the differentials between the excise duty on spirits and those on beer and wine.
Accordingly, we urge that there should be no increase and no revalorisation of the excise duty on spirits in the forthcoming Budget.
1.
INTRODUCTION 
1.1
Since the late 1970s, Scotch Whisky and other spirits have faced more difficult domestic market circumstances than any other major category of alcoholic drinks.
Yet they remain much more heavily taxed than competitor products.
1.2
In previous submissions, The Scotch Whisky Association has demonstrated that there is no objective evidence that this discriminatory tax regime is necessary for tax revenue, health or equity reasons.
The Chancellor has indicated that he taxes categories of alcoholic drinks, and that he treats them differently because he wishes to retain ‘flexibility’.
That is, he wishes to be able to change the structure of excise duties to reflect changing market circumstances experienced by different sectors of the drinks market.
1.3
As we understand it, the Chancellor does not tax spirits more heavily because of their intrinsic properties nor because of the categories of persons who consume spirits, but because he considers that spirits face market circumstances which allow them to bear heavier taxes.
1.4
The structure of excise duties is an historical anomaly, born of a quite different period and totally different market circumstances.
Even if there has been some limited Government recognition of this fact, changes in the taxation structure have lagged badly behind changes in the market place.
Spirits continue to compete on very unfavourable terms with beers and wines, which enjoy much more favourable tax treatment and market circumstances.
1.5
Discrimination against spirits at home has implications for our most important and fastest growing market — the European Community.
The Chancellor fought hard to improve on the initial proposals put to ECOFIN, but he was fighting with one hand tied behind his back.
So long as he taxes spirits in a highly discriminatory fashion at home, he can expect other Member States to follow suit.
If the promised two-year review of market competition is to have a favourable outcome, the UK Government must put its own house in order.
1.6
The remainder of this submission concentrates on the changes which have occurred in the domestic market for alcoholic drinks.
In view of these market changes we would ask the Chancellor to utilise that degree of flexibility he has retained to reduce the degree of excise duty discrimination against spirits.
The SWA therefore urges that the practice of index linking excise duty on spirits should be discontinued, and that there should be neither an increase in excise duties, nor revalorisation, until present differentials have been substantially eroded.
2.
THE DOMESTIC MARKET 
2.1
Per capita alcohol consumption since 1979 has remained more or less flat (Figure 2.1).
Within that static total, wine has accounted for an increasing share of total alcohol consumption and the amount of alcohol consumed in the form of spirits has fallen by 30%.
2.2
The same trends are evident in terms of consumer expenditure.
Figure 2.2 shows that spirits' share of consumer expenditure on alcoholic drinks has fallen from 28.9% in 1979 to 23.8% in 1991.
Over the same period, the share of beers has risen from 53.8% to 565% and the share of wines, cider and perry from 17.3% to 19.7%.
2.3
Beer's share of consumer expenditure has increased despite a falling volume of alcohol consumption in the form of beers.
This reflects an increase in the real price of beer, over a period during which the real price of Scotch has fallen.
The real duty-paid price of beer has risen by 60% since 1979, while the real duty-paid price of spirits has fallen by 10% (Figure 2.3).
2.4
The domestic drinks market today offers a far wider range of products to choose from, while production has become more concentrated in major ‘drinks’ companies with a wide drinks portfolio.
These products are aggressively promoted and marketed.
The reduction in real transport costs and modern distribution systems result in greater import penetration of the domestic market (for instance, there is a much wider selection of wines available to British consumers), resulting in a highly competitive drinks market.
2.5
At the same time, consumers have become more aware of the range of alternative drinks products.
This is a result of increased foreign travel and a reflection of increased availability and more aggressive promotion and marketing of a wider range of products.
A ‘typical’ consumer now chooses from a wider ‘repertoire’of drinks than was the case in the 1960s.
2.6
These trends have had very important implications for Scotch Whisky.
In the 1960s, Scotch accounted for some 60% of UK spirits consumption and for some 10.5% of total UK alcoholic consumption.
Today (1990–1991) Scotch Whisky's share of the spirits market is 41% and of the total market 8.6%
2.7
Within the spirits category, Scotch Whisky has had to compete with a wider range of heavily marketed white spirits.
Within the market for all alcoholic drinks, the main competitor has been wine.
There has been a quantum leap in the range and quality of wines marketed in the UK.
Within a static market for total alcohol consumption, this has resulted in a fall in the share of Scotch.
2.8
The SWA has always accepted that these changes in the market are not solely a result of the high duties imposed on spirits.
The Government's response to these changes in market conditions has, however, been woefully inadequate.
The Chancellor has preserved his flexibility to adjust duties between different categories of drinks, but has made little use of that flexibility in the face of overwhelming evidence that market conditions have changed fundamentally in favour of wines.
This aspect is developed in greater detail in the next Section.
3.
EXCISE DUTIES AND COMPETITION 
3.1
While the ratio of the excise duty on spirits to that on beers (expressed on a per degree of alcohol basis) has declined from 3.14 in 1979 to 1.78, the degree of discrimination compared with wines has worsened — from 1.65 in 1979 to 1.87 as of today (see Figure 3.1).
Through time wine has taken a much larger share of the domestic market.
Yet, spirits continue to be much more heavily taxed than other alcoholic drinks.
3.2
The extent to which excise duties are reflected in domestic retail prices is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Excise duties account for 54% of the retail price of a typically priced bottle of Scotch and are 42% and 18% of the retail price of typical wine and beer products respectively.
When VAT is added to the duty-paid price, this rises above 65%.
3.3
The Government might argue that this is a consequence of the European Court of Justice beer and wine judgement, which effectively tied the taxation of wines to that of beers.
That judgement accepted that there is price competition between beers and wines.
The evidence of price competition between wines and spirits, within the UK domestic market, is just as strong.
3.4
The Chancellor has been unwilling to use his flexibility to reflect the reality of such competition to allow spirits to compete on more equal terms.
The outcome is that Scotch Whisky has been left to compete on distinctly unfavourable terms with imported wines.
This has been very harmful both to the industry and to the national interest.
3.5
The level and the structure of excise duties both impact on consumer choice.
The level, and changes in the level, of excise duties for spirits influence consumer demand, even if all alcoholic drinks are taxed in a similar fashion.
The scale of this impact will depend upon the own-price elasticity of the demand for spirits.
3.6
The Treasury demand equations incorporate own-price elasticities for spirits and wines which are greater than unity (demand is sensitive to price) and an own-price elasticity for beer which is less than one (demand is not sensitive to price).
In short, they accept that the demand for spirits is sensitive to tax-induced changes in prices.
3.7
The structure of excise duties also influences consumer demand as between drinks categories.
The direction and scale of these effects depend on the cross-price elasticities of demand between different beverage categories.
3.8
If beverage categories are substitute goods (and therefore in competition with each other) the cross-price elasticities will be positive.
For example, an increase in the price of spirits will be associated with reduced spirits consumption and increased consumption of other beverages.
3.9
The everyday experience of The Scotch Whisky Association and its member companies, testifies to the fact that different beverage categories are substitutes for each other and that different excise duty treatment depresses the market share of spirits and increases the market share of wine and beer.
3.10
The results published earlier this year by The Henley Centre confirm this experience.
For the five main EC markets (the UK, Germany, France, Italy and Spain), it finds strong evidence of positive cross-price elasticities between spirits, on the one hand, and wines and/or beers on the other.
3.11
In short, the Government's own evidence suggests that the demand for spirits is sensitive to its own price and that high excise duties (and VAT), must have a substantial adverse impact on sales within a depressed market context.
The Henley Centre results also suggest that discriminatory taxation will reduce spirits' share of consumption to the benefit of other categories of alcoholic drinks.
Market trends indicate that imported wines have been the main winner — Scotch Whisky the main loser.
4.
EXCISE DUTIES AND TAXATION REVENUE 
4.1
If the structure of excise duties maintained revenue without unduly distorting consumer choice, there might be some justification for the present system.
The evidence, however, is to the contrary.
4.2
The present system seriously distorts consumers' choice by depressing sales of Scotch Whisky and encouraging the sales of other drinks.
Alternative excise duty structures could maintain existing revenue levels with less distortion of consumer choice.
4.3
Since 1979, per capita alcohol consumption has remained static, but the real value of excise duties on alcoholic drinks has fallen by 12% (Figure 4.1).
By contrast, the real value of excise duties on all excisable products has risen by 11.5% and the real value of VAT revenue on all goods and services by 66.5%.
4.4
The Chancellor could argue that this outcome reflects the restraint exercised with respect to alcoholic drinks.
In reality this has been forced by the ECJ judgement and by market circumstances, particularly the reduced market share of spirits which are heavily taxed.
4.
Within the alcoholic drinks category, real excise duty revenue raised from Scotch Whisky has fallen by 44% since 1979 and by 26% for other spirits.
In contrast, the real value of excise duties has risen by 7% for beers and by 17% for wines (Figure 4.2).
The conclusion is self evident — if the Chancellor wants to maintain the real value of excise duties from alcoholic drinks he must switch the burden of taxes from spirits to beers and wines.
4.6
In a wider context, if the Chancellor wishes to maintain revenue from sales taxes, then excise duties on other excisable products and, above all a broad based sales tax like VAT, are much more efficient revenue gatherers, than excise duties on alcoholic drinks.
4.7
Our previous submissions and the evidence of the Treasury's own demand equations, indicate that it would be perfectly possible to move toward a more equitable tax system and maintain revenue.
Figure 4.3 shows how raising real excise duties on wines and beers and lowering real excise duties on spirits, could achieve existing revenue targets.
Given the own price elasticities adopted by the Treasury, such an outcome would also have the advantage of meeting revenue targets, while reducing the existing excise duty differentials.
5.
THE NATIONAL INTEREST
5.1
Three main dimensions of the national interest are particularly relevant in the present context:
the importance of the EC market;
Scotch Whisky's contribution to the trade balance; and
the particular significance of Scotch Whisky to Scotland.
5.2
The Chancellor will need little reminding of the importance the industry attaches to negotiating satisfactory arrangements for excise duty ‘harmonisation’.
From the early 195Os the SWA pressed the UK Government to recognise that greater equity of tax treatment must begin at home.
This was necessary to create a convincing case for EC excise duty ‘harmonisation’ which did not penalise spirits.
Such arguments were met by an unwillingness of successive Chancellors to recognise that increased pressure for some degree of ‘harmonisation’ would eventually prove irresistible.
5.3
While the provisional agreement reached in the July 1992 ECOFIN was better than we feared at one juncture, it still marks a worsening in our relative position.
It contains
for the first time, de jure discrimination against spirits in favour of wines and beers
a two tier system of minimum thresholds for spirits, as against a zero minimum rate for wines and a single rate for beers
widespread concessions for small distilleries and special deals for certain spirit products.
5.4
There is a requirement for a competition study, but no certainty that the Commission will produce a thorough review of the competition between different categories of alcoholic drinks.
5.5
The Community market now accounts for 39% of all Scotch Whisky exports, as compared with only 20% on UK entry (Figure 5.1).
For spirits, cross-border trade within the Community accounts for a much higher proportion of production than is the case for wines and beers (Figure 5.2) and is dominated by the UK which accounts for 51% of all intra-EC trade in spirits (Figure 5.3).
5.6
Scotch Whisky is the most export-orientated major industry in the UK (Figure 5.4).
The EC is its largest and most rapidly growing market.
Hence, it is in the national interest that no further ground be conceded when the ‘harmonisation’ agreement is renegotiated in two years time.
It will be impossible to achieve a satisfactory outcome unless the Chancellor accepts the prior need to reform UK excise duties.
Other Member States cannot be expected to recognise the impact of tax distortions unless the major spirits producer, the UK itself, recognises the force of the competitive argument, and applies it in its domestic market.
5.7
The relevance of Scotch Whisky to UK exports and the trade balance is easily demonstrated.
The UK has a trade deficit on food and drinks products of some £6 billion.
The trade balance on alcoholic drinks is in surplus, entirely due to a favourable trade balance in Scotch Whisky of £1.8 billion (Figure 5.5).
In 1991, the trade surplus for Scotch was some three times the current trade surplus for oil!
5.8
Discriminatory UK excise duties against spirits worsen the trade balance and reduce domestic income and employment because they increase UK imports of wine at the expense of domestically produced spirits.
The Association's calculations indicate that if wine bore duties at the spirits rate, wine imports to the UK would fall by £200 million per annum.
5.9
The existing structure of excise duties clearly has a perverse impact on the balance of trade.
Adam Smith's famous dictum that we should not subsidise grape production in Scotland, does not extend to subsidising wine imports at the expense of the ‘wine of the country’.
5.10
Finally, we would emphasise the particular importance of the Scotch Whisky industry to Scotland.
The industry accounts for 20% of total Scottish exports (Figure 5.6) and is Scotland's second largest industrial employer (see Figure 5.7).
It is particularly important to remote rural areas with few employment opportunities and to industrial areas experiencing high unemployment.
It is an industry which, given fair tax treatment, has substantial opportunity for expansion at home and abroad.
To realise that potential it must have fairer taxation treatment from its own Government.
5.11
The national interest demands that excise duty discrimination against spirits should be ended, both for domestic reasons and because it is essential to the Government's negotiating position in future ECOFIN discussions.
In view of the Chancellor's desire to maintain flexibility, the Association proposes that be should neither increase nor revalorise excise duty on spirits in the first 1993 Budget.
6.
FUTURE BUDGETS
6.1
At this juncture we do not wish to pursue in detail the issues raised by changing the budget date to November.
However, we would advise the Chancellor that if increases in excise duties for spirits were immediately implemented after a November Budget, this would substantially increase the seasonality of our sales and would have serious disruptive effects and adverse cost implications for our industry.
6.2
Sales of Scotch Whisky have two seasonal peaks — during the Christmas/New Year season and in March, prior to the budget.
In consequence, sales show greater seasonal fluctuation than most other consumer products.
6.3
We therefore welcome recent press indications that changes in excise duties would not be implemented immediately.
The Association would strongly recommend that they should take effect at the earliest in January of the following year.
Flexibility
History
The European Community
Proposal
PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL (1979 = 100)
MARKET SHARE OF EXPENDITURE ON ALCOHOL
REAL PRICE OF BEER AND SCOTCH (1979= 100)
Alcohol Consumption
Consumer Expenditure
The Nature of Competition
Implications for Scotch
RATIOS OF EXCISE DUTIES PER DEGREE OF ALCOHOL
EXCISE DUTY AS % OF TYPICAL PRICE (1992)
Excise Duty Discrimination
Tax Induced Price Competition
REAL VALUE OF EXCISE DUTIES and VAT (1979 = 100)
REAL VALUE OF EXCISE DUTIES (1979 = 100)
REVENUE EFFECTS OF EXCISE DUTY CHANGES
Excise Duty Revenue
An Alternative Structure
SCOTCH EXPORTS BY REGION
INTRA-EC TRADE
SHARE OF INTRA-EC SPIRITS TRADE
The European Community
EXPORT EARNINGS PER EMPLOYEE
BALANCE OF TRADE, 1991 (£ million)
TOP 5 SCOTTISH EXPORTING INDUSTRIES
TOP SCOTTISH EMPLOYERS
The Trade Balance
Scotch and Scotland
Conclusion