

GUINNESS BREWING WORLDWIDE
Produces the world's most distinctive and one of the world's most widely distributed beers.
Is the 7th largest brewer in the world by volume and the 3rd largest by operating profit.
Guinness brands are brewed in 44 countries and sold in over 130 countries.
With its global interests, Guinness is Britain's largest brewer.
Is Spain's largest brewer, through Grupo Cruzcampo.
Received The Queen's Award for Technological Achievement in 1991, for its patented in-can system.
BREWING TRADING PROFITS (£M)
Guinness Brewing Worldwide (GBW) is the brewing company of Guinness PLC and employs approximately 12,000 people worldwide.
The company is organised into four operating regions:—
Ireland
Europe (excluding Ireland)
Africa & Americas
Asia-Pacific
Guinness has a unique portfolio of international premium brands.
Guinness stout is the world's leading stout brand, accounting for around 40 per cent of the company's beer volume.
Other beers in the GBW portfolio include Harp Lager, Cruzcampo Lager, Smithwick's Ale and Kaliber.
GUINNESS IRELAND
Ireland is the birthplace of Guinness.
In 1759 Arthur Guinness founded his brewery at the St. James's Gate site in Dublin and in 1769 the first export shipment took place.
Guinness Ireland is responsible for the production, packaging, sales and marketing of Guinness and all its other brands in both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
Its headquarters at St. James's Gate, Dublin, is also the location of the Group's main stout brewery.
It is the main beer export centre for the Group worldwide.
Currently some 40% of its output is exported.
St. James Gate is also the home of the Guinness Brewing Worldwide Research Centre where products such as Kaliber and Canned Draught Guinness were developed.
There are four other Guinness breweries in Ireland: the Harp Brewery and the Macardle Moore Brewery in Dundalk, Smithwick's in Kilkenny (founded 1710) and Cherry's in Waterford (founded 1792).
Since 1982, the company has invested almost IR£400 million in capital projects in its Irish operation.
Some IR£150 million of this was spent on the St. James's Gate site.
The construction of a new brewhouse, designed to produce over 2.5 million pints a day, was just one of the major projects undertaken.
The Dublin brewery is, as a result of this investment, one of the most technologically advanced of its kind.
GUINNESS EUROPE (excluding Ireland)
The European region consists of three main groups: Guinness Brewing GB, Grupo Cruzcampo in Spain, and the remainder of Europe, which includes Guinness GmbH in Germany and Guinness Italia Srl in Italy.
GUINNESS BREWING GB
Guinness Brewing GB, based at the Park Royal Brewery in London, brews beer for the domestic market.
Completed in 1936, the brewery is currently undergoing a £53 million four-year modernisation programme to renew production facilities.
In addition to Draught Guinness and Guinness Draught Bitter, it produces Kaliber, Harp Lager and Kronenbourg 1664 (under licence).
In March 1989, Draught Guinness in cans was launched nationally following a very successful test market during 1988.
In Spring 1992, Guinness Draught Bitter in cans was also launched nationally.
This is the UK company's first non-stout brand to bear the Guinness name since the launch of the eponymous stout, and it looks set to consolidate the leading position of the Guinness in-can system in the take home trade.
Kaliber, Guinness' alcohol-free lager launched in 1986, continues to be Britain's No. 1 alcohol-free lager in both the on and off trade.
In addition to the brewery at Park Royal, Guinness Brewing GB also operates a packaging plant at Runcorn in the North of England.
GRUPO CRUZCAMPO
In 1991, Guinness PLC acquired La Cruz del Campo S.A., Spain's largest brewer, with over 27% market share.
The transaction represented a key strategic move for GBW into the Spanish beer market.
Subsequently, Cruzcampo acquired Unión Cervecera, previously 60% owned by Carlsberg, with Carlsberg taking a 10% share in the enlarged Cruzcampo group.
The combined group, Grupo Cruzcampo, is now the unrivalled market leader in Spain.
Grupo Cruzcampo has an extensive range of brands which, apart from the main Cruzcampo, Alcázar and Carlsberg brands, also includes Keler, Estrella del Sur, Elephant, Henninger, Oro Lujo, El Léon, Victoria, Calatrava, Skol and Grolsch.
Kaliber Spain was launched in Spain in 1992.
CONTINENTAL EUROPE
GBW has operations across continental Europe, with offices in France, Germany, Italy and the Canaries.
Draught Guinness has been launched in Sweden and new markets have also opened up in Hungary and Greece.
In addition to the above, Guinness is also available in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Guernsey, Iceland, the Isle of Man, Jersey, Luxembourg, Madeira, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Switzerland.
GUINNESS & AMERICAS
AFRICA
Guinness has a long history in the African continent and has progressively extended its distribution in the last 30 years.
It is now one of the leading beer brands in Africa, being brewed in 22 countries and sold in a total of 37.
Most of these are supplied by licensed and contract brewing agreements with long-established partners.
The principal brand is Guinness Foreign Extra Stout which enjoys an unequalled brand image and reputation for quality.
The largest markets for Guinness in the region include Nigeria, Cameroon, Kenya and Ghana.
Nigeria
Guinness Nigeria PLC, in which GBW has a 25.5% shareholding, operates three breweries in Nigeria.
The Ogba brewery produces Harp Lager while the breweries in Benin and Ikeja product Guinness Foreign Extra Stout and Malta Guinness.
Cameroon
This is the principal beer market in French-speaking Africa.
The company's wholly-owned subsidiary in Cameroon, Guinness Cameroun SA, supplies the domestic market nationally through its own sales depots and independent distributors.
Cameroon is also the main exporter of Guinness brands to Equatorial Guinea and Chad.
Kenya
Kenya is an important and well-established African market for Guinness.
GBW has a minority shareholding in Kenya Breweries Ltd.
Ghana
Guinness Ghana, in which GBW has a 39% equity holding, is now the leading brewery in the country, producing Guinness Foreign Extra Stout and Malta Guinness.
Other African Markets
Guinness also has significant shareholdings in breweries in Sierra Leone and the Seychelles.
Elsewhere in Africa, Guinness is brewed under licence in the Ivory Coast, Mauritius, Reunion, Togo, The Gambia, Liberia, Central African Republic, South Africa, Namibia, Burkina Faso, Gabon and Tanzania.
AMERICAS
Guinness Import Company
In 1990, Guinness Import Company completed the acquisition of All Brand Importers and established the company as one of the leading importers of premium beer in the US.
Its portfolio includes brands such as Moosehead Canadian Lager, Pilsner Urquell, Dos Equis, Sol and Bass Ale as well as Guinness Stout, Harp Lager, Smithwick's Ale and Kaliber.
Today, Guinness Import Company employs approximately 120 people and operates through a nationwide chain of wholesalers.
The company is the country's third largest imported beer marketer, with over 10 per cent of the market.
The flagship brands, Guinness Stout and Harp Lager, continue to grow.
Canned Draught Guinness (known in the USA as Pub Draught Guinness) is now available throughout North America.
Guinness Import Company (Canada)
In Canada, operations comprise a long-standing joint venture with Labatts Ltd for packaging Guinness Stout, and a separate distribution company, Guinness Import Company (Canada) Ltd, for imported draught beer.
The company markets a brand portfolio of draught and packaged beers, including Guinness Stout, Harp Lager, Bass Ale, Smithwick's Ale and Grolsch Lager.
Draught Guinness in cans was launched in 1992 and, with Draught Guinness and Smithwick's, is a leading brand in the imported sector of the market.
Caribbean/Latin America
Guinness has long been exported to the Caribbean and Latin America and is now supplied through licensed and contract brewing agreements and some direct exports.
GUINNESS ASIA-PACIFIC
Australia
Guinness has an arrangement with Carlton and United Breweries, a division of Fosters, to brew and distribute its beer products in Australia.
Canned Draught Guinness was launched in Australia in early 1992, imported from the UK.
New Zealand
Guinness has an arrangement with Lion Nathan to brew and distribute Draught Guinness and to package Guinness Original in New Zealand.
Malaysia
Guinness has been sold in Malaysia since 1890.
Guinness Malaysia Berhad was incorporated in 1964, and in 1965 a brewery was opened in Kuala Lumpur.
In the highly sophisticated and competitive Malaysian markets, Guinness is a mainstream yet premium brand, accounting for a third of all beer consumed in the country.
In November 1989, Guinness Anchor Berhad was formed, as a result of the merger of Guinness and Malayan Breweries Ltd (in which Heineken has a major shareholding).
The brand portfolio includes Guinness Foreign Extra Stout and Lion Stout, Anchor, Tiger and Heineken beers, Anglia Shandy and Green Sands Shandy and Guinness Malta.
Indo China
Export sales to Cambodia commenced in 1991 and export sales to Vietnam commenced in 1992.
Export sales to China grew significantly in 1992.
Singapore
In November 1989, a joint venture with Malayan Breweries Ltd Singapore (coinciding with the Malaysian merger) formed GAPL Pte Ltd Singapore, trading as United Stout Marketing.
United Stout Marketing is responsible for the marketing and sales of Guinness Foreign Extra Stout, Anglia Shandy and ABC Stout in Singapore.
Indonesia
Foreign Extra Stout has been available in Indonesia for many years and local production began in 1974.
Guinness' share of the beer market stands at 10%.
Japan
Guinness Stout is imported from the UK and marketed in Japan by a joint venture company, Sapporo Guinness Co Ltd, in which Guinness has a 49% share.
Thailand
Foreign Extra Stout has been brewed and sold by Thai Amarit Brewery in Bangkok since 1974.
Hong Kong
Foreign Extra Stout and bottled Draught Guinness are imported and marketed by Guinness Hong Kong.
Taiwan
Since the lifting of import restrictions in 1987, Foreign Extra Stout has been imported and marketed here.