

THE HENLEY RESEARCH CENTRE
Since its establishment in 1945 the College has had a strong commitment to research aimed at improving management and the development of managers.
The Henley Research Centre acts as a focus for research at Henley and within the Henley Network.
Henley offers both organisations and individual managers the opportunity to carry out interdisciplinary research into issues of strategic importance.
A RESEARCH COMMUNITY
By bringing together the academic faculty, researchers and practising managers the College has created an international research community capable of undertaking well founded and practical research.
As well as assignments commissioned by organisations, the Centre carries out research sponsored by national and international agencies.
For individuals the centre offers the opportunity to develop personal skills and the possibility of submitting work for a higher degree, DBA, PhD or MPhil of Brunel University.
The DBA is based on full or part-time study and the PhD and MPhil based on full-time study only.
Researchers can complete the DBA programme at Henley, Henley-Nederland, Groupe ESC — L'Ecole Superieure de Commerce de Grenoble in France or at the Singapore Institute of Management.
THE INTERNATIONAL CONNECTION
Since its foundation Henley has been involved in developing management educators and trainers.
This has involved both training at Henley and in centres elsewhere in the World.
Currently the College has eight Teaching Fellows sponsored by the UK Government and it works closely with partners elsewhere in Faculty development.
The Henley Network is an international group of organisations dedicated to the improvement of business performance through better management.
It offers the international MBA.
Joint research and management development programmes are designed and undertaken with Network members across Europe and in the Far East.
Current joint projects involve research in Germany, the Netherlands, France, Finland, Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Croatia and Russia.
A system of computer mediated communications enables academics, researchers and other course participants to contribute to projects from wherever they are based and gives a strong international dimension to all the activities.
PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH
An important feature of the College's activity is publication of research.
The College is closely associated with a number of journals including The International Journal of Strategic Management (Long Range Planning) and the Journal of General Management.
There is also a Working Paper Series to enable early publication of reviews and propositions to promote debate.
Special publications report the output of major research projects and staff are encouraged to publish books and journal articles.
Regular Research Seminars and Conferences are a feature of the Henley Research Centre Calendar.
Dissemination also takes place through the development of new teaching materials for use on executive programmes both at Henley and its partner colleges.
As an additional service to clients, Henley endeavours to publicise findings in the international and local media.
RESEARCH AND THE ORGANIZATION
HENLEY RESEARCH CENTRE STRENGTHS:
sharp client focus
Access to a wide range of academic skills
Expertise in a range of research method
Experience in a partnership approach
Development of clients' personnel
Skilled project management
The Henley Research Centre carries out in-depth investigations which are highly focused on organisational issues and are based on joint programmes working to agreed targets.
It has the advantage to those commissioning the research of a dedicated team with access to the wider Henley academic community.
PARTNERSHIP APPROACH
Where organisations have a research need Henley works closely with the client to define and plan the project.
The client remains closely involved in each stage of the investigation.
By adopting this approach the client is assured maximum value from the project.
There is also the opportunity for the client's own personnel to be closely involved in the work in order to develop their own personal skills and expertise.
Henley can offer access to a wide network of specialist researchers and academics to supplement its own faculty if necessary.
This network enables issues to be tackled across national boundaries.
IMPLEMENTING THE CHANGES
The changes recommended as a result of an investigation sometimes involve development programmes for managers.
Henley is particularly experienced in designing and running programmes of this type, as our faculty have considerable expertise in the strategic management of change and programmes to aid implementation.
Programmes can combine face-to-face activities, distance learning and action learning.
They can be run at Henley or other locations.
Some of the studies being carried out at Henley are being sponsored by a group of clients with a common need.
Henley has experience of establishing research consortia and also obtaining third party funding for such work.
Success in these ventures results from close project management.
HENLEY EXPERTISE
Henley has specific expertise in the design and execution of research as well as experience in advanced statistical analysis.
A wide range of methods are used in research studies, e.g. focus group, interview, questionnaire, direct observation, modelling.
A comprehensive library and extensive computing facilities with software designed for research purposes are also available.
CONFERENCES
The College has the ideal environment and resources to run major conferences and seminars.
Henley hosts conferences to report research outcomes from both its own and the wider academic community.
Staff and researchers are encouraged to present research findings to conferences both at a national and international level.
Recent contributions have been made in the fields of project management, developments in management education, information systems and entrepreneurship.
CASE STUDIES
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
This project aims to develop training materials for the smaller to medium enterprise within the supply chain.
Three year funding has been received from the EC's Community Action Programme for Education and Training for Technology (COMETT).
The other partners in the project include: — 
The first stage is a training needs analysis.
This is to be followed by pilot programmes in advance of the development of distance learning materials including the use of multimedia programmes.
The final stage will be evaluation of the programme.
MANAGING IT BENEFITS
The project aims to establish methods for increasing the value for money achieved from IT investments.
It is a multi-year programme being jointly undertaken by Henley and the management consultancy arm of Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte, as part of the IT Partnership programme.
The project involves working closely with organisations across Europe to improve the management of IT benefits.
HENLEY FUTURE WORK FORUM
The purpose of the Henley Work Forum is to promote a better understanding of the opportunities for restructuring organisations offered by effective application of Information and communications technology and to promote good practice.
The Henley Work Forum carries out research, holds regular meetings to discuss findings and provides a focus for networking and information dissemination.
BUSINESS IN EUROPE
During 1991 over 3,000 businesses were surveyed in the South East of England, an area described as the ‘Golden Triangle’.
The output was a published report widely distributed in the area.
Phase 2 of the survey, which is being carried out by researchers in the Henley network is now in progress and will include comparative studies in major EC countries.
The output will be a published report and international conference.
WORK-BASED LEARNING PROJECT
The project which is being jointly funded by The Department of Employment and Henley Management College aims to develop a national model for integrating work-based learning with the professional and academic requirements of personnel managers.
It is intended to develop a number of approaches to the assessment in the work place of competences, that arise as an integral part of the role of personnel managers.
The project, whilst initially focusing upon the requirements of the service sector, will be extended to incorporate a variety of other industries thus providing more extensive ‘test-beds’ in which the model can be developed.
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES
It is predicted that this will be the most challenging area for business in the '90s.
Current research includes a comparative study of management attitudes in different economic areas, a review of management development activity in Europe and the development of cases illustrating good practice.
RESEARCH AND THE INDIVIDUAL
THE DOCTOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
THE PROGRAMME ENCOMPASSES:
Advanced study into key areas of business in an international context (managing markets, resources, people, information)
The enhancement of consultancy skills.
Skills in developing others.
This can be as a senior executive, trainer or educator
The understanding of research methodology.
Research skills.
The Henley Extended Learning Programme — HELP (see p9)— uses computer mediated communication to facilitate the above activities internationally.
A range of higher academic qualifications (DBA, PhD, MPhil) is offered by the College.
The DBA focuses on skills needed for senior levels of management, management consultancy, management development and education.
Over a period of at least two years participants complete a range of activities closely related to their own development needs.
PHASE 1
The first phase of the programme includes the agreement of a personal learning contract based on an assessment of personal competences in relation to career objectives.
PHASE 2
The second phase involves in-depth study of business topics and the preparation of working papers.
This is carried out with other colleagues on the programme and some is completed in teams.
Participants are assigned to one of the College's Faculty Groups.
Peer group review of process and progress is a key feature in the learning design.
Through this activity participants can review and develop their skills in coaching others.
During the second phase participants are also engaged on project work and study of research methodologies.
Much learning is experiential but project work is supplemented with a programme of research seminars.
Projects are completed under the supervision of experienced consultants.
Participants develop project management skills by being involved in all phases of the consultancy process including reviews of the management process and quality of output.
Evidence of skills in coaching, training or education are developed through a mix of work-based activity and personal study.
Opportunities exist for skills development in classroom techniques, distance/open learning, outdoor education and process consultancy.
KEY RESEARCH PRIORITIES
BUSINESS STRATEGY
High Growth Companies
Comparative Performance
Supply Chain Management
Managing IT Benefits
Employment Policies
Environment
TQM
Internal Marketing
Technology Management
GENERAL MANAGEMENT
Competences
Teams and Team Building
The Management Development
Process
IT in Management Learning
MANAGING CHANGE
Culture
Technological
Project Management
GENERAL
Regular Business Surveys 
PHASE 3
The third phase of the DBA involves interdisciplinary research into one or more key issues facing business.
This is supervised by academic tutors.
Participants can be attached to either an individual research project or to an interest group within the Henley Network.
The output is required to be a contribution to both theory and management practice.
A series of research conferences and seminars enables researchers to present reviews and findings to an informed audience.
ASSESSMENT
Assessment for the DBA is based on a mix of competence assessment and research output.
Evidence to show competence is agreed in the personal learning contract.
The quality of research is assessed by a thesis of publishable standard, working papers, conference and seminar presentations and by viva voce.
ELIGIBILITY
To be eligible for the DBA programme candidates must have completed an MBA (Master of Business Administration) or a similar degree-level qualification in management.
Candidates must also have a good career record and present a career plan that demonstrates the relevance of the DBA.
For those seeking to complete only part of the programme an MPhil can be awarded for a shorter period of study.
SCHOLARSHIPS
Scholarships to cover the cost of full-time study may be available from Government or International Agencies.
The College has a limited number of bursaries.
Overseas candidates should consult the British Council locally.
For those suitably qualified teaching and consultancy opportunities are available.
Participants remote from Henley must have access to a PC and modem as well as adequate library facilities.
CHOICE OF LOCATION
Participants have the choice of spending time at Henley Management College, Henley-Nederland, Groupe ESC — L'Ecole Superieure de Commerce de Grenoble in France and Singapore Institute of Management.
A period of continuous study is required each year and candidates are advised to budget for at least one week per year in residence.
At least one period should be outside their home country.
Provision of skills-training in consultancy and personnel coaching/development can be arranged from other sources.
Research conferences are organised in different countries each year.
A programme is available on request.
THE PhD/MPhil PROGRAMME
Henley began registering research students in the early 1970s and at any one time has over sixty people working towards an MPhil or PhD with the College.
The Brunel/ Henley Degree Congregation held at the College awards around twelve PhD, MPhil degrees annually.
The PhD and MPhil programmes are based at Henley and give training for those whose careers are likely to involve a high level of research.
The programme focuses upon the development of research capability based on the candidate's own normally specialist background.
Candidates are usually linked into on-going Henley research projects.
Students attend a programme of research seminars and workshops as a preparation for the research investigation.
They use computer mediated communication via The Henley Extended Learning Programme — HELP (see p9)— as part of the learning research process.
ELIGIBILITY
Candidates from both the UK and overseas are accepted on to this full-time programme.
A good first degree or equivalent in a relevant discipline is required as well as experience in the chosen field of research.
The period of study depends upon entry qualifications but for the MPhil a minimum of 12 months full-time study is required.
PhD candidates with a Masters qualification have to complete a minimum two years full-time study.
APPLICATION
As part of the application process candidates are required to develop an outline research proposal.
This is evaluated both for its intellectual content, practicability and relevance to the work of the Henley Research Centre.
If the proposal is acceptable supervisory arrangements are made before the candidate's application is formally approved.
ASSESSMENT
Assessment of the PhD/MPhil is by thesis and viva voce.
In addition candidates are required to have published a review of preliminary research findings and contributed to research seminars/conferences.
FUNDING
Funding for UK candidates may be available from the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC).
Overseas candidates should contact the British Council for advice.
SOME RECENTLY COMPLETED THESES
PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH
Henley's Working Paper Series was established in 1990 to promote the debate of research before publication.
All papers are refereed and discussed at research seminars.
Papers are prepared by Henley faculty, research staff and associates.
They present a wide range of research interests and views.
These papers are circulated to Business School libraries and provide a useful source of reference.
A list of current and planned papers is available on request.
PARTNER INSTITUTIONS
BRUNEL UNIVERSITY
Brunel, The University of West London, received its Royal Charter in 1966 and is a fully accredited British University.
It has become well known for its close working relationships with industry, commerce and the public services.
Henley, while maintaining its independence, collaborates closely with Brunel in the development and administration of management degree courses.
Course members are registered at Brunel University which also confers the degree.
Currently there are more than 5,000 people registered for higher degrees through Henley.
HENLEY — NEDERLAND
Henley-Nederland and the College work jointly to operate the Henley/Brunel MBA programmes as well as the DL BBA (a Dutch qualification incorporating Henley materials).
A programme of seminars/workshops/exchanges as well as European funded research projects are planned.
Henley-Nederland is located at Zeist in Holland.
THE SINGAPORE INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
SIM is an independent, non-profit making and self-financing professional management organisation which was founded in 1964.
It was established by a group of senior executives from Singapore government, industry, business and education for the purpose of developing the managerial skills necessary for the sound expansion of the Singapore economy.
Today, SIM is a well established national management organisation committed to the enhancement of managerial and organisational effectiveness in Singapore and has over 5,000 members.
SIM offer a wide range of certificate, diploma and degree courses (including the Henley/Brunel MBA), as well as short courses in business and management.
They also run conferences and seminars and provide in-house training and consultancy services on a range of specialist topics.
UNIVERSITAT DER BUNDESWEHR, MUNICH, GERMANY
The Universitat der Bundeswehr is a research university, chartered under authority of the Bavarian Ministry of Science and Culture, and is funded by the Federal Ministry of Defence.
Since 1986 it has offered a wide range of programmes in the fields of management and technology with the Graduate School of Business Administration taking the lead role in these activities.
Due to the need for internationally qualified managers in the German economy, an emphasis has been placed on the development of international management programmes.
New ways were found to co-operate with European and non-European partners in the course of designing and realising these programmes according to the needs of the students and their sponsoring organisations.
The University offers the Henley Distance Learning MBA course and is involved in developing projects particularly aimed at Eastern Europe.
GROUPE ESC — L'ECOLE SUPERIEURE DE COMMERCE DE GRENOBLE
The Graduate School of Business was set up over 10 years ago by the Chambre de Commerce et d'Industrie.
It has developed specialist expertise in the Management of Technology as well as in Business Development.
It recently moved to new purpose-built premises alongside the World Trade Centre.
It works closely with local industry through the Chambre.
It is now one of France's leading Business Schools with links to Y2 overseas schools for exchanges and joint research.
COLLEGE RESOURCES
THE LIBRARY
The Library forms part of the College's computer network system and is an active working unit geared closely to the work of the College.
The stock of books, corporate information, and government publications are carefully selected and reviewed regularly.
Subscriptions are held to over 400 journals and there are special collections of Country Information, Newspaper Cuttings, Market Research Reports and Theses.
The College Library also holds the papers of Colonel Urwick, one of the pioneers of British management education.
‘On Line’ and CD-ROM searches are available on request as well as microfiche, microfilm and video facilities.
The Library is also linked to the Henley HELP system which supports the Distance Learning operations of the College.
The CAIRS Integrated Library System as well as CD-ROM products are available via the Novell network.
Close contacts are maintained with other British and European Business Schools and the Library participates in the production of the European database SCIMP.
INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEPARTMENT
Located in purpose built accommodation, the department is responsible for the administration and support of Information Technology within the College.
Its activities cover programming, installation and maintenance, staff training, desktop publishing as well as graphic art and video production.
There are two computer teaching rooms equipped with Wang personal computers.
Each syndicate room and conference room has a personal computer.
All these computers are linked on a Local Area Network (LAN), giving access to a variety of software packages as well as electronic mail.
Access is also provided from the LAN to the HELP system and the College Library.
External students and tutors are able to access HELP using PSS or Dialplus.
The three main systems, ie the minicomputer, the teaching LAN and the HELP system are linked via a communications processor, which also provides controlled access to external services via PSS, and to Brunel University via a direct line.
The College has links with the International Business Schools Computer Users Group whose aims include making the use of IT more effective in business.
THE HENLEY EXTENDED LEARNING PROGRAMME
HELP has been developed over the last five years and is available to Henley programme members throughout the world.
All research programme members are linked via HELP, a system of computer mediated communications.
This enables part-time students to be linked into the research community and undertake joint work with others based around the world.
Electronic seminars are an important means for learning and the network provides interesting opportunities for cross-boundary research.
It has a questionnaire capability enabling widescale surveys to be undertaken.
It also provides access to many external information services.
The College has the capability to develop multi-media learning materials utilising Computer Based Training and other approaches.
THE HELP SYSTEM WILL PROVIDE:
Electronic seminars on key issues
Electronic research methodology seminars
Access to colleagues and tutors internationally
Opportunities for group projects
Access to external databases such as library information and business services
THE COLLEGE
Henley Management College was founded in 1945 as ‘The Administrative Staff College’ by a group of business leaders who recognised a need for training at a senior level in business management and public administration.
The College rapidly acquired a reputation for post experience management education of a high quality and innovative nature.
In 1972, Henley formed a special link with Brunel, the University of West London and was thus able to offer postgraduate degrees validated by the University.
The College is international, operating in the UK and throughout the world.
In 1990, College faculty worked with over 8,000 managers from over 90 countries.
In 1991, the College was granted a Royal Charter, recognition, we believe, of our contribution and status in the world of management development.
The courses offered by the College fall into three broad categories: Qualification Programmes, Executive Programmes and Corporate Programmes.
RESEARCH CENTRES
Centre for Information
The CIM's mission is ‘to equip managers to achieve the full corporate benefit of information systems and resources’.
College staff have regular contact with the IT industry through consultancy and industry-sponsored research.
Contact:.
Centre for Employment Policy Studies
Established in 1979, it is concerned with the planning and implementation of organisational human resource policies in both the public and private sectors.
It aims to make a practical, continuing contribution to the knowledge of employment issues, in the light of social, political and population changes.
Recent work has led to a report on creating international managers; organisation cultures; clerical and secretarial labour markets and skill formation in the supply chain.
Contact:.
The Centre for Business Enterprise
A centre for the study of high growth medium size companies.
Recently published research includes Strategy and Leadership in Growth Companies (Anglo-German Foundation), and International Strategies of Growing Companies (Price Waterhouse).
Contacts: and .
International Centre for Services
The Centre will study the development of international business in services.
It aims to create a world-wide network of contacts with leading academics and consultants who will contribute to regular international conferences and working parties.
The Centre will develop scenarios on emerging international markets in services, establish a database and produce company cases recording best practice.
Contacts: and .
The Henley Centre for Automotive Research
HCAR specialises in research and consultancy in the automotive industries which include vehicle fleet management, dealer operations, contract hire and leasing, daily rental management and vehicles disposal.
The Centre operates in the UK and Europe.
Contact:.
Project Management Unit
This Unit is involved in teaching, research and consultancy.
The Unit runs the College's qualification programmes in project management, including open and company-based programmes.
Recent research has studied the information needs of programme directors, project organisation structures and performance, and the motivation of project-based personnel.
Contact:.
HALT
Henley Advanced Learning Technology was set up to develop applications of technology in management education.
HALT is developing computer-based materials including CDi as well as computer mediated communications.
Research is being undertaken into evaluation of applications.
Occasional workshops are offered to review developments.
Contact:
THE HENLEY ENVIRONMENT
The College is situated in Buckinghamshire midway between Henley on Thames and Marlow.
Set in 30 acres of attractive parkland on the River Thames, it offers the ideal environment in which to study.
Greenlands was once the family home of W H Smith (of newsagent and bookshop fame).
The gardens at Greenlands owe much to his direction and planning and are enjoyed today by course members and staff alike.
Balancing the busy work schedules with exercise and relaxation is an important aspect of the approach at Henley.
The College has a continuing programme of upgrading and expanding the sports and recreational facilities.
On site, it has tennis, squash, badminton, boating, croquet, putting, a Trim Trail and an outdoor heated swimming pool.
The Henley Greenlands Association Room houses snooker and table tennis.
Nearby, a local golf course offers special rates to course members.
THE HENLEY INTERNATIONAL ALUMNI NETWORK
Everyone who joins the Henley Management College community by completing one of Henley's courses, automatically becomes a member of the Henley International Alumni Network (HIAN).
HIAN's purpose is to encourage contact between members, former members, and between them and the College.
It fosters these links and contacts throughout the world.
Through Alumni support staff based at Henley, the Network encourages the development of National Associations in countries where there are Henley students/ members.
Each National Association is autonomous and run by its members, but co-ordination and liaison is maintained through HIAN.
National Associations provide opportunities for social activity, professional development and networking within each country and provide a welcome point of contact for visiting Alumni from other countries.
National Associations are encouraged in every country where Henley has a presence.
Currently National Associations are active in  and are in the process of being established in 
All members of HIAN receive the College's Journal ‘Henley Newslink’, which contains information and news about Henley's world-wide activities as well as articles by and about leading members of the international business community and Alumni.
The key advantage of membership of HIAN is the opportunity it provides for international networking.
Information is available about members of National Associations, where they are, what they do and how to get in touch with them during the course of business travels.
The National Association for the United Kingdom, is the Henley Greenlands Association.
Amongst its other activities it hosts Members Days at Henley each summer, when the College is pleased to welcome members and their families from all countries to Greenlands.
Further services and facilities for Alumni are being added to the range provided by HIAN and by each National Association.
For further information contact  at the HIAN office.
THE NEXT STEP
Organisations or individuals wishing to discuss research proposals with the Centre or requiring further information should contact: or his staff at Henley or if outside the UK the local contact person.
The Qualification Programmes range from certificate, diploma and MBA to MPhil, PhD and DBA.
Over 5,000 students are registered worldwide on the Masters programme, the majority studying the Distance Learning MBA.
Full-time, part-time and Modular MBA programmes are also available.
Executive Programmes cater for mainly company sponsored participants who attend residential programmes on a continuous or modular basis.
These programmes last between one day and eight weeks and address the needs of managers at particular times in their career.
Three phases of development are addressed; the functional/specialist managers preparing to move to more general management roles, senior managers needing to take a more strategic approach to their roles, and the more senior managers/directors who need specific, relevant briefings on both strategic and corporate governance issues.
A portfolio of over 30 short courses complements the longer programmes and also meets more specialist requirements.
Corporate Programmes encompass two areas of tailored programmes for companies.
Company Programmes have a successful 15 year record of designing and delivering carefully tailored organisational and management development courses.
Company MBA and Diploma distance learning programmes were developed in 1986 and have an impressive client list including Shell, BICC and Pedigree Petfoods.
Inter-Company and Consortium programmes are run for organisations sponsoring smaller groups and provide a useful cross cultural experience.