

UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
Two posts of Administrative Officer
A. The University's Central Administrative Service
The University's central administrative service consists of some 120 academic-related staff and 190 clerical or other staff.
The chief officer is the Registrar.
Below him are four Deputy Registrars who head the four main divisions of the central administrative service, namely the Secretary of Faculties (Academic Division), a Deputy Registrar (General Administrative Division), the Secretary of the Chest (Finance Division), and the Surveyor to the University (Buildings Division).
The first three divisions, along with the Registrar, are based in the University Offices in Wellington Square; the University Surveyor operates from an office nearby in Tidmarsh Lane.
In addition, at Deputy Registrar level, there is the Director of the Administrative Information Services Unit.
There are also three other Directors who report directly to the Registrar for the sections of the University Offices under their charge, namely the Director of the Development Office, the Director of the External Relations Office, and the Director of Research Services.
B. The Academic Division
The Academic Division is responsible for servicing the General Board of the Faculties (which under Council is responsible for the academic administration of the University) and some 13 standing committees, 16 faculty boards (and a variety of board committees), 15 inter-faculty and similar committees, and the Libraries Board and its committees.
It is also responsible for administering the procedures for the admission, supervision and examination of all graduate students.
The Secretary of Faculties (Mr A.P.
Weale) is assisted by two Senior Assistant Registrars, one of whom is the Secretary of the Medical School, and a number of Assistant Registrars and Administrative Officers.
C. The General Administrative Division
The General Administrative Division, which is headed by Mr P.W.
Jones, is responsible for the servicing of the Hebdomadal Council (the body charged with the ultimate responsibility ‘for the administration of the University and for the management of its finances and property’), for a wide range of matters relating to the general administration of the University, and for various ad hoc inquiries and working parties.
It includes a section, under the Director of Personnel Services, which services the Staff Committee, the body responsible to Council and the General Board of the Faculties for all personnel matters in relation to the non-teaching (including academic-related) staffs of the University; the Director of Personnel Services is assisted by one Assistant Registrar and two Administrative Officers.
In addition to these staff, the division includes three Senior Assistant Registrars, three Assistant Registrars, and a number of Administrative Officers.
D. The posts advertised
Two posts are available:
(1) the first post will be based in the Academic Division and will involve in part assisting the Senior Assistant Registrar (Miss C.L. Lee) who currently has oversight of arrangements for academic audit, quality assessment and related matters, particularly with the preparation of statistical material and the organisation of visits.
The post-holder will also be involved in the preparations for the next HEFCE research assessment exercise; this will include questions relating to the establishment of a publications database, and candidates for this appointment should therefore be computer literate.
The appointment is also likely to involve assistance in servicing various academic boards or committees, and/or other administrative functions within the division, the precise details to be settled according to the qualifications and experience of the successful candidate;
(2) the second post will be based in the General Administrative Division.
This is a new post, which has been established primarily to provide relief to senior members of the General Administrative and Academic Divisions and to enable the divisions to cope with the additional demands placed upon them by ad hoc tasks, for example the creation of new working parties.
The duties will be decided in discussion between the Secretary of Faculties and the Deputy Registrar (Administration) but are likely to involve a combination of ad hoc tasks and working parties and assistance in servicing various boards and committees, academic or administrative, the precise details of which will be settled according to the qualifications and experience of the successful candidate.
This post could be suitable for someone near the beginning of a career in administration, though some previous administrative experience, not necessarily in university administration, is desirable but not essential.
A high standard of literacy, however, will be required.
There is a well-established career structure within the university administration and in the case of both posts therefore there will be opportunities for advancement, depending on the ability and performance of the post-holders.
Candidates may express a preference between the posts.
In the absence of any stated preference it will be assumed that the candidates will be willing to be considered for either appointment.
The intention is to complete the preliminary short-listing in the week beginning 12 July 1993, with a view to holding interviews on Tuesday, 3 August.
Candidates are asked to note this date
E. General conditions
Applicants should be graduates, preferably with some experience of employment within higher education.
The appointment will be in the academic-related administrative grade 2 (15,796 — 20,442 per annum, with a discretionary range to 22,925).
The starting salary of the successful applicant will be fixed according to experience.
The appointment will be subject to a three-year probationary period.
Should the probationary period be completed satisfactorily, the appointment will continue until retiring age, subject to the provisions of the University Statutes and Decrees and to such provisions  of the Education Reform Act which may be applicable to this appointment.
The age of retirement for university appointments is 65.
Staff are eligible to join the Universities Superannuation Scheme, a contributory scheme to which members pay 6.35 per cent of annual salary.
Subject to the Statement of Pensions Policy which will be issued to the successful candidate, the appointee will be deemed to be in membership of the above pension scheme until such time as he or she gives notice in writing to exercise the right not to be a member of the scheme
The appointee will be entitled to 38 days of annual leave (this figure of 38 includes 8 public holidays).
The actual distribution of annual holidays, excluding the public holidays, is normally four weeks during the summer vacation, and five days at Christmas and five days at Easter, when the offices are closed.
Appointees to established posts such as this one, who are living more than 20 miles from Oxford, will be eligible for relocation allowances.
These are intended to cover removal expenses and some of the other fees and charges incurred when moving house.
The University has a generous maternity leave scheme.
Provided they have at least one year's service with the University by the expected date of birth, or have at any time been eligible to receive full-rate Statutory Maternity Pay or were at any stage entitled to the benefits of a previous employer's paid maternity leave scheme, women are eligible for 18 weeks maternity leave on full pay, followed by up to 22 weeks unpaid maternity leave.
The University has recently opened its first child care nursery and is actively pursuing plans for a second.
The University Childcare Officer is also able to provide information about other childcare facilities in the local area.
Applications with a detailed curriculum vitae should reach the Deputy Registrar (Administration), University Offices, Wellington Square, Oxford, OX1 2JD, by not later than 12 July 1993.
They should include the names of two persons to whom reference may be made.
The University will assume that it is free to approach referees at any stage unless the candidate's application stipulates otherwise (i.e. candidates who wish a referee or referees to be approached only with their specific permission and/or if they are being called for interview on the final short list or are in receipt of a conditional offer, are asked to state such requirements explicitly alongside the details of the relevant referee(s)).
The University of Oxford's policy and practice require that entry into employment with the University and progression within employment will be determined only by personal merit and the application of criteria which are related to the duties of each particular post and the relevant salary structure.
Subject to statutory provisions, no applicant or member of staff will be treated less favourably than another because of his or her sex, marital status, race, ethnic or national origin, or colour.
Halford Mackinder Professorship of Geography: memorandum of guidance for candidates and electors
1.
The professorship and the desired qualifications of the next holder
Under the provisions of the university decree governing the post, the Halford Mackinder Professor of Geography is required ‘to lecture and give instruction in Geography’.
It will also be expected that the holder of the post will provide research leadership, and take a particular interest in the School's graduate programme.
The University seeks the best available candidate, with an international reputation in scholarship and research.
The former holder of the post was Professor David Harvey, whose interests lay in the field of Human Geography.
Although there is a preference for appointing his successor in that field, candidates whose interests lie in Physical Geography will be considered.
2.
Headship of the department
The current head of department is the Professor of Geography, Professor Andrew Goudie.
The University is about to introduce a general policy for headships in all departments.
This will provide that any university postholder (but normally a professor or reader) will be eligible to hold the headship for periods of up to five years and some professors and readers will be required to serve as head if asked by Council.
It is thus possible that in the course of the next few years Council will assign the headship for a period to the holder of the Halford Mackinder Professorship, who will among those carrying an obligation to serve if so requested.
3.
The School of Geography
The School of Geography at Oxford is one of the biggest autonomous Geography departments in any British university, with two professorships and a further academic staff of 20.
Professor Ceri Peach holds an ad hominem chair of Social Geography and Dr Michael Williams holds an ad hominem readership in Geography.
There are about 300 undergraduates working in the School and some 45 research students.
Numbers of undergraduates and research students have increased substantially in the last 20 years and have been matched by recent extensive building additions to the School.
In each of the last three UGC/UFC research selectivity exercises, the school was placed in the top category.
Geography is housed in its own substantial buildings close to the centre of the University, the libraries and the colleges.
The main building dates from the 19th century and two new wings have since been added.
The main building contains tutors' rooms, research rooms, a computing room, laboratories, and cartographic and administrative offices.
One of the new wings contains the main lecture hall, a classroom for practical work, a seminar room and tutors' rooms.
The second wing houses the departmental library and map collection.
Oxford has almost unparalleled library facilities in the Bodleian, which is a copyright library.
The School's own library and map collection contain over 100,000 volumes and over 60,000 maps; over 200 periodicals are taken currently and more than 130 series of research papers are taken from 70 other geography departments and research institutions.
There is a growing microfilm and microfiche collection.
There are also some 10,000 air photographs and slides.
The departmental library is on four floors with two large reading rooms and an  extensive map and atlas store.
It is a lending library.
In addition, geographers are able to use the library resources of the Bodleian, other departments of the University, and their own colleges, which generally concentrate on providing basic material for undergraduates.
Computing facilities
The University provides an excellent range of facilities for computation.
There are high speed links direct from the School of Geography to the University's mainframe computers.
JANET facilitates direct access to other university computers in London, Manchester, Cambridge and elsewhere in the UK and overseas.
The University's Computing Service offers an excellent range of peripherals and specialist services, including high quality Calcomp plotters, and a typesetting service.
A wide range of software is supported, including specialist statistical packages, databases, and software for computer modelling.
The School of Geography has a range of micro-computing facilities available for both teaching and research use.
Staff and graduate students have access to a number of IBM PCs, laser printers and some digitising facilities.
A wide range of software is available including word-processing, spreadsheets, computer assisted cartographic packages, standard statistical packages, desk-top publishing software, programming languages and several GIS systems.
Laboratory facilities and field equipment
The past ten years have seen a considerable increase in laboratory facilities.
In addition to the usual equipment for sediment analysis (which includes a new laser granulometer) and petrographic examination, there is a separate environmental geochemistry laboratory, housing, amongst other items, a CHN analyser, a computerised Perkin Elmer atomic absorption spectrophotometer and graphite furnace, a multi-channel chemlab auto-analyser, a UV spectro-photometer, flame photometers and turbidimeter.
A new environmental cabinet permits simulation of weathering in a wide range of environments.
The school's equipment includes a scanning electron microscope.
This is complemented by various photomicroscopes.
There is also a Bartington magnetic susceptibility meter.
For field work, the school has a departmental vehicle.
Field equipment includes a Turner's field fluorometer, a Livingstone corer, rubber dinghy, autosamplers, data loggers, stage recorders, a rainfall simulator, an EDM and other items of surveying equipment.
The School maintains its own meteorological station — the Radcliffe Meteorological Station — which has the longest continuous record in the UK.
Individual members of the department have links with Anthroplogy, Earth Sciences, Oriental Studies, Queen Elizabeth House and Social Studies
4.
Staff
A list of the academic staff of the department and their research interests is appended.
There are, in addition, at present the following support staff:
Administrator of the School 
2 cartographers
5 library staff
4 secretarial staff, including the secretary to the head of department and a secretary on whom the Halford Mackinder professor has first call
3 technical staff Radcliffe Meterological Observer
5.
Teaching
The School is responsible for the teaching of the Honour School (Honours BA) of Geography.
Courses are also given to students reading for the degree in Human Sciences, and for a number of postgraduate degrees in area studies.
Members of the School staff will also contribute to the M.Sc.
in Environmental Change and Management once this is established.
Undergraduate courses
Honour Moderations involves the study of five subjects, four of which are compulsory and one of which is selected from a list of options.
The course is examined by a paper in each subject at the end of the summer (Trinity) term of the first year.
The compulsory papers are Ideas in Geography, Physical Geography, Human Geography and Geographical Techniques.
Ideas in Geography requires the examination of selected important geographical writings of individual authors of the 19th and 20th centuries.
The Physical Geography course is concerned with meteorology and climatology; geomorphology (climatic, tectonic, and lithologic influences): drainage basin hydrology and ecosystems.
The Human Geography course deals with world population growth and distribution; the origin, evolution and distribution of human settlements; natural resource use and technological innovation; forms of territorial organisation.
The Geographical Techniques course is in two parts, the first of which covers a wide range of methods, including the collection of data and techniques for analysing geographical material as well as theoretical aspects of the subject.
The second part requires the submission of a folder of fieldwork.
Finally, one additional subject is chosen from the following list: Ethnology, Political History 1919–1945, Plant Ecology, Sociology, and the Geomorphology of Britain.
The Final Honour School involves a piece of independent research work for a dissertation and five other subjects.
Three of these subjects are compulsory, two are chosen from a long list (see below), while the dissertation is a free choice restricted only by practicality, ingenuity and application.
The compulsory papers include two on the Geographical Environment.
In the first of these, physical environment is stressed; in the second, the human controls on the environment and the distribution of activities are emphasised.
Candidates also have to choose a paper in one of these two areas: the Philosophy, Nature and Practice of Geography or the United Kingdom and France.
In addition there is a choice of two optional subjects from the following list:
Climatology;
Landforms;
Arid Zones,
the Middle East;
Urban Geography;
Social Geography;
Historical Geography;
Geography of Russia and its relations with the successor states of the former USSR;
Southern Africa;
Biogeography;
Hydrology;
Quaternary Environments;
Economic Geography;
African Societies in Transition.
Two papers are set in each option so the options constitute one half of the final examination papers.
Graduate programmes
Hallmarks of the research training provided by the department include both a commitment to individual, specialised scholarship and a concern for broader contemporary trends and potentials in the discipline.
Three degrees by research are available.
The M.Sc., M.Litt., and D.Phil. are all awarded on the examination of a thesis.
A department-wide graduate seminar is held during each Michaelmas and Hilary Term for the benefit of research students.
In addition, graduates organise their own series in Trinity Term.
They are seen as an important part of academic life in the School.
Research students are expected to attend and may be asked to contribute a paper on their research programme for discussion at an appropriate stage in its progress.
From time to time papers are offered by members of the academic staff and by visiting speakers.
The graduate seminar normally is chaired by the head of department and the Halford Mackinder Professor.
Graduate students are encouraged to organise their own informal seminars.
In addition, the School of Geography and the University offer a wide range of seminars and visiting lectures which students are encouraged to attend.
In conformity with ESRC requirements, a formal programme of graduate education in human geography is provided.
This programme, which is still at the experimental stage and therefore subject to adjustment in the light of experience, is intended to supplement and not to replace the close personal supervision which graduate students are entitled to expect.
All incoming graduate students (including non-ESRC funded students) are expected to participate unless they have already completed a Master's or equivalent coursework elsewhere which would allow them to claim exemption from some or all requirements.
Satisfactory performance in this course work will be a condition of up-grading from probationary to full research status at the end of the first year of study.
All other graduate students in the School of Geography are, of course, welcome to attend any aspect of the course which they may find interesting or useful.
The department is part of the Wessex consortium, a grouping of Geography departments from Reading, Bristol, Southampton, Exeter, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Lampeter and Oxford.
All of the first year graduate students in human geography in these universities are expected to participate in two intensive residential courses of approximately one week's duration each.
Financial assistance, where necessary, is provided by colleges and the department.
The first course (held in the first term) will cover topics such as:(a) the process of research;(b) social theory and human geography;(c) research strategies in human geography; and,(d) a survey of some current research in the field.
The objective is to orient students to relevant literatures, to suggest a variety of possible methodologies to be employed, and to inform students of the specialist educational resources available in the different departments in the region.
The second course (to be held in the second term) will require students to present for discussion and peer criticism the theoretical, methodological and empirical bases which they intend to use in their chosen field of enquiry.
The emphasis will be on presentation skills  as well as substantive content.
In addition, students should gain insights from peer criticism as well as from listening to the ideas of others at a similar stage of research.
Research
The school publishes a research paper series.
It offers research training across the whole spectrum of the discipline of Geography.
From the active research fields and interests of members of the academic staff, listed below, it may be seen that social, historical, urban, political, economic, quantitative and applied aspects reflect current emphases in Human Geography, whilst in Physical Geography studies of Karst, Quaternary environments, sedimentology, hydrology and palaeolimnology and the arid zone are among principal fields of research.
Overseas research interests presently relate to North America, southern Africa, western Europe, Latin America, the Middle East, China and the former Soviet Union.
Close research links exist with several overseas universities.
7.
The Environmental Change Unit
This Unit was opened in 1991 with the support of a wide range of benefactors.
The Institute's Director is Professor Martin Parry, who heads a research team of 22 working on the effects of climatic change on agriculture, energy efficiency and climatic change.
The ECU is housed near the School of Geography, and complements the School's base in environmental science and its interests in the Tropics, notably Africa.
Professor Parry and his colleagues are already actively involved in the supervision of research students, and it is planned to introduce an M.Sc.
in Environmental Change and Management in the near future.
8.
Departmental budget
The departmental budget (which covers costs other than those of buildings (including rent and external maintenance) and the salaries of academic staff which are met centrally) for the School of Geography for 1992–3 is of the order of 408K, of which 304K relates to the cost of departmental salaries and 104K to non-staff costs.
The department's recurrent equipment grant for 1992–3 is 48K.
9.
College association
The professorship will be held in association with a non-stipendiary fellowship at St Peter's College.
Professorship of the Archaeology of the Roman Empire: memorandum of guidance for candidates and electors
The professorship, which was last held by the late Professor Martin Harrison, is one of the 12 established chairs under the Board of the Faculty of Literae Humaniores, complementing the Lincoln Professorship of Classical (Greek) Archaeology and Art.
It will be held in conjunction with a fellowship of All Souls College.
Like most arts subjects at Oxford, Archaeology is not organised departmentally.
The professor will exercise major responsibilities on behalf of two bodies: the Faculty of Literae Humaniores and the Committee for Archaeology.
1.
The Faculty of Literae Humaniores
The faculty is made up of three sub-faculties: Philosophy, Ancient History, and Greek and Latin Languages and Literature.
The professor will be a member of the last two, which together hold 7 established chairs.
There are also at present 3 ad hominem professors, 2 readers and 38 lecturers.
There is a university lecturer in Roman Archaeology.
The professor will be qualified for election as an official member of the board of the faculty (which has final authority over the proceedings of its sub-faculties), and will be expected to serve from time to time on the various standing and ad hoc committees appointed by the board.
The professor will be expected to play a major part in the organisation of syllabuses, teaching and lecturing in Roman Art and Archaeology, in close collaboration with the sub-faculties of Ancient History and Classical Languages and Literature.
At present, papers in Roman Art and Archaeology are offered in Honour Moderations in Greek and Latin Literature and Latin Literature with Greek and in the Final Honour Schools of Literae Humaniores, Ancient and Modern History and Classics and Modern Languages.
2.
Committee for Archaeology
The Committee has charge of the Institute of Archaeology and of admission of graduate students in all branches of Archaeology, and has charge of the new degree in Archaeology and Anthropology, in which papers are offered in Roman Art and Archaeology.
The professor will be a member ex officio of the committee, and will be expected from time to time to hold offices such as that of Chairman of the Committee or Director of Graduate Studies, and in due course to assume the duties of professor in charge of the Institute, which are customarily rotated by arrangement.
The professor will be expected to play a full part in the admission and supervision of graduate students, the appointment of supervisors and examiners and the general administration of graduate studies.
Graduates in Roman archaeology may read for the D.Phil. or M.Litt. (by thesis) or the M.St.
or M.Phil.
(wholly or partly by taught courses).
The Ashmolean Museum, which includes the Heberden Coin Room, offers a particularly important resource for both research and teaching in Classical Archaeology.
The duties of the professor are, in summary, to pursue original research in the archaeology and art of Rome and its empire; to give in each academic year at least 36 lectures and classes; to promote the study of Roman Art and Archaeology at undergraduate  level both in the Honour School of Literae Humaniores and related joint schools and in the new Honour School of Archaeology and Anthropology; to play a leading part in the guidance, supervision, encouragement and examination of graduate students; and also, when requested to take part in undergraduate examinations.
The professor is expected to fulfil the lecturing obligation partly by giving lectures to undergraduates and partly by giving lectures or seminars suitable for graduate students.
While it is recognised that the professor will probably wish to give lectures and classes in areas connected with his or her own field of research, he or she will be expected to cover a somewhat wider range of topics, as required by undergraduate and graduate courses in Roman Archaeology.
Duties and conditions are laid down in greater detail in the accompanying extract from the Decrees and Regulations.
It is hoped that the professor will play a leading part in creating and maintaining contacts with other departments of Classical Art and Archaeology both in the UK and abroad; in organising visits to Oxford by overseas scholars; in forwarding attempts to maintain and revive classical teaching in schools and universities; and in communicating to a wider public the results and importance of Classical Archaeology.
The professor will be a Fellow of All Souls College.
Fellowship involves membership of the Governing Body (with the possibility of being invited to serve on college committees), a workroom in college or its annexe, meals without charge, academic allowances exceeding 1,800 per annum, and membership of BUPA for the fellow and dependents (subject to tax).
The Estates Bursar would be available to discuss these financial aspects of the College Fellowship.
The professor will have a room and access to secretarial services in the Institute of Archaeology.
Travel and research grants are available from the faculty board and from certain trust funds.
The professor will be provided with a research assistant.
This will be a fixed-term, non-renewable appointment for three years on Research Support scale IB (12,828 — 17,379).
It is hoped that it will be possible to continue the post after the first appointment so that there can be a series of three year appointments but this will be dependant on a review of the financial position.
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD COULSON PROFESSORSHIP OF THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY
The electors intend to proceed to an election to the Coulson Professorship of Theoretical Chemistry, which falls vacant on 1 October 1994 upon the retirement of Professor N.H. March, and invite applications by 26 July 1993.
The professor will be required to lecture and give instruction in Theoretical Chemistry.
The professorship will be held in what, from 1 October 1994, will be the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, which is being created by amalgamating the previously separate Department of Theoretical Chemistry with the Physical Chemistry Laboratory.
The headship of the amalgamated department will be assigned by the Hebdomadal Council from time to time for specified periods of not less than five years to one of the persons holding an established academic post in the department, normally with the title of professor or reader.
Professor J.P.
Simons, FRS, Dr Lee's Professor of Chemistry with effect from 1 October 1993 has been assigned the headship until 30 September 1999.
The stipend of the professorship is at present £34,467 per annum.
A pensionable allowance (currently £6,000) will be added in respect of the duties as head of the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory for any periods during which these are assigned to the professor.
After taking up the post, the professor will become eligible for consideration, in reviews which will take place from time to time, for one of a small number of additional awards which may be made in recognition of outstanding academic distinction and/or contribution to the academic work of the University (e.g. in leadership in, or in the development of, some field of study).
The professor will have the option of becoming (or remaining) a member of the Universities Superannuation Scheme (USS).
The professor is required to retire not later than the 30 September immediately preceding the 66th birthday, except that, if the successful candidate can establish a vested interest, as defined in the University's statutes (details available on request), in retirement at age 67 or later, then the date of retirement will be not later than the 30 September immediately preceding the 68th birthday.
The University encourages links with industry and other outside bodies.
Although the holding of outside appointments such as consultancies must be approved by faculty boards, no limit as such is set on the amount of money individuals may receive in this way.
The criterion is the amount of time such appointments take up: a maximum of 30 days per annum may be spent on such activities before any deduction in stipend is considered.
The University's appraisal scheme is not linked to arrangements for pay, promotion or probation.
Under the scheme, discussions with appraisers are held every five years, and more frequently if requested by appraisers or appraisees.
The scheme is designed to further personal development and to encourage reflection on institutional arrangements.
A non-stipendiary professorial fellowship at University College is attached to the professorship.
The professor will be qualified for election as one of the official members of the Boards of the Faculties of Mathematical Sciences and Physical Sciences who are elected from time to time by the respective faculties from the lists of qualified persons to hold office for two years.
The University has a generous maternity leave scheme, which goes well beyond the statutory provisions.
Provided that they have at least one year's service with the University by the expected date of birth, women are eligible for 18 weeks maternity leave on full pay, followed by up to 22 weeks unpaid maternity leave.
Women with less than one year's service are eligible to apply for unpaid maternity leave.
This policy is under review, with the intention of improving it still further.
The University has limited creche facilities and is actively pursuing the provision of improved facilities; applications from women wishing to return to work on a part-time basis after the birth of a child would also be considered.
The University of Oxford's policy and practice require that entry into employment with the University and progression within employment will be determined only by personal merit and the application of criteria which are related to the duties of each particular post and the relevant salary structure.
Subject to statutory provisions, no applicant or member of staff will be treated less favourably than another because of his or her sex, marital status, race, ethnic or national origin, or colour.
Where suitably qualified individuals are available, electoral boards will contain at least one member of each sex.
Candidates should send to the undersigned ten copies (one from overseas) of their applications and of any statement that they may think it desirable to submit, and should name three referees.
Testimonials should not be sent.
The choice of the electors will not necessarily be limited to those who apply.
All reasonable interview expenses will be reimbursed.
Removal expenses and travelling expenses in connection with the move to Oxford of the successful candidate are generally paid in full in appropriate cases.
Professional expenses of up to £2,500 also are available where appropriate to cover solicitors' and other costs in connection with a move.
Further details are available on request.
The appointment of the nominated candidate will be subject to the satisfactory completion of a medical questionnaire.
Further particulars, which include extracts from the relevant decrees and regulations and a memorandum of guidance, are attached.
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD COULSON PROFESSORSHIP OF THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY Extracts from the Decrees and Regulations
The professor will be required to lecture and give instruction in Theoretical Chemistry.
The professorship is tenable until retirement, subject to the provisions of the statute concerning the Visitatorial Board and also subject to any relevant provisions which may be introduced into the statutes as a result of the implementation of the Education Reform Act 1988.
The duties of every professor shall include original work by the professor himself and the general supervision of research and advanced work in his subject and department, and assistance of students in their studies by advice or informal instruction.
It shall be the duty of every professor to act as an examiner or assessor as and when requested to do so by a nominating committee or other competent body unless he can show reasonable cause to the satisfaction of the Vice-Chancellor and Proctors why on a particular occasion he should not do so.
It shall be the duty of every professor to act as the supervisor of graduate students as and when requested to do so by a faculty board or other competent body, unless he can show reasonable cause, to the satisfaction of that board or other body, why on a particular occasion he should not do so.
Except when they are earned by the professor as the supervisor of graduate students, as an academic adviser under the regulations for Recognized Students, or (subject to the approval of the faculty board or boards concerned and the General Board, including approval as to the length of time for which the permission shall be given) in respect of tutorial teaching for up to four hours per week (exceptionally up to six hours per week), any fees received for lectures or instruction given by the professor in the University shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the department of which he is in charge or, if he is not in charge of the department, shall be paid to the Curators of the University Chest for the credit of the University General Fund.
Whenever the professor is engaged in research work within the University being research work which is funded in whole or in part by an outside body on terms that any invention, know-how, copyright or information arising in the course of such work shall be patented, dealt with or otherwise used or exploited in such manner as the outside body may direct, any such invention, know-how, copyright or information shall be subject to the terms of the agreement with the outside body and the professor is required to comply with all obligations including those of confidentiality imposed by that agreement.
(Any other inventions made by the professor in the course of his employment will be deemed to fall within the provisions of Section 39(2) of the Patents Act 1977, i.e. will be taken to belong to him.)
No professor may hold any other appointment, except the office of Proctor or of Assessor, whether in the University or not, without leave of the board of the appropriate faculty and of the General Board; and the General Board shall determine what reduction, if any, shall be made in the professor's stipend.
The General Board may dispense any professor from discharging the duties of his office during one term (i.e. a term of sabbatical leave) for every six terms of qualifying service, provided that(i) qualifying service shall normally accumulate up to a maximum of eighteen terms, from which six terms are deducted whenever a term of leave is granted, and (ii) not more than three terms of sabbatical leave shall be granted in any one period of three years.
The professor will normally be allowed to retain his full stipend during any term of sabbatical leave provided that(a) he will spend a considerable part of his leave in advanced study or research;(b) he will give up all teaching and administrative duties in Oxford other than examining and graduate supervision;(c) if after taking account of any loss of normal sources of income and any gain of income from new sources (less any additional expenses associated with new activities), he is in a better financial position than if he had not taken leave, he will forgo from his stipend such sum as will leave him in approximately the same financial state as if he had not taken leave.
(A) The following provisions apply to periods during which the headship of the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory is not assigned to the professor:
The professor shall reside within the University (i.e. within twenty-five miles of Carfax, the central point of Oxford) during six months at least in each academical year, between the first day of October and the ensuing first day of August, and in particular during not less than six weeks of each term.
The professor shall lecture, or hold classes, in two at least of the three university terms and shall give at least thirty-six lectures or classes in all and not less than twelve in each of two terms, of which not less than sixteen must be lectures.
(B) The following provisions apply to any period during which the headship of the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory is assigned to the professor:
The professor shall reside within the University (i.e. within twenty-five miles of Carfax, the central point of Oxford) during six months at least in each academical year, between the first day of October and the ensuing first day of August.
The professor shall lecture, or hold classes, in two at least of the three university terms and shall give at least twenty-eight lectures or classes in all and not less than twelve in each of two terms.
The laboratory or department under the charge of each professor shall be open for at least eight weeks in each term, and at such other times, and for such hours, as the professor shall think fit.
Students shall be admitted to the laboratory or department under the charge of the professor, upon such conditions as Council shall from time to time by decree determine.
The professor shall have the charge of such laboratory or department and of such collections as may be assigned to him by decree, and shall make provision for the lighting, warming, water-supply, and cleansing of the buildings assigned to him.
He shall undertake the personal and regular supervision of his laboratory or department, and of any departmental demonstrators and other assistants employed therein.
When the professor is in charge of any collection belonging to the University it shall be part of his duty to make such collection accessible to, and available for the instruction of, students attending his lectures.
The professor shall, for seven weeks in each term, be ready to give instruction in the subject of his chair to such students as shall have been admitted to the laboratory or department under his charge; and such instruction shall be given in the laboratory or department or in some classroom connected therewith.
The professor shall also, at the close of each term, inform any society which may request him to do so, as to the regularity of attendance and the proficiency of the students belonging to such society who have been admitted into the laboratory or department under his charge.
The professor may apply through the board of the faculty concerned to the General Board of the Faculties for leave to keep a register regulating the number of students who may be admitted to the practical classes in his department.
The General Board shall have power to accept or refuse the application and, if it accepts it, to determine, in consultation with the professor concerned, the number of students whose names may be on the register at any one time and the method of their selection.
Under the University's safety policy, heads of departments and institutions are responsible for the health, safety, and welfare of all people who are lawfully in the buildings under their charge and are required to bring to the notice of all employees a written statement describing the organisation and arrangements for safety within their departments.
Heads of departments and institutions are indemnified by the University in respect of any claims made against them under civil law in connection with safety duties.
In the unlikely event that any criminal charges are brought against a head of department in connection with safety duties the University undertakes to meet the reasonable cost of his defence.
Coulson Professorship of Theoretical Chemistry: memorandum of guidance for candidates and electors
1.
Professorship of Theoretical Chemistry
The Coulson Professorship of Theoretical Chemistry falls vacant on the retirement in September 1994 of Professor N.H. March, who has presided over a separate department.
This is to be amalgamated with the Physical Chemistry Laboratory in 1994, when the new professor takes office.
The professorship will then be one of two statutory chairs in the new department, together with Dr Lee's Professorship of Physical Chemistry.
The present holder of this chair, Professor J.S. Rowlinson, FRS, retires in September 1993 and will be succeeded by Professor J.P.
Simons, FRS.
In terms of staff numbers the amalgamated department will be one of the largest devoted to Physical and Theoretical Chemistry in the world.
The Coulson Chair was established in the knowledge that Theoretical Chemistry was making significant contributions to Physical, Organic, and Inorganic Chemistry besides becoming an established field in its own right, and it was envisaged that the professor might choose to be associated with the work of any of the laboratories.
This principle still applies, and applications are invited from people working in all areas of Theoretical Chemistry, even though the professor will be located within the new Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory.
No differentiation will be made between candidates involved with analytical or computational work.
The major duties of the professor will be to pursue his or her own research and to sustain an active research group, whilst acting as a focus for the extensive activity in Theoretical Chemistry that already exists in the Oxford Chemistry School.
Ample opportunity exists to interact with experimentalists across a very wide range of Chemistry, and such co-operation would be welcomed.
The professor will be expected to oversee the provision of lectures in Mathematics to first-year students (for the greater part, those reading Chemistry), and of problems classes related to them.
Within the general lecture scheme of the Chemistry School the professor will also lecture to undergraduates on Theoretical Chemistry, and will be concerned with supplementary subjects (see below) with a Theoretical Chemistry content.
Graduate lecture courses are few at present but may be expected to grow in number in the near future.
It has been traditional for the theoretical chemists to run series of seminars additional to those in Physical Chemistry, and it is expected that the Coulson Professor will wish to continue this.
It is hoped, too, that the new professor will encourage the continuance of the renowned Coulson Summer Schools in Theoretical Chemistry.
The professor will also be expected to undertake examining duties and such administrative tasks as will from time to time arise, including possibly being head of department (see below).
2.
The Oxford Chemistry School
Oxford has the largest chemistry school in the United Kingdom, and one of the largest in the world.
It admits about 190 undergraduates each year on to an unique (in England and Wales) four-year course.
The final year of this course (the ‘Part II’ year) is spent wholly in thesis work in a group chosen by the student, under the supervision of a full member of the academic staff.
Approximately 70 per cent of the students graduate with upper second class or first class degrees, providing a substantial pool of talent from which graduate students can be recruited.
There are at present 63 members of staff, of whom four hold statutory chairs and four ad hominem ones; one of the latter is the Aldrichian Praelector, the fifth statutory position in Chemistry, which can be associated with either a readership or a professorship.
The number includes nine Fellows of the Royal Society.
There are about 120 post-doctoral workers, 235 research students, and about 145 ‘Part II’ students.
Each year more than 450 research papers are published in international journals.
The School includes the Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences, which is an Interdisciplinary Research Centre involved with protein science, under the direction of Professor J.E.
Baldwin, FRS.
It involves work in six separate areas of interest: blood clotting and fibrinolysis, immunology, signal transduction, viruses, enzymes of secondary metabolism, and protein folding and specificity.
Its core research facilities include crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, computation and graphics, biotechnology, glycobiology, and organic chemistry, although all branches of Chemistry are actually involved in the centre.
By 1994 research in Chemistry will be divided among four buildings, three devoted exclusively to each of the three main branches, and the fourth shared by all and the IRC.
Within it the areas devoted to each will be under the aegis of the respective heads of departments.
It is possible that the space allocated to the Coulson Professor will be in this shared building, although the whole utilisation of space within the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory will be reviewed in the near future.
Planning and development of Chemistry, and co-ordination of the approaches of different laboratories, is made through the Interdepartmental Committee for Chemistry, which is a standing committee of the Physical Sciences Board.
Each head of department is an ex officio member of this committee.
Its other members are the chairman and secretary of the Sub-faculty of Chemistry (normally from two different departments) and a representative of whichever department is then under-represented at this level.
It has power to co-opt a further member; at present this member is the committee's chairman.
The chairman qualifies for election to the Physical Sciences Board as an official member, and, if elected, is a member of the General Purposes Committee of that board.
The chairman is also a member of the Committee of Heads of Science Departments.
The Sub-faculty of Chemistry, which consists of all those involved in the teaching of the subject, meets once a term with an elected chairman (not usually a professor) who serves for two years.
Its role is to oversee the general academic running of the subject in Oxford, and it concerns itself, for example, with the lecture course and examinations.
It is advised by an academic committee specifically concerned with the structure and balance of the lecture course.
All full academic members of each laboratory have dual appointments, being fellows of colleges as well as having university posts.
Those who are tutorial fellows are responsible for undergraduate admissions and tutorial teaching in their college capacities.
Graduate students must also secure a college place, but each laboratory and the faculty board play the dominant role in determining whether the student is qualified to embark on postgraduate studies; they also appoint the supervisor.
The admission of research students is delegated by the Physical Sciences Board to the head of department.
Research students register as Probationer Research Students in the first instance, and, subject to a formal review of progress at the end of the first year, they may have their registration upgraded to that of D.Phil.
Student.
3.
The Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory
In its amalgamated form, the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory will contain the Dr Lee's and Coulson Professors, the ad hominem Professor of Electron Spectroscopy (Professor D.W. Turner, FRS, who, however, will retire in September 1994), a second ad hominem professor (Professor M.S. Child, FRS), an ad hominem reader currently working in another department, and 18 lecturers.
In the future, however, lecturerships as they fall vacant may be associated with any of the departments of Chemistry, according to perceived need, and the establishment of any one may change.
Five of the current staff (P.W.
Atkins, M.S.
Child, W.G. Richards, P.A. Madden, and D.E.
Logan) have predominantly theoretical and computational research interests.
Throughout the period of its existence the Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, like the Physical Chemistry Laboratory, has received a constant stream of distinguished foreign scientists on sabbatical leave.
The laboratory also contains a senior research associate (the head of a college).
In addition there are a senior research officer, a university research fellow, three departmental research assistants (one at present associated with Theoretical Chemistry), and several other research fellows, on a range of appointments.
There are approximately 30 additional postdoctoral workers, 70 postgraduates, and 45 ‘Part II’ students.
The head of department is assisted by an administrator, and there are 35 members of the technical and clerical staff, plus six cleaners and a caretaker.
A secretary will be associated with the Coulson Chair.
General facilities include a library, excellent electronic and mechanical workshops, and an ethernetted system of workstations linked to the external university system, which is now shifting progressively towards a distributed system around a fibre-optic spine.
All the research groups are independent of one another, giving an unusual spread of research interests in a single laboratory.
Inter-group co-operation and stimulation are common, and are facilitated by the excellent atmosphere which exists within the laboratory.
In each of the past two years 155 research papers have been published, whilst three international journals are edited from within it.
Dr Lee's Professorship is likely, in future, always to be filled by an experimentalist.
4.
Headship of department and administration
It is stressed that, on appointment, the Coulson Professor will not be the head of a department, and that there will be no separate department of Theoretical Chemistry.
The headship of the Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory is assigned by the Hebdomadal Council, on the recommendation of the Physical Sciences Board and of the General Board of the Faculties, for specified periods of not less than five years, to a person holding an established academic post in the department, who will usually be a professor or reader or the holder of such a title.
It is expected that assignments to the headship will normally occur on a five-year cycle, with the existing head eligible to be redesignated.
It is also expected that the Physical Sciences Board will agree to forward to the General Board the name selected by the members of the department.
A procedure for selection has been defined by the Interdepartmental Committee for Chemistry.
At the time of the election to the Coulson Professorship, the headship will have been filled.
The Coulson Professor will be amongst those eligible to be head of department.
In the event that no person acceptable to Council is willing to assume the headship on any occasion, either the Coulson or the Dr Lee's Professor will be required to assume it.
Candidates should note, therefore, that the new professor will be bound by this requirement.
The departmental administrator's responsibilities include finance, staff relations, the appointment of clerical assistants and technicians, and the maintenance of premises.
An elected departmental committee also assists the head of department in the following terms as defined in the Statutes of the University: ‘The functions of the departmental committee shall be to advise the head of department on all matters affecting the department, with particular reference to (a) annual estimates;(b) allocation of resources and accommodation;(c) junior academic appointments.’
Academic staff are appointed on the recommendation of a committee which comprises the head of department and at least two other members of the department, a representative from a different sub-faculty of the Physical Sciences Faculty (normally Physics), and two representatives from the college with which the appointment is associated.
The committee reports to the faculty board, and final approval is given by the General Board.
The filling of the posts as they become vacant is decided by the General Board after consideration of recommendations from the faculty board.
5.
Finance and space
The Physical Chemistry Laboratory has been conspicuously successful in obtaining outside grants for sustaining and expanding its research from governmental, industrial, and international sources.
It receives a substantial recurrent grant from the University, which covers its operational overheads.
This grant is subject to considerable change at present owing to alterations in the HEFCE funding arrangements for universities, but it is hoped that within a few years the total income will rise to new levels.
Details of funding are available on request.
The Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory consists of a main building with a connected annex, with a total area of about 4,700m 2 , together with about 550m 2 in the New  Chemistry Laboratory, situated some 50m distant.
The precise allocation of space to the Coulson Professor, and its location, are yet to be decided.
6.
Courses
During the first year the student pursues five topics, of which four must be the three main areas of Chemistry, and Mathematics.
The fifth can be chosen from some 15 others, with the great majority taking either Biological Chemistry or Physics.
These courses are examined at the end of the first year, and their successful completion allows entry to the second year; the marks are not counted towards the final degree.
Subsequently the student's study is devoted to Chemistry, on which written examinations are sat at the end of the third year.
The student can, optionally, take a supplementary subject chosen from a range pertinent to Chemistry.
In the third year the student chooses two branches of Chemistry to an advanced level, and is examined on all three branches.
The fourth year is spent entirely on thesis work, and the student writes a substantial account, which is submitted to two examiners.
The grade of the degree is assessed on the basis of the overall performance on the written papers at the end of the third year, the thesis, and the results from a viva voce examination.
Following changes in school curricula, and the consequent introduction of the new first-year course described above, it is probable that some lectures will be introduced into the fourth year, and graduate lectures will be increased.
At present a limited number of these is provided: departmental and group seminars take place regularly, and a prestigious series of lectures, the ‘Hinshelwood Lectures’, occurs each year.
Recent lecturers have been M. Quack, A. Pines, J.W. White, and A.H.
Zewail.
7.
Research
The research interests of the department are diverse and are described in the handbook provided.
Members are involved in collaborative projects within Oxford, nationally and internationally.
8.
College association
The professor will hold a non-stipendiary fellowship at University College.
9.
Further information
Any further information can be obtained by direct approach to the Chairman of the Interdepartmental Committee for Chemistry, Dr K.A.
McLauchlan, FRS, Physical Chemistry Laboratory.