

Agriculture & Food
BSE found in pig
The UK government has placed an official ban on the use of offal in animal feed and petfoods from any cattle at risk from bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE).
This follows a statement from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food that the disease can be transmitted to pigs.
The ministry revealed that in experiments one pig had developed spongiform encephalopathy after its brain had been injected with BSE-infected tissue from a cow brain.
A ministry spokesman insisted, however, that pork was quite safe for human consumption, and that no known cases of transmission of the disease to pigs had occurred outside the laboratory.
Similar experiments are expected to show that BSE can also be transmitted in this way to sheep and goats.
New Scientist 22 September
Agriculture & Food
Genetic developments with potatoes and peas
Scientists at the seed company Nickerson International have produced a crop of potatoes which have been genetically modified to resist pests such as the Colorado beetle and tuber moth.
The company is hoping that the work could also lead towards the protection of plants from pests more common in Britain, some of which show poor response to traditional pesticides.
Unlike most previous field trials where crops have been grown using tissue cultures, this particular crop, of the variety "Desirée" , was grown from tubers, which is how potatoes are normally cultivated.
The potatoes have been modified with the pea lectin gene which stops pests absorbing vital proteins.
The crop will be examined to ensure that the potatoes have not been altered in any way other than in their new ability to manufacture the lectin protein.
One area for concern during the trials was the chance that if the potatoes were to become weeds, the new genes could be transmitted to other similar plants in the area.
Andrew Watkinson, a member of the Advisory Committee on Release to the Environment, said that as long as Nickerson made careful checks for tubers and burnt off any remaining material, there would not be much likelihood of this occurring.
The company is now hoping to be able to conduct further field trials in the US and Israel, both of which currently use pesticide sprays to control their pest problems.
New Scientist 8 September
Agriculture & Food
Gene-spliced corn "breakthrough" 
Ciba-Geigy, the Swiss pharmaceuticals company, have announced a breakthrough in biotechnology.
Genetic engineers, working for the company, have successfully altered the genetic characteristics of a commercial cereal crop, to enable it to resist disease, pest attack and intemperate conditions.
This is felt to be an important advance, as cereal crops make up such a large part of the world's food supply.
Although biotechnologists had previously had success in breeding resistant broad-leaved crops, such as soya beans and tobacco, cereal crops have been much more difficult to modify.
This is due to the fact that the bacteria normally used to penetrate the cell walls does not affect them.
Using a method known as "biolistic" technology, Ciba-Geigy engineers have now been able to penetrate the cell walls of a variety of corn suitable for commercial farming.
The company has produced a first generation of plants from the modified seeds, and is now waiting to see if they will reproduce to a new generation, containing the implanted genes.
New Scientist 1 September
Conservation: Land
Antarctica: pressure mounts for ban on mineral extraction
International consensus on an agreement that would ban all mining and oil drilling activities in Antarctica may be reached at a meeting to be held in Chile in November.
It is expected that the 25 Antarctic Treaty countries attending the conference will agree to negotiate a legal framework for a comprehensive environmental protection protocol for the world's last unexploited wilderness.
Diplomats say that an agreement may be ready for signing in two years.
The Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA) was negotiated in 1988.
Since then, however, opposition to mineral exploitation has increased.
New Zealand supported the convention until Febuary when it decided not to ratify it.
In September the government introduced legislation in parliament banning all such activity.
The proposed draft protocol builds on existing pollution controls and includes measures to regulate tourism as well as providing for additional protection for fauna and flora.
A secretariat to co-ordinate the exchange of data and opinions is also proposed.
The United States, in a major policy change, now no longer supports CRAMRA.
Facing considerable opposition, the Bush adminstration decided not to submit the convention to the Senate for ratification.
Instead, it will propose a long term moratorium on mineral activities.
A total ban has not been ruled out in the event that scientists discover minerals which could be extracted without damaging the environment.
Australia and France are working on a joint convention to have Antarctica declared a world nature reserve and land of science.
The majority of the consultative members now support a mining ban, with the possible exception of Britain and Japan who appear still to favour the minerals convention.
Greenpeace have joined with the World Wide Fund for Nature in launching a petition campaign for a complete ban on mineral exploitation in Antarctica.
International Herald Tribune 6 September
Conservation: Land
Arctic pact agreed
Canada, Scandinavia, the Soviet Union, Japan and China have agreed on a pact for joint environmental protection and scientific research in the Arctic.
The joint venture entails monitoring air pollution, sharing technical information, raising funds for environmental protection and conducting joint research on timber harvesting, wildlife management and offshore gas and oil drilling.
The pact is widely seen as one of the environmental fruits of glasnost in the Soviet Union.
New Scientist 15 September
Conservation: Land
New tsetse fly trap raises fears for wildlife areas
Controversy has arisen over the possibility of eradicating the tsetse fly from large areas of Africa.
The debate has been brought to a head by the development of an efficient fly trap by a group of British-led scientists in Zimbabwe.
Darkened traps are given various animal and insecticide odours which dupes the fly into thinking that it is biting a cow.
Research is being carried out in Zambezi where 14,000 sq kilometres of land has already been cleared of the fly.
Environmentalists fear that the eradication of the fly will permit cattle farmers to move into previously unattainable territory, with disastrous consequences for ecologically sensitive areas.
Dr Glyn Vale, of the Rekomitjie research station in northern Zimbabwe's valley, claims that the ecologists lack the evidence to prove that the tsetse has prevented farmers from flooding into treasured wildlife areas.
He maintains that the new trap system is environmentally sound and far more effective than previous methods, such as spraying insecticide which, as well as being expensive and ecologically dangerous, is not feasible in hilly, hard to reach areas.
The European Community has to date provided £16 million for insecticide along the "fly belt" which runs through Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
It is to renew funding over the next three years and is pressing for measures to ensure that the cleared areas do not become overpopulated.
The EC has cut funding for aerial spraying and has initiated support projects in tsetse-free areas to help farmers increase production, improve marketing and minimize the need for more land.
Times 11 September
Conservation: Land
Norfolk Broads devastated by modern farming methods, claims NCC report
A report by the Nature Conservancy Council has revealed that the Norfolk Broads are being devastated by modern farming methods despite government measures intended to preserve the area.
The report's conclusions are particularly embarrassing to the government as the Broads have been regarded as a test for its conservation commitment.
In 1988, they were given National Park status by a special Act of Parliament.
NCC officials suspect farmers are using excessive amounts of fertilizer, even though the Broads are located within "environmentally sensitive areas" (ESAs), where farmers are paid to use less intensive farming practices.
Much of the pollution is caused by a backlog of fertilizers, built up over the last 30 years, seeping into the groundwater which feeds many of the dykes.
Contamination will continue even if fertilizers are discontinued.
Damage has extended into the dykes which run between the grazing marshes.
A total of 2,640 dykes were examined, half of which have become floristically impoverished within the last 17 years.
The dykes are the last stronghold for plants and must be cleaned up if they can be expected to re-colonize the Broads in the future.
If the trend continues, only plants which thrive in such pollution can be expected to survive.
Another NCC report also accuses the government of slackness in declaring Sites of Special Interest (SSSIs) in the Broads.
While two-thirds of the Broads should be made SSSIs, says the NCC, only eight per cent are classified as such.
Campaign co-ordinator of Friends of the Earth, Andrew Lees, said the report confirmed that the government's failure to control intensive farming practices was leading to the destruction of the Norfolk Broads.
He added that unless Environment Secretary Chritopher Patten gives the NCC the requisite powers and resources to do what the law requires, the Broads will be doomed.
Guardian 2 September
Conservation: Land
 "Forbidden Britain" day trespass
On Sept. 30, ramblers all over Britain joined in demonstrations and acts of trespass in support of the Ramblers' Association Forbidden Britain Day campaign.
The aim of the association is to acquire greater access to the countryside in areas where it feels the public is unreasonably excluded.
This is the first time since its formation in 1935 that the association has organised a trespass as part of its campaign.
It has done so now in response to what it feels is a growing impatience from its members with the continuing reluctance of landowners to permit access to their property.
Landowners singled out for attention on Forbidden Britain day included the Earl of Macclesfield, who owns an estate of 8,000 acres, most of which is denied to the public, and Viscount Parker, who has an estate in the Oxfordshire Chilterns.
Ramblers protesting near his estate said that they were watched by a large group of men with dogs and sticks in evidence, but the demonstration passed off peaceably.
Viscount Parker is afraid that if he were to open up his land, much of the flora and wildlife would suffer, including buzzards and also red kites, which he is hoping will soon be re-established in the area.
Protesters at Snailsden moor were led by Benny Rothman, who was jailed in 1932 for a similar protest trespass on Kinder Scout, in Derbyshire.
Snailsden Moor is currently denied to the public as the rights are held by a shooting syndicate.
Mr Rothman said that, in comparison to other European countries, Britain was very backward in granting freedom to roam.
Times 1 October
Conservation: Land
Call for national parks in Scotland
The Countryside Commission for Scotland has published a report recommending that four national parks should be created to prevent further damage to mountain areas.
The report, commissioned by the Scottish office, proposes that parks be established for the Cairngorms, Ben Nevis and Glen Coe, Wester Ross and the Trossachs with Loch Lomond.
Although national parks were designated in England and Wales back in the 1950's, Scotland has none.
The proposed areas are included among 40 National Scenic Areas, which affords them some protection, but the Commission feels that they urgently need much better management and investment if their natural beauty, range of species of wildlife and cultural values are to be preserved.
Members of the local communities concerned, including farmers and landowners, are afraid that national park management would restrict both present and future activities on land within park boundaries.
Other parties not completely in agreement with the proposals include the Highland Regional Council, which would lose some control in the designated areas, and the Scottish National Party, which feels that parks would not necessarily be in the interests of either the nation or the environment.
The report will be submitted, after public consultation, to the Secretary of State for Scotland, Malcolm Rifkind, at the end of the year.
It is expected that he will be favourably disposed towards the report's proposals.
Guardian 5 September Independent 6 September
Conservation: Land
Council for national parks report
A report recently published by the Council for National Parks calls upon the government to make a much stronger commitment to protect the environmental values for which the parks were originally created.
The council feels that all too often inappropriate decisions are being made regarding development, often to the detriment of the beauty and ambience of the parks.
It cites the example of noisy, high-tech leisure activities, such as microlight aircraft and motorized hang-gliders, and recommends that these should be banned, in favour of encouraging more peaceable activities.
The report also suggests that car parks should be situated at a distance from popular walking areas, so that visitors would have to take "the long walk in" to reach particular beauty spots.
This could help deter the casual visitor.
Further recommendations are that development should be more carefully controlled, and that national park authorities should also be given the power to control forestry activities within the park areas.
Independent 5 September
Conservation: Land
Anti-peat campaign gathers pace
Surrey County Council is to become the first local authority to sign the Peatland Protection Charter, and to commit itself to the phasing out of the use of peat in the council's public parks, gardens and other landscaping activities.
The campaign against the extraction and use of peat was set up last spring by a group of environmental and conservation organisations, led by the Royal Society for Nature Conservation, in order to try and protect what remains of Britain's lowland bog areas.
These areas are seen as irreplaceable, and many have been designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest by the Nature Conservancy Council, as they are often rich in interesting and unusual species.
However, peat producers have been angered by the campaign mounted against them, and argue that information given to the public regarding the bogs, has been misleading.
Fison's Horticulture, the largest peat extractor in Britain, points out that much of the lowland areas owned by them, including Thorne Waste and Hatfield Moors, had already been spoilt by extraction, long before they bought the land.
According to Robert Lancaster, Fison's company chairman, although there are "pockets where there are things of ecological interest…a lot of it really does look like a wasteland." 
Guardian 18 September Independent 18 September
Conservation: Species
Dolphins off US guard duty
Pressure from animal rights groups has persuaded the US Navy to drop plans to use bottle-nosed dolphins to guard a Trident nuclear submarine base in Washington State.
The dolphins were trained to use pressurized canisters to shoot intruders with a .45 calibre bullets at point-blank range.
The trainers suggest that, as guards, they fell short of expectations.
Rather than ramming the trainers with the guns, the dolphins either "swam away or put their snouts on the trainers' shoulders — very affectionately!" 
The dolphins"future is undecided.
BBC Wildlife September
Conservation: Species
Puzzling deaths of Mediterranean dolphins
Hundreds of dead dolphins have been washing up on shores in the Mediterranean recently, leaving scientists puzzled as to the cause.
Striped dolphins — Stenella coeruleoalta, a deep water variety — have been found on beaches in Spain, Italy and France since August when marine biology experts raised the alarm.
PCB poisoning, seaweed toxins, viral infections, perhaps combined with pollution, have been suggested by marine specialists to explain the deaths.
Experts met in Spain in September to discuss the problem but delegates failed to agree on a possible cause.
Ferran Costa, a biologist for the Barcelona zoo attending the conference, ruled out toxic poisoning because 15 of the dolphins examined showed no trace of toxins.
He also felt that the level of PCBs required to kill a dolphin would have affected other species also.
He conceded that high levels of pollution could have affected the dolphin's defence mechanisms making them vulnerable to attack by an infectious agent.
Some dolphins had 10 times the accepted level of PCBs in their bodies, according to Alex Aguilar, head of the Vertebrates Department at Barcelona University biology faculty, who agreed with Costa's view.
A British expert, David Taylor, who attended the conference as a member of the International Zoo Veterinary Group, did not rule out the virus theory despite tests which show that 25 per cent of the dolphins appeared not to have been affected.
He also pointed out that evidence showing that PCBs act as immunodepressants is inconclusive.
Links made with the deaths of sperm whales, common dolphins, Risso's dolphins and pilot whales elsewhere, including the North Sea epidemic which killed thousands of seals, have not been substantiated.
There have also been unconfirmed reports of algae blooms coincident with the dolphin deaths.
Algae blooms, together with above average temperatures, coincided with the North Sea deaths and the deaths of humpbacks and dolphins along the US east coast in 1987.
Above average temperatures were also implicated in these incidents.
New Scientist 15 September BBC Wildlife October
Conservation: Species
Chinese medicine poses threat to rhinos
Despite the threatened status of the rhino, China is still using rhino horn to produce large quantities of traditional medicine, according to Dr Esmond Bradley Martin, a Kenyan-based conservationist who is conducting research on behalf of the World Wide Fund for Nature.
China is the only country to continue the manufacture of drugs containing large quantities of rhino horn, and rhinos are being killed to meet the demand, says Dr Martin.
Although China is a member of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), rhino is being smuggled into the country from Yemen, Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan and to a lesser degree from Singapore and Thailand.
Chinese CITES reported rhino horn stocks at 21,772 lb at the end of 1989, certainly the largest in the world and representing some 3,300 black rhino.
Guardian 27 September
Conservation: Species
Japanese develop synthetic ivory substitute
Researchers at the Sakai Research Laboratories in Japan have developed an alternative to ivory using dairy products.
The substitute is almost identical to the real thing, according to Mitsuru Sakai, the centre's director.
Substitutes have been developed in the past but failed to absorb water to the extent that ivory does.
Piano keys made with synthetic resins or polymer fibres eventually become slippery with sweat from the pianist's fingers after been played for a long time.
The same held true for mouthpieces for wind instruments and replacement roots for teeth, Sakai explained.
The new substitute, made from eggshells, milk and titanium dioxide, has capilleries which make it more absorbent then other substitutes.
The material is made by combining crushed whole eggs and milk, to which three kinds of the enzyme lipase are then added to break down fats.
The mixture is coagulated and titanium dioxide is added to adjust the weight.
The researchers hope to make the new material more like elephant tusk by streaking it and roughening the texture.
The institute has approached Fukuvi Chemicals to negotiate a marketing agreement to manufacture the product commercially.
Previous to the CITES ban on ivory, Japan had been buying 130 tonnes of ivory each year, which suggests a massive local demand for the new substitute.
Piano keys and name seals alone accounted for 80 tonnes of ivory.
New Scientist 1 September
Conservation: Species
China to join ivory trade ban
China, the last country to allow the import of ivory, is to accede to the world ban on ivory as of January 1991.
The Chinese government told the Lausanne-based Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) that it will withdraw the exemption it took out when the ban was agreed last October.
In theory, the decision brings the international ivory market to an end.
Of the seven countries which had exempted themselves from the ban, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Botswana and South Africa were ivory producers and exporters, while China and Hong Kong were the only countries to continue importing ivory.
When Hong Kong's exemption ended in July, China became the sole ivory importer.
Since last year, China's ivory carving industry has collapsed, effectively removing any economic incentive to resist the ban.
Simon Lyster, of the World Wide Fund for Nature, said the decision sealed the fate on the ivory trade.
"There will now be no legal market for African ivory.
That's very good news for the African elephant."
Times 6 September
Conservation: Species
Loggerhead turtles spark violence in Greece
Loggerhead turtles are at the centre of a dispute between property developers and conservationists in Greece.
A longstanding argument on the island of Zakinthos turned violent in September when mobs attacked volunteers who monitor and protect the turtles when they come ashore at night to lay their eggs.
The Mediterranean loggerhead (caretta caretta) is one of seven species of marine turtles under threat worldwide.
Once found in Spain, Italy and France, they now only nest in Turkey, Greece and Cyprus because of pollution and tourism disturbing the nesting beaches.
Six beaches on the island are protected under EC conservation directives, but the Sea Turtle Protection Society says that the Greek government refuses to take action against taverna and hotel owners who continue to erect buildings on the beaches.
Landowners claim government compensation is inadequate compared with potential profit from bars and umbrella and sunbed rentals.
The volunteers supervise the turtle's hazardous journey down the beach to the water, deterring predators and tourists.
The turtles are guided by the natural luminosity of the beach as they make their way to nest, but are distracted by artificial light sources such as from beach discos.
They become disorientated, wander aimlessly around and often die of dehydration.
Discarded rubbish and noise are also a big problem.
Loggerheads reach sexual maturity at 20 years and can live to nearly 100 years.
Under natural circumstances, only one in a thousand survives to maturity.
Sunday Correspondent 12 September
Conservation: Species
South African seals' fate hangs in the balance
A decision by the South African goverment as to whether to carry out the proposed slaughter of over 30,000 Cape fur seals is imminent.
The kill, planned for 15 July, was postponed by the Minister of Environment Affairs, Gert Kotze, because of protests from animal welfare and conservationist groups.
The government maintains that the purpose of the hunt is to cull the herds but evidence suggests otherwise.
Dr Jeremy David, assistant specialist scientist in the Fisheries Department, claims that the killing was for commercial purposes.
A five-year contract was awarded to Mr Hsein-Hsu, a Taiwanese businessman, to harvest seals on the South African coast.
3,000 pups and 600-700 males were taken, in what was described as a totally disorganized operation.
No attempt was made to use all the carcasses and some reports said that in some cases only male genitalia were used.
Nevertheless Mr Hsein-Hsu's permit was renewed with an increase to 25,000 pups and 5,768 adult bulls.
Opponents of the hunt say that killing seals for non-essential products cannot be justified economically or ecologically.
It is also questionable whether it is wise to kill adult males indiscrimately, many of which could be harem masters.
Furthermore, there is no evidence linking the seals with a decrease in fishing yields or on the status of the marine ecosystem.
BBC Wildlife October
Conservation: Species
Tanzania resumes safari hunts
The Tanzanian government has lifted a 17-year ban on game hunting to allow safari hunting from August 1 to November 3.
The hunting will be conducted in organized safaris and will cost an estimated $5,600 for a seven-day trip, officials said.
Hunting will be restricted to smaller game like gazelle, and exclude big game animals like elephants, rhinos and lions.
The ban on trophy hunting was introduced in 1973 as a result of the imminent extinction of some big game animals.
Neighbouring Kenya, the major tourist destination in East Africa, may follow suit and amend its ban also.
Africa Economic Digest 6 August
Conservation: Species
Farmers to be "licensed to kill" bird pests
Environment Minister David Trippier has announced that the British government will comply with an EC directive requiring landowners to have licences to kill pestential birds such as crows, magpies and jays.
The directive will provide limited protection for 13 species of Britain's "nuisance" birds.
The government has admitted that it has agreed to the directive only in order to conform to Britain's obligations under EC law.
It argues that protection for the birds is unnecessary as they are not threatened by current control practices.
It plans to issue general licences entitling landowners to kill unwanted birds on their property.
The British Association for Shooting and Conservation says it will campaign against changes to current regulations, arguing that setting up a complicated bureaucracy to control shooting will only cause confusion.
Times 19 September
Conservation: Species
Estuary birds under threat
Commercial development on Britain's estuaries is threatening millions of birds and waterfowl, according to a report by the RSPB published September 5.
It accuses the British government of failing to meet its commitments to protect marine wildlife as set out under the RAMSAR wetlands convention, and says that urgent action is needed to save the estuaries.
A total of 123 estuaries were surveyed, of which 80 are under threat, with 30 facing imminent irreparable damage from port and industrial expansion, new marinas, tidal barrages, land reclamation, pollution, recreational activities and anglers.
The estuaries are part of the East Atlantic Flyway, a vital migration path between the Arctic and the southern hemishphere, which is used by one and a half million waders and half a million waterfowl.
Areas facing irreparable damage include the Dee estuary in Wales where port, road and recreational development and pollution threaten 105,000 birds; the Wash, where 260,000 birds are threatened by industrial development, an airport and oil refining; the Mersey, where a tidal barrage and airport development threaten about 60,000 birds; and the Thames, including the Medway and Swale, which is facing immediate damage from development and pollution threatening 177,000 birds.
In their report, Turning the Tide — a future for estuaries, the RSPB calls for government action on a coastal strategy.
Recommendations include stopping development in crucial habitat areas, providing protection for areas of special value, and increasing local jurisdiction over coastal activities and government support of international directives to set an example.
The Nature Conservancy Council (the government's conservation watchdog) sees the RSPB's report as optimistic and the real menace as far greater.
Its own study identifies threats from 50 plans for land reclamation and 78 proposals for new marinas.
New Scientist 8 September Guardian 6 September Times 6, 22 September Independent 6 September
Energy
Energy contributed by wind power "embarrassingly small" 
Wind power advocates have expressed concern that its potential has been neglected in the initial list of renewable energy projects covered by the first Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation.
The British Wind Energy Association is concerned that new wind projects total only six and that the 30 megawatts which these turbines would contribute to the national grid is "embarrassingly small" in comparison with Denmark, the Netherlands and Spain.
Small-scale hydropower projects and electricity generated from waste make up the majority of the schemes which have received approval.
The NFFO will be set annually by the Department of Energy; it aims to guarantee that new electricity distribution companies in England and Wales use a certain amount of renewable souces to generate power.
This arrangement does not apply to Scotland which has the highest average wind speeds in Europe.
The short duration of the contracts on offer is considered unrealistic and Jim Halliday, chairman of the BWEA, believes Britain's renewable energy programme could be halted "just when it is needed most" since the NFFO is threatened with termination in 1998.
New Scientist 22 September
Energy
Motorway wind power
Wind power turbines could be situated on the central reservation of motorways harnessing the draught produced by passing traffic.
Spinning signs outside petrol stations were the inspiration for Raymond Livings, an industrial design student at Coventry Polytechnic.
His idea could help meet the common criticism that turbines are both noisy and a blot on the landscape.
Since motorways fit this same description they would seem to be the perfect location.
Britain's 2,000 kilometres of motorway could accomodate 130,000 wind turbines safely and efficiently at a cost of £10,000 for each device.
The turbines can be powered by wind and the draught of cars from any direction and each produce up to three kilowatts with wind speed of 50 kilometres per hour.
With stronger winds the rotor blades are designed to maintain a constant speed — stalling, and then re-setting, when wind speed reaches 105 kilometres per hour.
The resulting uniform frequency of energy allows synchronisation with the national grid.
There is as yet no firm estimate as to the amount of electricity which could be generated by such a scheme.
In theory, it could be quite substantial.
New Scientist 22 September Chicken droppings power plant A new power station is to be built in Diss, Suffolk, which will use chicken droppings as a fuel source.
The government has given its approval for sale of electricity, generated by the station, to regional electricity companies, as part of its scheme to encourage use of renewable energy.
It is estimated that the station, the first of its kind to be constructed in Europe, will use about 200,000 tons of this particular biofuel per year, generating enough electricity to supply 10,000 houses.
The droppings are burnt to provide sufficient heat to power high pressure steam boilers.
Simon Fraser of Fibropower, the company behind the scheme, describes the new power station as "environmentally friendly" .
He points out that the droppings which the plant will be using would normally be used as manure for spreading on fields.
This has, in the past, been a cause of nitrate seepage into local water sources
However, Simon Roberts, energy spokesman for Friends of the Earth, has said that the plant will need huge quantities of droppings, which would have to come from battery farms.
This casts some doubt on how "environmentally friendly" the scheme would be.
Guardian 24 September
Energy
Domestic appliances are "energy greedy" 
 "Most consumers do not think of domestic appliances as polluters" says a report published by the Department of Energy.
This highlights the direct link between the use of electricity to power such energy hungry devices as dishwashers and problems of acid rain and global warming.
The report, commissioned by the March Consulting Group, states that the amount of electricity consumed by these appliances could be cut by 40 per cent by the adoption of available energy-efficient designs.
The report suggests that individual products could be labelled to inform the public about how much electricity the appliances consume.
Independent 4 September Financial Times 5 September
Energy
Prevention of cadmium contamination
Cadmium, one of the most toxic metals known to man, should be used only where no satisfactory alternative exists.
This reminder is contained in a new study by the Roskill Information Services market research group — echoing the European Community Directive of 1988.
The study says that recycling of nickel cadmium batteries is essential both to alleviate supply problems and to prevent contamination of the environment.
In 1989, cadmium consumption exceeded supply for the third year running.
Financial Times 5 September
Environmental Politics
UK White paper and reactions
Despite early enthusiasm and optimism for the UK White Paper on the Environment, it was greeted with a widespread sense of disappointment following its launch by Environment Secretary Christopher Patten on September 25.
Patten promised last year a paper that would set out Britain's agenda for the environment to the end of the century.
Yet the report is widely agreed to have very little that is tangible to say about how the UK's environmental stategy is to be taken forward.
Entitled This Common Inheritance: Britain's Environmental Strategy, it describes many old policies as new and is seen as a mixture of hopeful and vague suggestions and promises simply to consult, consider and review.
The lack of substantial commitments to action is widely seen as reflecting conflicting interests and clashes within the government, particularly among the Departments of Transport, Energy, Agriculture and Trade and Industry where the environment is a contentious issue.
After her early support for Patten the Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, is said to have "lost interest" .
The proposals, under the principle of "making the polluter pay" , are set out under six headings: Europe, The World, Land Use/Planning, Pollution Control, Research/Monitoring and Government.
The main points are as follows: *Europe.
The European Community will be urged to introduce energy efficiency labelling of electrical goods and to repeal regulations hindering reductions of greenhouse gases.
An EC-wide pollution control system is suggested.
The government will also urge the EC to bring forward the phasing out of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) to 1997. *Developing countries.
Financial and technical support to aid developing countries in their efforts to reduce global warming is promised.
£9.4 million will be contributed over three years to help phase out CFCs in developing countries and energy efficiency initiatives will also receive support.
Aid for research into deforestation and forest replacement is promised and tree planting will be encouraged as an effective way of absorbing and locking up carbon dioxide.
Support for anti-poaching projects, protection of endangered species, management of wildlife reserves and opposition to the resumption of commercial whaling will continue.
*Energy efficiency.
An energy efficiency office will be established to promote energy savings.
Its work will be backed up by a new ministerial committee.
Wider use of waste heat will be encouraged and a 15 per cent saving on the government energy bill sought by 1995.
Higher insulation standards will be set for new buildings.
Greater guidance will be given to motorists about fuel economy, speed limits enforced more widely and the car MOT extended to improve car tuning.
Continued support for "high levels of investment" in public transport is promised.
Local authorities are urged that they should collect methane from 1,000 landfill sites over the next five years.
*The countryside.
The tree preservation order will be extended to cover hedgerows.
Grants for woodland management will be available from 1992 and a new national forest for the Midlands considered.
Proposals for national parks and marine reserves will be considered.
Support is offered to bring all public footpaths and bridlepaths into good order by 2000.
Councils will be required to keep registers of contaminated land.
*Transport.
New road capacity "which would only encourage extra commuting" will be discouraged.
Use of quieter, cleaner lorries and the development of cycle routes will be encouraged.
In London "red routes" will be introduced to "speed up" traffic movement.
*Air pollution.
An expert advisory panel on air quality will be established, monitoring of air pollutants will be improved and information made more widely available through weather forecasts.
 "Critical Loads" will be developed for different pollutants.
A new European agreement will be sought to control ground level ozone and incineration of toxic waste.
The government will ensure power stations meet EC requirements for reduced emissions of pollutants which cause acid rain.
Straw burning will be banned by 1993 in England and Wales and new advice will be issued on avoiding passive smoking.
A reduction is promised in human exposure to lead, the EC ban on cadmium use [see above]will be supported and all identifiable polychlorinated biphenyls will be phased out and destroyed by 1999. *Water quality.
Statutory water quality objectives will be established and £28 billion will be invested to bring bathing and drinking water up to standard by the mid-1990s.
Attempts will be made to reduce pesticide use in water catchment areas.
The maximum fine for water pollution will also be increased to £20,000 and targets are to be set to reduce sea-dumping of dangerous substances.
Dumping of liquid industrial wastes is scheduled to be stopped by 1992, mining waste by 1997 and sewage sludge by 1998.
* Waste and recycling.
A target of recycling 50 per cent of recyclable household waste has been set for 2000 and recycling facilities will be a requirement at new shopping developments.
An environmental product-labelling scheme will be introduced.
Costs of industrial waste disposal will rise to discourage waste generation and two research projects are to be set up to consider recycling building and mining waste.
*Nuclear power.
On nuclear power, the government promises that any future proposal by UK Nirex Ltd for an underground waste disposal site will be subject to a public inquiry.
A full review of the future of nuclear power is promised after the completion of Sizewell B in 1994. *Noise.
Among proposals to combat noise pollution are alterations to road surfaces, reductions in aircraft and vehicle noise, controls over burgular and car alarms, better sound insulation in buildings and a "quiet neighbourhood" scheme are proposals to be examined to combat noise pollution.
*Research and education.
Spending on environmental research and monitoring is to be increased and environmental education will become more prominent in the national curriculum.
*Government structure.
A ministerial committee will be retained to co-ordinate the government's approach to environmental issues and a minister from each department will be responsible for environmental policies.
Reactions
The government restructuring on environmental issues has been the most favourably received proposal of the paper.
It was one of three major recommendations made to the government by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
In other areas the WWF were disappointed.
Spokesman Simon Lyster said they "were hoping for much bigger measures to protect Britain's remaining wildlife habitats on the land and in the sea" .
Although the White Paper claims the government has "a long standing policy of keeping roads away from Sites of Special Scientific Interest" , a Friends of the Earth critique points out that this "rhetoric is not born out when the implications of the Department of Transport roads programme are examined" .
However, the FoE did welcome a number of proposals they had been campaigning on for some time.
In other responses, Lord Melchett, executive director of Greenpeace, said that the White Paper was even worse than had been expected from leaks and that the government had "dodged the important issues by reiterating existing inadequate policies and avoided making any new commitments which would protect the environment" .
Shadow Environment Secretary, Bryan Gould, said that the paper was full of suggestions for action by others but "extremely thin on any measures that will be taken by the government" .
Representatives for the Green Party described it as "a nice statement of wishful thinking that does not realistically meet all the problems we face" .
Daily UK newspapers, 24, 25, 26, 28 September Making A World of Difference: WWF-UK September Stealing Our Future: Friends of the Earth 26 September
Environmental Politics
UK is still "The Dirty Man of Europe" 
Details of the UK government's environmental record have been published in a report commissioned by Greenpeace, which claims to show that the country is stuck with the title of the "Dirty Man of Europe" for the next decade.
To rid the UK of the label, the document says, the government must introduce fundamental policy changes on issues as diverse as air, water and waste policies, Antarctic oil exploration and greenhouse gas control.
The report details 17 ways in which the UK remains the "Dirty Man" : 1.
Britain is the largest sulphur dioxide polluter in Western Europe.
Present trends mean that by 2003, a quarter of all the sulphur dioxide emitted into the air of the European Community will be from the UK.
Currently the UK emits the largest quantities of nitrogen oxides and will still do so by 1998. 2.
Britain exports, on the wind, more pollution than any other West European country, notably sulphur, which has acidified the southern Norway environment.
Britain also is the largest contributor of heavy metals, copper, cadmium, lead, to the North Sea.
3.
Britain is one of the world's largest importers of radioactive waste.
Discharges from Sellafield have made the Irish Sea the most radioactively contaminated in the world.
4.
No targets have been set to reduce air pollution, despite the enormous increase that will inevitably result from greater car and lorry mileages as the governments' huge road-building programme is implemented.
5.
The UK is the largest producer of ozone-destroying chemicals in Western Europe.
The country emphasises its attainment of the modest Montreal Protocol target (a cut in consumption of CFC's by 50 per cent).
But in 1988 the UK exported 45,000 tonnes of CFCs.
A total of 81 of the importing countries had not signed the Montreal Protocol.
6.
Western Europe's largest producer of methyl chloroform — a chemical which produces an estimated 16 per cent of the chlorine which damages the ozone layer — is ICI in Britain.
Production is planned to continue for another two years.
7.
Late or inadequate action by the government over the production of pollutants is endemic.
No cut in carbon dioxide emission is planned, merely stabilisation by 2005.
Yet Denmark plans a 20 per cent reduction by 2000 and the Netherlands aim to stabilise production by 1995, with cuts thereafter.
Although Sweden plans to phase out CFCs by 1995 and Norway plans to cut production by 90 per cent by 1995, the UK will not phase these chemicals out until 1997.
Sewage sludge and industrial waste will still enter the North Sea from Britain until 1998.
Germany stopped outflows in 1983. 8.
The UK has consistently delayed European Community environmental initiatives.
Proposals opposed include the Large Combustion Plant Directive, comprehensive introduction of catalytic converters for cars and EC work on controlling carbon dioxide emissions.
9.
Department of the Environment briefings have led the British press to blame other countries for North Sea pollution.
10.
Britain claims its target for reducing presently projected levels of carbon dioxide by 30 per cent by 2005 is "very demanding" .
But the projections on which the "cut" is based far exceed six others from expert groups and serve to make the target look like a reduction when in practice it is not.
11.
Britain denies forest damage and eutrophication problems in efforts to bolster claims that pollution controls are not needed.
12.
 "Victorian policies" are used to "dilute and disperse" land, air and water pollutants, rather than treating them effectively.
In 1989, for example, the problem of dirty beaches led to a government commitment to dump sewage further out to sea.
13.
Britain has reneged on a 1989 agreement to use Flue Gas Desulphurisation (FGD) equipment on at least 12,000 MW of power stations.
Now cheap low sulphur coal is being imported (after a statement by the Prime Minister that this option would not be acceptable to the people of Britain), gas is being burned, and only 8,000 MW is being fitted with FGD. 14.
The dumping of British industrial waste in the North Sea is continuing despite an agreement to stop by the end of 1989. 15.
Britain has defended its right to use the North Sea as a dumping ground.
At the 1990 North Sea Conference the right to put radioactive waste on or below the sea bed was insisted upon by Britain, provoking the Dutch Environment Minister to assert that "Britain is playing with all our lives" .
16.
In 1989, Mrs Thatcher stressed the need for Britain to pay for mineral research in Antarctica, despite a resolve by the UN General Assembly not to exploit Antarctic minerals.
17.
More legal actions from the European Community on water and air pollution face Britain than any other EC country.
Why Britain Remains the Dirty Man of Europe — A report for Greenpeace by Media Natura
Environmental Politics
Labour's green plans unveiled
A landmark environment policy document was issued by the Labour Party in September, which claims it is committing itself to a green government.
The document proposes the stabilisation of carbon dioxide emissions by 2000 — a target which is likely to disappoint some.
Labour has rejected the idea of a carbon tax and seems to intend to achieve the cut largely through controls on the use of cars and through implementing a public transport drive.
It also intends to use the principle of "least cost planning" for power stations.
Planning permission will only be given if planners can show it would be cheaper to supply the demand rather than reduce it with energy conservation measures.
All policy decisions made by the next Labour government will be vetted by a Minister of Environmental Protection.
Alternative energy sources like wind and solar power will receive substantial support for research and development.
Farmers will be offered money to cut the use of pesticides and fertilizers, and those who choose to convert to organic methods of cultivation will receive support premiums to assist them during the lean transition period.
Payments for the maintenance of hedges and wildflower meadows will be available.
The document does not explain how these changes will be implemented or how much they will cost.
Drinking water will also come under new controls.
Local authorities will regain the right to prosecute water companies who produce sub-standard drinking water and water quality will come under the aegis of the new Food Standards Agency — an organisation which will be answerable to parliament.
Guardian 19, 11 September Daily Telegraph 16 September
Environmental Politics
WWF cleans up its investments
Following disclosures to the press that the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) invests in trans-national companies whose activities it campaigns against, WWF has agreed to re-invest in "ethical and Green" companies.
WWF International had investments with firms producing nuclear and conventional weapons, oil, and pesticides.It invested in Shell and Nestlé, two companies usually shunned by ethical concerns.
A newly created ethical committee is to meet soon to draw up guidelines for WWF International's investment committee, which is likely to agree to a large-scale transfer of funds.
Guardian 5 September
Environmental Politics
Green organizations' growth rate soars
Membership of most of the UK's conservation and environment organisations is expanding at an unprecedented rate, according to a survey conducted by BBC Wildlife.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB), with a more than three quarters of a million members, has grown by over 40 per cent since the end of last year.
Friends of the Earth has had a similar growth rate in that period, so that its membership is now over 180,000.
Greenpeace UK grew by 84 per cent in the first six months of 1990 to a total membership of over 360,000.
Smaller organisations have also grown fast.
Survival International, which works for the rights of threatened tribal peoples, doubled its membership between the end of 1989 and the middle of 1990.
The Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society, only four years old, is recruiting about 1,000 new members each month.
BBC Wildlife September Times 10 September
Environmental Politics
European ministers fail to agree on environmental taxes
The twelve environment ministers of the European Community have agreed that market forces can and should be used to environmental ends, but they failed to decide on the measures to be used or what the environmental ends should be.
The European Commission supported community-wide taxes on carbon emissions and phased increases in energy prices for each fossil fuel according to its contribution to global warming, but there was little agreement among ministers, some wanting stronger and some weaker measures.
Belgium, France, Denmark and West Germany agreed that a community-wide) carbon tax should be applied.
West Germany had already decided to impose a duty on carbon dioxide emissions, with the proceeds being invested in energy-efficient technology.
But Carlo Ripa di Meana, the European commissioner for the environment, suggested that the carbon tax is not required urgently because oil prices are rising anyway due to the Gulf crisis.
Dissenting countries included Britain, which opposed on principle, because it does not agree with removing taxation from national to Community jurisdiction.
Some of the poorer members felt their chances of "catching up" economically with the rest of the Community would be hampered by heavy carbon taxes.
Contrary to some expectations, however, Greece supported environmental taxes.
The Netherlands disagreed because it thought harmonised taxes would be too weak.
The country has ambitious plans for environmental tax incentives and other financial incentives [see below].
Denmark wanted a tax on CFCs as well as on carbon dioxide.
The West German parliament has proposed that carbon dioxide emissions from a united Germany should be cut by 30 per cent by 2005.
Many of East Germany's energy-efficient industries are expected to shut down in the aftermath of the country's reunification.
New Scientist 22 September
Environmental Politics
Dutch economic policy plan
The Dutch government is to raise its spending on the environment from £4 billion this year to more than £5 billion by the year 1994.
The 1991 budget, outlined by Labour finance minister Wim Kok, provides for cuts in defence spending and business subsidies in order to fund social and environmental programmes.
The Dutch national environmental policy [NEPP — see ED 37\38]has been widely praised for its ambitious approach to reducing internal polluting emissions, and contrasted favourably with the relative inaction of Britain and the US.
The latest plan included a stated objective of achieving clean air, water and soil by 2010, in addition to making a contribution to the fight against international environmental threats.
Its new pesticide proposals are regarded as the strictest in the world: "organic" and "biodynamic" farmers are to be seen as pioneers pointing to new chemical-free techniques for the rest of the agricultural community.
If put into effect, the plan will require pesticide use to be reduced by 35 per cent by 1995 and by 50 per cent by 2000.
 "End of pipe" techniques for dealing with industrial pollution are regarded as inadequate and the plan sees changes in the way farms, industries and individuals behave as of primary importance.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emmission levels are to be stabilised by 1994, and reduced by three to four per cent by 2000.
The total of non-recyclable waste produced by industry and individuals is to be reduced from its present level of 20 million tonnes to 12 million tonnes by 2000.
The number of car kilometres travelled annually by the population is to be permitted to increase by no more than 35 per cent, over the 1986 figure, by 2010.
Tbe plan proposes to achieve this through improved public transport, the encouragement of car-pooling for commuter journeys, public education programmes, a rise in petrol prices, a rush hour tax and additional road tolls.
Financial Times 26 September Guardian 24 September Times 24 September
Environmental Politics
Finnish appeal on aid to East Europe
The Finnish government is to appeal to other Western countries to give aid to East European countries in the form of technical, industrial and scientific expertise rather than direct financial help.
The appeal follows concern in Finland that its economy, largely dependent on forestry, will be seriously threatened if present levels of pollution from East European countries continue.
Finnish Environment Minister, Kaj Barlund, said that sulphur deposits in the south of the country "surpass the level nature can bear by two or three times" and that unless action was taken they would face serious problems in the next 10-20 years.
Barlund added that "forests do not grow as fast in the south, so we cannot afford to lose massive areas" .
Earlier this year East European countries, including the Soviet Union, agreed to take part in the European Environment Agency.
European 7 September
Environmental Politics
US Defense Department to undertake environment research
A US Defense Department proposal now working its way through Congress includes funds for a Strategic Environmental Research Program.
The scheme was introduced by an influential group of senators and is almost certain to pass.
Sam Nunn, one of the proposing senators, said: "There is a new and different threat to our national security emerging — the destruction of our environment" .
The programme would have a budget of $200 million for environmental sensors on military submarines, ships and aircraft.
It would pay for time on military computers and research on alternative energy sources and methods of cleaning polluted soil and water.
Furthermore, the military's data banks, which contain information on ocean temperatures and currents, weather patterns and changes in vegetation in many regions of the world, are likely to be made available to environmental researchers.
New Scientist 22 September
Environmental Politics
Space data for environmentalists
After the launch next year of the first environmental research satellite, ERS-1, the European Space Agency (ESA) is expected to change its policy of charging environmental researchers for satellite data.
Some countries — Pakistan, Brazil, India, Kenya and Indonesia — have already requested the ESA for environmental data from the new satellite.
The American space agency, NASA, already allows access to data from climate research satellites and makes only a minimal charge.
In 1995, the world's space agencies are intending to launch 15 observation platforms into space, which will make systematic observations across the globe.
NASA has suggested that the data be made available to less industrialised countries for environmental research.
New Scientist 10 September
Global Warming
Climate change report predicts three degrees rise by 2100
An international panel of climate experts, chaired by Dr John Houghton, director of the Meteorological Office, have warned that global temperatures will rise by 0.3C each decade, making the planet warmer than it has been in the past 10,000 years.
In their Climate Change Report, they predict rising sea levels as the Earth warms as a result of the imbalance of greenhouse gases.
The report will be used as the basis for policy making at the second World Climate Conference in Geneva in November.
Houghton says that it will take at least 15 years to determine the impact of human activity on global warming, the time necessary to allow for an observation network covering land, sea and atmosphere to be set up.
The report concludes that warming of between 0.3C and 0.6C has taken place over the past 100 years, a figure which correlates with data from a range of global warming models prepared recently by climate scientists.
On present trends, the earth's temperature will increase by 3C by the year 2100, unless emissions are cut, the report says.
Times 25 September Guardian 25 September Financial Times 25 September Independent 29 September
Global Warming
CFCs role as greenhouse gases emphasized
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) need to be completely phased out because of their contribution to the greenhouse effect, say two researchers at the University of Munster, Germany.
Some CFCs are already controlled by the Montreal Protocol in an attempt to halt damage caused by the chemicals to the earth's ozone layer.
But the German research shows that the five controlled CFCs along with eight similar compounds — some of which have been suggested as non-ozone-damaging substitutes for the controlled CFCs — are important greenhouse gases.
During the last 30 years, CFCs have contributed only one third as much to the Earth's heat budget as carbon dioxide.
But at the rate emissions of CFCs are growing, the gases are likely to overtake carbon dioxide as principal contributors to the global warming problem.
The researchers, Wilfrid Bach and Atul Jain, used current projections of the carbon dioxide contribution to find that warming due to this gas alone between 1986 and 2050 is 1.43C.
If CFC emissions continue to increase at the current rate, they would cause an extra 2C of warming over the same period.
Even if production of the five main CFCs is reduced by 50 per cent— the figure aimed at by signatories of the Montreal Protocol — the warming due to CFCs by 2050 will be nearly as great as that caused by carbon dioxide.
Bach and Jain conclude that all CFCs need to be phased out by 2000.
Then the overall greenhouse warming by mid-century would be 1.71C, instead of 3.35C.
New Scientist 8 September
Global Warming
Nitrogen fixation study
New calculations reveal that up to one fifth of the estimated global rate of nitrogen fixation results from natural biomass burning.
The researchers, from the Max-Planck Institute in Mainz, estimate that between 12 and 28 million tonnes of nitrogen are released each year from natural biomass fires.
Laboratory tests revealed that only 32 per cent of the nitrogen content ended up as organic nitrogen compounds.
Around half of the nitrogen in the burnt biomass may be released as nitrogen gas.
Green Magazine September
Global Warming
Higher world temperatures confirmed
A re-assessment of meteorological data collected over the last 100 years has confirmed that the earth has warmed by 0.5C over that period.
It has been claimed by some that the apparent warming trend was in fact only a reflection of the "urban heat island effect" , because most of the records come from cities.
But researchers have re-assessed data from both urban and rural sites around the world and concluded that the heat island effect can account for no more than 10 per cent of the measured temperature rise.
New Scientist 22 September
Global Warming
British sea walls need repair
Lack of accurate records of storms and waves in the North Sea means engineers cannot assess the need for building and repairing sea walls along the east coast of Britain, according to a mathematician from the University of Bristol, Howell Peregrine.
 "Walls built after the 1953 floods are getting old" , explained Peregrine.
 "Some of them have cracks and they need repair now" .
He also pointed out that storms are becoming more frequent, sea levels have risen and the eastern part of England is sinking.
But only one record of last year's storms — the worst for years — is in the public domain.
Oil companies do monitor conditions but do not make the information public.
Peregrine said: "We do not know the effect of waves and we cannot estimate what we should build" .
New Scientist 1 September
Nuclear Power
Kazakhstan explosion results in "ecological disaster zone" 
The central Asian Soviet republic of Kazakhstan declared its eastern region, close to the Chinese and Mongolian borders, an ecological disaster zone on September 27, after an explosion and fire at a nuclear fuel processing plant released clouds of highly toxic beryllium oxide into the atmosphere on September 12.
The blast took place at the Ulba metallurgic works, in a workshop producing beryllium for the Soviet nuclear industry.
Reports vary as to whether this beryllium was destined for use in reactors or in warheads.
The Soviet Union says it was used for nuclear fuel.
Beryllium is a light metal which catches fire easily and burns like a magnesium flash.
As it vapourises it releases white smoke — beryllium oxide.
This oxide is light and easily airborne.
On the day of the explosion winds were calm and the gas was slow to dissipate.
The area affected included the city of Ust-Kamenogorsk, with a population of 20,000, situated in the Altai mountains.
Gas was reported to have filled the city streets for about five hours after the blast.
Contamination could cause lung problems, similar to bronchitis, and eye and skin problems.
It could also cause liver and kidney malfunction and attack the central nervous system.
Medical sources in Moscow said while it could be fatal in extreme cases, most symptoms should disappear in six months.
Initial testing showed twice the level of permitted beryllium compounds in water and soil samples, and 60 to 96 times the permitted levels of airborne beryllium.
On September 17 Izvestiya reported that the situation had "normalized" , but it became clear later that the dangers had not been fully appreciated at the time due to a lack of sophisticated monitoring equipment.
Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarvayev has asked for compensation from Moscow for health damage in the region, and for an independent inquiry, with foreign experts, to study the ecological consequences.
Financial Times 14, 29 September, 1 October Guardian 14, 29 September, 1 October International Herald Tribune 14 September, 1 October Independent 14 September Times 14, 29 September Le Monde 19 September New Scientist 6 October BBC Summary of World Broadcasts 29 September, 1 October
Ozone layer
Arctic ozone found to be seriously depleted
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are destroying atmospheric ozone over the Arctic as well as the Antarctic, with the extent of damage greater than previously suspected, according to Dr Michael Proffitt and colleagues at Colorado University.
High altitude measurements made by the Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition team last winter provide evidence that "although there is as yet no ozone hole in the Arctic" the protective layer of gas over the North Pole has been found to be seriously depleted.
The loss of ozone during the Arctic winter is shown to be up to 35 per cent rather than 10 per cent to 25 per cent as indicated by previous analysis of the data.
On the basis of these measurements, ozone losses in the Arctic winter appear to be "not very much less than in the Antarctic spring" says Alan Plumb of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, "but the effects are less dramatic because polar ozone is being resupplied about as fast as it is being destroyed." 
It is believed that ozone depletion in the Arctic appears less severe than the Antarctic because air currents in the northern hemisphere produce fresh supplies of ozone-rich air into the region and allow the ozone levels to be restored.
The ozone supplied by these seasonal air currents to the Arctic is "borrowed" from elsewhere in the stratosphere, however.
Although it may not yet be easy to detect the overall depletion of atmospheric ozone in the whole of the northern hemisphere, there is evidence which suggests that Europe's ozone layer has thinned by about 3 per cent in the past 20 years, according to research published earlier in the year.
International Herald Tribune 6 September Independent 6 September Times 6 September New Scientist 15 September
Pollution: Air
Studies on British air pollution
A report commissioned by the UK government on acid rain and nitrogen oxides has concluded that many ecologically sensitive parts of Britain, particularly the wet, upland areas, are in danger of being damaged by emissions of pollutants into the atmosphere.
Motor vehicles and coal-fired power stations are held to be the main offenders.
The UN Economic Commission for Europe has issued figures for critical levels of nitrogen dioxide in the atmosphere.
The government was warned by scientists of the UK Photochemical Oxidants Group, responsible for the report on nitrogen oxides, that many urban, and some rural areas, have atmospheric concentrations of nitrogen dioxide greatly in excess of critical levels as set by the UN Economic Commission for Europe.
The report recommends a number of steps designed to limit pollution.
These include fitting cars with catalytic convertors, installing cleaning devices, such as gas scrubbers in power stations, and introducing nitrogen oxide controls.
New Scientist 22 September
Pollution: Air
California lead poisoning
Two state-run studies in California have revealed "an epidemic of occupational lead poisoning" according to Neil Maizlish, a state epidemologist and chief author of one of the studies.
Lead, a toxic metal, is widely used in many industries, and workers exposed to high levels can suffer severe health problems, including anaemia, infertility, miscarriages, and damage to the brain and nervous system.
The studies, which examined adult workers in industries using lead, blamed poor enforcement of laws designed to limit exposure to the metal, together with ignorance of the laws among industrial managers.
Washington Post 30 August
Pollution: Water
Baltic summit tackles sea pollution
A two-day summit of northern European governments in Ronneby, Sweden, has highlighted the need for urgent measures to be taken to address the problems of pollution in the Baltic Sea.
The Baltic, being a mainly stagnant sea, is very susceptible to the accumulative effects of pollution.
A large area of its surface water is suffering from de-oxygenation due to algal growth.
This is activated by the concentrations of nitrogen and phosphorus from fertiliser run-off from agricultural practises.
Effluent from industrial activities in countries bordering the sea is also causing various pollution hazards.
Fish stocks in the Baltic are in decline as a result of the de-oxygenation and increase of hydrogen sulphide in the water.
Countries bordering the Baltic have agreed, as a result of the summit, to implement an emergency programme to clean up the Sea, with a target of halving the inflow of harmful substances by 1995.
The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency has estimated that £2.75bn per year will be needed to achieve this aim, and the question of where the money will come from has not yet been agreed
The worst offenders are some of the Eastern European countries, who are unlikely to be able to make substantial financial contributions.
Observers expect that wealthier nations in Western Europe will be approached to help finance "clean-up" packages.
Some assistance may be available through existing EC aid initiatives to eastern Europe.
Financial Times 5 September Algal blooms are causing serious problems around Italy's coast, with damaging effects to its tourist industry.
A scheme is to be implemented whereby the blooms will be held offshore by a series of floating barriers.
The algae can cause the death of fish and other aquatic organisms, and can also trigger painful skin problems for people who come into contact with their slime.
Local environmentalists are concerned, however, that the new barrier scheme may be harmful to some marine wildlife, and that it would also be aesthetically unattractive.
Their feeling is that the plan is treating a symptom, rather than the cause, and is designed to appease the tourist industry, rather than to help the environment.
Green Magazine October
Italy acts against algae
Pollution: Water
 "Blue flag" beaches carry virus risk
A new system of classification for Britains' designated "clean" bathing beaches was recommended in a motion at the Institution of Environmental Health Officers' annual congress, held in September.
In his address to delegates at the conference, Dr David Wheeler, manager of environmental services at the Robens Institute, Surrey University, said that EC directives on viral contamination levels in seawater were being ignored because they were too stringent.
Consequently, many beaches designated as being clean by the current "blue flag" scheme, could, in fact, still carry a high risk of viral infection for people swimming in the sea off these same beaches.
Viruses are carried in the seawater from sewage outfalls, and while some may only cause minor stomach upsets, others, including coxsachie and echo viruses, could lead to hepatitis, meningitis and quasi-paralytic disorders.
At present, beaches are being designated as clean on bacteriological levels, with the virus levels being ignored.
Dr Wheeler recommends that new standards should be set for beaches, with a system of grading for levels of contamination, so that bathers would be more aware of the dangers.
The scale of grading would include combined standards for bacteria and viruses, with beaches graded as pristine, good, acceptable and fail, depending on their combined levels.
Observer 9 September Daily newspapers 12 September
Transport
Solar plane crosses USA
An ultralight glider powered by recently-developed lightweight solar cells [see ED 37/38}successfully flew 6,400 kilometres across the US.
The cells, designed by Sanyo Electric, covered the wings and tail of the plane and provided electric power to drive the propeller for take-off.
Although very bright sunlight was required to generate enough power to achieve lift off, once in the air the plane flew like an ordinary glider.
Landings could be made in dimmer evening lights.
The flight began in July but was delayed for two weeks until early August following initial problems with take-off at high altitudes.
New Scientist 22 September
Transport
RSNC report on roads
Hundreds of important wildlife sites in the south-east of England are threatened by the government's road building programme; almost half being officially protected sites, according to a report produced by the South-East Wildlife Trust's Transport Campaign.
The report, supported by the Royal society for Nature Conservation and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), found 372 sites at risk from 54 road schemes in nine counties.
Projected figures suggest that over 1,500 wildlife sites would be damaged or destroyed in the national roads programme.
The projection is based on an average of eight threatened sites for each scheme found in the south-east.
The 372 identified sites include 50 designated Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), of which 15 were in Kent.
The government programme, announced in May last year in the White Paper, Roads for Prosperity, envisages an extra 2,700 miles of new or widened roads to be added to the existing system.
The RSNC report examined proposed road schemes in Kent, Essex, Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, Hertfordshire, Surrey, East and West Sussex.
Areas found to be at risk include ancient woodlands dating back to the last ice age, internationally rare lowland heaths, meadows and marshes containing many rare species of plants, flowers, animals, birds and insects.
The New Forest and Butterwood in Hampshire, threatened by several roads, are the subject of case studies identifying flora and fauna of special interest.
The New Forest contains plant and animal species unique in Britain, including wild gladioli and New Forest cicada.
Butterwood has the richest woodland flora in Hampshire, together with a wide variety of insects, including 25 species of butterfly.
The Transport Department is said by the report to "have recently admitted that they only put a nominal value on public open space which would be destroyed by a proposed road scheme" .
In cost-benefit analysis, the more important a site is in conservation terms, the smaller the monetary value placed on it when calculating likely compensation payments to be incurred by a road scheme.
Rupert Harwood, Transport Campaigner for the Wildlife Trust, commented that"the findings discredit the cynical assertion that road-building is somehow good for the environment.
The litany of senseless destruction, including some of the country's most important wildlife sites, casts a shadow over the entire roads programme."
RSNC press information 17 September Times 15 September Independent 15 September
Transport
AA survey pinpoints lack of motorists' action on pollution
An Automobile Association (AA) survey on drivers attitudes to pollution showed a deep divide between awareness and action.
The report found that 95 per cent of respondents were aware that cars contributed to environmental pollution.
However, only 30 per cent had taken any personal action to minimise their own contribution.
The survey also found that while 58 per cent of drivers suggested fitting an "autocatalyst" to help reduce air pollution, only 2 per cent of those questioned had done so.
Questioned on attitudes to public transport, 82 per cent replied that it was not suitable and 48 per cent said they would use it more often if services were improved.
About one third of drivers said they used their cars for unnecessary journeys.
*The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders suggested that the government should offer financial incentives to motorists willing to scrap their old cars and buy environmentally "cleaner" new cars.
In proposing a cut of 10 per cent in the car tax, the society also suggested that there was a strong environmental case for reducing vehicle fuel taxation on diesel to make it significantly cheaper than petrol.
Financial Times 14 September Green Magazine October
Waste and Recycling
Italian toxic waste comes to Britain
Consignments of highly toxic chemical waste from Italy have been transported by lorry across Europe to Britain, at the rate of 200 barrels each week since February.
This is the same waste that formed the cargo of the Syrian ship Zanoobia, which was denied permission to unload at ports all over the world in 1988.
Waste is transported overland in this manner to keep down costs, but environmentalists are extremely concerned that there is a high risk of disaster should an accident occur during transportation.
Castalia, the Italian company responsible for the waste in question, has refused to publicise the exact nature of the toxic chemicals involved, but it does deny that any of the waste is radioactive.
Although the Department of the Environment has said that other developed countries in Europe, including Italy, should be able to dispose of their own waste, the consignments are being dealt with by the municipal toxic waste department in Manchester.
European 7 September
Waste and Recycling
Illicit toxic waste imports
Large quantities of hazardous waste are being illegally imported into Britain.
Greenpeace has published an analysis showing that an illicit trade in toxic waste exists which is estimated to be three times larger than the legal trade.
Environment Secretary Christopher Patten has claimed that this prevents the waste being dumped in less industrialised countries which lack the technology to deal with the material.
But Greenpeace say that 80 per cent of the waste comes from highly industrialised countries, principally Switzerland, Belgium and the Netherlands.
Once in the UK, less than a quarter of legally imported waste is incinerated.
The rest is dumped in landfill sites.
At present, Britain is one of Europe's major waste importers, after France.
Bryan Gould, shadow Environment Secretary, says there has been a fivefold increase in planning applications for toxic waste incineration capacity.
 "This can only be because operators think that levels of toxic waste imports will go on increasing" .
Six new incinerators are planned to increase the UK's annual capacity from 83 000 to 500 000 tonnes of toxic waste per year.In September, the illicit import of several hundred tonnes of hazardous waste from West Germany was uncovered.
The material included flammable and toxic paint residues and solvents which had been stored at a site in Essex not licensed to deal with hazardous waste.
It was sent from West German industrial sites described as goods in transit, thus evading controls on waste importation.
But the producers who sent the material regarded it as waste and paid for it to be taken off their hands.
Greenpeace cites the shipments as a case study of the confusion surrounding the rules governing the European Community's trade in toxic waste.
Guardian 18 September Independent 4,6,19 September
Waste and Recycling
Rubbish power in Amsterdam
Biological waste is to be used to produce electricity in a new scheme approved by Amsterdam's municipal council.
Up to 80,000 tonnes of fruit, vegetable and garden debris collected by the city's refuse department will be treated with yeast so that methane gas is produced.
The gas will drive turbines to generate electricity for the local grid.
Methane from the sewage treatment plant in Amsterdam East may be used similarly and the biological residue will be reprocessed into compost for farms and gardens.
New Scientist 22 September