

Agriculture and Food
Investigation into the animal foodstuffs industry
The Ministry of Agriculture has announced an inquiry into the practices of the animal foodstuffs industry.
This action comes in response to the House of Commons agricultural select committee which, seven months prior to the publication of its report, urged that there should be more research into "mad cow" disease.
The industry is alleged to be responsible for the spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), through the practice of feeding farm stock with recycled remains of other farm animals and poultry.
A committee of "experts" are to investigate the present regulatory framework of the industry which has been criticised, also, for not providing adequate safeguards against salmonella and vitamin A poisoning.
As a further measure to prevent the possible contamination of meat destined for human consumption, legislation is being introduced which will ban the practice of splitting cattle skulls to remove head meat in abattoirs.
Guardian 22 November Financial Times 22 November
Agriculture and Food
Congenital BSE scare
A kudu calf, one of a species of exotic antelope, has died at London Zoo after exhibiting the nervous and debilitating symptoms associated with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or "mad cow" disease.
The calf's mother had died from the disease 15 months earlier, having allegedly contracted the infectious agent from bone meal.
But the kudu calf had not been fed with this potential source of infection, which was banned in June 1988.
The director of the zoo, David Jones, believes that "it would be dangerous to conjecture that it is BSE at this stage, but the indications are that it probably is." 
The case is being examined by government scientists who are investigating whether the disease can pass between generations and, if so, what is the statistical likelihood of this happening.
Scrapie, the form of the disease that infects sheep, can be passed from one generation to the next but there exists no evidence of maternal transmission in other species.
The British Veterinary Association subsequently urged the government to discourage farmers from breeding from the offspring of "mad cows" .
An Agriculture Ministry spokesman said that there would be no change in policy.
* The first case of BSE has been discovered in a Swiss cow.
Independent 20 November Times 21 November, 15 December
Agriculture and Food
Cling film dangers
There are renewed concerns over the safety of cling film following publication of a report by the government steering group on food surveillance.
The second survey of food wrapping material, Plasticisers: Continuing Surveillance, published by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, warns that potentially toxic chemicals contained within the film can "migrate" to food.
In 1987, the committee of research scientists advised suspended use of such food packaging materials "until appropriate toxicological testing and evaluation have been performed" .
Their concern was over dietary intake of the plasticiser di-2-XXXX ethylhexyl (DEHA) used in PVC cling film and known to cause cancer in laboratory mice.
Although the risk to humans was believed to be remote, manufacturers reduced DEHA in the film.
The current report questions the present use of a replacement plasticiser, acetyl tributyl citrate (ATBC), which was developed for use in microwaves.
ATBC's use in Britain has increased to 30 times the level of 1987.
Although there is no evidence that the plasticiser can damage health, the scientists urge that new toxicological studies be carried out to allay fears that existing cling films might be carcinogens.
Until ATBC is known to be not only "microwave friendly" but also "user-friendly" , consumers are warned not to use cling film for wrapping food or lining dishes when cooking in a microwave oven.
It is known that ATBC gets into food when the film is in direct contact, and migration increases when temperatures are raised.
Most plasticisers are soluble in fat and wrapping fatty food in this material is another way of increasing migration.
This further warning — that the film should not be used to wrap fatty foods — prompted the opening of a cling film "hotline" for confused consumers.
Retailers and manufacturers sought both clarification over what does constitute safe use, and a definition of cling film (any stretchy film which clings to itself).
There was mixed response from supermarkets, some of whom are continuing to use what they term "low migration PVC film" .
The Food Safety Directorate say that all packets of cling film should carry health warnings.
Independent 14, 23 November Times 13, 14 November Guardian 13, 14 November Observer 18 November
Agriculture and Food
Report urges alternative conservation payments to farmers
A newly published report, Future Harvests: The Economics of Farming and the Environment, urges that farmers be encouraged to conserve "hedges, habitats and hawks rather than milk lakes and beef mountains" .
The introduction of payments to farmers for environmental management could replace European Community production incentives, says the report, commissioned by the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Council for the Protection of Rural England (CPRE).
Existing price support mechanisms, sustained by the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), ensure a minimum price for much farm produce but "encourage over-production of food by intensive agricultural systems at the expense of the environment" .
With the scheme of payments proposed by agricultural economist and author of the report, Dr Tim Jenkins, farmers would compete in a free market and receive less income from food production.
But they would enter into a five year contract and qualify for annual payments of about £30 per hectare for the maintenance of land free of non-agricultural development.
Bonus payments would be awarded for conservation of wildlife habitats — woodland, hedgerows, ponds — and of stone walls, traditional farm buildings, archaeological sites, the prevention of overgrazing, and for not "improving" the land.
The report argues that such environmental subsidies would cost less than the sum earmarked by the Ministry of Agriculture for this year's CAP, the administration of the proposed scheme being facilitated by the CPRE's knowledge of the state of Britain's farmland.
The countryside would be protected further by the reduction of inputs used in intensive farming, and there would also be a net saving of energy.
* The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has launched a report in Brussels calling for a radical overhaul of the Common Agricultural Policy.
They believe this action must be taken to prevent widespread destruction of wildlife habitats.
Financial Times 13 November Observer 25 November Independent 12 November Times 12 November
Agriculture and Food
Elver fishing at rock bottom
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) is to launch an enquiry into the sudden decrease in the number of elvers caught in the Severn, Britain's largest fishery.
The three year survey will establish the cause of the decline and decide whether a closed season is necessary.
The numbers of baby eels in Scandinavian and European rivers are also declining, and the NRA believe that the depopulation may be being caused by an unknown factor, possibly pollution, in the Atlantic.
Every year, Europe's eels leave its rivers to spawn in the Sargasso sea.
Their larvae later drift back into European estuaries.
Elvers were traditionally eaten by local Gloucestershire people and have been netted in the Severn for hundreds of years.
Since the early 1970s, however, catches have dwindled from 100 tonnes at peak season, to 50 tonnes.
At up to £35 a kilo, they are now too expensive to eat and are bought for restocking rivers with edible eel in Europe and elsewhere.
The NRA grants 600 fishing licences a year, mostly to commercial companies.
Times 27 December
Agriculture and Food
Goose diet
Animal rights should extend to geese, say French foie gras abstainers.
They believe that its production through force-XXXX feeding to fatten the geese, amounts to torture and must be stopped.
According to The National Society for the Protection of Animals, a million of the world's starving children could be fed on the excess food given to these geese.
Guardian 22 November Independent 22 November
Agriculture and Food
Campaign against live animal exportation
As part of their campaign against the exportation of live farm animals to Europe, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals is to use newspaper and poster advertisements designed to challenge indifference.
One poster to be displayed on Tube carriages will ask passengers to imagine being trapped in a carriage with 600 other people for 35 hours without food and water.
The RSPCA say that "if animals need to be transported it should be in carcass form only." 
In the summer of 1989 during the "lamb war" , the government permitted the export of live sheep to France, and thousands of calves and pigs were also exported to the Continent for slaughter.
The RSPCA launched their new campaign on the day that both they and Compassion in World Farming were unsuccessful in their High Court submission that the government had acted unlawfully.
The society wishes to ensure that the standards which apply to all animal transportation are not "thrown away on the altar of the lowest common denominator of European politics" .
Animal welfare groups in the 11 other EC countries are active in the campaign.
Included in the criteria, which the RSPCA insist new EC regulations should meet, are a maximum journey time to abattoirs of eight hours, and certification for those responsible for the animals' care in transit.
There should also be a team of European inspectors who can ensure that such legislation is effective.
Independent 14 November
Conservation: Land
Antarctic Treaty meeting gets half way there
Antarctic Treaty nations have failed to approve a recommendation to turn the continent into a "world park" , but they agreed to discuss draft proposals for an "environmental protocol" at a further meeting in April this year.
Originally drawn up in 1959, the Antarctic Treaty provides an international framework for human activities in the area.
Currently there are 39 signatories, of whom 25 have scientific research programmes on the continent.
Seven nations have territorial claims in the area, including Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway and Britain.
Both the Soviet Union and the USA have reserved the right to make such claims.
The meeting, held in the Chilean town of Vina del Mar, took place against a background of growing calls for the planet's "last great wilderness" to be protected for perpetuity as a haven for its wildlife and for responsible scientific research and tourism.
Environmental organizations led by Greenpeace, the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Australian Conservation Foundation had spearheaded the campaign, which had met with strong support from the Australian and French governments.
Their call for the "world park" scheme was supported at the treaty meeting by 10 other states.
The strongest opposition came from the UK, USA, Chile and Japan, with the key debates focusing on the question of possible mining activity.
The US delegation suggested extending a moratorium on all such operations for an extended period, perhaps of 50 years.
The UK, for its part, proposed the conclusion of an agreement regulating any mineral exploitation as might eventually occur.
A Chilean spokesman argued that "we want a pollution-free Antarctica, but we also want a useful Antarctica, not a frozen museum protected under a glass case" .
Japan continued to favour the guidelines laid down in the 1988 Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources (Cramra).
The vast majority of delegations recognized, however, that this no longer commanded significant support, and its effective abandonment was seen by environmentalists as one of the achievements of the meeting.
Britain's initial position of support for Cramra had been to all intents and purposes relinquished by the end of the meeting.
A joint Greenpeace/WWF petition in favour of the "world park" had raised over one million signatures.
Among those actively campaigning for it were scientist Joe Farman, who had "discovered" the hole in the ozone layer over the continent, French mariner Jacques Cousteau and polar explorer Robert Swan.
With international pressure mounting, the meeting closed with an agreement to explore a draft protocol which would include "prohibition of mineral activities" , together with sections on regulation of tourism, waste disposal and marine pollution, and protection of the continent's flora and fauna.
Although environmentalists declared themselves disappointed at the outcome of the meeting, they acknowledged that substantial progress towards some form of comprehensive protection for Antarctica's environment had been achieved.
Several pointed out that the mining issue was only one of a number of considerations, particularly given the fact that commercial exploitation would remain unviable for some time to come.
Economist 24 November New Scientist 24 November Daily newspapers, incl.
Le Monde, Internatinal Herald Tribune, Guardian, Times, Financial Times, Observer and Independent, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23 November; 6, 7, 8 December
Conservation: Land
 "Countryside Stewardship" scheme to pay farmers for conservation
A three year pilot scheme to be launched early this year, will pay farmers and landowners to manage the countryside instead of producing food.
If successful, the initial £13.3 million plan will be expanded throughout Britain to recover areas that have been damaged by intensive farming.
The "Countryside Stewardship" scheme will be run by the Countryside Commission, which hopes to have 80,000 hectares under its management at the end of the term.
An initial capital sum will be given to farmers with appropriate terrain such as chalk and limestone grasslands, lowland heaths, river valleys and coastal areas.
Monthly payments will then be made for maintaining the lands in a way that preserves their wildlife and scenic beauty.
Farm incomes are expected to fall in the 1990s and the Commission expects many farmers to participate in the scheme, despite initial protests that the payments are too low.
Those taking up the scheme will be obliged to let the public walk on their land.
Independent Times
Conservation: Land 
Las Vegas water demands may threaten desert ecology
A report from US National Park Service scientists has argued that the proposed use of underground water systems by the city of Las Vegas may dry up water supplies in a large area of the National Park system.
Rare species of plants and animals hundreds of miles from Nevada may be threatened.
For the last two years, the city has received only half its average rainfall of four inches.
Faced with drought, the Las Vegas Valley Water District has made 146 applications for access to 26 underground basins as far as 250 miles away and as much as 1,000 feet below the surface.
The basins are scattered over 20,000 square miles and fed by underground rivers which extend through Nevada, Utah and California.
Las Vegas generates two thirds of Nevada's income, mostly from gambling and related tourism, and continues to expand despite national recession.
The city is growing at the rate of 6,000 people a month, whilst 90% of the state's water supplies are currently used by just 6,000 farmers.
Developers claim that tapping underground supplies in agricultural valleys would create many thousands of new jobs and bring billions of dollars in revenue to Nevada.
According to ecologists it is impossible to predict the long-term impact of tapping into the area's subterranean reserve, but ratification of the water district plan could result in the drying up of the natural springs in the Death Valley National Monument in California, destroy verdant valleys throughout the West and kill rare fish species such as the Moapa dace, which has survived since the ice age.
Hearings are expected early this year, and if approved, are expected to be contested in the federal court.
Washington Post December 7
Conservation: Land
New threats to SSSIs
The Nature Conservancy Council (NCC) has warned that leisure parks and industry are rapidly replacing agriculture as the most serious threat to UK Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
In the past year, 35 sites which were of ecological importance due to their plant and animal populations have suffered long term damage.
A total of 2,000 hectares of land were involved.
The major cause of short term damage continues to be agriculture but on a decreasing scale.
Recreational projects such as the development of watersports on estuaries and industrial work including mineral and peat extraction are having an increasing impact on the environment.
The Welsh coast was cited as a particular case for concern.
The newly organised NCC predicted that developing the means and skills to communicate effectively with these groups, with whom it had not previously dealt, would constitute its biggest challenge in its efforts to protect the environment.
* The NCC has bought 2,000 acres of peatland in Shropshire and Clwyd for preservation as nature reserves.
Independent 12, 29 November
Conservation: Land
Cairngorms proposed as World Heritage site
The World Conservation Union conference in Perth, Australia is considering an application to confer world heritage status on the Cairngorm mountain range in Scotland.
The application to the committee, which is administered by UNESCO, was made by Scotland's environment minister, Lord James Douglas Hamilton.
The new title is purely honourary and will not result in any increased legal claim for protection of the area.
The Cairngorms already hold the official UK titles of national scenic area, national nature reserve and site of special scientific interest.
If approved, the Cairngorms will become Britain's second world heritage listing.
The only current listing is at St Kilda.
Independent 4 December
Conservation: Land
Development continues on UK wildlife sites
An application for the judicial review of Poole Borough Council's decision to grant planning permission for the building of 200 houses on ecologically-fragile Dorset heathland has been overturned.
Canford Heath, which forms part of a larger 17 acre site of special scientific interest, is representative of Britain's disappearing dry lowland heath.
It is inhabited by the country's two rarest reptiles, the smooth snake and the sand lizard and three rare species of bird, the Dartford warbler, the nightjar and the hobby, a bird of prey.
The Worldwide Fund for Nature and British Herpetological Society took Poole Council to the High Court after the government's Nature Conservancy Council (NCC) failed to intervene.
The conservation organisations maintained that Britain was obliged to protect the site under a European Community directive on Birds and the Berne Convention, a European wildlife treaty.
British conservationists are now campaigning for changes in planning law in order to increase protection for wildlife sites.
* Other British SSSIs are under threat from development plans.
In Northamptonshire, the NCC is opposing Kettering District Council's plans to build Cransley Lodge, a village planned to include 750 houses by 1997.
The proposed development is to be situated next to Birch Spinney and Mawsley Marsh, SSSIs which feature an exceptional mixture of rare wildlife including flowers and herbs, and are one of the district's last breeding grounds for snipe.
Sir Hugh Rossi, chairman of the House of Commons Environment Committee, is one of the directors of Stock Land and Estates, the development company involved.
If approved, plans for Cransley Lodge are almost certainly to be subjected to public enquiry.
* Conservationists have alleged that planning regulations are being misused in order to put up collections of new buildings in the middle of Exmoor National Park.
Landowners have bought old farms for use as holiday homes and have then claimed planning permission to house local workers, provide employment and manage the land.
The Ministry of Agriculture usually supports such applications.
The final decision on planning permission now rests with Environment Secretary, Michael Heseltine.
Times 13 December Independent, Guardian, Times 22 December Observer 9 December Independent 31 December
Conservation: Land
Christmas trees may hold back sea
Scientists from the National Rivers Authority have asked local people at Mablethorpe, Lincolnshire, to donate their discarded Christmas trees to help find a cure for Britain's eroding beaches.
Coastal defence experts, faced with an unexpected rise in sea level and a resulting strategic review of shore defences, are hoping that the Christmas trees will take root and anchor down the dunes.
The Christmas trees could provide a "cheap and cheerful" alternative to a concrete wall surrounding England's windswept and treeless east coast.
Independent, Guardian 28 December
Conservation: Species
Orang-utan threatened by poaching
The poaching of orang-utans is becoming big business in Indonesia, according to the International Primate Protection League.
Speaking at the World Conservation Union meeting in Perth, Australia, the organisation claimed that without protection, 5,000 of the remaining 50,000 orang-utans will continue to be lost each year.
The young orang-utans are sold abroad; in Taiwan, where a television series portraying them as cute and cuddly has created a demand for orang-utan pets, they fetch up to £6,000.
At least 1,000 baby orang-utans have been smuggled into Taiwan by boat.
Capturing the animals entails shooting the adult females, whose skulls are sold to tourists.
Another contributing factor to the flourishing trade is the rapid destruction of the animal's habitat by mining and logging companies.
The animal's increasing vulnerability to malnutrition and disease makes them easier to trap.
New Scientist 8 December
: Species
Virginia debates ban on pesticide responsible for eagle deaths
Virginia's Pesticide Control Board has rejected restrictions on Carbofuran pesticide proposed by its manufacturer, FMC, on the grounds that they will not prevent bird deaths.
Moves to ban Carbofuran began in early 1990 after 200 songbirds were found dead in one county.
Farmers' groups and FMC claim that the proposed restrictions are the most stringent in the country, but Virginia's environmental groups and the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries are seeking a complete ban on the pesticide, which is responsible for the deaths of more than two million birds a year, including bald eagles who feed on smaller dead birds which have been poisoned.
FMC have been training farmers to use the insecticide as economically as possible in an effort to pre-empt the ban.
The Environmental Protection Agency plans to reach a decision by early 1991 on whether a national ban on Carbofuran is to be imposed.
Washington Post 15 November
Conservation: Species
India to Launch Project Elephant
India is developing a plan to save its 20,000 wild elephants.
Elephant numbers are currently stable, but great pressure is being put on the animal which is being forced to roam increasingly vast areas to find food and shelter as its habitat is taken for fuel wood by rural peasants.
Distressed, roaming elephants often plunder crops and occasionally kill people.
Half of India's forest has been destroyed over the last 40 years, leaving only 10 per cent coverage.
Fuel wood is extremely expensive, and the destruction of habitat has replaced hunting and poaching as the major threat to the animal.
Project Elephant, to be announced in full next year, will be run as far as possible along the lines of India's successful Operation Tiger.
Like Operation Tiger, it is expected to be a low budget operation costed at £6 million over four years.
However, the requirements of the two schemes differ considerably as, according to the Ministry of Forestry, the elephants are wandering miles from their usual territories, whereas Operation Tiger required the creation of relatively small reserves.
Times 27 November International Herald Tribune 30 November
Conservation: Species
Endangered salmon cause re-think of US river use
Five sub-species of salmon from the Columbia river and its tributary, the Snake, are likely to join US official lists as endangered species.
The measures needed to protect the salmon have implications for several industries in the area.
The rivers irrigate three million acres of farmland, feed a huge commercial fishery, provide a shipping canal, support a substantial leisure industry and supply half of the area with electricity.
All of these uses may be restricted in order to protect the endangered salmon.
Each tributary has evolved distinct sub-species as salmon return to their own birthplace and will not mate with salmon born elsewhere.
Last year, only two salmon climbed Idaho Lower Granite Dam compared with 4,500 in 1950. 100 sub-species have already disappeared from the two rivers and the Shoshone-Bannock native American tribe, the National Marine Fisheries Service and conservation groups have petitioned to have the remaining species listed.
A final decision will be made by the Secretary of Commerce in June 1992.
The debate over the salmon is likely to prove an even bigger political issue than that of the future of the northern spotted owl (see ED No. 40) because it involves several industries, whereas the owl involved only logging.
A parallel debate is evolving in Maine where officials have asked for the removal of a dam, built in 1936, in order to preserve salmon runs.
Economist December 1
Conservation: Species
China decides to save panda
China has agreed, in principle, to go ahead with a plan to save the giant panda from extinction.
A final decision over funding, to be agreed between the state council and the ministry of forestry, is expected by next March in time for China's next five year economic plan.
The project is expected to cost £30 million over a five year period.
About 1,000 pandas remain.
Most of these live in the province of Sichuan with others in Gansu and Shaanxi.
The programme for their recovery will involve extensive management and conservation of the panda's bamboo forest habitat, notably increased patrolling of existing reserves and the "corridors" of bamboo which lie between remote forest areas.
The plan was devised with the help of the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), which welcomes China's decision to go ahead as a major step toward saving the panda.
The WWF is reported to be contributing a six-figure sum toward the scheme.
Times 6 November
Conservation: Species
Monk seal numbers diminish as conservationists argue
A proposal to capture six monk seals for a breeding programme at "Marineland" — a dolphinarium in Antibes, France — has met with strong opposition from environmental groups such as the World Society for the Protection of Animals, the Bellerive Foundation and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
The controversy has resulted in each side accusing the other of contributing to the seal's demise.
International concern for these extremely rare mammals arose after thousands of grey seals were wiped out by the canine distemper virus.
Monk seal bodies are periodically washed up on the Mediterranean cost and there are fears the virus will lead to their extinction.
The monk seal lives in colonies off the coast of Morocco, Mauritania and the eastern Aegean.
It is listed as one of the world's most endangered animals by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature.
The total world population was put at 190 at the last count.
Advocates of the breeding plan, which was instigated by British vet and TV celebrity, David Taylor, claim that unless steps are taken, the seal will be extinct by the year 2000.
The campaign which aims to prevent the capture of the seals claims that the dolphinarium has inadequate facilities.
Observer 11 November
Conservation: Species
Snake savers of Hong Kong
The Hong Kong government is planning legislation to prevent two species of snake from being eaten as a winter delicacy.
The introduction of import and export licenses will protect the Asiatic and king cobras, and the Oriental rat snake in accordance with the UN-backed Convention of International Trade in Endangered species.
The price of snake meat, which is believed to warm the blood, is expected to rise by more than 30 per cent.
Times 17 December Independent 17 December Guardian 22 December
Conservation: Species
Report costs total UK species reinstatement at £12 million
The Nature Conservancy Council have issued a report which puts the cost of the conservation of the entire range of Britain's rare species of flora and fauna at £12 million.
At present, 93 plants and 88 animals fall under the protection of the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act.
The report however, claims that protection alone will not restore numbers, and has taken steps towards establishing a more practical and active method of nature conservation.
The 429 page report includes a thorough and specific recovery plan for every endangered species.
The ecology of each species is described along with its past and present distribution.
Each is given a specific recovery goal in terms of scientific knowledge, management and cash.
Requirements vary enormously between species.
Reinstatement costs range from £795,000 for the red squirrel and £230,000 for the dormouse to £525 for the least expensive plant, the small alison.
In total, the report contains reinstatement plans for 93 plants, 17 bats, 26 marine mammals, five other mammals, nine amphibians, reptiles and marine turtles, three fish and 28 invertebrates.
It does not include birds for which a separate report is being compiled by the NCC and RSPB.
Independent 26 November
Conservation: Species
Japanese deny massacre of dolphins
The killing of 582 Risso dolphins on a remote beach in southern Japan has led to outrage amongst international wildlife groups.
At home, the Japanese government has spearheaded a campaign to discredit reports that originated from its own news agency, Kyodo.
The initial reports claimed that local fisherman had killed the dolphins in order to protect their fishing grounds and for dolphin meat, which was divided up amongst Fukue islanders in the East China Sea off Nagasaki.
Television pictures of local people clubbing dolphins and hacking at their carcasses shocked viewers in Japan and around the world.
An investigation by the Japanese Fisheries Agency concluded in an announcement by the Foreign Ministry that the dolphins had committed a "mass suicide" from which local fisherman had been trying to save them by driving them back into the sea.
A Japanese government spokesman claimed that post mortems had revealed parasites in the animals' ears which may have resulted in their having lost their sense of direction.
Greenpeace Japan claim that 1,714 dolphins were killed last year in similar situations in Shizuoka and Okayama prefectures.
In 1978, Japan suffered worldwide condemnation when fisherman from Iki island killed 1,000 dolphins to protect their fishing grounds.
* Japan has launched the latest in its series of "scientific" whale hunts.
The expedition to the Antarctic aims to kill 330 Minke whales which, opponents say, are already an endangered species.
Japan claims that essential data on the Minke population can only be obtained from dead whales.
Some, however, continue to end up as whale meat in restaurants.
Times 10, 27 November Independent 6, 7 November Guardian 23 November International Herald Tribune 7 November
Conservation: Species
Deer hunting to continue on National Trust lands
Deer hunting is to continue on National Trust (NT) lands whilst a three year investigation is made into the effects of a possible ban.
This decision, by the trust's central committee, was made despite a vote by NT membership in favour of an outright ban at its annual meeting in Wales.
The working party will investigate the alternative practices of culling and management on the lands in Exmoor and the Quantock Hills in the West Country.
It will also take into account how a ban might affect the Trusts's ability to purchase or lease land and its prospects for gifts and bequests.
The NT annual meeting was attended by only seven per cent of the membership; 68,679 voted in favour of the ban and 63,985 against.
Calls to end hare and fox hunting were defeated.
Those opposed to the hunt have pledged to continue campaigning for a ban and have accused the central committee of fudging the issue.
Guardian 14 December
Conservation: Species
Reports warn of bird extinction
An RSPB report entitled Europe's Most Threatened Breeding Birds warns that at least 28 species of European birds may be about to become extinct unless prompt action is taken.
The report, which takes a wide definition of Europe including Greenland, Turkey and the western Soviet Union, cites pollution, agriculture, drainage and persecution as the causes of the decline in numbers.
South-east Turkey and the Polish and European Soviet Union regions contain the largest numbers of birds at risk.
These are followed by the Atlantic Canaries, Azores and Madeira, which contain 10 of the most threatened species of birds, most of which no longer exist elsewhere in the world.
Six of Europe's birds of prey fall into the high risk category.
Many, like the black vulture were once common across Europe but now exist only in scattered colonies.
The decline of the vulture is due to the success of livestock farming and loss of habitat.
Europe's two species of imperial eagle have also met with drastic decline.
Intensive farming methods and particularly insecticides have had a disastrous effect on the lesser kestrel, an insectivore which now numbers only hundreds, whilst wetland birds such as the marbled teal and white-headed duck fail as their habitat is drained for crops.
Fish-eating birds are being destroyed to reduce competition for fish stocks, whilst many ground birds such as the corncrake and bustard are declining as a result of major changes in agriculture.
The report calls for intensified research and monitoring of threatened species, whilst the RSPB's head of international affairs has urged that this take place immediately in order that species be saved.
Where conservation has already begun, bird species such as the red kite and white-tailed eagle are either maintaining a steady population or increasing in numbers.
Concern over the bird population is further compounded by a report from the Nature Conservancy Council (NCC) on the risks posed to seabirds by the North Sea Oil industry.
The report, the result of a three year survey and third in a series named Seabirds at Sea, found that more than half of the world's total number of breeding pairs of Manx shearwater, puffin, gannet and black guillemot live off the west coast of Scotland and in the Irish Sea.
A substantial oil spill off the costs of Ireland or Britain could therefore wipe out more than half of the world population of these species, the report said.
European 26 — 28 October Times 8 November
Conservation: Species
Endangered species update
Belize has designated 100,000 acres of rainforest, nearly two per cent of its total land area, for the protection of the jaguar.
The big cat has been hunted to near extinction.
Elsewhere in the world, other species thought to be extinct have been rediscovered in the wild.
One of these is the tiny Fender's Blue butterfly, Icaricia icarioides fenderi, a colony of which has been spotted in a remote area of Oregon's Willamette Valley after not having been seen since 1937.
According to the Worldwide Fund for Nature, two species of pheasant previously thought to have become extinct have also re-emerged in Vietnam.
Meanwhile, following a protest by villagers, British Gas has rerouted a £2.7 million gas main to avoid disturbing a colony of rare glow worms near Barrowden, Leicestershire.
Guardian 7 November International Herald Tribune 22 November Guardian 21 November Times 16 November
Conservation: Species
Eastern europe leads world trade in endangered species
A report from CITES to Interpol claims that the Soviet Union and eastern Europe are emerging as the centre for the world's illegal trade in animals.
The extremely lucrative trade in endangered species is proving irresistible to countries in grave currency crisis.
Turnover is now estimated at over $5 billion a year, making the animal trade the most profitable international illegal enterprise after the world trade in narcotics.
Western Europe's trade in rare species is estimated as involving three million rare birds, 10 million reptile and crocodile skins, 40,000 protected primates, 15 million furs, one million rare orchids and 350 million tropical fish each year.
The report singles out Italy and Spain as having the most lax controls in western Europe, but this may be the tip of the iceberg compared to the trade through eastern Europe, which acts as a "clearing house" for importation into other countries.
Animals arrive with forged documentation which claims that they have been bred in captivity, and which therefore entitles them to be taken on to other western destinations.
Chimpanzees, which top the endangered species list, currently command a huge price in the Soviet Union, which CITES officials believe may be accounted for by their use in AIDS research.
Pharmaceutical companies and medical researchers breed their own animals, but demand always exceeds supply and extremely high prices are paid.
Meanwhile, Viennese police have found so many rare animals in the possession of eastern Europeans that a magistrate has asked for help from CITES in identifying where they come from.
European 23-25 November
Energy
Energy conservation out of fashion in Britain
Spending on energy conservation has fallen by 28 per cent over the past two years, despite the government's public commitment in the environment white paper to saving energy as the principal means of combating the greenhouse effect.
Government statistics show that expenditure on cavity insulation declined by 49 per cent over two years, and on double glazing by 34 per cent.
There was also a fall of 25 per cent in the amount spent on energy-efficient boilers, which are one of the most effective ways of conserving output.
The Association for the Conservation of Energy has described the figures as "ghastly" , and called for a range of fresh incentives to encourage energy-conscious investment.
These include: abolishing VAT tax on energy efficient products; introducing an energy labelling scheme; and establishing a powerful independent agency to replace the ineffective Energy Efficiency Office.
Guardian 29 December Independent 29 December
Energy
Germans to test vegetable oil as engine fuel
Three leading German companies are experimenting with fuel produced from rape seed oil to power a new low pollution truck engine.
The project is being financed by the German Technology Ministry, and is one of the current initiatives to restructure the East German economy.
However, an American bank is interested in developing the project in the third world, as the engine will also run on palm oil.
Veba, the large German energy concern, will conduct trials at the Schweldt oil refinery.
These will involve rape oil being added to diesel in a one to four ratio and tested in Volkswagen and Mercedes diesel engines.
If successful, full scale testing will commence next year, assuming that the price of crude oil remains at a high enough level to encourage research into alternatives.
If the project goes ahead, 200,000 hectares of East German land could be planted every four years, employing many East German farm workers threatened with job losses.
The oil will work with the Elspeth engine, which operates with virtually any vegetable oil.
If the project gets the green light, engines will be produced in Nordhausen, formerly in East Germany, where motor workers are also currently threatened with redundancy.
Financial Times 11 October
Energy
Unleaded petrol to be dyed green
Germany, France and Belgium are proposing to dye unleaded petrol green in an attempt to overcome a tax dodge by garages.
Excise duty in most countries is lower for unleaded than 4-star, so some garages are allegedly buying lead free at a lower rate of tax and selling it on to customers as leaded.
The garages blend the different fuels together so that it is impossible to tell the difference between the blended mixture and unadulterated 4-star.
In Belgium, garages save about three pence per litre.
According to one Belgium government official, the colouring agent would be used in such small quantities that it would not harm the environment.
Independent 29 November
Environmental Politics
Canada unveils green
programme The Canadian government has published a five-year environmental programme aimed at conserving and improving the quality of the country's air, land and water.
The initiative will cost 3 billion Canadian dollars (£1.3 billion), and is the result of over 100 separate proposals, involving 40 federal agencies.
It includes a commitment to create five new national parks by 1996, and to set aside a total of 12 per cent of the country's territory as "protected areas" for wildlife.
It sets the target of reducing atmospheric pollution by 40 per cent over the next decade, and of stabilizing carbon dioxide emissions at their present level by the year 2000 (fast becoming the widely accepted consensus target — see EDs 39 and 40).
The Great Lakes and other waterways are to undergo a clean-up programme, and regulations will be introduced to ensure safer drinking water.
Environmentalists have attacked the plan for lacking specifics, and have warned that it may be diminished by budgetary cutbacks as a result of scrutiny by the federal Treasury.
Others suggest it represents a cynical attempt by politically-ailing premier Brian Mulroney to regain popularity ahead of the 1993 elections.
International Herald Tribune 13 December Financial Times 13 December Times 12 December
Environmental Politics
Bali hotel-building halted
The Indonesian government has responded to environmental concerns by banning the construction of all new hotels on the popular tourist island of Bali.
The ban will last until at least 1992.
The move followed warnings that the island would face a severe water shortage if further development continued.
Tourist officials, meanwhile, had alerted the government to the possibility of the Bali's culture and landscape being swamped by mass tourism.
International Herald Tribune 22-23 December
Environmental Politics
CBI survey shows limited environmental impact
A survey of leading UK corporations conducted for the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) has revealed that only 54 per cent give detailed consideration to environmental matters at board of directors level.
The poll was targeted at finance directors, of whom 90 per cent agreed that "the environment" was a serious issue for their business.
To date, however, this had not resulted in major practical steps being taken by companies, the survey showed.
Of those companies surveyed, 56 per cent had no formal environmental policy, and only 29 per cent had referred to environmental concerns in their annual reports.
Times 24 December
Environmental Politics
German Greens victim of own success
The west German Green Party (Die Grünen) suffered a major electoral setback in the first all-German elections.
Their 3.9 per cent of the vote fell short of the 5 per cent threshold entitling them to representation in parliament.
As a consequence, all 42 deputies in the former West German Bundestag lost their seats.
Eight Green deputies were elected in eastern Germany, where they campaigned in alliance with the civil rights group, Bundnis 90.
Observers blamed the poor showing on the fact that the major parties had taken on board many of the "lighter green" policies of Die Grünen.
Others suggested that preoccupations with unification, and with threatened recession, had also led people to return to traditional politics.
* The ruling Christian Democratic Union and its ally, the Christian Social Union, are preparing a plan for taxing activities which cause pollution as a means of financing clean-up programmes in former East Germany.
* Italy's two environmental parties have agreed to unite, making the new agglomeration Europe's fourth largest in parliamentary terms, with 16 MPs.
European 7-9 December Financial Times 6 December Economist 8 December
Environmental Politics
Greenpeace activists held in Pacific
Four Greenpeace volunteers attempting to take samples for radioactivity testing at in the French nuclear testing ground of Muroroa atoll were arrested by French commandos on Dec. 11.
They were subsequently taken to Tahiti to face a magistrate.
The four were from the Greenpeace ship, Rainbow Warrior II (whose predecessor had been sank by the French secret service while on a similar mission in 1985).
The French government had earlier offered to allow Greenpeace representatives to visit Muroroa, on condition that they refrained from taking samples.
Le Monde 4 December Guardian 12, 15 December Independent 5, 14 December
Environmental Politics
Finland's concern over USSR nuclear waste store
The Soviet Union's plans to build a new store for nuclear waste, close to the Finnish border near Leningrad, have aroused worry amongst Finnish environmentalists.
This is the latest in a series of conflicts over the Baltic environment, including an escape of effluent from the chemicals complex on the river Dvina which poisoned large numbers of fish.
Finnish environmentalists are demanding more information about the content of the spill.
New Scientist 1 December
Environmental Politics
UK civil service holds first joint environmental meeting
Some 40 senior government officials from 10 separate departments held a joint seminar in mid-December to discuss ways in which the government as a whole could respond to environmental problems.
The meeting was the first of its kind, and reflected the "cross-XXXX departmental" responsibility for the environment accepted by the government in the white paper published in September [see ED 39].
Those attending included the head of the diplomatic service, Sir Patrick White, reflecting the growing importance of an international approach to issues such as global warming.
Other departments represented at either permanent or deputy permanent secretary level included environment, agriculture, health, transport, trade and industry and the treasury.
Environmental policy will be co-ordinated by a cabinet-level committee, chaired by the prime minister.
An inter-departmental group on environmental economics, to be chaired by the government's newly-appointed deputy chief economic adviser, Rachel Lomax, will hold its first meetings in early 1991.
It will be principally concerned with issues such as pollution taxes and other "market-based" strategies for environmental protection.
* Friends of the Earth have issued a paper calling for a statutory duty of environmental protection to be placed on all government departments and local authorities.
Greening the Machinery of Government suggests that this duty should include ensuring an optimum use of natural resources, reduction in waste, and the enforcement of the "polluter pays" principle.
Times 17 December
Environmental Politics
Europe's green label
The European Community is set to introduce a "green labelling" scheme, by which a range of consumer products will be eligible for the stamp of relative environment friendliness.
As announced by European Commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana, the EC-wide scheme will pre-empt similar proposals under discussion in many member states, including the UK.
A comparable scheme has been under way since 1978 in West Germany, where products judged environment-XXXX friendly have been awarded "Blue Angel" status.
The EC labelling will revolve around an international panel, comprising representatives of industry, trade unions, environmentalists and consumers, who will draw up criteria for each group of products on a "cradle to grave" basis.
The labels will be awarded on a comparative basis: the least environ-XXXX mentally-damaging brand receiving the mark.
They are not intended to suggest that any given product does no harm whatsoever to the environment.
The project now goes ahead to the Council of Ministers for approval.
International Herald Tribune 15-16 December Times 30 November Financial Times 30 November European 30 November-2 December
Environmental Politics
Soviet politician proposes green legislation
Vitalii Chelyshev, member of the Supreme Soviet and key figure in the Soviet environment movement, has proposed that substantial tax concessions be offered to foreign companies developing green technology.
The new law, proposed by Chelyshev while addressing the "Meeting Place Europe" conference in Bergen, would mean that firms would be taxed at a maximum of ten per cent.
This compares with tax rates of up to 40 per cent currently in operation in the USSR.
Firms registered under the new law would be exempt from legal changes until 2016, a clause that will reassure western companies thinking of taking advantage of the new facility.
There are also provisions to compensate companies if the firm they have been contracted to clean up goes out of business.
Chelyshev's other activities include plans for a chain of green cafes and an environmental magazine.
He is seeking to promote environmental awareness in a society which, he claims, tends to view such ideas as a western luxury.
New Scientist 17 November
Environmental Politics
Soviet mines cut down on sulphur emissions
The Soviet government has responded to Finnish concerns by agreeing to take steps to cut sulphur emissions from two major mining and metalwork complexes close to the Finnish frontier.
Emissions which currently amount to nearly 500,000 tonnes per year will be cut to 73,000 tonnes as a result of modernization to be carried out on the plants, in the towns of Nikel and Monchegorsk on the Kola peninsula.
The $900 million cost of the modifications will be met in part by Finland, Sweden and Norway.
Tass 21 November (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Italy grapples with environmental contradictions
Italy's failure to implement EC directives have resulted in it being taken to the European Court of Justice more times than any other country in 1989.
Italian politicians are now debating a "catch-up" bill to deal with the accumulated directives.
Meanwhile, the Italian government is lobbying its EC partners to make Milan the permanent seat of the Community's environmental agency after 1992. * Italy's tiny Green Party has been using filibuster tactics to prevent any changes to the Italian tax system which has driven all but one of the major foreign oil refiners from the country.
Only Esso Italiana remain in the face of the Italian legal and fiscal restraints.
The Green Party aims to gain concessions on environmental safeguards for nuclear power and on the ingredients of unleaded petrol.
European 26-28 October Daily Telegraph 6 November
Environmental Politics
First alternative Swiss bank
The first branch of the Banque Alternative Suisse (BAS), which claims to prioritise "respect for the environment and the rights of man" instead of maximum profits, has opened in Olton, northern Switzerland.
The BAS, born out of a coalition between environmental, Christian, co-operative and third-world activists, offers clients ethical guarantees and a new attitude towards their money.
Interest on deposited funds will not rise above 3.75 per cent.
Le Monde 6 November
Environmental Politics
US dam vetoed
Plans to dam Colorado's South Platte river have finally been vetoed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The Two Forks dam project, which was to supply the population of Denver's burgeoning suburbs with water, was first proposed ten years ago.
According to the EPA, the dam would have had "unacceptable adverse effects" on the environment, including damage to fisheries and recreational sites.
The issue became a national symbol of the struggle between development and environment.
International Herald Tribune 24-25 November
Global Warming
World climate conference's agreement on global warming
The second world climate conference, held in Geneva in early November, ended with an agreement to work towards a convention on limiting global warming, but failed to draw up a specific strategy for curbing emissions of greenhouse gases.
Environmentalists dubbed it a failure for this reason, but acknowledged its importance as the first occasion on which all major world governments had agreed that global warming was a reality.
The 137 governments participating agreed a statement which committed them to working towards a legally-binding climate convention, which should be ready for signature at the Brazil conference on environment and development in 1992.
This would include commitments by industrialized countries to cut carbon dioxide emissions, and to provide assistance to third-world states to do the same.
Negotiations on the agreement are scheduled to open in Washington in February.
The final statement urged "all developing countries to establish targets and/or feasible national programmes or strategies which will have significant effects on limiting emissions of greenhouse gases not covered by the Montreal Protocol" [on CFCs — see ED 35/36].
The politicians based their stance on the report of the conference's scientific sessions, which warned that immediate action was required to limit the warming.
They recommended cuts of "one to two per cent per year, starting now" , which could "stabilise atmospheric C02 concentrations by the middle of the 21st century at about 50 per cent above pre-industrial concentrations" .
This was close to the recommendations of the Inter-Governmental panel on Climate Change [see ED 39].
The conference was marked by a split between the USA, Soviet Union and Saudi Arabia on the one hand, who resisted the imposition of specific emissions cuts, and the remaining Western countries, including Europe, Japan and Australia, on the other, who argued for the adoption of a freeze on C02 emissions at present levels by the year 2000.
The division marked a post-Cold War schism along economic and ecological, rather than ideological, grounds.
At the start of the conference, the 18 countries which together comprised the European Community and the European Free Trade Area had agreed on this freeze as a common target.
A similar target had been adopted by Japan [see ED 39].
The new German government had gone a stage further, adopting a target of a net reduction in C02 emissions of between 25 and 30 per cent by the year 2005.
Much of this, however, could be achieved by closing down and/or modernizing the grossly-polluting industries of eastern Germany.
The conference's failure to set limits came under fierce attack from environmentalists.
Greenpeace's scientific adviser, Dr Jeremy Leggett, was particularly scathing: "There is a chasm between what the scientists have been saying and what the politicians are prepared to do about it.
We have seen hundreds of the world's best climate scientists urge immediate cuts in C02 emissions, but the politicians hesitate even to advocate a freeze on such emissions.
They have treated the interests of future generations in a cavalier fashion."
Daniel Becker, director of the global warming programme of the US environmental group, the Sierra Club, declared that: "The United States helped make this conference a failure.
More than 700 scientists sent out a clarion call for action and the US is the only wealthy country not to make tangible promises."
Third-world governments were equally critical.
15 of them, together with Austria, issued a formal objection to the conference's final statement, claiming that it did not go far enough in setting goals for limiting global warming, or in guaranteeing aid to developing countries.
The consensus among most observers was that an inadequate, watered-down agreement had been accepted reluctantly by the conference for fear of completely alienating the United States.
* The Swiss government announced on Oct. 31 that it would impose a tax on fossil fuels which contributed to global warming.
The tax would be levied at a rate of 15 per cent on petrol and 18 per cent on diesel oil.
Daily UK newspapers, 6-8 November Washington Post 8 November Le Monde 1, 2, 9 November New Scientist 10, 17 November Financial Times 10 November International Herald Tribune 6, 8 November UN Information Service, 6 November
Global Warming
Alpine glaciers recede
Italian glaciologists have reported the shrinkage of the Valtellina ice cap over the Italian Alps, suggesting that it could disappear altogether within 60 years.
Over the last 100 years, the ice cap has shrunk in area from 20 kmsq to only 13 kmsq; this year its thickness has dropped by 2.5 metres.
The glaciers of the Valtellina are retreating by up to 7 cm a day.
First signs of the thaw date from 1850, but the process accelerated during the 1920s, 1960s and 1980s in what could be another manifestation of the greenhouse effect.
Professor Claudio Smiraglia of Milan State University blamed decreasing snowfall in winter, and long, hot summers this century.
Green Magazine November
Global Warming
New interest in domestic energy efficiency
A comprehensive energy efficiency labelling scheme for houses has been launched by MVM, a consultancy specialising in property and planning information.
The scheme has been approved by UK energy secretary, John Wakeham, who has indicated that it may eventually become incorporated into building regulations for new houses.
Home energy efficiency is increasingly seen as a route to a reduction in national greenhouse gas emissions.
The new scheme, called Starpoint, is based on a one to five star rating system.
The number of stars indicates the level of energy efficiency in terms of heating, hot water system, insulation and windows.
It is estimated that the carbon dioxide output of an average household in theUK is 6.5 tonnes a year, equivalent to a two star rating.
Upgrading by one star would cost about £1000.
If every household in the UK was to to do this, national fuel costs would be reduced by £7 million and carbon dioxide pollution by 16 million tonnes a year.
Financial Times 14 November
Global Warming
Dutch plan to compensate for power emissions
The association of Dutch electricity producers (SEP) has planned to plant thousands of trees in order to compensate the world for carbon dioxide emissions from a new coal-fired power station.
The 600-megawatt Rotterdam station, due to begin operation in the mid-1990's, is expected to discharge 75 million tons of CO2 over its 25 year lifetime.
The tree-planting scheme, for which £6 million has been allocated, will run from 1991 to 2015.
Independent 6 November
Global Warming
 "Green Con" awards for 1990
Friends of the Earth's annual "Green Con" award was won by the newly-privatized Eastern Electricity, which earned the damning accolade on the grounds of a letter from its chairman urging its customers to use more electricity if they wanted to combat global warming.
The letter suggested that "there is very little CO2 or global warming gas emissions from the all-electric home" .
As FOE's director, David Gee, pointed out, this omits to mention the role of power stations in emitting greenhouse gases.
Green Con runners-up were paper makers Scott, who claimed that its investment in tree plantations for the paper trade helped combat global warming.
This ignored the energy-intensive consequences of its manufacture, FOE said.
Guardian 18 December Independent 18 December
Nuclear Power
Germans close five Soviet built reactors
The German government is to close five Soviet built nuclear power reactors in what was East Germany because officials think they are very unsafe and too costly to adapt.
However, hopes that the decision would spark off similar closures throughout Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union are largely unfounded, due to the economic crisis sweeping the region.
Germany is replacing the energy loss partly by constructing a $30 million oil-fired power plant, and partly by redirecting energy from the western Germany's power grid.
Other former Eastern bloc countries also face growing concern over their ageing nuclear power stations.
The reactors at issue are the pressurised water variety, including notably the VVER Model 2are, of which there are five in the Soviet Union, two in Czechoslovakia and four in Bulgaria.
Also causing concern is the newer VVER Model 213.
Czechoslovakia has six, and Hungary four.
New York Times 22 October
Nuclear Power
French government admits nuclear miscalculation
The French Atomic Energy Commission has reawakened concerns over plutonium contamination at a former nuclear dump near Paris, by admitting that radioactivity at the site is more widespread than previously thought.
The Committee for Independent Research and Information on Radioactivity (CRII-RAD) revealed that it had found traces of plutonium at the dump.
Faulty concrete containers, thought at the time to be the source of pollution, were removed in 1973 and the site was declared decontaminated in 1979.
Fresh soil samples, taken recently in the presence of journalists, are currently being investigated for gamma rays and alpha particles.
Whatever the outcome, CRII-RAD are highly critical of CEA in the affair and say that the official CEA figures have been well below the real plutonium levels at the site.
New Scientist 17 November
Nuclear Power
Proposed nuclear dump may fail on safety evidence
A deep underground repository planned by NIREX, the nuclear industry waste disposal company, will fail to meet its 2005 target date, if safety issues are aired at a public inquiry.
The Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee report expresses concern that the safety case will be based on information derived from only two boreholes at each site.
According to committee chairman Professor John Knill, it would be well into the early 2000s before sufficient evidence on the choice of site could be collected.
The repository is urgently needed to take intermediate level radioactive waste currently piling up and Nirex is hoping that the public inquiry will be completed by 1994.
Independent 20 November
Nuclear Power
American nuclear waste site "approved" 
The US Energy Department has been allowed "conditional permission" to store radioactive and hazardous waste in an underground salt cavern in New Mexico.
The Environmental Protection Agency has authorised the storage of only 8,500 drums in the cavern over a five year test period.
Since this represents only one per cent of projected capacity, it will not be of significant help in meeting concern over weapons production.
Before full authorization, the Energy Department needs Congressional approval.
One Senator has said he will try to stop the waste transfer until he is satisfied that transporting plutonium-contaminated wastes pose no threat to state residents.
The EPA's conditional approval is also likely to be challenged by the Natural Resources Defense Council which claims that weapons plant wastes are potentially explosive and liable to migrate.
It adds that evidence has come to light of two possible explosions involving similar waste.
Washington Post 3 November
Ozone Layer
Scientist discovers 1960s ozone depletion
A New Zealand chemist has discovered that the ozone layer above the Antarctic was considerably depleted in the 1960s.
He reached the conclusion after studying samples of preserved moss from the period.
The work may reveal whether ozone depletion is cyclical and if chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are the only cause of the hole.
Kenneth Markham, who works for the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, funded by the New Zealand government, analysed flavonoids, photo-protective pigments which are synthesised in plants when they are exposed to harmful UV-B radiation, the wavelength most affected by the depletion of stratospheric ozone.
Comparisons between the favonoid levels of Antarctic moss taken between 1964-1986 and ground based measurements of South Pole ozone levels revealed that they were a near mirror image of each other.
The results also confirmed the ozone hole of the 1980s.
Suspected causes of the 1960 depletion range from nuclear bomb testing, the low flux of particles from the Sun, emissions from the volcano Agung, and the fact that the ozone is most badly depleted in alternate years.
New Scientist 24 November
Ozone Layer
EC agrees to ban CFCs ahead of schedule
The European Community has agreed to ban the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) by June 1997 — three years ahead of the deadline laid down in the Montreal Protocol on protection of the ozone layer [see ED no. 35/36].
production of CFCs' is to be cut by 85 per cent by 1995.
Halons — used mainly in fire extinguishers — are to be abolished by the year 2000.
The decision was taken at a meeting of EC environment ministers on Dec. 21, which also imposed new limits on exhaust emissions which will effectively make catalytic converters compulsory on all new vehicles by 1993.
EC Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana challenged the USA and Japan to match the new CFC deadline.
Times, Financial Times, Independent 22 December
Ozone Layer
Yugoslavia ratifies Montreal protocol
The Yugoslav parliament has ratified the Montreal protocol on the protection of the ozone layer, the state news agency announced on Nov. 30.
It also discussed the possibility of a World Bank grant to help industry to adapt to the demands of the protocol.
The agency added that Yugoslav industry had reduced emissions of ozone-damaging gases by 20 per cent since 1986.
Tanjug (Yugoslav news agency) 30 November (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
US Clean Air Act sets emissions standards
President Bush has signed into law a series of new air pollution controls, designed to limit harmful emissions from industry and motor vehicles.
Delays in implementation deadlines have, however, produced a lukewarm response from campaigners.
The Clean Air Act Amendments (1990) are designed to close loopholes left by the previous set of amendments, passed in the late 70s.
During the interim period, air quality has deteriorated; health-damaging smogs have been recorded in 100 cities across the US, and acid rain has affected forests and rivers in the New England and the north-east.
The new laws include the following provisions: * the installation by 1995 of equipment to cut emissions of 41 listed pollutants by 70 per cent; a further 148 pollutants must be similarly-controlled by 2003; * a cut of 10 million tonnes in emissions of sulphur dioxide (one of the principal causes of acid rain) by the year 2000; * the compulsory use of high-oxygen content petrol in 44 cities by the year 1992.
Bush described the controls as "the most significant air pollution legislation in our nation's history" .
A spokesman for the industrial lobby warned that the amendments "will dramatically change our lifestyles and the way most companies do business." 
It was claimed that they would result in significant increases in consumer prices for cars, patrol and electricity.
High-sulphur content coal mining areas, such as the Mid-West, were expected to lose out in favour of lower-sulphur coal from the West Coast and abroad.
Washington Post 16 November
Pollution: Air
Czechoslovak government report reveals chronic air pollution
A report published by the Czech government has revealed the extent of air pollution in Bohemia, northern Czechoslovakia, and its effect on the population.
The new "democratic" government has pledged billions of crowns to put right the damage caused by a 40 year industrial race with the West.
The publication of environmental information was prohibited under communist rule.
Damage to the water supply, food chain, forests and soil of this once rural and beautiful area is being intensified by a natural phenomena known as "autumn inversion" which is trapping pollution and sending air pollution levels up ten times higher than international safety limits.
As seasonal temperatures cool, hot and cold air meet, forming a seal over the industrialised valley of the Bilina and Labe (German Elbe) rivers on the former border with East Germany.
Water droplets trap poisonous gases and millions of tons of ash laden with cadmium, lead, mercury and arsenic linger.
The resulting pollution permeates five districts.
According to the report, pollution is so bad that even 100 kilometres away in the national capital of Prague, up to 99.3 per cent of the 1.2 million people live in a highly degraded environment as a direct result.
Life expectancy in the valley is 10 years lower than the national average, and the incidence of respiratory disease is abnormally high.
Unborn children are affected and the death rate is steadily rising.
More than half of the deaths are attributable to circulatory disease, whilst nearly a third of the population die from cancer.
Children in particular are being affected.
Pollution is stunting their growth and reducing blood enzyme activity.
Bohemian children suffer from two to three respiratory diseases a year, and one third suffer from non-specific allergies.
It is reported that everyone in the area has lost a relative as a direct result of pollution.
Local companies have been persuaded to foot the bill for specially-developed breathing masks now worn by children on their way to and from school.
European 30 November — 2 December
Pollution: Air
Breakthrough in "natural" pollution measurement
A study by Dublin's Trinity College has established that yeasts found on tree leaves are pollution-sensitive and can provide an inexpensive method of monitoring air pollution.
The project was financed by the European Commission as part of its environment clean-up programme.
Cultures grown from leaf-yeast samples taken from 23 European cities were counted and computer analyzed.
The method proved much cheaper than the conventional equipment currently used to monitor pollution levels, and is quick enough to allow recognition of pollution hotspots and the drawing up of weekly pollution maps.
European 19-21 October
Pollution: Air
Four-year study portrays grave air pollution across Europe
The preliminary findings of an EC report on air pollution in Europe have concluded that about 10 per cent of the European Community's forests have been damaged by sulphur emissions.
The report argues that the £4.7 billion currently spent by EC countries on curbing air pollution is virtually ineffective, and provides evidence for far more stringent control of sulphur emissions.
The report is the result of four years study by the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), a non-governmental organisation funded by scientific organisations in the east and west.
Covering European forestry from the Atlantic to the Urals, it is the most comprehensive to date.
It concludes that damaging levels of sulphur are deposited on 75 per cent of all European forestry, with the most severe impact occurring in those eastern countries which were once communist.
For many thousands of trees in Czechoslovakia and eastern Germany, it is already too late.
The cost of forest loss through sulphur pollution is about three times the amount dedicated to controlling air pollution by European political leaders.
Current sulphur levels represent timber losses of 48 million cubic metres for western Europe, 35 million cubic metres for eastern Europe and 35 million cubic metres for the European part of the Soviet Union.
The report recommends a threefold cut in sulphur emissions.
This could be achieved by the reduction of consumption of fossil fuels, increased energy efficiency and the installation of more effective emission control equipment on motor vehicles and power plants.
The IIASA report will be published in full later this year and will provide information for a new accord currently being negotiated between 20 European countries to further limit sulphur emissions.
Independent 6 December International Herald Tribune 20 December
Pollution: Air
UK power industry claims it will beat EC emission targets
The Department of the Environment (DoE) has announced that it will be able to beat EC targets for reductions for sulphur dioxide emissions.
The department has revealed its plans to spend £1.2 billion on desulphurisation of four power stations, £4.5 billion to clean gas power stations and £300,000 for equipment to reduce nitrogen oxide emissions.
The total cost to the electricity generating industry, it said, would be £6 billion over the next 10 years.
Friends of the Earth, however, has claimed that these figures are artificially inflated as money spent on the cleaner gas programme needed to be spent anyway.
The organisation claims that desulphurisation plans have been cut to suit the newly privatised power industry and that the department had reneged on its original agreement to desulphurise a further two power stations.
The EC has granted Britain lower sulphur emission targets than its EC neighbours.
Financial Times 21 December
Pollution: Water
Chinese order anti-pollution drive
The Chinese State Council has ordered a range of anti-pollution measures affecting small industrial enterprises such as paper mills, chemical works, printing and dyeing factories.
Those which emit pollutants above designated levels are to be closed down or switched to other work.
The decision comes against a background of increased Chinese public utterances on environmental questions.
The government has urged environmental scientists to increase co-operation with foreign experts; it has published the first national Environmental Yearbook; and released details of an eight-year survey of background radioactivity, which purports to show it as well below international norms.
* The Laotian Agriculture Ministry has announced plans for the semi-settlement of a quarter of a million families of shifting cultivators, in an effort to restrict the effects of "slash and burn" farming on the country's forests.
Xinhua news agency, Peking, 13, 18 December (BBC summary of world broadcasts) KPL news agency, Vientiane, 29 December (BBC SWB)
Pollution: Water
Berlin water pollution crisis
The newly-unified city of Berlin is facing a "drinking water emergency" , according to Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer.
The water supply of over a million people living in the area are is contaminated by a range of pollutants, including heavy metals, and nitrates at concentrations of up to 25 times the permitted EC limits.
If water standard applying in West Germany prior to unification were to be observed, a large number of the wells supplying the water would have to be shut down.
River water in the region is also contaminated by phosphates, ammonia, benzol and zinc.
One river close to a pharmaceuticals factory was liberally laced with painkillers.
As one analyst remarked, "the fish aren't feeling a thing." 
The principal cause of the problem, however, was fertilizer run-XXXX off, which contaminated groundwater and led to eutrophication of surface water.
Scientists are now exploring ways of limiting this, including reactivating disused sewage seepage fields in the area.
New Scientist 6 December
Pollution: Water
Japan's blue coral reprieve
One of the world's richest colonies of blue coral, situated off Japan's southern island of Ishigaki has won a reprieve from development and, marine biologists believe, destruction.
The reef, described by the World Conservation Union as more diverse than Australia's Great Barrier reef, has been threatened for over a decade by the proposed building of a second airport for the island.
An alliance of government officials and construction companies say the airport can be built without damage to the reef.
But the governor committed to the development was unseated in an election in Okinawa.
One day before the election, the World Wide Fund for Nature-XXXX Japan launched a campaign to save the southern islands.
Prince Philip, attending the symposium as President of WWF International, was reported as having agreed, diplomatically, with a conservation union survey which concluded that an airport would destroy the reef with its colonies of 600-year old blue coral.
He added that the electorate could determine whether or not this happened.
Voters were reportedly swayed, in part by the newly elected governor's promise "to reconsider" the Ishigaki project.
Almost all the coral which once surrounded Japan's southern islands has been destroyed by pollution caused by soil erosion, and rising sea temperatures threaten to kill the world's remaining blue coral.
New Scientist 24 November
Pollution: Water
Worldwide oil spill agreement
Under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization, 90 countries have agreed to set up an emergency response system to deal with oil spillages.
The system will be based on a network of anti-pollution equipment in strategic locations around the globe, backed up by a training programme to ensure that governments and the various oil industries are well-equipped to cope with an accident.
The countries involved have pledged to offer mutual assistance in the event of a spill.
Ship captains are obliged to report all major pollutant leakages, and ship owners will be obliged to meet the costs of clean-up operations under the "polluter pays" principle.
Financial Times 12 December
Pollution: Water
TBT fouls water
Tributyltin (TBT), the most toxic chemical to be introduced deliberately into the environment, has been found in surface seawater at more than 10 times the concentrations known to harm marine life.
Scientists from the Plymouth Marine Laboratory found high levels of TBT, used as an anti-fouling agent in boat hull paints, in coastal water and in samples taken 200km out in the North Sea.
Although there is no worldwide ban on TBT in anti-fouling paints, legislation exists in many countries to prohibit its use on yachts and pleasure craft, and such a ban has existed in Britain since 1987.
Naval and commercial vessels have continued to use the paints, however, and sea lanes are contaminated, according to Dr Tony Stebbing at the Marine Laboratory.
He reports that the chemical is concentrated in the topmost layers of seawater — home to the plankton which feed larger marine animals.
Even at relatively low levels, TBT causes masculinization in female dog whelks.
This renders them sterile and has resulted in their virtual elimination from the Southampton and Solent coastal waters.
A resolution calling for a ban on TBT in anti-fouling paints was agreed by the International Maritime Organisation's environment protection committee.
Guardian 30 November Independent 30 November New Scientist 8 December
Transport
Government transport
assumptions "false" A report commissioned by the Royal Society for Nature Conservation has accused the government of basing its transport policies on a range of false assumptions about journey times, traffic densities and the effect of new roads.
Unspoken Decrees: Road Appraisal, Democracy and the Environment points out that the Transport Department at present bases its estimates of the cost-effectiveness of new road schemes on remarkably narrow criteria.
On the basis of the assumption that every minute saved on a journey is worth 3p, it produces notional "savings" of millions of pounds, based on its own traffic forecasts.
It neglects to take into account the possibility that people might also attach a comparable value to environmental protection, and similarly fails to attach a value to the contribution vehicles make to acid rain and greenhouse gas emissions.
The report also criticized the department for refusing to accept that new roads generate more traffic.
Should a new road become liable to traffic jams, as the London orbital M25 motorway has done, transport officials will suggest widenings or further road construction as a solution, thereby compounding the problem, according to the report.
Guardian 28 December
Transport
 "Gasohol" mixture reduces air pollution
The preliminary findings of American research show that the addition of methanol and ethanol derivatives to petrol can significantly reduce carbon and other pollutants.
Scientists from Mobil Oil and General Motors found that the alcohol-based chemicals cut emissions from cars of all ages by 10 per cent.
The substances used were methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) which is a product of methanol, and ethyl tertiary butyl ether (ETBE) which is derived from corn.
The research has been prompted by the newly passed Clean Air Act.
MTBE is already used as an emission reducing additive in Germany and the Netherlands.
Meanwhile, the American moonshine industry has high hopes for expansion as the "white lightning" produced in back country stills finds a new use in the mixture of 90 percent gasoline and 10 per cent ethanol known as "gasohol" .
Times 28 December Washington Post 2 December
Tropical Forests
EC timber ban sparks Asian threat
Indonesia and Malaysia have responded belligerently to the European parliament's resolution calling for a ban on imports of tropical hardwoods.
The two countries' joint forestry committee has called for retaliatory action, including a ban on imports of certain EC products, to be taken by the forthcoming meeting of economic ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The committee declared that it was "unfair" for western environmentalists to blame ASEAN countries for global problems.
While admitting that forested areas were becoming smaller as a result of "rapid development" , it claimed that both Indonesia and Malaysia had taken steps "to sustain forest resources" .
* The Malaysian government is considering extending the period of timber concessions to 25 years, with the proviso that trees cut should be at least 40 years old.
It claimed that this would extend the life of the timber reserves of Sarawak to at least 20 years, in contrast to the International Tropical Timber Organization's estimate of 11 years.
Voice of Malaysia 4 December (BBC summary of world broadcasts) International Herald Tribune 1-2 December
Tropical forests
Brazilian rainforest loss "exaggerated" say MPs
Members of the House of Commons' Environment select committee have concluded that the rate of destruction of Brazilian rainforest is not as great as has been reported.
The MPs reached their conclusion after visiting the country.
Their report warned, however, that forest loss in Brazil still constituted "an environmental disaster" .
It quoted Brazil's National Institute for Research as calculating that 120,300 square miles of forest had been destroyed in the years leading up to 1989.
Financial Times 19 December
Tropical forests
Japan under pressure in Chilean forestry
Japanese corporations which are financing the felling of virgin Chilean forest for the wood chip industry are running into growing opposition from the country's environmental movement — and from its state forestry concern.
Conglomerates such as Mitsubishi and Daio Papers imported around two million tonnes of wood chips from Chile last year.
Much of this comes from small landowners, and at least one-third is believed to be being felled illegally, without the permission of the state forestry corporation, Conaf.
The corporation is attempting to encourage the development of "sustainable" forestry through selective felling.
in the meantime, it is aiming to build up its resources for keeping the operations under surveillance by imposing a "policing tax" of $1 per tonne from sawmills involved in wood chipping.
Its stance has come under fire from the president of the private sector's wood alliance, Corma.
Guillermo Guell proclaims that: "we live off the forest, so we don't need anybody to tell us how to look after it — least of all trendy ecologists sitting in Santiago apartments" .
He blames "European and American neo-XXXX colonialists" for instigating the complaints.
Non-Japanese companies largely steer clear of virgin forests, opting instead for investment in eucalyptus plantations.
Financial Times 19 December
Tropical forests
Cocaine labs contribute to Amazon pollution
A report from Brazil's League of the Defence of the Environment claims that areas of the Amazon basin are being poisoned by toxic chemical waste from thousands of tiny Bolivian cocaine factories.
The report, which was commissioned by the US Agency for International Development, claims the main producer regions of Chapare and Beni are dumping 38,000 tons of waste each year into streams which feed Amazon tributaries.
Cocaine production requires large amounts of water, hence factories are nearly always built by streams.
Until recently, police raiding illegal factories added to the problem by disposing of the chemicals directly into streams, a practise which has now ceased.
Washington Post 21 November
Tropical forests
Guyanese wilderness threatened by gold mining
The Guyanese Geology and Mines Commission is to provide expert advice for gold miners on how to minimise environmental damage.
The move follows reports that a new mechanised suction dredge is breaking up river banks, blocking rivers and killing fish.
Legislation to control mining activity is expected to follow.
Gold miners armed with the new dredges are pouring into the Pakaraima and Upper Mazaruni Mountains, a rainforested area which is home to the Akawaio Indians.
Waterways provide the main thoroughfare in the Upper Mazaruni and many of these are already blocked.
Fish are unable to spawn as their breeding grounds are buried or destroyed by sand banks created by the dredgers, whose operations render water undrinkable as far as 60 km downstream.
Local and environmental groups fear that the new mining activity will turn what is now magnificent scenery into a mud choked ecological disaster.
The dredger represents a major technological advance for the miners.
Operating like a huge vacuum cleaner, it sucks up gravel into the dredge where it is sieved to retrieve the fine, black, gold-bearing sand.
Larger gravel is discharged back into the river.
The older method entailed the risk of being buried alive by collapsing river banks.
A diver, often an Indian, was required to hold and control the nozzle against a river bank in up to 10 hour shifts.
The new dredge is capable of chasing gold deposits as far as 70 metres inland from ancient water courses.
An increased demand for labour means that mining companies are paying Indians 20 times the normal daily rate.
This has meant a dramatic rise in food prices which have resulted in families being forced into debt.
The Guyanese mining community is small but powerful and Indians fear that the government will turn a blind eye to their protests.
New Scientist 10 November
Tropical forests
ITTO meeting decides fate of tropical forests
The ruling body of the International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO) has given its approval to the continued logging of key tropical forests in Malaysia and the Amazon.
The governments of the countries concerned claim that logging will not harm rainforests.
The ITTO has pledged to bring all tropical forest under "sustainable" management by the year 2000.
The outcome of the meeting, held in Yokohama, Japan, resulted in claims that the position of the ITTO was untenable and contradictory.
The organisation has the dual role of protecting both the rainforests and the interests of 47 nations involved in the timber trade.
Sarawak, which produces one fifth of the world's tropical timber, has proved a hard case for the ITTO.
Last year, international pressure persuaded the Malaysian government to commission an ITTO report into the condition of Sarawak's forests.
The survey concluded that if logging continued, all of Sarawak's forest would be gone by 2002.
It recommended increased scientific research, better training for foresters and the establishment of reserves to conserve the diversity of species and allow indigenous people to follow traditional lifestyles.
If conservation measures were adopted, the report said, the forests could cope with 9.2 million cubic meters a year.
The report failed to state exactly how much timber could be harvested at present.
Environmental groups claimed that the report simply legitimised Malaysia's current practice.
They put an upper limit of 4.6 million cubic meters on annual timber extraction.
Sarawak currently yields over 15.7 million cubic metres of timber each year.
Environmental groups also called for measures to protect the rights of forest peoples, which were not adequately addressed in the report.
Meanwhile, logging of the ecologically-unique Mata Atlantica jungle in Brazil is to be resumed after agreement on the creation of three new reserves at Tefe, Rio Preto and Ibama.
Logging in the area was banned four months ago over concern for unique bird, plant and primate species in the remaining five per cent of the original forest.
The three new timber projects will cover over million and a half acres.
The ITTO council will contribute £2.5 million toward the scheme.
New Scientist 24 November, 1 December Observer 25 November
Waste and Recycling
Kazakhstan fines USSR Space Committee
The USSR Space Committee has agreed to pay 1.5 million roubles compensation to the district of Kazakhstan for extensive dumping and pollution around a cosmodrome at Baykonur.
Nature conservation authorities in Kazakhstan have claimed that large areas of once productive land are now littered with detritus such as burnt out rocket stages, and that the soil has become contaminated soil with toxic substances.
The authorities have also claimed that the use of large tracts of land for military purposes has caused considerable inconvenience to local people.
BBC Summary of World Broadcasts 9 December
Waste and Recycling
H2> 
Iraqi recycling success
Iraq's state paper production company has found a successful method of recycling printed paper into writing paper and school notebooks.
The process is expected to make paper continuously available and to lead to an annual $5 million saving in hard currency.
BBC Summary of World Broadcasts 24 November
Waste and Recycling
ICI to halve waste by 1995
ICI is to halve its output of all chemical waste and double its worldwide environmental spending to £1 billion by 1995.
The chemicals giant announced its new company policy at a European petrochemicals conference in London, where it also pledged that all future plant will be built to the highest standards operating in any country in the world.
Other changes expected to be implemented this year (1991) include energy conservation and in-house recycling schemes, which may be offered to clients.
The company also claimed to be investing in the use of biotechnology to neutralise waste and plans to recycle CFCs and plastics [ED no. 40].
Environmental improvement would mean the closure of some labour intensive plants which could not be economically cleaned up, the company said.
Half of ICI's manufacturing capacity is in Britain, where it employs 52,000 people.
Closure of some of the oldest plants on Merseyside and Teeside could result in the loss of thousands of jobs.
Greenpeace has criticised ICI's plans for not revealing exactly how much pollution and waste each plant produced in order to enable environmental groups to monitor its progress in reducing them.
Financial Times, Guardian, Times, Independent 29 November
Waste and Recycling
Old incinerator to turn rubbish into energy and money
Plans have been unveiled for a £30 million project which will turn an out-of-action, uneconomic incinerator into a high technology plant which will make a profit from using rubbish to generate electricity.
Terms for the project such as planning permission and cost, are being negotiated between Merseyside Waste Disposal Authority and the proposer company, Urban Waste and Power.
The company, jointly owned by Zambian Consolidated Copper Mines and the Swedish Celsius group, is negotiating for construction of four similar plants elsewhere in England.
A similar plant, already in operation, has been restricted by the convertible energy of rubbish which fluctuates too much to optimise electricity production.
Urban Waste and Power have overcome this problem by ensuring that the mix of rubbish is maintained at 60 per cent of the calorific value of a similar quantity of coal.
The plants will also produce cement as a by-product.
Financial Times 18 December
Waste and Recycling
The changing state of sewage sludge
Thames Water Utilities, which handles half of Britain's sewage dumping into the Irish and North seas, has announced plans to build two giant incinerators in east London.
Britain is committed to cease marine dumping of sewage within eight years and must at least quadruple its facility for incineration in order to meet this obligation.
The £600 million scheme could result in a rise in domestic water bills of up to 25 per cent, unlikely to appeal to consumers.
The water industry favours the change over to European methods of incineration and composting, but faces opposition from people living in the vicinity of proposed incineration plants.
In the north-east of England, a joint proposal by International Technology Europe and Northumbrian Water for two plants designed to burn sewage sludge and organic chemicals is currently being held up by a lengthy public enquiry, with local people in strong opposition.
Over a quarter of Britain's 3.5 million wet tonnes of sewage sludge is dumped at sea.
A further 42 per cent is spread on farmland and 23 per cent is dumped in landfills or piped out to sea.
Only four per cent is at present incinerated.
New Scientist 1 December Independent 15 November
Waste and Recycling
UK fly tipping tipped to fly
The Department of the Environment (DoE) is to introduce tougher legislation to prevent the illegal dumping of waste after legitimate companies have been continuously undercut by illegally operating "fly tippers" who deposit waste on unapproved sites.
The Control of Pollution (Amendment) Act, introduced by Joan Ruddock as a private member's bill in July 1989, has not been effective in stopping the activities of the tippers.
The National Association of Waste Disposal Contractors (NAWDC), representing 90 large waste disposal companies, said that the government had acted too slowly.
Financial Times 10 December
Waste and Recycling
Recycling initiatives — a summary
US fast food giant, MacDonald's, is planning to introduce a scheme this summer that will recycle rubbish from 100 of its 381 UK outlets.
Rubbish will be sorted at a site in northern England and turned into commercial products including compost made from food scraps and paper and an array of items using recycled plastic.
Some of these, such as trays and chairs, will be used by the organisation itself.
The company, which will hold shares in the recycling business and assist in the marketing of products, continues to be criticised by environmentalists for not using washable plates and cutlery.
In the wake of its rival, Britain's second largest food chain, the 200 outlet Burger King, is investigating in-house packaging recycling schemes.
The company previously claimed that it had used biodegradable cardboard packaging since 1957.
Dunlop Footwear has also announced it plans recycling of old wellington boots.
The new PVC recycling process is the result of five years research.
The Gates company, who produce the traditional green or "Hunter" wellington as worn by the Royal family, has criticised Dunlop for claiming greenness for a product which originates from petrochemicals.
Gates claims that its gumboots — made from natural rubber — are an altogether greener welly.
Dunlop claims that disposal, not origin, is the key environmental issue and hopes to inaugurate the UK's first "welly bank" , gleaned from industrial contractors, this year.
Recycling is expected to reduce production costs by up to 35 per cent.
UK wellington boot sales numbered seven million pairs last year, of which more than 85 per cent were PVC.
In the US, Pepsi-Cola and Coca-Cola announced their plans to use recycled plastics in drinks bottles within half an hour of each other.
Financial Times 5, 14, 31 December Greengauge November