

Agriculture and Food
Banned cattle offal exported to Thailand
Large amounts of offal, potentially infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), are being exported to Thailand and other countries.
The use of offal for human consumption or animal feed is prohibited in the UK and export licences to the European Community have been suspended since September 1990.
With offal mounting up from the four million cattle slaughtered in Britain each year, the developing countries are an obvious target for the rendering companies in desperate need of new markets.
No legislation currently exists to prevent offal being exported for human consumption in non-EC countries.
The Food Magazine (Food Commission) January/March
Agriculture and Food
Illegal meat "sold in Britain" 
An illegal trade in meat which is unfit for human consumption is flourishing in Britain.
Unmarked boxes of jointed meat with forged inspection stamps are being sold into the bulk meat trade.
The sub-standard meat is mixed with other boneless meat in boxes and is distributed to institutions such as hospitals and schools.
Irregularities include bruising, septic arthritis, peritonitis, abscesses, faecal contamination and maggots and fly eggs.
Representatives of the Institution of Environmental Health Officers have said that the risks to health are "staggering" and have urged a co-ordinated effort to stamp out the trade, and the recognition of its purveyors as criminal.
The Food Magazine January/March
Agriculture and Food
BSE and scrapie agents "may survive in soil" 
The agent which causes the scrapie disease in goats and sheep can survive for up to three years in soil, say researchers at Maryland University.
The scientists warn that this may also apply to the agent which causes BSE (or "mad cow disease" ).
They have suggested that the carcasses of animals which have died of either disease should not be buried in farm fields, as it is now thought that it may be possible for other livestock to become infected.
Times 1 February New Scientist 9 February
Agriculture and Food
Scottish farmers trapped by BSE
Council help has been refused to Strathclyde farmers, who have had great problems in disposing of animal carcasses since the BSE epidemic led to a collapse of local carcass collection enterprises.
The Scottish Farming Minister is reported as saying"It is hoped the difficulties being encountered by the industry will be short-term.
It must be said, however, that other industries encountered similar trading problems from time to time".
Recent research has shown that the scrapie agent can live for several years when buried in soil.
Scottish Environment News February
Agriculture and Food
Piglets perish at Spanish border
Over 15,000 piglets have died in transit from Germany at the Spanish border, after officials delayed their passage through concern that they might be carrying a newly discerned pig illness.
The so-far unidentified sickness, dubbed "blue ear disease" , has hit breeders in Germany and the Netherlands.
Belgian pig breeders, who suffered severely from an epidemic of swine fever last year, are concerned that the illness might spread.
The incident highlights the inhumane conditions in which live animals are transported within the EC.
European 1-3 March
Agriculture and Food
Zambians eat radioactive beef
In the Zambian capital of Lusaka, hundreds of people are facing possible radiation sickness after eating tinned beef contaminated in the Chernobyl nuclear accident.
Nearly 3,000 cans of meat, originally imported as food aid from Czechoslovakia, were buried by the state authorities after scientific tests discovered that they were contaminated with radioactivity.
The tins were dug up by hungry residents of the capital for consumption or sale.
Independent 9 February
Agriculture and Food
Scottish scallops scuppered
Scottish scallops, worth about £7,000 and due for export to Spain, have been buried alive after being found to be contaminated with heavy metals.
The scallop beds at Pentland Firth, between Orkney and mainland Scotland, contained unacceptable levels of cadmium and were declared unfit for human consumption.
Experts have said that the cadmium may be due either to pollution or to "natural seabed reserves" .
The Dounreay nuclear plant, the largest nearby industrial commercial operation, has said that it only discharged 1.8 kilograms of cadmium over 10 months last year.
According to the Scottish Agriculture and Fisheries Department, the cadmium level was only slightly higher than that found naturally in the area.
A spokesman for Greenpeace said that industrial pollution appeared to be the most likely cause.
Guardian 20 February
Agriculture and Food
Farmers urge cut in fertiliser use
A group of farmers is urging a reduction in crop production, to be achieved through binding cuts in the application of nitrogen fertilisers.
The National Farmers' Union's South East region environmental study group is arguing for a fertiliser cut of about 20 per cent, to be applied across Europe by means of individual farm quotas.
This should lead to an initial reduction of some 11 per cent in crop production, and the group hope that in the long run, cuts of up to 20 per cent could be achieved.
This would effectively end the problems of over-production which have interfered with the workings of the European Community's Common Agricultural Policy.
The group suggest that, in return, farmers be offered a range of financial incentives for countryside conservation, such as leaving "wildlife corridors" and unmown field headlands, planting appropriate woodland and cutting back on use of pesticides.
Independent 12 February
Agriculture and Food
Pesticide use "can be cut by half" 
A report published by researchers at Cornell University, in New York state, claims that farmers could reduce by half their use of pesticides without any diminution in their crop yields.
This could be achieved through genetic modifications of crops, increased use of biological controls, such as natural predators, and a planned approach to crop rotation.
Such a strategy would add about one per cent to US food bills.
The report represented the culmination of a number of research programmes conducted at universities and government institutes across the United States.
A total of 40 crops were studied as part of the research, including wheat, citrus fruits, vegetables, cotton and tobacco.
New Scientist 2 February
Agriculture and Food
China claims crop spraying breakthrough
China, the world's third largest pesticide producer after the USA and USSR, claims to have developed a new crop spraying technique which reduces pollution and increases efficiency.
According to scientists at the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, the technique is the first in the world to be tailor-made to the requirements of developing countries.
In last year's trials, which took place in farmland across seven provinces, wastage was cut by 30-50 per cent, and costs were significantly reduced.
China produced 210,000 tons of pesticides in 1990, 96 per cent of which it claims to be highly effective but low on toxicity and residue.
China's pesticide output has, however, quadrupled since 1985.
Xinhua News Agency, Peking 20 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Agriculture and Food
Ghana protests against US pesticides
Friends of the Earth Ghana has issued a statement protesting against the export of hazardous pesticides from the US to developing countries.
The pesticides concerned, Butachlor, Halozyfop, Nuamrimol and Prothiophos are dangerous to people and other forms of life, plants included, the statement said.
Chemicals are exported without the approval of the Environmental Protection Agency, to whom FOE Ghana has made its complaint, along with the pesticide companies involved.
West Africa 4 February 91
Agriculture and Food
Better labelling required
There is growing public demand for increased information on food labels according to a survey conducted by the Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food (MAFF).
Nearly half the 1,000 respondents to the MAFF questionnaire took "a great deal" or "quite a lot" of notice of what was written on the labels.
Many asked for more clearly presented and detailed information with less false claims.
Four out of five wanted to see quantities of main ingredients so that they could tell, for example, how much fruit there is in a fruit jam or how much fish in a fish finger.
72 per cent said that nutritional information made it easier to choose the healthy, balanced diet, which has so long been urged by health educationalists and consumer bodies.
The government currently only supports voluntary labelling through the EC and foods that are high in sugars and fats tend to be inadequately described.
Consumer bodies have said that enforced labelling would lead to better foods.
The survey was carried out as part of the government's Food Advisory Committee's review of food labelling.
It revealed that the main examiners of food labels were women, particularly and those in the higher socio-economic brackets.
The Food Magazine January/March
Agriculture and Food
Consensus emerges against irradiation
Fierce consumer opposition to food irradiation is likely to prevent companies from using the technique, despite its being legal.
The Food Irradiation Campaign's report, Attitudes to Irradiation, shows that a great majority of companies will not even handle irradiated food.
Of the 79 food companies that responded to the survey, only two will irradiate.
Sainsbury's will be the sole supermarket to stock irradiated produce.
Of the 46 manufacturer respondents, only Mattessons Wall's said that they would use irradiated foods in their products, conditional on public demand.
The food companies were also concerned over the absence of an irradiation test, which makes monitoring impossible.
A Mintel Market Analysis report on food safety has warned food companies to steer clear of irradiation which, it says, will further undermine consumer confidence in manufactured and processed food.
The Food Magazine January/March
Agriculture and Food
Monocultures "kill off British birdlife" 
The farming community's increasing concentration on monocultures, particularly wheat, over the past two decades has contributed to the dramatic falls in the populations of a number of native British birds, according to a report by the Agriculture and Food Research Council.
The researchers focused on the starling, whose numbers have dropped from 160 million in the 1960s to five million breeding pairs today.
They said that the shift away from permanent pasture, together with the grubbing up of hedgerows, has had "a direct and disastrous effect on starlings" .
Large wheatfields have few earthworms for baby starlings, with the result that many starve.
Adult birds fail, apparently, to fly farther afield in search of food.
The research suggests that a similar pattern may apply to rarer species such as lapwings and redstarts.
The British Trust for Ornithology has recorded large reductions in the populations of tree sparrows, corn buntings and skylarks, largely due to modern crop monocultures and extensive use of herbicides.
Observer 3 February
Agriculture and Food
Chicken "de-beaking" in question
Evidence presented at the International Ornithological Congress in New Zealand has suggested that the "de-beaking" of chickens, widely used in the poultry industry, may not be as benign a practise as previously thought.
The chick's beaks are removed with a hot knife when they are just a few days old in order to prevent the savage pecking which often occurs in densely populated factory farming environments.
The industry has always assumed that the birds recover quickly, but research by Dr Michael Gentle, of Edinburgh's Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics Research, has shown that the animals experience chronic pain for weeks or months afterwards.
The birds' beaks contain pain receptors, and although they show little sign of distress immediately after the operation, pain may be delayed as is the case with human burn victims.
The nerves may continue to grow, remaining active and sensitive to touch and temperature change, as in the case of human amputees.
Behaviourial evidence suggests that chickens feel long-term pain and depression after their amputations. * The Beijing Farmer's Daily has reported an experiment in which Chinese scientists have fitted 140 hens with rose-tinted contact lenses.
It is thought that the chickens may become calmer and improve their egg-laying performance.
BBC Wildlife March Guardian 21 February
Conservation: Land
Great Barrier Reef becomes first "particularly sensitive area" 
The Great Barrier Reef in Queensland, north Australia, has been designated the world's first "particularly sensitive area" .
The reef's new status, granted by the UN International Maritime Organisation, will enable the Australian government to insist that ships that pass through the reef carry a pilot.
The world's largest coral system is traversed by hundreds of vessels each year.
Some of these carry toxic cargoes and an accident could result in economic as well as ecological damage.
The designation means that other marine areas may now qualify for similar protection.
New Scientist 23 February
Conservation: Land
Okavango spared
The Botswana government has decided not to go ahead with plans to dredge the Boro River and build on the Okavango delta [see ED No. 43].
The news has been welcomed by environmentalists including Greenpeace, who have recommended that the Okavango be protected as a World Heritage site.
The Botswana government is keeping open its options to dredge the area in the future, if it feels that this is necessary.
Radio RSA, Johannesburg 13 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Land
Boreholes may sink Zambian capital
The Zambian capital of Lusaka, and surrounding towns, may be in danger of sinking into the ground because of the increasing numbers of water boreholes being drilled in the area.
Central government has sunk over 1,200 waterholes in southern and western provinces over the last ten years, and continues to sink about 150 boreholes a year in Lusaka alone.
Local government has not been able to supply clean water from surface sources.
The Department of Water Affairs in Lusaka has warned that dangerously low water table levels have left an underground vacuum into which cities and towns might sink.
New African February
Conservation: Land
Australian tree planting to combat salination
A large mining company operating in Western Australia, the Alcoa corporation, has launched a land care programme centred around tree-planting in an effort to combat salination.
Much of Australia's farmlands are threatened with salination, caused in part by the consequences of farmers cutting down trees to clear land for wheat and other crops.
The resulting rise in the water table brings salt to the surface, forming a crust which kills vegetation and speeds desertification, creating the most serious environmental threat Australia has faced.
New Scientist 9 February
Conservation: Land
Estuaries suffering "widespread damage" 
Britain's 5,825 miles of estuaries are facing "continuing widespread destruction" , according to a report by the Nature Conservancy Council, the government's conservation body.
The report warns that 85 per cent of mudflats and surrounding salt marshes and dunes have been damaged by human activities.
A total of 45 estuaries, including 26 which are important wildlife sites, are threatened by land reclamation schemes, which include new housing estates, marinas, waste-disposal facilities and coastal roads.
Numerous birds and fish depend on the estuaries and mudflats, for wintering grounds and breeding and migration routes.
Species likely to suffer from development include brent geese, dunlins, redshanks and ringed plovers, among the birds, as well as fish such as golden mullet, wild salmon and sea trout.
Among rare plants in estuarine habitats are stalked sea-purslane and Welsh mudwort.
Added to the pressure of development is the lack of a single authority controlling activities in estuarine areas.
Responsibility is split, not always on clearly-defined liens, between local planning authorities, the Crown Estate Commissioners and a total of 18 different government departments.
The Worldwide Fund for Nature and other conservation groups have called for a simplification of this network.
Of the 136 estuarine areas which have been designated as"sites of special scientific interest (SSSI), a total of 56 were damaged between 1986 and 1989.
Observer 10 February
Conservation: Land
Forestry Commission report records shift to broadleaves
The annual report of the Forestry Commission — the state forestry body — notes that planting of broadleaved varieties of trees has increased by 10 times over the last decade.
A total of 5,000 hectares were planted in the year ending March 31, 1990, compared to 500 in 1980.
This has been achieved in part through the introduction of new incentives for mixed woodland — particularly the farm woodland scheme — and the removal of tax breaks for commercial (and therefore largely coniferous) forestry.
The total area planted fell from 30,000 to 20,000 hectares, however — largely as a result of the ending of tax incentives.
The outgoing chairman of the Countryside Commission, Sir Derek Barber, criticized the tax changes as "stagnating the former active pools of private investment" .
He said that, in the face of an annual timber import bill of £7 million, Britain could still expand its own conifer plantations.
Times 9 February
Conservation: Land
A million acres of community forests outlined
The government has unveiled plans for nine new "community forests" , to take shape on existing farmland and derelict ground, over the coming decades.
The nine are in addition to the three already announced in 1989 (Mercia in Staffordshire, Thames Chase east of London, and the Great North Forest in Tyne and Wear).
The new forests will be located in the following areas: Bedford; Bristol; Cleveland; Manchester; Nottingham; South Hertfordshire; South Yorkshire; and Swindon (Wiltshire).
In each case, they will comprise a blend of new and existing woodland, with some areas allocated to housing, industry and farmland, reflecting the fact that they are all on the fringe of population centres.
Each will cover between 40 and 80 square miles, about half of which will be cloaked in trees.
Their development has been entrusted to the Countryside Commission, which has been given a grant of £600,000 to set up a co-ordinating committee for each forest.
They are expected to take at least 30 years to mature.
The total cost of the scheme will amount to around £70 million at current prices.
The new plans are seen as further evidence in support of the belief that intensively-farmed lowlands are likely to continue to produce unwanted agricultural surpluses.
The Forestry Commission has declared its intention to expand forestry, particularly of the broadleaved variety, at "down the hill" locations — a move away from recent tendencies to afforest uplands with conifer plantations, which have come in for extensive criticism [see section on Pollution: Air in this issue].
Times 9, 15 February Independent 15 February
Conservation: Land
Alps campaign launched
A new campaigning group has been launched to counter the ravages of tourism on the environment of Europe's most popular mountain range.
Alp Action has been set up by the Geneva-based Bellerive Foundation, under the chairmanship of Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan.
Tourist numbers currently total 50 million annually, and demand is expected to continue growing well into the next century.
Widespread deforestation to make way for ski slopes has eroded topsoil, increasing the incidence of avalanches.
Large numbers of rare and beautiful Alpine plants are threatened with extinction.
These problems are compounded by the weight of motor traffic — estimated at seven million vehicles per year — carried on the Alps' narrow roads, which is exacerbating tree die-back due to acid rain.
Alp Action is to launch a number of conservation projects, including reforestation, together with a public education programme.
It will operate in all the Alpine countries (Germany, France, Switzerland, Italy, Austria and Liechtenstein).
Specific plans include the reintroduction of captive-bred brown bears to Austria, and European lynx to the eastern Alps.
To mark the 700th anniversary of the founding of the Swiss Confederation, Alp Action is reintroducing the bearded vulture (lammergeyer) to its ancestral home in the Swiss Alps.
The organization also plans anti-erosion hedging in Liechtenstein, and moves to stabilise the level of France's Lac Lamoura, where several rare fish species are under imminent threat.
Its total of 26 projects will cost around $1.4 million.
Some of the work is sponsored by the Milka Jacobs Suchard chocolate company.
Observer 3 February European 1-3 February
Conservation: Species
Japanese airport plans threaten new reef
Japanese plans to build an international airport on the Shiraho reef have been abandoned — in favour of building the same airport on the next reef along.
Authorities say that the development will cause "no environmental problems" but the international conservation community, who have opposed the project for over a decade, strongly disagree.
The new site is only a short distance away and is just as likely to damage the Shiraho reef, the most diverse remaining ecosystem in Japan.
The reef consists of 130 species of coral and supports over 300 species of fish as well as other assorted marine creatures.
The Japanese community who live on the reef have been awarded the Peter Scott Merit Award in recognition of the 11 years they have spent fighting the development.
BBC Wildlife February
Conservation: Species
Unique Australian frogs die out from unknown cause
Several species of Australian amphibian, amongst them some of the most beautiful and interesting in the world, have died out and are now thought to be extinct.
No cause is known for the mysterious catastrophe, which is now claiming members of related species.
The deceased amphibians included two species of the unique gastric brooding frog, Rheobatrachus silus and R. vitellinus.
The female brooding frog swallows her eggs at birth.
Later, she opens her mouth and the tiny frogs emerge.
During "incubation" , the frogs gastric juices are turned off and she eats nothing.
The frog's ability to transform its stomach into a makeshift womb constitutes a unique form of amphibian reproduction, and has greatly interested scientists.
Until 15 years ago, the frogs were abundant in Northern Australia.
Then they began their mysterious and rapid decline.
The last one was seen alive in 1979.
At about the same time, two species of day frog, Taduactylus diurnus and T. eungellensis, died out from the same Queensland habitat.
A third species of the day frog, of which there are six, is now declining, as have several other of exotic amphibians.
Environmentalists have been particularly alarmed by the disappearance of this whole network of species for reasons unknown, for it demonstrates a world that is changing in ways that we do not understand.
BBC Wildlife February
Conservation: Species
Namibian seal row puts new legislation to the test
A decision by Namibia's Department of Sea Fisheries (DSF) to "harvest" approximately 19,000 Cape fur seals has angered Namibian and South African environmentalists, who are seeking international support to stop the killings.
According to the new Namibian constitution, individuals have the right to demand environmental protection from the government, a right that the Namibia Animal Action Group (NAAG) and the Windhoek branch of Earthlife Africa intend to use if the DSF fails to publish information on seal harvesting.
The 600,000 seals of the colonies of Cape Cross and Luderitz are being shot mainly to export their genitals to the far east for their supposed aphrodisiac quality.
The market in seal meat, fur and fat is very limited.
According to the DSF, the ecology of the waters have been adversely affected by overfishing and the seals will starve in their thousands unless they are culled.
Prior to Namibian independence, the waters of the Benguela current were illegally fished by the world's largest fishing fleets, with no regard to quotas.
For Earthlife, however, the fact that seal pup mortality is about 95 per cent indicates that the species needs protection, not culling.
* All seal culling in South Africa has been halted pending the completion of research.
A two year study is to take place which will include the consideration of methods of killing that are more acceptable than stabbing or clubbing.
New African January Guardian 15 February
Conservation: Species
Japan's shell industry puts hawksbill turtle at risk
Japan is jeopardising the existence of the hawksbill turtle by its continued importation of the animal's shell for its traditional "bekko" or tortoiseshell carving industry.
The ancient art of shell carving has earned Japan an exemption from international law protecting the turtle.
However, a report from the US Fish and Wildlife Agency has claimed that Japan is contravening its allowance.
The report estimates that about 234,000 shells have been imported since 1981.
The hawksbill has been an internationally protected species since the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) treaty of 1973.
Under the treaty, exceptions are granted to countries who have a traditional dependence on a particular species.
However, those found to be "undermining the effectiveness" of an international protection programme can be penalised.
It is anticipated that US agencies are to declare Japan in violation of international treaties and, if the issue cannot be resolved by negotiation, sanctions are likely to be imposed.
Washington Post 19 January
Conservation: Species
Dolphins dwindle
A growing number of the world's 65 species of dolphin are becoming extinct, according to a report from the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA).
The Global War Against Small Cetaceans estimates that 500,000 dolphins are killed each year.
Most of the dolphins are snared in the driftnets of commercial fishermen, but others die as a result bombing, stabbing, spearing, electrocution and mutilation.
Japan, Taiwan, South Korea, Mexico, Peru and Sri Lanka are cited as the worst offenders.
Japan alone is responsible for about 100,000 dolphin deaths a year.
The report concluded that restrictions on excessive trawling were urgently needed.
* A representative of the Japanese Fishery Agency has reported an extremely rare short-nosed white bellied dolphin being sold as food in a western Japanese market.
* Southern Japanese fishermen drove about 1,000 dolphins back into the sea after having been informed by the government that they were rare Fraser's dolphins.
About 300 of the dolphins were killed.
International Institute for Environment and Development information Guardian 2 February Independent 2 February
Conservation: Species
Greenpeace launches dolphin research project
Greenpeace is to make its own study of bottle-nosed dolphins at Cardigan Bay, Wales, following the government's refusal to fund dolphin research.
Public concern over the popular cetacean has mounted as numbers have rapidly declined.
A world record level of toxic polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) was found in the body fat of a dead baby dolphin in 1988.
Britain's two groups of bottle-nosed dolphins, at Cardigan Bay and Moray Firth, are the most northerly in Europe.
Greenpeace hopes to identify individual dolphins by the bite and fight marks on their fins, and to chart their behaviour in an effort to protect them from extinction.
Guardian 1 March
Conservation: Species
Endangered species update
Two rare kakapo chicks have been hatched in captivity in New Zealand for the first time.
The kakapo, a grounded parrot, is one of the world's rarest birds.
Meanwhile, two hundred plastic puffins are to be strategically placed around Cardigan Island, off the Welsh coast, in the hope that this will persuade real ones to nest there.
Care has not been so tender for the eiderdown duck, which has perished in large numbers due to oil slicks in its Iceland habitat, as European demand for its fluffy down, mainly used in bedding, increases.
The opal allotoca, a two-inch fish species thought to be extinct, has been found alive and well in a large Mexican cattle pond.
Times, Guardian, Independent 27 February Independent 1 March News from Iceland January
Energy
US energy strategy spurns environmental consideration
The US Administration has unveiled plans for new energy legislation which gives little consideration to environmental priorities.
Earlier plans drawn up by the Department of Energy contained references to fuel taxes, automobile restrictions, alternative energy initiatives and incentives for green investment.
All such considerations have been axed from the final bill which permits drilling along the Californian coast and in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The new legislation favours nuclear power, abolishing one of the two permits previously needed by power companies to build and operate stations.
It is now also possible for companies to investigate potential nuclear waste storage sites without the consent of local or state authorities.
The Alliance to Save Energy, a coalition of US environmental groups, has called the plan "woefully inadequate" , criticising it for being geared solely to the needs of the power industries.
Democrat policy on energy includes plans for the development of alternative energy sources and a reduction in dependence on imported oil.
According the Sierra Club, a law requiring new cars to use 40 per cent less fuel by 2001 would save ten times the anticipated output of the proposed Arctic wells.
New Scientist 16 February International Herald Tribune 11 February
Energy
Europe's "Energy Charter" links East and West
The European Commission has announced plans for increased energy exchanges between Eastern and Western Europe.
Under the proposed "Energy Charter" , Western environmental and technical assistance would be made available to former eastern-bloc nations and the Soviet Union, in return for the West having improved access to oil and gas reserves.
Guardian 14 February
Energy
Atomic Energy Authority campaigns for central role as DoE is disbanded
The Atomic Energy Authority is seeking a central, directive role in national energy policy as the Department of Energy is disbanded.
Britain's largest nuclear research institute is hoping to diversify outside the nuclear sector as the industry becomes increasingly unpopular.
It is likely that the move will also be interpreted as an attempt by the nuclear industry to renew its fading influence.
The government expects to wind down the Department of Energy after the next election.
Those responsibilities not taken over by the newly privatised gas, petroleum and electricity industries are expected to be handed over to existing departments such as Trade and Industry and Environment.
This has been widely criticised as failing to provide for the development of a coherent energy policy to take account of environmental and other considerations such as events in the Gulf.
The Authority, which has recently renamed itself AEA Technology in an attempt to market its skills in the private sector, is launching an intense campaign aimed at the government, the Labour Party and respective energy advisers.
It promotes itself as the best candidate to advise the government on energy matters.
Last year, the Authority was severely criticised by a Commons Energy Select Committee report which claimed that the nuclear industry had spent an inordinate amount of money on publicising itself.
Guardian 13 February
Energy
European Commission changes tack to invest in waves
The European Commission has made a sudden U-turn and invested approximately £860,000 in wave power feasibility studies.
Many wave-energy researchers believe that the consistently unfavourable attitude of the EC towards wave power has its origins in unfavourable assessments which were provided for the Community by the British government.
These assessments have since been largely discredited.
In 1982, British wave power studies using the "Salter's duck" energy device mistakenly estimated the cost of electricity generation at around twice the likely figure.
The project was conducted by the Energy Technology Support Unit — run from the Department of Energy at Harwell — which is also the laboratory of the UK Atomic Energy Authority.
Raising the question in the European Parliament of why wind power had been consistently misrepresented, Welsh MEP Llewellyn Smith, said: "we all know that this is not just a question of wave energy but about protecting the nuclear industry by discrediting other sources of energy" .
New Scientist 16 February
Environmental Politics
European environment agency "homeless" 
The European Environment Agency (EEA), formed in May 1990, is without a home and cannot function.
In theory, it exists to provide comparable data on the environment and thereby aid and encourage appropriate legislative response to ecological damage.
Although all 12 EC governments agreed that the agency should be established, they have not managed to agree upon its location.
Brussels, Copenhagen, Strasbourg, Madrid, Heraklion and Cambridge have been among the front runners of 48 competing cities.
Meanwhile, EC officials are aware of the damage to the Community's credibility while prospective participants in the EEA's work, including East European countries and European Free Trade Association members, are unable to move beyond the present stalemate.
Environmental data and expertise which exists already in the Corine resource, a project which ends this year, is in danger of being lost whilst the EEA wrangle continues.
The EC Commission's own environment department may be allocated some of the $6.5 million which, to date, has been earmarked for the new agency.
European 1-3 February
Environmental Politics
UN funds environmental protection
The UN has set up two new funds to support environmental protection work.
The Multilateral Fund will channel money from richer nations to help third-world economies implement the provisions of the Montreal Protocol on protection of the ozone layer [see ED no. 39].
The Global Environmental Facility has been set up jointly by the World Bank, and the UN Environment and Development Programmes.
It will provide $1 billion worth of support for project work and training programmes designed to combat ozone depletion, global warming, maritime pollution and the diminution of biological diversity.
Our Planet (UNEP) Vol 2, No 4 1990
Environmental Politics
European environmental audits
European Commission proposals on environmental audits have been circulated to industry associations and are under consideration by the UK's Department of the Environment.
Implementation of these proposals would result in tens of thousands of industrial plants being required to carry out an annual audit on the environmental effects of their operations.
Such audits are being carried out already by a number of large European companies.
The new proposals specify a list of 58 industries for whom audits would be compulsory.
An additional requirement is that each industrial site would have to publish a yearly environmental statement which would be open to public scrutiny.
Financial Times 8 February
Environmental Politics
US Administration hopes for voluntary pollution cuts
The US Administration's Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has appealed to industry to halve emissions of 17 toxic substances over the next four years — or face potentially costly controls imposed by government.
EPA Administrator William Reilly has called on industrialists to "exercise choice and imagination" in curbing the pollutants, which include carbon tetrachloride, benzene and chloroform.
Most of them are listed under the provisions of the Clean Air Act of 1990, but restrictions imposed by the Act will not come into force until 1995.
Environmentalists have criticized the plan as naive.
The National Wildlife Federation warns that voluntary agreements between companies and an agency "which cannot verify or enforce the reductions offers little guarantee of progress" .
Washington Post 9 February
Environmental Politics
Recession and war dampens public concern over the environment
A poll carried out by the Mori organization claims to show that the UK public's interest in environmental issues has fallen significantly since July last year, when nearly one-third of respondents identified it as a prime concern.
In the latest survey, only 5 per cent said that it remained a priority; the emphasis had switched to defence, foreign affairs and the recession.
The dip in interest reflects both the fact that environmental issues are still seen by many as irrelevant to pressing day to day concerns such as employment, and also the extensive media coverage of the Gulf War, which has distracted attention from other matters.
* A similar pattern has emerged in the United States, where organizations such as the National Wildlife Federation, the Sierra Club and the Wilderness Society report a drop in the level of donations, forcing them to lay off staff and make cutbacks in campaigns.
The cuts follow a period of intense growth: the Wilderness Society membership doubled between 1987 and 1990, and other groups recorded similar rises.
Many had planned future campaigns on the basis of sustained growth.
The pattern runs contrary to that of Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and growing numbers of Asian and Latin American countries, where concern at pollution and environmental degradation continues to grow.
* This year's Glastonbury Festival, which raised over £130,000 for the Green Party and the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in 1990, has been cancelled.
Farmer Michael Eaves, on whose land the festival is staged, says that the event "needs calming down" in the light of the large numbers of travellers who converge on the site.
Washington Post 15 February Independent 28 February Green Magazine March
Environmental Politics
Japan's new environment ambassador
Japan has appointed its first special ambassador for global environment affairs.
Nobutoshi Akao takes office at a time when the country is increasingly coming under fire from environmentalists for ignoring global priorities.
Despite a range of domestic environmental controls introduced under the auspices of the state Environment Agency over the past 20 years, critics believe that industrial success and economic growth continue to take precedence over concerns such as imports of tropical timber, the use of controversial drift-nets by Japanese fishing fleets, and continuing industrial pollution of land and sea.
An issue high on the Japanese public's agenda is the conservation of wildlife, including porpoises trapped in fishing nets, and the plight of whales.
In schools, teachers are refusing to instil the official line that whaling continues for "scientific" purposes only.
A further challenge for the new ambassador is the discontent within the country over the government's provision of $3 billion for the "conservation of the global environment" .
The fear is that 65 per cent of this sum is to go into nuclear power, on the grounds of its low levels of greenhouse gas emissions.
Nuclear power is, however, widely unpopular within Japan.
Economist 2 February
Environmental Politics
Soviets to take part in
monitoring of the environment The Soviet government has announced a decision to take part in global ecological monitoring by both utilising and contributing to the UN Environment Programme's GRID database.
Moscow has said that it recognises that GRID's potential exists in the effective use of advanced methods of collecting and analyzing the results of land, aerial and space monitoring of the environment, such monitoring being "an important element in early forecasts of ecological catastrophes" .
This decision coincides with an announcement by Soviet scientists and ecologists that 1,382,000 square miles of the Soviet Union is an "ecological disaster area" .
This represents 16 per cent of the country — land and sea — an increase of 4 per cent on a similar assessment last year.
Tass in English 8 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Times 9 February
Environmental Politics
 "Eco label" update
The European Commission has proposed that the planned "eco label" for green consumer products [see ED 41/42]be awarded in two stages.
Under this scheme, which is about to be announced to member governments, initial assessment of a wide range of goods would be undertaken by the country of manufacture.
If the products satisfied this panel's criteria, they would then be referred to an EC jury for further scrutiny, to ascertain whether the Commission's "eco label" requirements are met.
Times 5 February
Environmental Politics
French eco-label launched
The first products bearing an official "eco-label" will shortly appear in French shops.
The "NF (Normes Francaise) Environnement" label will be awarded to products which meet a range of environmental criteria.
For the present, however, the system excludes vehicles, pharmaceuticals and basic foodstuffs, the latter on the grounds that these are already covered by a range of controls.
The NF-Environnement label has been set up by the National Consultative Committee for "Ecoproduct" Labelling, under chairmanship of MP Alain Brune.
Le Monde 14 February
Environmental Politics
Green Party's "alternative" budget
The Green Party has issued its proposals for an "alternative budget" .
The Green Budget was billed as the "first step to a sustainable future" .
It proposed a raft of new taxes and incentives to promote ecological economics.
These included a 75 pence increase in petrol tax, the elimination of tax perks for company cars, and new levies on carbon dioxide emissions and the use of nitrogen fertilizers.
Cash raised would be used on improving public transport and funding energy conservation measures.
The government's ambitious road building programme would be ditched in favour of plans for new train, tram, bus and overhead monorail networks.
Incentives would be introduced for "cleaner" cars.
In the field of personal finance, the Greens called for the abolition of the poll tax, and its replacement by a local income tax running at six pence in the pound.
Separate national insurance contributions would end, child benefit would be increased by 50 per cent, and a national minimum income of £35 per week introduced.
The proposals budgeted for a surplus of £200 million.
Green Party activist Sara Parkin described it as a step towards "turning the green vision of an ecologically sustainable society into a practical reality" .
Guardian 12 February Independent 31 January The Green Budget (Green Print Books)
Global Warming
UN global warming conference opens
The first session of a long-running UN-sponsored international conference on global warming and climate change was held in Washington on Feb. 4-14.
It aims to produce an internationally-binding treaty on steps to limit climate change, with a view to having an agreement in place in time for the opening of the major UN conference on environment and development in Brazil in June 1992.
This first meeting, attended by delegates from 130 countries, agreed that future talks should concentrate on identifying "appropriate commitments" to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, and provide aid to third-world countries in developing less polluting industries.
At the conclusion of the meeting, little progress had been made beyond agreeing procedural rules and setting up two working parties.
Several delegations, including that from Britain, expressed disappointment at the slowness of the progress.
The UK and other European countries came out in favour of setting strict targets on emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxides.
The continuing reluctance of the US Administration to agree to any specific targets on emissions or third-world aid was identified as the principal brake on progress.
However, delegates acknowledged that the US had given some ground when it announced an "action programme" on the first day of the conference.
Although this amounted to little more than a restatement of previously-agreed policies, including the Clean Air Act of 1990 [see ED no 41/42]and the planned phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons, it did for the first time set a tentative target, suggesting that emissions of greenhouse gases in the year 2000 would be "equal to 1987 levels" .
US official sources predicted that these measures alone would reduce carbon emissions by 15 per cent.
This reduction, however, is likely to be far outstripped by the increasing output of carbon dioxide.
Prior to the conference, the US official line has been to wait until a link between carbon dioxide and global warming became proven.
In contrast, the countries of Europe have agreed to stabilise emissions at 1990 levels by 2000, reducing them thereafter.
The next meeting of the conference is scheduled to be held in Nairobi, Kenya, in June.
* A protocol governing emissions of nitrogen oxides in Europe came into force on Feb. 14.
The protocol was agreed by environment ministers of member states of the UN Economic Commission for Europe at a meeting in Bulgaria in November 1988.
It commits its signatories "freeze" NOx emissions at 1987 levels from 1994.
Le Monde 7 February Washington Post 5, 15, 16-17 February Independent 20 February New Scientist 16 February UN Economic Commission for Europe information release
Global Warming
Global Warming
US agency outlines potential for carbon dioxide cuts
The United States Administration's Office of Technology Assessment has claimed that the US could achieve cuts of up to 35 per cent in carbon dioxide emissions over the next 25 years without "major technological breakthroughs" or recourse to swingeing levies on energy consumption.
The Office, which has the status of a congressional research agency, said that the cuts could be achieved primarily through improved energy efficiency.
Its "tough scenario" , required to reach the 35 per cent target, would include the following measures: the insulation of houses to a standard that would reduce heating requirements by 85 per cent and air conditioning by 45 per cent; the introduction of energy-efficient lighting for commercial buildings, to cut consumption by 60 per cent ; a requirement that new car engines be designed to achieve an average of 58 miles per gallon; a reduction in coal-fired power stations, with compensatory increases in natural gas and nuclear generating capacity; and the planting of large areas of forest, which would act as a "sink" for excess carbon dioxide.
The Agency says that the cost of such measures could vary from net annual savings of $20,000 million to an annual loss of $150,000,000 million — equivalent to 1.8 per cent of national income.
It does stress, however, that"existing equipment would not have to be instantly scrapped and replaced by untested prototypes.
The requisite energy-related technologies are either already available or demonstrated and close to commercialization".
Washington Post 9 February
Global Warming
Scientists warn government of impact of global warming
The first report to investigate the projected effects of global warming on Britain over the next 40 years has been released by the Department of the Environment.
Probable threats include damage to the countryside, the disruption of sections of industry and agriculture, and a detrimental effect on health.
The report, entitled the Potential Effects of Climate Change in the United Kingdom, stresses the need for early government planning to deal with the impact of climate change.
Compliance with other countries in reducing emissions of greenhouse gases is also urged.
Changes in consumer demand can be expected as products which rely heavily on water in their production process increase in price.
These include chemicals, paper, cloth, drink manufacture and processed food.
The insurance industry may be crippled by claims over environmental damage.
If unchecked, carbon dioxide levels will continue to rise to twice their pre-industrial levels by 2028. * A UN study conducted by international scientists has used a computer simulation of how the planet functions, to predict that the average global temperature will increase between two and six degrees Fahrenheit by 3000AD.
Financial Times 2 February Independent 2 February Times 2 February Guardian 2 February Washington Post 10 January
Global Warming
UK greenhouse gas emissions on the rise
Britain's output of carbon dioxide rose by 1.6 per cent in 1990, compared with 1989 levels, largely due to an increase of 1.8 per cent in fossil fuel consumption.
The rise triggered warnings by environmentalists that Britain would fail to meet its target of freezing carbon dioxide emissions by 2005 unless the government acted quickly to introduce tight controls on the burning of coal, gas and oil.
The 1.6 per cent increase in CO2 is set against an increase of only 1 per cent in gross domestic product over the year, indicating that the economy became more polluting per unit of wealth created.
Increased consumption of fossil fuels was in part caused by a 6 per cent reduction in electricity generated from nuclear power, due to a decline in imports of nuclear electricity from France and the prolonged shutdown of several nuclear power stations for maintenance.
Independent 20 February
Global Warming
British climate research faces cuts
The Natural Environment Research Council, which co-ordinates much of Britain's research into global warming, faces a 10 per cent cut in real terms in its research budget over the next five years — despite the fact that the government stresses the importance of its work.
The NERC's chairman, John Knill, warned that its research programme would have to be scaled down from next year, unless fresh government funds were forthcoming.
NERC scientists were the first to discover the hole in the ozone layer, and have played a key role in UN-backed climate change research.
Current research projects include studies of ocean circulation and computer modelling of the global atmosphere — both important planks of efforts to predict and assess climate change.
Independent 5 March Financial Times 6 March
Nuclear Power
Japanese nuclear accident
Japan's oldest nuclear reactor, of the pressurized water variety, was shut down in an emergency procedure on Feb. 10, after a pipe that was part of the cooling system ruptured.
No-one was hurt in the incident, which occurred at the Mihama plant near Fukui, some 220 miles west of Tokyo.
The plant affected, a 500,000 kilowatt pressurized light water reactor, began operation in 1972.
The incident began when high pressure primary cooling water leaked into the secondary steam system which powers the reactor's generator.
This led to a rapid drop in pressure in the primary cooling system, and to the leak of some 20 tons of radioactive coolant into the secondary system.
The reactor was shut down automatically by an emergency cooling system, which floods the reactor core, thereby avoiding the risk of a partial "meltdown" , similar to that which occurred in Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania, in 1979.
However, the Japanese Energy Agency later admitted that an emergency pressure release valve had failed to work during the shutdown process, forcing technicians to use a back-up water sprinkler system.
They also acknowledged that operators had initially delayed taking action for nearly an hour, in the belief that a gauge which showed an increase in radioactivity in the secondary system might be giving false readings.
A small amount of radioactivity (at the level of 0.134 curies, according to Japanese authorities) was released into the environment.
The accident provoked protests from Japan's vocal anti-nuclear community, which called for the reactor to be shut down, together with other old pressurized water reactors, which make up 17 of Japan's total of 40 nuclear plants.
* A further radioactive leak occurred later in the month at the Tokai Mura plant north-east of Tokyo.
The leak took place in a "hot cell" , used for treating highly radioactive waste, during a switch to an emergency power system while the main power was shut down during construction work.
The government announced plans last October to build a further 30 reactors in the next 20 years, which would bring nuclear power's share of the country's electricity generating capacity to 17 per cent.
A public opinion poll published at the end of last year showed that 90 per cent of those questioned felt uneasy about the nuclear power programme.
Nature 14 February Independent 11, 14 February International Herald Tribune 11-13, 28 February Guardian 12, 13 February Times 11, 13 February
Nuclear Power
Radioactive waste to be stored in Britain
Contrary to earlier government reassurances, some 90,000 cubic metres of nuclear waste from foreign sources are to be stored in Britain, according to David Lowry, a senior policy consultant with Casella Environmental.
It will consist of waste sent to the Sellafield reprocessing plant, Much of the waste is of the low-level variety, but it includes 10,000 cubic metres of medium-level waste, and 80 cubic metres of high-level waste.
Lowry was speaking at a conference of "nuclear-free" local authorities, which called for a halt to the import and processing of all foreign radioactive waste, pending a public investigation into the government's strategy on nuclear waste.
* A leaked memorandum shows that growing amounts of untreated nuclear waste are being stored at the UK Atomic Energy Authority's base at Aldermaston, due to delays in constructing safe disposal sites, in part for fear that they will not meet safety requirements.
The waste is mainly from obsolete nuclear weapons manufacturing plant.
Much of the responsibility for dealing with it is likely to be handed over to private contractors, with the Energy Authority having a supervisory role.
Guardian 12, 13 February
Nuclear Power
Old reactors may be buried instead of decommissioned
A meeting of the nuclear industry is believed to have resulted in the overturning of accepted procedure or "reference strategy" for the decommissioning of nuclear reactors.
Instead of being demolished, the unused reactors will be locked up for 35 years.
After this time, Nuclear Electric plans to erect huge containment buildings over entire reactor sites, leaving these for another 100 years before demolition.
It is possible that the reactors will never be demolished, but will be buried in mounds of sand or gravel.
Such a strategy would cut costs by £1.2 billion.
Independent 1 March
Nuclear Power
German town poisoned by Soviet uranium mine
Reunification has revealed that Soviet uranium mining in the small town of Schlema, in eastern Germany, has left a legacy of environmental disaster, radioactive pollution and chronic health problems.
The mine was a product of the Soviet Union's race to match US nuclear capability after Hiroshima in 1945.
At that time, some 40,000 miners, including many conscripts, worked in the mine.
The area was controlled by the Soviet/East German company Wismut.
Described as a "state within a state" , any contact with outsiders, including letters to relatives in West Germany were forbidden.
Even the scant health records that were kept show 7,000 miners to have contracted lung cancer.
An independent church survey has recently recorded rates of still births at 10 times the national average, along with a high number of skin and respiratory diseases.
Responsibility for the clean-up operation now falls on the German state, whose legacy includes two lakes filled with radioactive waste and massive tips of soil contaminated with uranium.
European 15-17 February
Ozone Layer
First commercial plant for alternative to CFCs
A new plant which produces an alternative to R12 — the chlorofluorocarbon used in refrigerators and air conditioners — has been opened at Runcorn, Cheshire.
It is the world's first commercial plant for the production of HFC 134a — which does not attack ozone, being chlorine-free.
ICI, which developed the R12 replacement, has cut its production of CFCs to roughly half the amount it manufactured three years ago.
The chemical group continues to make about 50,000 tons a year, but aims to phase out production by 1997 in accordance with the Montreal Protocol — an international ozone layer treaty [see ED no. 39].
Independent 16 February
Pollution: Air
Effects of the Kuwaiti oil fires
The most serious environmental consequence of the Gulf war was the firing of some 650 Kuwaiti oil wells by retreating Iraqi forces.
The resulting fires led to widespread air pollution.
These produced a thick black smoke cloud, dense enough to obscure the sun in Kuwait, northern Saudi Arabia and southern Iraq.
The initial effects included "black rain" , caused by the soot, falling on the whole northern Gulf region, Iran and southern Turkey.
Although this was in itself relatively harmless, the more serious likely effects of the fires include the following: * Acid rain: Kuwaiti crude oil is particularly rich in sulphur.
* Photochemical smog, which could approach levels experienced by London in the 1950s; this could lead to bronchitis and breathing problems, particularly among children and old people.
* Increased cancer risk from high concentrations of benzene and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
* Reduced solar radiation if the smoke persists.
This could lead to a drop in temperature of between 5 and 10 degrees centigrade over the region, with the curtailment of the spring growing season and consequent losses of food production.
* Long-term contamination of soil and groundwater, notably by heavy metals and acids.
This would have the most pronounced effects on the "fertile crescent" of the Tigris and Euphrates Valleys.
As with the oil slick [see below], however, the worst predictions of the effects of the oil fires were likely to be confounded.
Speculation that global climate change could result was largely discounted, since the smoke cloud was too low to have an impact on stratospheric climate circulation.
Oil fire specialists, including the Texan Red Adair's company, warned that it could take at least two years for the fires to be put out.
A spokesman for Red Adair said that: "this is absolutely the worst-case scenario of what the Iraqis could do — it's something the world has never seen before" .
Nature 7 March World Conservation Monitoring Centre 12 March Daily UK and US newspapers, last week of February, first week of March
Pollution: Air
Government stalls publication of acid rain maps
The publication of government maps showing which power stations most need the installation of equipment to curb acid emissions has been withheld until after share applications for the two electricity companies have been tendered.
A government white paper had promised the maps by the end of 1990.
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has responded by using government research to create its own maps.
The organisation has concluded that emissions from eight key power stations urgently need restriction to save areas that are acutely vulnerable to acid rain.
The government, adamant that the burning of low sulphur coal and gas are adequate to meet EC emissions restrictions, has admitted that certain areas are particularly susceptible to acid rain and need protection.
FoE have identified these areas as the Pennines, parts of Scotland, Wales, and the West Country.
Power stations in most urgent need of modification include those at South Glamorgan, Shropshire, Nottinghamshire, Cheshire, Kent and Fife.
FoE claim that even EC standards are inadequate and that the government has been fogging the issue in the run up to privatisation.
If implemented, FoE's recommendation that all power stations should be fitted with emission controlling equipment would be likely to close both PowerGen and National Power.
Prospectuses issued by both power companies have admitted that environmental costs may be on the rise, but no figures have been given.
The electric industry is prohibited from passing on the costs of environmental protection to the public.
Guardian 28 February
Pollution: Air
Pollution laws may put engineers out of a job
A survey by the Engineering Employers' Federation into the effects of new anti-pollution legislation has concluded that up to 50 companies may go out of business; 200 are expecting a serious decline in profitability, and many hundreds more are uncertain about their future.
The Environmental Protection Act requires the installation of new pollution abatement equipment, and despite assurances by David Trippier, Minister of State for the Environment, the federation is concerned that neither HM Pollution Inspectorate nor local authorities have adequate staff or expertise to advise individual companies on how the legislation will affect them.
The federation drew its conclusions after sending a questionnaire to 3,300 of its members.
Financial Times 25 February
Pollution: Air
Pollution restrictions "eased to suit power industry" 
Proposed restrictions on emissions of nitrogen oxides (Nox) from power stations have been watered down to meet the concerns of the newly-privatized electricity generating companies, claim environmentalists.
Nox, together with sulphur dioxide, is one of the leading contributors to acid rain pollution.
As first drafted, the proposals of the government's Pollution Inspectorate would have required the companies to fit costly scrubbing filters to power station chimneys to meet the Nox emissions limits.
They called for monthly limits for Nox emissions from a variety of solid fuels, with the highest being 400 mg per cubic metre.
As eventually published, the proposals make no differentiation between fuels, and raise the ceiling by over half to 650 mg per cubic metre.
This will enable the generators to use a cheaper, but more polluting, "low-Nox" system.
The government has described the proposals as a "consultation document" .
A Greenpeace spokesman said that the government had "been nobbled by the power industry" .
The prospectuses of the two new generating companies, National Power and Powergen, both include warnings that tight environmental restrictions would have a damaging effect on potential profits.
Financial Times 7 February
Pollution: Air
Upland conifers "worsen acid rain" 
A report by the Department of the Environment admits that the practice of planting large stands of conifers on British uplands has worsened the effects of acid rain, resulting in the deaths of salmon, trout and frogs, and the pollution of upland streams.
The problem results when acid rainclouds drifting across moorland come into contact with the branches of conifers.
They trap some of the vapour, allowing it to run to earth.
This can increase acid precipitation by up to 100 per cent compared to that which would prevail over the natural vegetation of heather or moorland grasses.
The problem is particulary acute in areas over 300 metres, where forest cover can increase depositions of sulphur by 50 per cent, and that of nitrogen by 100 per cent .
The Forestry Commission has undertaken to bear the report's findings in mind when embarking on future tree-planting programmes.
It is likely that the report will provide added ammunition to environmentalists who have for long opposed the blanket afforestation of uplands.
Independent 6 February Guardian 6 February New Scientist 9 February
Pollution: Air
Romanian pollution detailed
A report published by the University of Bucharest has claimed that the country is "saturated" with pollution, as a result of inadequate or unenforced controls during the Ceausescu years.
Despite the fact that Romania is largely an agricultural country, its outdated power and chemicals plants produce as much pollution as those in major Western countries.
Emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxides, ammonia, hydrochloric acid, chlorine and soot cause extensive damage to forests and inland waters.
The report claims that some 5.5 per cent of the country's trees have lost their leaves, while many others suffer from pollution.
Areas particularly badly affected include the cities of Giurgiu, Braila and Turnu-Severin, which suffer from severe acid rain; the provinces of Gorj, Sibiu and Maramures have sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere at 12 times the official limit.
Rivers have been polluted by chlorine, phenol and detergent, together with run-offs resulting from the over-application of pesticides on farmland.
Stretches of the Danube delta are completely dead.
Nearly one million hectares of agricultural land are "seriously polluted" .
Among the pesticides causing the problem are DDT and lindane, long banned in the West.
In more remote areas such as the Carpathian Forest, however, the picture is brighter, with deer and wild boar in large numbers, together with an estimated 8,000 bears and 1,500 lynx.
New Scientist 9 February
Pollution: Air
Indonesian villagers halt chemical plants
A group of protesters from five Indonesian villages in the Bognor area of the country have won a battle against two chemical plants owned by drug companies.
The plants had for the past three years been emitting toxic fumes which had caused skin diseases among the villagers, killed fish in local fishponds and contaminated farmlands.
One of the plants, the PT Para Amino Phenol factory, has now been closed down.
The other, Reasima Abadi, will remain open after carrying out improvements to its waste treatment.
International Institute of Environment and Development Perspectives, February
Pollution: Air
US lead clean-up
The Bush administration is to go ahead with plans to cleanse the environment of traces of lead, which can cause mental and physical retardation in children.
The programme will involve stripping lead paint from housing, replacing lead water pipes and removing contaminated soil from Tehranmany areas.
It is estimated that lead reaches toxic levels in the blood of 17 per cent of urban children under school age.
Research has also shown that the metal, dubbed the "silent killer" , can cause high blood pressure in men, complications during pregnancy and fetal damage.
Screening at health care centres is expected to cost $164 million over the next five years.
Washington Post 21 February
Pollution: Air
Pollution Inspector named
The Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, has reinforced earlier commitments to give the Inspectorate of Pollution a more independent status by appointing an executive from the private sector as its new head.
David Slater, who replaces Frank Feates, was formerly director of the Technica engineering group.
Responding to criticism from environmentalists, the government has increased the Inspectorate's staff and budget, and given it the status of an independent agency.
Under the Environmental Protection Act, it will monitor emissions from 5,000 major industrial plants and carry out audits of waste regulation authorities.
Financial Times 19 February
Pollution: Air
Pollution brings Tehran to a standstill
On 17 February, pollution levels in Tehran reached such a high level that citizens were asked to stop their cars and stay in their houses.
A state of emergency was declared by Tehran's Environmental Protection organisation as the density of carcinogenic hydrocarbons climbed to 66 times permissible levels, and those of nitrogen oxides to 23 times permissible levels.
Voice of the Islamic Republic of Iran 17 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
World's first "pay-as-you-breathe" kiosks installed in Mexico
Oxygen booths, in which people will be able to breathe pure oxygen at the cost of $2 a minute, are to be installed around Mexico City centre.
More people die of respiratory infections than any other cause in Mexico City, which is said to have the dirtiest air in the world.
Situated 2,300 metres above sea, the air contains about a third the amount of oxygen of that at sea level.
The city is being severely polluted by an array of emission-releasing industries, an oil refinery and three million cars.
In winter the situation is exacerbated by cold air which seals in the dirt, preventing it from escaping over surrounding mountains.
Economist 16 February
Pollution: Water
Gulf oil slick update
The massive oil slick in the northern Gulf, caused in large part by Iraq's action in deliberately releasing oil into the sea [see ED no. 43], continued to cause concern during February, although earlier reports that it would have a devastating effect on marine ecology appeared to be exaggerated.
The major slick, and the only one posing a serious threat to wildlife, had emanated from the Mina al-Ahmadi terminal in Kuwait, and from oil storage tanks ruptured in combat at the Saudi border town of Khafji; smaller slicks came from Iraq's Mina al-Bakr terminal and facilities around Bubiyan Island.
By early March, oil had come ashore at various points along a strip of Saudi coastline stretching some 130 miles south of the Kuwaiti border.
It was at its thickest in Mussallamiyah Bay, where a layer of oil six inches deep was more or less trapped by booms and sand barriers.
Here it had a devastating effect on seagrass beds and mangrove swamps.
Seabirds were the first and most visible casualties of the slick, with up to 20,000 estimated killed.
Among those worst effected were the socotra and great cormorants, and the great crested and black necked grebes.
Even lightly-oiled birds were dying as they ingested oil while attempting to preen themselves clean.
A mission mounted jointly by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the International Council of Bird Preservation warned on March 14 that hundreds of thousands of migratory birds, which used the beaches, salt marshes and mudflats of the Gulf as resting places, would shortly be at risk as they arrived en route from East Africa to northern Asia and Europe.
The RSPB launched a Gulf Appeal to fund work in determining which areas were most seriously threatened.
Other wildlife seems to have escaped immediate disaster, with no reports of deaths among the dugong or turtles, and just one dolphin washed up dead on the shore.
Efforts to counteract the effects of the oil were concentrated on protecting desalination plants — the main source of the western Gulf states' drinking water.
The Saudi plant at Safaniya was closed as a precautionary measure on Feb. 8, but reopened a few days later.
Overall, it appeared by the middle of March that the Gulf environment was proving more resilient than had been feared, but environmentalists cautioned that the full extent of the damage would not be apparent for some time, particularly as the oil sank to the bed of the shallow Gulf, where it would damage vital food plants.
World Conservation Monitoring Centre updates 28 February, 12 March RSPB information 14 March Daily UK newspapers throughout February
Pollution: Water
Long-term effects of Exxon Valdez oil spill
The oil spilt from the Exxon Valdez in 1989 has caused long-term damage to the wildlife of Alaska's Prince William Sound, according to recent studies of bird and fish populations.
Some of the most gloomy predictions have, however, been confounded, and in some respects the local ecology has proved surprisingly robust.
A survey by US federal scientists has recorded "total failure" to reproduce among colonies of murres — diving birds found widely in the northern Pacific.
They suggest that the species could take up to 70 years to recover, and estimate that some 150,000 murres died as a result of the spill.
The reproduction failure is blamed on a shortage of adult birds to defend colonies against predators.
A second study suggests that commercially-important species, including herring, shrimp, mussels, clams and rockfish have all suffered from the oil spill, presenting a "risk that they may not respond to conventional management actions for decades" .
Environmentalists stress that these are only preliminary findings, and that over the next few years, more extensive damage to wildlife in the Sound may be uncovered.
Evidence has also emerged that oil has entered the food chain after being ingested by fish such as salmon.
More evidence of environmental damage is expected to emerge in legal proceedings against Exxon, scheduled for April.
Washington Post 21 February
Pollution: Water
Leningrad's water at risk
An abandoned warship is in danger of contaminating Leningrad's water supply with strontium-90, which can cause cancer.
The Kit was scuttled on the orders of the Soviet nuclear agency, in the 1960s, after use as a floating laboratory for testing radiation protection equipment.
Its hold is estimated to contain some 2,000 tons of contaminated water.
The ship lies in Lake Legoda, which feeds the river Neva and supplies the Leningrad area with much of its domestic, industrial and agricultural water needs.
Soviet naval experts are attempting to make the wreck safe.
Green Magazine February
Pollution: Water
Water company adds chlorine "to combat terrorism" 
The Severn Trent Water company, which supplies water to much of central England, has justified its recent unannounced addition of large amounts of chlorine to its water on the grounds that it was intended to counteract any possible terrorist action related to the Gulf conflict.
It admitted adding the chlorine only after large numbers of consumers had demanded to know why their water tasted so strongly of the chemical.
More sceptical observers suggested that some unacknowledged health risk, such as an outbreak of the waterborne parasite, cryptosporidia, had triggered Severn Trent's action.
Scientists confirmed that the addition of chlorine was unlikely to protect against any serious attempt to interfere with the water supply.
The matter was raised in parliament by Labour's environmental spokeswoman, Ann Taylor.
Guardian 8 February
Transport
Dutch tolls to pay for transport
The Netherlands government is planning to introduce a toll system on the nation's roads as part of an effort to reduce traffic congestion.
Money raised by the tolls will be directed towards improvements in public transport, together with investment in the rail and canal network, with a view to encouraging both passengers and freight to find alternatives to the road.
One of the projects which will be supported is a new rapid rail transit system, the Randstad Rail, for the country's capital, The Hague.
The tolls are likely to be restricted to particularly congested areas, and busy times such as rush hours.
The plans have been criticized by the vehicle owners' organization, Stichting Weg, which has termed them "impractical, unreasonable and inequitable" .
But a cautious welcome has come from freight hauliers — who favour blanket daily tolls rather than rush-hour only fees — on the grounds that clearer roads will speed their deliveries.
New car registrations have risen from 99,000 in 1989 to 140,000 last year.
At present rates, car usage is expected to grow by 70 per cent over the next 20 years.
The subject has been addressed before.
A proposal to increase the purchase and running cost of cars two years ago ran into stiff opposition, and contributed to the downfall of the Lubbers government.
New Scientist 17 February
Transport
Car companies set up environmental group
A network of European car manufacturers have established a new trade association which will place particular emphasis on the need to "green the car" .
Headed by Renault's chief executive, Raymond Levy, the Association of European Auto-Makers will also include General Motors, Ford Europe and Saab.
Peugeot-Citroen have declined to join.
European 22-24 February
Transport
French government supports electric cars
The French Prime Minister, Michel Rocard, has issued a call to government departments to use electric cars for their staff fleets wherever possible.
The French car company, Peugeot, which is developing electric models, estimates that by 1995 a total of 200,000 electric cars will be sold in Europe each year.
It aims to take a quarter of the market share.
New Scientist 9 February
Transport
Catalytic converters on the increase
The numbers of new British cars fitted with catalytic converters increased by over 1,000 per cent in 1990, accounting for 5.4 per cent of the two million cars sold last year, according to figures released by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
The vast majority were fitted with the more complex three-way converter, which cuts down emissions of carbon monoxide, nitrous oxides and hydrocarbons.
Catalysts will be compulsory on all new cars manufactured after Dec. 31, 1992.
Financial Times 20 February
Transport
Eastern trunk route unveiled
Plans for a major private dual-carriageway cutting through eastern England have been criticized as "highly destructive" by Friends of the Earth.
The 240-mile road exists as yet only in the form of a feasibility study, conducted by an ad hoc group of consultants under the banner of EACO-Route, on behalf of industry and local authorities.
They claim it would provide a parallel "fast track" to the existing A1, by-passing "overheated" centres such as Cambridge and York.
Although the road was originally intended to be a private toll-financed venture, the feasibility study suggested that tolls could only contribute between 30 and 40 per cent of the revenue required.
It is thus unlikely that the road would be constructed without substantial assistance from the Department of Transport.
EACO-Route's project manager, Rob Lane, claimed that the road met the government's (controversial) cost-benefit criteria, and added that its construction could provide 60,000 jobs and attract 100,000 people into new towns and villages in East Anglia and the north-east, improving prospects of economically-depressed areas such as Hull and Teeside.
Friends of the Earth claim that it would devastate at least 16 sites of special scientific interest, including the Chippenham Fen National Nature Reserve in Cambridgeshire and Pocklington Canal in Humberside.
FOE's transport campaigner, Roger Higman, said: "This road cannot be justified unless concreting over the countryside to create unsustainable traffic growth can be called justification." 
Independent 26, 28 February
Transport
First environmental car race
Australia has staged the first Grand Prix restricted to "environmentally friendlier" vehicles.
The 1991 Energy Challenge was run over a 370 kilometre course in New South Wales, and the winners were those who completed the course with the least polluting emissions, calculated on the basis of their performance against a "greenhouse gas index" , without holding up other traffic.
Speed was not a factor.
The race was only open to vehicles which ran on unorthodox fuels, or which had internal combustion engines modified for greater energy efficiency.
The most fuel efficient entrant was a Daihatsu turbo diesel car, which completed the course at an average of 121 miles per gallon.
A Mitsubishi van powered by natural gas scored the best rating on the greenhouse gas index, with other good performers including vehicles running on mixtures of unleaded petrol and ethanol.
The top-placed battery car came in at eighth place.
New Scientist 9 February
Transport
 "Explosive" green petrol plan delayed
German plans to remove bromine and chlorine from leaded petrol have been put on hold by the EC, which is concerned that the new environmental measures may result in explosions.
European Commission scientists believe that removal of the two chemicals will make the fuel more volatile.
Financial Times 25 February
Tropical Forests
Mexican "debt-for-nature" swap
The Mexican government has agreed a "debt-for-nature" swap with the US environmental group, Conservation International.
In return for the group's agreement to purchase and write off $4 million worth of Mexican debt from foreign creditors, the government has undertaken to carry out a $2.6 million programme of support for forest conservation efforts, with a particular focus on the Selva Lacandona, which is the largest remaining tropical rainforest in North America.
Since the debt is being traded at discounted rates on the secondary markets, Conservation International will be able to purchase it for about $1.8 million.
Since 1970, about half of Selva Lacandona has been destroyed through clearance for agriculture and illegal logging.
Clearance is encouraged by a credit system under which farmers obtain grants for tree-felling on unclaimed land.
The policy was adopted by the Mexican government in part with a view to forming a well-populated "buffer zone" on the border with Guatemala, where the forest is situated.
Over 200,000 people now live in the area, as opposed to 5,000 in the 1960s.
The agreement will have little effect on Mexico's total foreign debt burden, which amounts to some $80,000 million.
It is however seen as an important signal of Mexico's willingness to respond to environmental concerns.
The US Congress is expected to raise the Mexican government's patchy environmental record during discussions over proposed free trade agreements.
Conservation International's Mexican director, Martin Goebel, commented that: "many people know Mexico as a" mega-debtor ", but few realize it is also a" mega-diverse "country, with more plant and animal species than all but three nations" .
Guardian 21 February Financial Times 21 February International Herald Tribune 27 February
Tropical Forests
India's "alarming" forest loss
The Forest Survey of India has reported that the country's forests are being destroyed at the "alarming" rate of 47,500 hectares per annum.
Total forest cover amounts to just over 64 million hectares — as opposed to the previously-quoted official figure of 75 million.
The survey reported that, despite the rate of loss, average timber productivity was just 0.5 cubic metres per hectare, by contrast to the international average of 2.1 cubic metres.
Press Trust of India 20 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Tropical Forests
Indonesia changes forestry priorities
The Indonesian government has responded to growing environmental criticism of its forestry policies by accepting a World Bank-sponsored plan aimed at promoting "sustainable development" of its forest reserves, which are the second largest in the world after Brazil.
One of the features of the plan is a proposal to allow a foreign company to monitor the timber industry.
It would use a mixture of field checks, aerial photography and remote sensing to calculate the extent of logging, as part of stepped up efforts to ensure that timber firms comply with government guidelines aimed at conserving the forest reserves.
At present, the government admits that only some 20 per cent of concession-holders meet the guidelines.
The foreign company would also assist the Forestry Department in collecting royalty and tax payments from the timber companies.
Analysts estimate that up to half the monies owed currently go uncollected.
Improved revenue collection will help finance better conservation measures.
World Bank estimates suggest that careless logging practices account for 200,000 hectares out of a total annual loss of one million hectares.
It adds that, at current rates, the forests' will be effectively logged out within 40 years.
Forestry and associated industries employ half a million people in Indonesia, and its mills supply 70 per cent of the world's export market for hardwood plywood.
The World Bank plan is likely to be opposed by the timber industry, which has close ties with numerous senior government officials, and by the Foreign Ministry, many of whose employees are alleged to profit by allowing logging restrictions to be ignored.
Initially, the project will be tried out on a pilot basis in three provinces: Riau; East Kalimantan; and the Moluccas.
Far Eastern Economic Review 7 February
Tropical Forests
 "Trained amateurs" to tap rainforest resources
American biologists have called for the establishment of a network of "trained amateurs" drawn from local populations to help tap potential medical resources of tropical forests.
Thomas Eisner from Cornell and Dan Janzen from Pennsylvania University suggested to a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science that pharmaceutical companies should train local "parataxonomists" to make inventories of their countries' flora and explore potential markets for its use.
Tests have shown that about half of the traditional folk remedies of such areas have pharmaceutical potential.
But other scientists, together with indigenous leaders, stress the need to ensure that the local forest peoples benefit from their own knowledge.
Anthropologist Darrell Posy criticizes scientists who "mine the rainforest for knowledge" without returning something of value.
A spokesman for the Amazonian Kayapo Indians, Payacan, says that scientists will be welcome if they can demonstrate that their activities will bring benefits to the Indians, but he adds that: "lots of scientists just come and ask and ask and ask and then go away and we never hear about their results" .
New Scientist 23 February
Waste and Recycling
Toxic waste "still sent to third world" 
Greenpeace has issued a report which claims that, contrary to new international conventions, European countries continue to send toxic and hazardous wastes to third world countries for disposal.
The European Commission has proposed fresh steps aimed at regulating the trade, which Greenpeace has said should be banned.
The matter is shortly to be discussed by the EC Council of Ministers.
* The Dutch government has ordered that a German ship which was attempting to export toxic waste to Poland via the Netherlands must return to Germany.
The consignment was destined for the Polish port of Szczecin, where 7,000 tonnes of poisonous waste has already been delivered.
European 15-17 February
Waste and Recycling
Bavarian recycling law comes into effect
New legislation in the German state of Bavaria provides for a sophisticated system of recycling rubbish.
Rural district authorities will be responsible for making separate collections of glass, paper and metals, which will all be recycled.
Other waste will continue to be incinerated.
One of the farthest-reaching pieces of recycling legislation in Europe, the law was originally passed in November, but implementation has been delayed pending a referendum on even more stringent waste regulations, introduced through a Green Party-backed "citizens' initiative" .
Voters narrowly rejected this scheme, which would have devolved responsibility to the communal level of authority, and cut down on the amount of incineration.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung 18 February
Waste and Recycling
Microbes to eat German cars
A Berlin research institute is developing a scheme by which micro-organisms will feed on abandoned Trabant cars, large numbers of which have been discarded by their former East German owners in favour of more modern Western models.
Disposal of the Trabants has presented problems since the chassis is constructed of synthetic resin and Soviet cotton wool waste, which break down into low-level toxic materials.
Research on the project may last two years, but its director, Franz Weissbach, is confident that, once the process is perfected, a Trabant chassis could be completely consumed by the microbes in two weeks.
He claims that the process could be extended to other waste disposal tasks: "Anything which can devour a Trabi probably has an appetite for a lot more besides." 
Times 6 February