

Conservation: Land
New countryside initiatives launched
The UK government has announced a series of new initiatives for the countryside, in a package involving £22.5 million of new expenditure spread over three years.
The package takes the form of grants to countryside agencies.
The Countryside Commission is to receive £7.3 million for footpath clearing and hedgerow restoration work; the Rural Development Commission £4.3 million to help create rural employment opportunities, while English Nature will receive additional funding for incentive schemes to protect the wider countryside.
Some observers suggested that the timing of the announcements reflected the government's desire to be seen to be spending money on the countryside in the run-up to the April general election.
The announcement coincided with the publication of a government policy review, Action for the Countryside.
This stated that: "Any notion that the economy of the countryside is fundamentally different to that in towns is now wide of the mark.
Some rural areas have an employment and industrial structure which is akin to that of successful urban areas."
Speaking at the launch, Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine said: "There has to be development if the countryside is to survive.
But development must be sensitive and there must be strong policies against poor quality development and to protect special areas which are irreplaceable."
Guardian 28 February
Conservation: Land
UK road schemes "threaten 81 wildlife sites" 
Government plans to improve the M25 London orbital motorway and construct a series of supporting road schemes threaten 81 important wildlife sites, according to a report from the Royal Society for Nature Conservation (RSNC).
In some areas, the M25 could be extended to the equivalent of 14 lanes by the construction of parallel roads.
The report alleges that the schemes would damage 10 registered sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs).
They will also generate 50,000 new vehicle journeys a day, adding to pollution and local traffic congestion.
A total of 47 of the sites affected are ancient woodland, the RSNC claim.
Some of the areas which are not directly destroyed could be damaged to the point where they are no longer viable as areas of conservation importance, says the report.
The organization believes that the new plans could be in breach of European law requiring full environmental impact studies to be carried out.
It argues that the M25 and other major radial routes around the capital should become toll routes, and that a light railway track should be constructed alongside the motorway to ease congestion.
Protestors from the radical environmental group, Earth First, took direct action, chaining themselves to construction gear, in an effort to halt the start of work on the M3 extension at Twyford Down, in Wiltshire [see ED nos. 52, 55].
Six people were arrested…
Independent 15, 17 February Guardian 17 February
Conservation: Land
Czechoslovakia, Hungary at odds over dam
The Czechoslovak government has decided to proceed with the controversial Gabcikovo hydro-electric dam project on the Danube.
The decision has drawn protests from environmentalists, who warn that it could have a damaging effect on the Danube valley ecosystem, and the Hungarian government, which views it as a possible infringement of territorial integrity.
The dam project was originally conceived in 1977, when the then communist regimes signed an agreement to share power from it.
Hungary pulled out of the scheme in 1989.
The Czechoslovak government insists that the dam will not harm the environment, and claims that earlier construction work has, in any case, permanently blighted 40 sq km of land.
It also says the country is losing the equivalent of $233 million a year while the dam is unfinished.
Radio Budapest 7, 10, 11, 17 February Radio Czechoslovakia 13 February CSTK (Czechoslovak foreign service) 6, 9 February MTI Radio 6 February Slovak Radio, Bratislava 4 February (all from BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Land
Croatian environmental damage outlined
The fighting in Croatia has caused severe damage to numerous environmentally-sensitive areas, according to a report compiled for the International Council for Bird Preservation (ICBP).
With around 40 per cent of Croatian territory affected by the war, damage to its wetlands has been extensive.
Attacks on an oil refinery at Sisak on the River Sava led to widespread contamination in the Lonja Field National park, one of Europe's largest fish-breeding areas, which attracts fish from the whole Danube delta.
In the Krka National Park on the Adriatic coast, around 2,500 hectares of ancient forest has been burnt, and a system of lakes and waterfalls based on ridges of limestone deposits destroyed.
Forests have also been burnt by napalm attacks, notably near Osijek and in the Paklenica National Park.
Populations of red deer and boar are believed to be under greater pressure from hunters due to wartime shortages.
BBC Wildlife magazine March 1992
Conservation: Species
International bear campaign launched
Libearty, the first international campaign to protect the world's bears, has been launched by the World Society for the Protection of Wild Animals.
According to the WSPA, five out of the world's eight species of bears are endangered and six are listed by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
Only the Russian brown bear and the American black bear are not on the list.
Among the threats to the bear population, the WSPA highlighted (i) the destruction of their habitats,(ii) the trade in body parts, particularly gall bladders, for medicinal uses in East Asian countries,(iii) the use of "dancing bears" in parts of Europe, and (iv) the "bear parks" in Japan where they are encouraged to fight or beg for food.
The WSPA said that the demand for bear body parts is threatening all five species living in Asia with extinction.
Increasingly the trade in gall bladders has put a price on bears worldwide, with killings in America and Russia increasing.
As part of its campaign, the society will publicise the fact that the active ingredient in bear bladders prized by traditional oriental medicine (ursodeoxycholic acid) is available in synthetic form.
New Scientist 29 February
Conservation: Species
CITES meeting in Kyoto
Environmentalists gathered in Kyoto, Japan, in late February alongside representatives of the 114 governments which had signed the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (CITES), in preparation for the triennial CITES meeting on March 2-13.
The session was marked by controversy over tuna and, especially, over the retention of the global ban on trade in ivory.
The ivory trade ban, in force since the African elephant was classified as an endangered species in 1989, was challenged by five southern African countries"Zimbabwe, Malawi, Botswana, Namibia and South Africa.
Arguing that their elephant herds could not be classified as endangered locally, representatives of these countries, led by Zimbabwe, attacked "conservation imperialism" and asserted their right to "sustainable utilisation" .
A regulated trade in ivory and other products from legally-culled elephants, they said, would help generate funds for wildlife and habitat conservation.
At the beginning of the Kyoto meeting a working party was set up to consider proposals from the southern African countries, which would differentiate between "critically endangered" and "endangered" species, and under which trade would be banned only if there were strong evidence that it was affecting the conservation of the species.
During the Kyoto session the southern African representatives rallied around a compromise formula, which would allow them to resume trade in elephant hides and meat (i.e. with reclassification of the African elephant to Appendix II) but with an initial zero quota for ivory.
Some environmentalists, and notably the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF), backed this as an appropriate approach within a responsible conservation policy.
It was bitterly opposed, however, by other environmental activists and by France, Germany, and the UK government (which also supported continuing the total protection for rhinoceroses, cheetahs and leopards).
The US reportedly wavered before opposing this compromise.
Other African countries were vocally hostile, arguing that any trade would provoke an upsurge in poaching.
Facing defeat on their compromise, the southern African delegations withdrew it on March 10, but warned that they would confer with their governments on the question of remaining within CITES.
A meeting was subsequently arranged for April, in Namibia.
Zimbabwe's environment minister Herbert Murerwa (who had also unsuccessfully advocated a limited legalisation of trade in rhino horns) complained afterwards that the integrity of CITES was in question, and that politicians and pressure groups had ignored scientific evidence that southern African elephant populations were "not only healthy but growing" .
The chairman of the Ivory Manufacturers' Association in Zimbabwe, however, advised against withdrawal from CITES; this could affect tourism and aid, he said, while ivory trade markets would remain blocked.
A Swedish proposal to ban fishing for bluefin tuna in the west Atlantic, and to limit catches in the eastern Atlantic, failed to win endorsement from the CITES secretariat.
It was strongly opposed by the conference host country, Japan, which consumes 40 per cent of the world catch of 38,000 tonnes.
Delegates from Canada and the USA, where bluefin tuna are caught for sport, also opposed it, all three countries and also Morocco arguing that stocks were effectively monitored by the International Commission for Conservation of Atlantic Tuna.
The Swedish delegation withdrew its proposal on March 10, having obtained promises that catches would be reduced.
The Danish government sponsored a proposal originating with US conservationist groups, but opposed by the US government, to list the black bear in Appendix II and thereby limit trade in, especially, bear gall bladders [see above].
Two countries not belonging to CITES, however, South Korea and Taiwan, were major markets for exotic products for use in traditional medicine, including bear gall bladder, rhino horn and tiger penis.
Dutch proposals to include two tropical hardwood tree species under CITES listing provoked the angry Malaysian response that CITES "should not be used as a tool to straitjacket international trade in timber" , for which the International Tropical Timber Organisation was already responsible.
A report to the meeting listed 135 infractions of CITES trade restrictions in 1989-91, over half involving EC countries.
Altogether some 2,500 animal species and 35,000 plants are listed either in CITES Appendix 1 (endangered species; trade in the species or its products is banned) or Appendix 2 (regulated trade permitted).
The organization's small Swiss-based secretariat and new secretary general, Izgrev Topkov of Bulgaria, urged that public attention should not focus exclusively on elephants and other "charismatic megafauna" .
*Soldiers in the South African Defence Forces (SADF) have been involved in ivory smuggling in collaboration with Renamo guerrillas in Mozambique, according to a US Defence Intelligence Agency report leaked to The Independent on Sunday on Feb. 23.
The revenue from the ivory was used both for personal gain and as a means of channelling funds to the guerrillas.
The report, based on testimony from Renamo and South African sources, states: "Part of the South African Army has been co-operating with private individuals to assist Renamo.
Such clandestine support was channelled through South African farms in the border area."
The SADF has been accused of involvement in ivory smuggling in the past, notably during the Angolan and Namibian wars, when the local elephant population was devastated.
The head of South Africa's CITES delegation, Piet Mulder, agreed that there was evidence of SADF involvement in ivory smuggling, but blamed it on a few corrupt elements.
*A report published on Feb. 24 by the UK-based Environmental Investigation Agency argues that southern African countries would not be able to provide adequate policing to ensure that any ivory trade came only from legitimate sources; it also alleges that the Zimbabwean and South African armed forces are involved in illegal smuggling.
Financial Times 2, 11 & 12 March Guardian 24 & 28 February, 2, 4, 6 & 11 March Independent on Sunday 23 February Independent 2, 4, 5, 6 & 11 March International Herald Tribune 4, 5, 11 & 20 March Pan African News Agency PANA 16 March
Conservation: Species
Salmon fishing ban in North Pacific
Canada, Japan, Russia and the United States have agreed to stop fishing salmon outside their 200-mile fishing zones in the North Pacific in order to preserve stocks.
The four countries signed a convention to this effect in Moscow on 11 February.
The original draft, initiated by the United States and Russia, called for more severe restrictions, but these were opposed by Japan.
ITAR-TASS (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 11 February Financial Times 14 February
Conservation: Species
Norway plans massive reindeer cull
The Norwegian Agriculture Ministry has published plans for a large-scale reduction in the reindeer herds of Finnmark, the country's northernmost province.
Reindeer in the area now number around 160,000, and have been blamed for widespread erosion as a result of over-grazing.
The Ministry's $8 million programme includes plans for the retraining of 450 Sami ( "Lapp" ) herdsman.
Around 2,200 of the estimated 60,000 Sami in Norway work with the reindeer herds.
The Sami parliament (a purely advisory body) has called on the government to inject more money into the scheme in order to improve job prospects for the redundant herders.
European 20/26 February
Conservation: Species
Greenpeace drops Greenland seal campaign
The environmental group Greenpeace has halted its campaign against seal hunting by Greenlanders, saying it is not opposed to the hunting or the sale of sealskin coats from the Danish territory.
The decision followed an announcement that the Danish team in the Winter Olympics would be wearing Greenland sealskin jackets, and it was seen in part as representing an effort to avoid any potential disruption of the games by Greenpeace demonstrators.
Greenpeace's campaign against the seal hunt has drawn fierce criticism from Greenland Inuit leaders, who pointed out that the seal was not an endangered species, and that its hunt was a traditional part of the Inuit economy.
European 20/26 February
Conservation: Species
Iceland quits IWC
The Icelandic government has withdrawn from the International Whaling Commission (IWC).
The fisheries minister, Thorsteinn Pálsson, justified the move on the grounds that the IWC had in recent years concentrated exclusively on conservation aspects of whaling, while according to its charter it had a twofold task of both conserving and exploiting whales.
An IWC moratorium on commercial whaling has been in effect since 1986.
Iceland's request in 1991 to take 250 whales was rejected by the IWC as premature [see ED 47].
New Scientist 15 February
Conservation: Species
Unknown bird species found dead in export cage
Four birds of a previously unknown species have been found dead in a bird trader's cage in Tanzania.
They were to be exported to the European Community as pets.
The incident has been highlighted by the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) as an example of the damage being done by the worldwide trade in wild birds.
The case was mentioned in an EIA report on the trade, the result of a six-year investigation.
The report describes how three out of four birds die of disease, crushing, overcrowding and starvation in transit.
Although it is illegal for native wild birds to be sold in the EC, the United States and Japan (the primary destinations), no action has been taken by the authorities.
The report calls for a ban on all such imports.
Times 18 February Guardian 18 February
Conservation: Species
Last two of curlew species
There are now only two slender-billed curlews (numenius tenuistrosis) left in the world, according to the International Council of Bird Preservation (ICBP).
The organization reached the conclusion after monitoring their last known wintering site in Morocco.
Until recently, the slender-billed curlew migrated in large flocks between their Mediterranean wintering grounds and their summer habitat in Siberia.
Hunting has been cited as a possible reason for decline — the migration route crosses areas of southern Europe where bird shooting is a popular pastime.
If the species dies out it will be Europe's first bird extinction since the great auk in 1844.
BBC Wildlife, March
Conservation: Species
UK government criticised for bird import licences
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has strongly criticised the British government for granting import licences to an international dealer who is wanted in Canada for illegal trafficking in birds of prey.
150 rare birds of prey, mainly large falcons, were taken to Spain from Saudi Arabia at the outbreak of the Gulf War by Philip Whitehead, until then the director of a falcon centre owned by the Saudi royal family.
He tried to export the birds to several countries, and has been allowed to import them by the British despite strong reservations from the Spanish authorities and concern expressed by conservationists.
A warrant for Whitehead's arrest was issued in Canada in 1985, alleging that he had operated as a falcon dealer and smuggler for ten years.
BBC Wildlife March 1992
Conservation: Species
Red kite reintroduction boosted
The reintroduction of red kites into Scotland has been boosted by the release of 20 more birds obtained from southern Sweden.
At least 36 of the 45 kites introduced since the project began still survive, making it one of the most successful reintroduction schemes.
The birds are radio-tagged for tracking.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News), January
Energy
Water tribunal rules on Quebec dam project
The International Water Tribunal (IWT) has told the Canadian province of Quebec that it should not proceed with its controversial James Bay hydroelectric project [see ED no. 47]until a full environmental impact assessment has been carried out.
Work on the project, which in all involves the flooding of around 26,000 sq km of land and the construction of 26 power stations, was temporarily suspended last year on environmental grounds by the Canadian National Energy Board.
The IWT, which is an independent body with no powers to enforce its decisions, expressed particular concern over the welfare of the native Americans who live in the region, notably 10,000 Cree and 6,000 Inuit.
The Grand Council of the Cree argue that completion of the project would destroy their traditional way of life.
Hydro-Quebec, the state-owned electricity company which is undertaking the James Bay project, has undertaken to comply with all environmental rulings made by the provincial or federal governments, and has invited the IWT to take part in environmental assessment.
In its ruling, however, the IWT also drew attention to the issue of energy use per se: "(Environmental) procedures and the generation of ever more information on impacts do not help avoid the essential issue that industrialized countries should reduce their wasteful energy consumption, rather than enlarging the capacity to create energy" .
New Scientist 29 February
Energy
Dutch abandon coal-fired power plant plans
The Netherlands Economics Minister, Koos Andriessen, has announced the abandonment of plans to build a conventional coal-fired power station at Maasvlakte, near Rotterdam.
Instead, the government will examine projects for smaller combined heat and power (CHP) plants elsewhere in the country, together with the possibility of importing hydro-electric power from Norway.
The decision not to proceed with the plant follows a court ruling that the plans contravened an EC directive and that construction should not proceed without an environmental impact assessment.
The proposed Maasvlakte plant had been criticized by environmentalists and Rotterdam City Council, together with the US petrochemical company Texaco, which wants to build a coal gasification plant in the country.
Environment Business 11 March
Energy
First orimulsion power station planned
National Powers, one of the UK's two major power generators, has applied to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution to convert a huge plant in Pembroke in Wales to orimulsion, a controversial new fuel.
Orimulsion is a recently patented mix of bitumen and water from Venezuela.
It is attractive to the power industry because it is cheap, but has been attacked by scientists and environmentalists as harmful to the environment because of its high sulphur content [see ED 53/54].
Environmental groups such as the Countryside Council for Wales, English Nature and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) have objected to the use of orimulsion in Britain.
British standards do not required it to be used in conjunction with flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) technology, which would reduce the emission of sulphur into the air.
Elsewhere, this is mandatory.
Guardian 7 February
Economics & Industry
GATT report on trade and environment
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) has published a report on the environment, in what is seen as a response to environmentalist criticisms of the organization's emphasis on free trade [see SAFE report, below, and also EDs 51, 52 and 55]in the run-up to final negotiations in the current "Uruguay round" of trade talks.
The report is also intended to help set the agenda for discussions at UNCED in June.
In general terms, the report argues that protectionism has a negative effect on the environment.
It accuses "particular producer groups" of "manipulating domestic environmental policies to benefit themselves at the expense of both the rest of the economy and ultimately even the environment" .
It is particularly critical of the European Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and of land set-aside programmes in the US.
Such policies, the report argues, lead to agricultural intensification and encourage environmentally-damaging reliance on agro-chemicals.
Farmers in the developing countries, it argues, produce food in less polluting ways, and should be allowed more access to northern markets.
The report comes out strongly against the imposition of trade sanctions against countries on environmental grounds: in an implicit reference to the recent US action against tuna imports from Mexico [see ED 55], the report says, "a country may not restrict imports of a product solely because it originates in a country whose environmental policies are different." 
Such moves are condemned as "environmental imperialism" , which will lead to trade chaos and conflict.
Global environmental problems, such as deforestation and ozone depletion, should be tackled through inter-governmental agreements, rather than unilateral action.
Existing trade barriers prevent third world countries from developing to the point where they can afford to implement high environmental standards, the report argues.
Among specific proposals are the introduction of internationally-traded "permits to pollute" , a plan for which is currently being prepared by the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), and the payment by industrialized countries of compensation to rainforest states in recognition of the global "carbon absorption services" performed by their trees.
The report claims that this would be more effective than resorting to timber import restrictions and the imposition of logging bans.
The thinking behind the report was criticized by environmentalists.
A Greenpeace spokesman commented: "The dictates of free trade lead to competitive pressures on companies, which seek the lowest costs in ways that can be harmful to the environment." 
Trade sanctions had to remain as promoters of environmental protection, he argued.
*Prior to the report's publication, US environmental groups had been stepping up their attack on GATT [see ED 55].
The Washington-based Public Citizen group alleged that GATT's intention of lowering what it referred to as "technical barriers to trade" could allow foreign governments to flout US laws on environmental standards.
A Californian prohibition on sale of food containing pesticide residues could be challenged under GATT's Uruguay round proposals.
California would be obliged to prove that the ban rested on "strong scientific principles" before an international panel.
 "They are usually trade specialists, not scientists, and they meet in secret" , said a Public Citizen spokesman.
The group is also concerned that if, as currently proposed, internationally-harmonized food standards were set by the Codex Alimentarius Commission [see SAFE report, below], quality would decline.
Codex guidelines permit levels of DDT in peaches 50 times higher than those in force in the US, for example.
Financial Times 12 February Independent 12 February Economist 15 February New Scientist 15 February GATT information release 11 Feburary
Economics & Industry
GATT proposals threaten health, environment, says SAFE
Current proposals in the Uruguay Round of talks on the General Agreement on Tarriffs and Trade (GATT) threaten both public health and environmental security, according to a new report from the SAFE alliance (Sustainable Agriculture, Food and Environment).
In Food Fit for the World, the report's author, Dr Tim Lang argues that GATT's emphasis on trade liberalization fails to take environmental priorities into account.
If its Secretariat's proposals are agreed to, "farming will become more rather than less intensive, global brands will erode local foods and developing countries' food self-reliance will be undermined" .
The Secretariat has stated that individual countries are free to set their own environmental standards, as long as they do not impede free trade.
According to the SAFE report, "this is dangerously close to saying that anyone can have high standards as long as they are useless" .
It argues that the talks should be suspended until priority is shifted from free trade to the protection of public health and the environment, and that the current proposals on Technical Barriers to Trade and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures [see ED no. 55]should be abandoned.
Northern countries should provide aid to help Southern nations improve their food standards.
SAFE is also concerned at GATT's willingness to allow the UN body, the Codex Alimentarius Commission, to play a key role in determining benchmark food standards.
Membership of the Codex committees includes a high proportion of commercial interests, with little balancing representation from public interest groups.
The six-member UK delegation to the Nutrition Committee included three representatives from food conglomerates.
The report cites various cases by which over-emphasis on free trade can lead to environmental problems, including the recent controversy over the US import ban on Mexican tuna [see ED no. 55].
The report is published in conjunction with the Public Health Alliance.
SAFE information 26 February
Economics & Industry
 "Ironic" World Bank memo leaked
An internal memorandum by the chief economist of the World Bank, Lawrence Summers, which suggests encouraging polluting industries to relocate to third world countries, has been leaked to The Economist.
In the memo, Summers, a former adviser to the US Democratic Party, advances three reasons why dirty industry should move to developing countries.
In summary, these are: i) low-income countries will not lose so much in the way of earnings if their population is damaged by pollution, since wages are so low anyway; ii) under-populated countries in regions such as Africa are effectively "under-polluted" compared to urbanized areas such as Los Angeles or Mexico City — ideally, there should be a "world-welfare-enhancing trade in air pollution and waste" ; and iii) environmental concern, on health and aesthetic grounds, is much more acute in high-income countries than in the third world, where direct alleviation of poverty is seen as more pressing.
A World Bank spokesman responded to the leak by denying that the memo in any way represented Bank policy, and adding that it had been written in a deliberately ironic tone in order to provoke internal debate within the organization.
Summers now "deeply regretted" writing it, the spokesman said.
The Economist 8, 15 February Financial Times 7 February Independent 7 February
Economics & Industry
EC structural funds "damage environment" 
A coalition of 66 European environmental groups, including the World Wide Fund for Nature and Amigos de la Terra, have issued a statement accusing the EC's system of structural fund grants of causing widespread environmental damage.
The funds, amounting to 12 billion ecus per year, are intended to support infrastructural developments in the Community's poorer regions.
But they are often applied without sufficient consideration for the environmental consequences, say the organizations.
European Commission President, Jacques Delors, has announced that the funds are to be increased over the next five years, although the regulations governing their use are to be reformed.
The environmental groups cite a number of examples of inappropriate use of the funds.
These include: * a new road tunnel through the Pyrenees, which will disrupt the habitat of France's last remaining brown bear colony; * the eastern Dublin by-pass, which will cut through an important wetland nature reserve; * the Lisbon to Oporto motorway, which will disrupt local water flows.
In many cases, such projects would not be undertaken without structural fund backing.
The organizations are demanding that more stringent environmental criteria be built into the reformed regulations.
New Scientist 15 February
Economics & Industry
European Bank adopts green guidelines
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has announced a series of guidelines which aim to ensure that environmental priorities are taken into account in every project which it supports.
It has also declared its intention to help develop new environmental industries.
The guidelines include commitments to: * provide technical assistance to local and regional authorities in the introduction and enforcement of environmental standards; * promote direct investment to environmental enterprises, an infrastructural work, particularly in areas whose environment has become degraded; and * support environmental training and public information.
Environment Business 12 February
Economics & Industry
Dutch tax proposals "deter industry" 
The Netherlands government's proposed carbon tax and associated "eco-energy" levies has provoked a number of large companies to consider withdrawing from the country, according to industrial sources.
The Netherlands already has some of the most stringent environmental levies in operation.
The carbon tax could lead to a doubling of prices for fossil fuels.
Among the companies which have threatened to cut their operations in the country, or to pull out altogether, are Shell, Dow Chemicals, and the Dutch division of Hoechst, a spokesman for whom said that it would consider moving to "Kazakhstan — where pollution really is a problem" .
The carbon tax proposals are similar to those mooted by the EC [see ED 51], which have been shelved in the wake of opposition from industry.
Further environmental levies, planned to be introduced in 1993, include taxes on the use of groundwater, pesticides and artificial fertilizer, together with waste incineration or dumping.
The ruling centre-left coalition is divided on the issue, with the Labour Party supporting the proposals, and the Christian Democrats opposed.
New Scientist 15 February
Economics & Industry
Industry "to pay for land clean-up" 
A new tax could be levied on UK industry to pay for cleaning up contaminated land, according to proposals currently being considered by the Department of the Environment.
Judith Denner, head of the Department's contaminated land section, said that the money would be paid into the equivalent of a US "superfund" , to support the decontamination of polluted sites, including those affected by toxic and heavy metals, and by potentially explosive concentrations of methane gas.
There are believed to be around 100,000 contaminated sites in the UK, many the legacy of mining, gas or chemical works, although Denner acknowledged that the full scale of the problem was not known.
Registers of contaminated land would be available for public scrutiny from April 1993.
New Scientist 22 February
Economics & Industry
French "green medals" announced
The French Environment Ministry has announced the award of "green medals" to companies which have made the most innovative contributions to environmental problems.
The winners include: i) the Martineau company of Haute-Garonne, which has developed an electrochemical technique for removing metals from industrial effluent; ii) Matussiere and Forest Paper, for producing web offset paper entirely from non-chlorine bleached recycled fibres; and iii) the Banque populaire du Haut-Rhin for devising a discount loan scheme for anti-pollution equipment.
Le Monde 25 February
Environmental Politics
Biodiversity Strategy launched
Global Biodiversity Strategy, a blueprint for conservation prepared by the World Conservation Union (IUCN), the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Resources Institute, has suggested that third world countries should declare sovereignty over their genetic resources as a means of protecting the earth's diversity of species, and allowing the countries concerned to profit from the growing demand for plants and animals.
The strategy maintains that advances in biotechnology and growing interest from plant breeders and drugs companies in genes from wild species warrant a reassessment of the notion that genetic resources are a common heritage.
It urges countries to assert control over the exploitation of their genetic resources through legislation and levies of royalties, fees and taxes on their use.
This would act as an incentive for conservation and would also enable poor countries to realize some of the value of the resources.
The report is intended as a complement to the International Convention on Biodiversity, which is expected to be signed at UNCED.
New Scientist 15 February
Environmental Politics
Government's green "openness" challenged
The UK government has announced a plan to give the public freer access to environmental information, in line with a 1990 EC directive on the subject.
But Friends of the Earth has claims that in practice, is still allows sensitive information to be withheld.
The proposals, in the form of a consultation document, would grant people the right to request information on a wide range of issues from government bodies.
Each government department and public body will publish "a statement of the principle areas in which it holds unrestricted environmental information" .
The public will be able to request information relating to these areas, but the body concerned will be allowed to refuse any requests "which are formulated in too general a manner" .
Friends of the Earth claim that this in effect allows ministers and officials to withhold details.
According to Campaigns Director Andrew Lees,: "Given the potentially broad scope of such" areas ", the obstructive official has ample opportunity to rebuff requests by anyone whose request is not specific enough to penetrate the bureaucratic defences of a body which does not want to release the information." 
Other "get out clauses" included requests for information which might involve the supply of "unfinished documents" .
The government also has the right to withhold "reports on alternative engineering options/solutions in the light of environmental factors" .
FOE claim that this would allow politically-controversial options to be buried.
With this in mind, FoE cites the Department of the Environment's refusal to publish its report on technologies for reducing nitrogen oxide emissions from power stations, which was completed a year ago, but has never been made public.
The proposals also allow government departments to make "reasonable charges" for providing information, including staff time and overheads.
This would enable them to "erect a price wall to deter curiosity" , claims FoE.
Friends of the Earth information 6 February Independent 7 February
Environmental Politics
Planning guidelines on environmental protection
Under new guidelines issued by the UK's Department of the Environment, local councils in Britain "the primary planning authorities" will have to take account of rising sea levels due to global warming when considering planning applications in low-lying areas.
Planners are also being instructed to site housing so as to minimize car use for journeys to work and school, and to encourage public transport and improved energy conservation measures.
The guidelines introduce into local planning the concept of protecting the environment through sustainable development.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England described the move as the most significant step to incorporate wider environmental concerns into the British planning system.
*The Scottish Office has announced tighter planning guidelines to protect sensitive areas.
These include a commitment that the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland must be consulted on all planed developments affecting sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs).
Financial Times 10 February The Scotsman 24 February
Environmental Politics
Polish call for environmental work scheme
The Polish Environment Minister, Stefan Kozlowski, has called for the formation of a civil work programme to undertake environmental protection measures.
It was wrong to pay out unemployment benefits, Kozlowski claimed, when no-one could be found to carry out urgent environmental tasks.
The unemployed should be given such work, he said, adding that at present, Poland lacked the expertise, equipment and finance to deal with environmental decay.
PAP Polish News Agency 27 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Bulgarian Greens name change
The Bulgarian Green Party, which played a major role in the movement leading to the overthrow of communism, has changed its name to the Conservative Environmental Party.
It will remain part of the Union of Democratic Forces coalition.
BTA Bulgarian news agency 1 March (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Global Warming
Tree plantations "not the solution to global warming" 
Reforestation on a massive scale is not a suitable strategy to combat the greenhouse effect, claim Friends of the Earth (FoE).
The social and environmental costs of reforestation to counter global warming far outweigh the likely benefits, according to the FoE's report, Deserts of Trees.
It argues that reforestation on a large scale would reduce biodiversity through damage to wildlife habitats, degrade soils, and lead to the forced resettlement of subsistence farmers.
Planting large areas of marginal land in the tropics with trees has frequently been advanced as an ideal solution, since fast-growing young trees will act as a "sink" for carbon dioxide emissions which would otherwise rise into the atmosphere and thus contribute to the greenhouse effect.
The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has suggested that an area the size of Europe would have to be planted every year to balance emissions of carbon dioxide.
FoE is urging the UNCED conference, however, to adopt strategies on combating climate change which do not rely on reforestation.
Large plantations, it says, are monocultures, vulnerable to attack by pests, impoverishing the soil and dispossessing local people.
Instead, attention should be focused on halting the felling of existing forests.
FoE's rainforests campaigner, Tony Juniper, admits that some tree planting is a good idea, but says that "politicians are using it as a green smokescreen to hide the failure of developed countries to cut emissions of carbon dioxide" .
Planting, he says, should be on a small scale, and "geared to local needs — fuel, fodder and fruit — rather than global priorities" .
Plantations have very little biological diversity, and some of the fastest growing ones, such as eucalyptus, may require the application of fertilizer and pesticides, and impoverish the soil by leaching out its nutrients.
However, Dr Tim Synott of the Oxford Forestry Institute suggested that plantations might be suitable on some formerly-forested lands that had become so degraded as to have very little biological value.
*The Japanese government is launching a five-year study project aimed at developing tropical forest plantations which will act as efficient "sinks" for carbon dioxide.
Scientists will study forests in south-east Asian countries, with a view to establishing what conditions produce the highest carbon dioxide absorption.
Kyodo News Service, Tokyo 29 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Independent 2 March Friends of the Earth information 1 March
Global Warming
 "Quick fixes" may be risky, says scientist
A leading climatologist has warned that "quick fix" schemes to deal with global warming would be "risky, impractical and unethical" and could potentially be more damaging than the problem itself.
Professor Stephen Schneider, of the US National Center for Atmospheric Research, stressed that there were other and better options available, such as strategies to reduce fossil fuel burning.
But he also noted that in the light of the extent of fossil fuel burning, deforestation and population growth, "we may need radical and risky geo-engineering schemes to muddle through while we figure out how to cure the problem fundamentally" .
Among the "quick fix" solutions which have been proposed to counter global warming are: placing thousand of large mirrors in space to reflect sunlight; making aircraft engines less efficient so that soot builds up in the stratosphere, with similar effect; dumping iron filings into the oceans to stimulate the growth of plankton, which absorbs carbon dioxide; using lasers to break up chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere; and firing a million tons of dust into the upper atmosphere, also with a view to reflecting solar radiation.
Guardian 10 February
Global Warming
Island states want urgent action
Representatives of 37 island countries which fear their survival is threatened by rising sea levels as a result of global warming are planning a joint strategy.
They will highlight their plight at UNCED and call for greater urgency in efforts to combat the greenhouse effect.
The Alliance of Small Island States, which includes Cyprus, Malta, the Caribbean islands, Maldives, Seychelles, and many Pacific territories, fear that they may become the first victims of global warming.
They also believe that the northern industrialised countries and the larger developing countries are not giving sufficient priority to preventing the rise of sea levels.
International Herald Tribune 18 February
Global Warming
Climatologists express fear over global warming
A poll of 400 of the world's leading climatologists organized by Greenpeace has shown that almost half think it possible that the greenhouse effect might reach the point of no return in the near future, and one in seven think it probable.
New Scientist 15 February
Global Warming
WWF warns of threat to protected areas and species
A report by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) on the effect of global warming on the world's national parks and protected areas claims that half of their plant and animal life is at risk.
Mountainous areas, coastal wetlands, tundra, and temperate forests are under particular threat.
Animals most at risk include the walrus and the polar bear, and among plants many species of alpine flowers are predicted to decline.
The predictions are based on a rise in global temperatures of 1 degree centigrade by 2025.
The report, Can Nature Survive Global Warming?, says there is conclusive evidence that glaciers are receding and sea levels are rising.
The WWF pollution and energy officer, Tessa Robertson, commented that"such events are ominous indicators of the effects of climate change.
If we continue to emit greenhouse gases at the current rate, more and more ecosystems and species will be in grave danger".
Financial Times 20 February
Global Warming
Sea defences survey
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has published the results of a survey of the state of sea defences around Britain's coasts, and pronounced them "generally satisfactory" .
Of the total 1,259 km of sea defences, 85 per cent are structurally sound, with 13 per cent requiring "moderate work" , and 2 per cent "significant work" .
The survey was carried out against a background of growing concern as to the implications of climate change on sea level rise.
Most of the country's sea defences are maintained by the NRA, with a small proportion in the hands of local authorities or private owners.
NRA information 4 March
Nuclear Power
Russia takes over Soviet nuclear ministry
The Russian government of President Boris Yeltsin has announced it will take over all the Russian facilities and functions of the former Soviet Ministry of Atomic Power, Engineering and Industry.
The move follows criticism from nuclear scientists that the Russian government had "liquidated" the old structure without taking steps to ensure the safe continuation of nuclear operations.
The new Russian successor body, Minatom, is charged with negotiating with other former Soviet republics with a view to setting up co-operation agreements on peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Although much of the nuclear industry is centred in Russia, uranium is mined in the Ukraine and the central Asian republics, and uranium pellets are manufactured in Kazakhstan.
New Scientist 29 February
Nuclear Power
Eastern Europe ponders waste problem
Three Eastern European states — Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Hungary — are considering constructing dry storage facilities for highly radioactive waste, after the breakdown of the system by which the Soviet Union reprocessed and disposed of nuclear waste from COMECON countries.
Companies from the UK, Canada, USA, Finland, Germany and France are tendering for schemes in Hungary, while the British company GEC-Alshom is bidding for a dry store contract for Czechoslovakia's Dukovany plant.
*Western countries need to provide at least another £4.1 billion to make former Soviet-bloc pressurized water reactors safe, according to the head of the German Siemens group energy division.
Present EC funding was only sufficient for studies and planning work.
New Scientist 8 February Financial Times 19 February
Nuclear Power
Bulgarian Kozloduy plant problems continue
The Bulgarian government has restarted a reactor at the Kozloduy nuclear plant, which was found to be in a "very poor condition" during an inspection by the International Atomic Energy Authority last year [see ED nos 48, 49/50].
It denied, however, that the reactor was one of two which had been turned off after particular criticism.
The allegation was made by Germany's Environment Minister, Klaus Töpfer.
A Bulgarian spokesman claimed that a newer reactor, Unit 5, had been activated in its place.
Controversy continued, however, during February, with numerous small failures delaying the reactor coming onstream.
These ranged from fires to defects in pumps and insulation materials.
Another reactor at the plant was shut down temporarily in early February, leading to the introduction of power cuts.
The government intends to publish a plan by the end of April for closing down all of the country's uranium mines.
Energy prices throughout Bulgaria will rise by 30 per cent from April 1.
International Herald Tribune 15 January Guardian 19 February Bulgarian Radio, 6 January, 6, 11 February BTA in English 5, 13, 29, 30 January, 4 February
Nuclear Power
Steel in Welsh reactors deteriorating
Steel used in the reactor pressure vessels of the Trawsfynydd nuclear power plant, Wales, is showing signs of rapid deterioration, according to analysis carried out for Nuclear Electric.
The plant's two reactors were shut down in February 1991 after safety fears.
The new discovery, of weakness in welded joints, may delay plans to reopen the plant's two reactors.
According to an engineer's report, the welds have been made brittle as a result of neutron bombardment.
 "If they split open, the fuel could catch fire, triggering a disaster of Chernobyl proportions" , according to John Large, a consulting engineer of Brunel University.
Nuclear Electric is planning to reopen Trawsfynydd for a six-month trial.
It claims that operating a reactor at higher temperature, but lower pressure, would strengthen the welds.
Observer 2 February
Nuclear Power
Sellafield criticized over doors incident
The Nuclear Installations Inspectorate has strongly criticized British Nuclear Fuels over an incident at the newly-opened Sellafield vitrification plant in September last year, when access doors were left open, exposing workers to risks of severe radiation.
The plant's function is to turn radioactive liquid waste into glass blocks.
Two sets of access doors, under computer control, are supposed to act as an airlock, with only one set open at any one time, thereby preventing any radioactive leakage.
During the incident, both doors remained open while a consignment of waste was being delivered during trial operations.
If workers had been in the vicinity, they would have received high doses of radiation.
The plant has been shut down since the incident.
The Inspectorate insists on a range of management and safety improvements before full operations begin.
New Scientist 22 February
Nuclear Power
Low-level radiation linked to leukaemia
Low-level radiation, widely regarded as harmless, may be a causal factor in leukaemia, according to research by the Medical Research Council.
The research found that alpha rays may cause damage to cells which only becomes apparent much later when abnormal chromosomes appear.
The link, if proven, could explain the "clusters" of leukaemia cases found in the vicinity of the Sellafield nuclear power plant.
Times 20 February
Nuclear Power
Scottish Nuclear opts for waste storage
The state-owned Scottish Nuclear company, which operates Scotland's two nuclear plants, has decided to "dry store" most of its spent nuclear fuel, rather than send it for reprocessing at the British Nuclear Fuels plant at Sellafield.
The decision should save £40 million per year, and calls into question the future viability of the Sellafield reprocessing facility.
Dry storage facilities are to be constructed at Scottish Nuclear's advanced gas-cooled power stations at Torness and Hunterston, planning permission permitting.
There are likely to be public inquiries into both schemes.
The dry stores, in the form of special concrete vaults, are planned to accumulate 2,200 tonnes of spent fuel over the next 30 years.
After 50 years the waste will probably be buried deep underground.
Guardian 11 February Financial Times 11 February New Scientist 15 February
Nuclear Power
German waste for Scotland?
Highly radioactive used fuel rods from German research reactors may be sent to the Dounreay nuclear plant, in northern Scotland, for storage, according to a secret German government report obtained by anti-nuclear groups.
The waste involves 1,000 used fuel rods from west Germany, and over 2,000, originally supplied by the Soviet Union, from the Rossendorf reactor in east Germany.
West German fuel rods were formerly sent for storage in the USA, until the practice was halted by environmental objections in 1988.
If the plan went ahead, it would make "Scotland the biggest waste depository in Europe" , according to the Northern Europe Nuclear Information Group.
*Transport of all fuel containers from the Siemens factory in Karlstein-Aschaffenburg, in Bavaria, has been banned by state environment officials, after a lorry was found to be carrying 50 radioactive fuel rods, containing 109 kg of uranium, across the state.
The lorry was supposed to be carrying empty containers only.
Guardian New Scientist 29 February
Nuclear Power
French nuclear dump sites published
The French government has published details of the locations under consideration for the disposal of high-level radioactive waste.
They include three sites in Les Landes, in the south-west, and others in Ain in the east, in Ille-et-Vilaine in Brittany, and Mayenne, north of the Loire.
The sites were chosen from preliminary studies of 28 locations.
The next step will involve test drilling.
Anti-nuclear campaigners are preparing to take action against the scheme, described as "completely unacceptable" by Yannick Bousse, head of a national co-ordinating body of environmental groups,.
European 6/12 February
Nuclear Power
Japanese government backs fast-breeder nuclear reactor project
The Japanese government has announced that it will support the next stage of development of a fast-breeder nuclear reactor.
The development was originally envisaged as a private enterprise initiative.
Observers suggested that the government's involvement followed a lack of interest from private industry.
Japan's prototype fast-breeder reactor, at Monju, is scheduled for start-up next year.
It will be followed by a "demonstration plant" aimed at proving the commercially-viability of the fast-breeder route.
Either two or three demonstration reactors are planned for completion by 2030.
Fast-breeder reactors require large quantities of plutonium.
This has led to concern by environmental groups that some may fall into the hands of terrorists or governments keen to develop nuclear weapons, during shipment to Japan.
Immediate needs are scheduled to be met by buying in spent fuel reprocessed in the UK and France, as well as Japan's own reprocessing activities.
New Scientist 22 February
Ozone layer
Northern ozone layer "set for record low" 
Scientists issued predictions in warning that the ozone layer over the northern hemisphere could dwindle to dangerously record low levels in the early spring, as a result of a build-up of depleting chemicals, combined with the effects of last year's explosion of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines.
This ejected fine dust and ash particles into the atmosphere, which are believed to be accelerating the chemical reactions by which ozone is destroyed by chlorine compounds.
The situation is exacerbated by unusually low levels of nitrogen oxides, which inhibit ozone destruction.
NASA satellite surveys had revealed record levels of chlorine monoxide over parts of North America and Europe during some days in January.
The findings led some scientists to advise people staying out in sunlight for long periods to wear sun cream and sunglasses to guard against the effects of ultra-violet radiation.
Environmental campaigners led by Greenpeace responded by calling for an immediate ban on the production of ozone-depleting chemicals, notably chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
Both the UK and the USA subsequently announced that they would cease all CFC production by the end of 1995 — five years earlier than the date agreed in the Montreal Protocol [see ED no 35/36].
After several European countries had made similar pledges, the European Community declared at the end of February a 1995 ban on production of all five "fully-halogenated" CFCs listed under the Protocol, together with the industrial solvents carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform, and halons, used in fire extinguishers.
The chemicals company, ICI, which has 10 per cent of the world market in CFCs, undertook to end their manufacture by the same date.
In the immediate term, US President Bush called on American manufacturers to cut production to 50 per cent of 1986 levels by the end of 1992.
Bush claimed that US industrial production was already 42 per cent down on previous levels.
The President also called for a re-examination of existing plans to phase out CFC substitutes, notably hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) by 2030.
HCFCs are also damaging to the ozone layer, albeit less so than CFCs.
The US's largest CFC manufacturer, Du Pont, announced that it will phase out production of HCFCs 10 years before that deadline.
Washington Post 6, 12 February International Herald Tribune 13, 24 February Guardian 10, 13, 15, 20 February The Times 4 February The Scotsman 13 February Financial Times 12, 13, 19 February Independent 6, 13 February Independent on Sunday 9 February New Scientist 8, 22, 29 February
Ozone layer
Three-year "monitoring gap" predicted
Satellite monitoring of the ozone layer is likely to be disrupted during 1995-98, as a result of international failure to ensure that a suitable satellite would always be in orbit.
NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite will come to the end of its useful life in 1995 — three years before the scheduled launch of the US Earth Observing System in 1998.
The planned launch of the German Atmos satellite — which should have gone up in 1995 — may be cancelled due to a funding shortfall of around £300-400 million.
It is understood that the UK Prime Minister, John Major, is urging the heads of other G7 countries to come to an agreement which would effectively "plug the gap" .
Independent 8 February
Ozone layer
Ozone loss could damage immune systems
Depletion of the ozone layer could cause a decline in human immune responses, according to a new report by the UN Environment Programme.
It warns that this could increase the dangers of AIDS and other serious infectious diseases.
Higher levels of ultra-violet radiation reaching the earth will also lead to annual totals of 1.6 million eye cataracts and 300,000 cases of skin cancer every century, the report predicts.
Cancers of the lip and salivary gland could also increase substantially.
International Herald Tribune 8 February Observer 9 February
Ozone layer
Joint Russian-Chilean ozone study launched
Russia and Chile have announced the launch of a joint study on the depletion of the ozone layer over the South American republic.
The project will be supported by the Chilean Air Force and the Russian Academy of Science.
A Russian M-17 aircraft will be used by the Chileans to monitor ozone loss over the country.
On the ground, teams of scientists will measure the amount of radiation reaching the earth.
Early last year, farmers and fishermen in southern Chile — which is particularly at risk from the Antarctic ozone "hole" — reported that sheep, rabbits and fish were going blind — possibly from cataracts.
People in the sparsely-populated region also suffered from severe skin burns, eye irritations and increased incidence of allergies.
*The environmental group Greenpeace has sent a fact-finding mission to the Tierra del Fuego area.
Financial Times 18 February
Pollution: Air
Health costs of Chinese pollution
Pollution in industrial areas of China is resulting in widespread health problems, according to the country's National Institute of Environmental Health and Engineering.
One of the principal factors is the reliance on coal as the main source of power.
Coal produces 70 per cent of the country's energy, much of it in the form of dirty power stations or domestic cooking stoves.
Around 15 million tonnes of sulphur dioxide are produced annually, leading to increasing acid rain problems, particularly in the Guangdong region.
In terms of concentrations of dust in the air, Chinese industrial cities are some of the dirtiest in the world.
According to the Global Environment Monitoring System, the city of Xian has the highest levels measured anywhere, at an average density of over 500 micrograms per cubic metre (Shenyang and Beijing are third and fourth, with around 400 mcg per cubic metre.
By comparison, Toronto's total is under 100).
Death from lung diseases in Liaoning province — site of some of the country's heaviest industry — is four to five times the Western average.
Pollution-related mortality and illness in Shenyang, the provincial capital, is estimated to cost the economy 177 million yuan (about $45 million) per year.
The death rates from lung cancer among women using low-quality coal in cooking stoves is as high as that of heavy cigarette smokers.
The Institute also claims that around 700 million people in China (a majority of the population) are dependent on polluted water supplies.
Of these, 77 million are suffering from excess fluoride.
The government claims that economic growth is outstripping the increase in pollution.
It officially plans to spend 220 billion yuan ($55 billion) over the next 10 years on environmental improvements.
Economist 15 February
Pollution: Air
Kazahkstan pollution "worse than Chernobyl" 
A study of the health and ecological situation in the Ust-Kamenogorsk region of Kazahkstan has revealed widespread problems, apparently resulting from a mixture of nuclear and conventional air pollution.
In one case, people had received radiation doses of 50 roentgens — four times that of those who had been evacuated from Chernobyl.
Their genetic code cells were showing similar deformities to those of Chernobyl residents.
The study warned that: "Levels of mutagenesis amongst people living in Ust-Kamenogorsk in terms of numbers and type of deformed chromosomes is close to that witnessed amongst people living close to Chernobyl." 
The study also reported high levels of heavy metals, including lead, arsenic and vanadium.
In some areas, the lead content of the soil was approaching 1.5 per cent— close to that found in ore deposits.
Residents eating locally-grown vegetables were consuming up to 11 times the maximum amount of lead regarded as safe by the World Health Organization.
Water in the area is severely polluted.
The scientists conducting the study reported that "many species are so morphologically deformed that they cannot be classified" .
Pollution-related illnesses included kidney disease, anaemia and defects in the endocrine system.
Kazahkstanskaya Pravda, 28 January
Pollution: Air
Gulf states produce "green" petrol additive
Gulf oil states are stepping up production of a "green" petrol additive in an effort to meet the requirements of the US Clean Air Act, which demands higher levels of oxygen in petrol.
The additive, methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE), is replacing lead as a constituent to improve the combustion efficiency of petrol engines.
Its two core components, methanol and butane, are processed from natural gas.
With rapidly expanding capacity in Saudi Arabia, Iran, Qatar, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, production of MTBE is expected to increase threefold from 11 million tonnes in 1990 to 33 million tonnes in 1995.
Middle East Times 5-12 February
Pollution: Air
Mexican vehicles to convert to cleaner fuel
In a further effort to tackle the chronic air pollution of its capital,[see EDs passim], the Mexican government has announced that all public transport and cargo vehicles in the city must convert to natural gas or liquid petroleum over the next three years.
the move will affect around 144,000 vehicles.
A further 147,000 vehicles which cannot be converted will have to be replaced over the same period by new ones equipped with catalytic converters.
Vehicle emissions have been calculated as accounting for nearly 80 per cent of Mexico City's pollution.
Financial Times 13 February
Pollution: Water
Pollution toll proposed for Malacca strait
The Indonesian government has proposed the levying of a toll on ships passing through the Malacca strait to raise funds to combat pollution in the heavily used seaway.
It has also asked Malaysia and Singapore, the two other countries bordering the strait, to collaborate in drawing up an emergency plan to protect the waterway from pollution.
Financial Times 14 February
Pollution: Water
French Navy attacks toxic seaweed
The French Navy has begun an operation designed to clean up the toxic seaweed which is threatening marine life in the Mediterranean off the south coast [see ED 53/54].
Navy divers are using compressors to suck the weed to the surface.
In areas where it is more entrenched, particularly the deeper waters off Cap Ferrat, a submarine will be used.
The seaweed is believed to have originated in aquarium tanks in Monaco.
European 13/19 February
Pollution: Water
Effluent charges to rise
The UK government has increased by 20 per cent the fees paid by industrial plants, sewage treatment works and farmers for discharging effluent into rivers and coastal waters.
The increases have been introduced as part of the "polluter pays" principle and are intended to cover the costs incurred by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) in controlling water pollution.
Financial Times 18 February
Pollution: Water
Water supply polluted by pesticides
An underground water supply serving the city of Peterborough, in eastern England, has been contaminated by pesticides which were dumped at nearby rubbish dumps.
Experts have described it as the worst case to date of pesticide contamination in Britain.
They have warned that similar cases, involving pesticides as well as other toxic chemicals, are bound to come to light in the future, the legacy of inadequate waste-disposal standards in force for many years.
Independent 13, 17 February
Pollution: Water
Survey names water polluters
The Ethical Investment Research and Information Service (EIRIS), an independent organisation which advises investors on the activities of companies, has found that nearly a quarter of Britain's major companies breached the limitations on discharges into rivers and waterways on numerous occasions in the last three years.
EIRIS named Allied-Lyons, BTR, Grand Metropolitan, Hanson, ICI, Shell and SmithKline Beecham as among the worst offenders.
It also found that some of the avowedly "green" unit trusts were actually investing in many of the polluting companies.
Independent 17 February
Transport
EC plans to control road traffic
The European Commission has published a green paper on the environment which include far-reaching proposals to reduce pollution caused by road traffic.
Among the proposed measures are increasing taxes on petrol and reducing taxes on biofuels (ethanol, methanol and vegetable oils).
The green paper declared that the growth of road transport in the Community had nearly reached the point where the environment could no longer sustain it.
But unless policies were changed, the number of private cars would increase by 45 per cent by 2010 and road haulage by 42 per cent.
Karel van Miert, the commissioner responsible for transport, commented that "the situation is likely to become completely unmanageable if we do not take comprehensive measures" .
Against this background the Commission has proposed specific measures to make road transport more expensive, primarily by increasing excise duty on fuel, so as to encourage wider use of rail and shipping.
At the same time, it proposes that duty on biofuels be cut to one tenth of that on petrol and diesel.
This would reduce carbon emissions and would also provide alternative uses for farm surpluses.
It claims that with such a tax incentive biofuels could eventually account for 5 per cent of overall fuel consumption in the Community.
*The authorities in the French city of Strasbourg have banned cars from the city centre — the first such move to be taken in France.
Financial Times 20 February Guardian 20, 24 February International Herald Tribune 20 February
Transport
Greener buses in London
New buses which emit no more pollution that an average car fitted with a catalytic converter are to be introduced to London by the capital's transport authority.
The new vehicles, a Swedish make, are considerably less polluting than older double-decker buses, which in many cases caused pollution well above European Community standards.
Green Magazine, March
Transport
Saab claims heat accumulator cuts emissions
The Saab car company of Sweden is developing a heat accumulator which it claims will reduce exhaust pollution by up to 40 per cent and petrol consumption by 8 per cent.
The accumulator works by retaining heat within the engine and oil, thereby avoiding "cold start" pollution.
Saab claim that 78 degrees centigrade of heat can be stored in a saline solution for up to three days.
Environment Business 11 March
Transport
Catalytic converters study published
The Department of Transport's Warren Spring Laboratory has published the results of a study of emissions reductions achieved by catalytic converters.
According to the study, a "cat" in good condition fitted to a typical vehicle will cut emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen by 90 per cent in each case.
Carbon dioxide emissions will increase by between 9 and 23 per cent, and fuel consumption will rise by 3-9 per cent .
Environment Business 11 March
Tropical Forests
Amazon Pact countries' rainforest summit
Leaders of the eight member states of the Amazon Pact, meeting in the Brazilian Amazon city of Manaus, have issued a declaration calling for financial and technical support from northern countries, in return for agreeing to preserve their forest resources as part of a strategy to combat global warming, to be discussed at the UNCED conference in June.
The declaration was signed by Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Surinam and Venezuela.
It stated that "biological resources are without doubt the natural resources of the countries which exercise sovereignty over them" .
Laying the blame for global warming at the door of the developed world, the declaration said that any climate convention agreed at UNCED "should not affect the economic and commercial interests of the developing nations" .
It called for financial support and the transfer of environmentally-appropriate technology from richer nations, in return for agreement from rainforest states to safeguard their forests for global benefit.
In particular, the declaration demanded payments for the use of indigenous peoples' knowledge by drug companies.
Brazilian Radio 10, 11 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Independent 11 February New Scientist 29 February
Tropical Forests
Honduran opposition to logging grows
Opposition is growing within the Central American state of Honduras to the granting of a huge logging concession in the pine forests of the Mosquito coast.
The agreement between the Honduran government and the US pulp and paper conglomerate, the Stone Corporation, was reached at the end of last year [see ED 53/54].
Contrary to expectations, however, it has yet to be approved by the Honduran Congress.
Stone plans to log four million cubic metres of pinewood annually, to feed a chipping plant and pulp mill in Puerto Lempira.
In the agreement, the government pledges to provide such infrastructure "as necessary or appropriate for the efficient management of Stone's business in Honduras" .
In return, the government hopes to earn annual revenue in the form of royalties of around $20 million.
The concession area is home to 35,000 Miskito, Tawakha, Pesch and Sumo tribespeople.
Thus far, Stone has failed to consult with any indigenous body.
Opponents of the scheme are critical of both the ecological consequences of destroying the forests and the apparent surrender of national sovereignty to a foreign corporation in return for uncertain gains.
According to Jose Herrero, president of the environmental group, Fundacion Cuero y Salado: "When the Honduran people found out about this, there was an outrage never seen before in this country, not even when the contras and US bases were here" .
Stone's operations in the US have also been criticized on environmental grounds.
The corporation has been fined 25 times for soil contamination at its Florida plant.
Guardian 14 February
Tropical Forests
Mexico extends rainforest park
The Mexican government has announced the enlargement of the Monte Azules biological reserve in the Lacandona rainforest in the southern part of the country.
The reserve has been extended eastwards by 55,000 hectares to the River Usumancinta on the Guatemalan border.
Some 60 per cent of the Lacandona — North America's largest rainforest — has been destroyed since 1970, partly due to the previous Mexican policy of populating the Guatemalan border area at a time of tension between the two states.
The reserve includes several Mayan ruins.
A similar area rich in both environmental and archaeological heritage lies over the Guatemalan frontier.
The possibility of a joint park is being discussed between the two governments.
Financial Times 18 February
Tropical Forests
Rainforest peoples' alliance formed
Representatives of indigenous peoples from rainforests across the world, meeting in Penang, Malaysia, have agreed to form a global alliance to further their struggle against threats to their homelands.
It will be based on a Charter agreed at the meeting, which includes a call for a new approach to conservation and development in tropical forests.
Over 50 forest peoples were represented at the conference, which was co-ordinated by the World Rainforest Movement.
They included the Orang Asli "the original peoples of Malaysia; the Baka (" pygmies") of Africa; the Kayan and Kelabit of Sarawak; various Amazonian Indian nations; and tribal peoples from Thailand, India and the Pacific.
The Charter calls on governments to recognize the forest peoples' rights to self-determination and ownership of their homeland.
It describes intensive logging as a "crime against humanity" , and demands the suspension of all logging concessions on indigenous land.
It also calls for the introduction of land reform outside the forests, to stem the flow of landless settlers, such as "slash-and-burn" farmers, on to tribal people's land.
Development efforts within the forest should be focused on small-scale projects under the direct control of indigenous communities.
The meeting passed particular resolutions condemning the uncontrolled logging in Sarawak and the continuing harassment of tribal peoples in the state.
Prior to the meeting, a delegation of Amazon Indians visited Dayak communities in Sarawak whose land had been badly affected by logging.
The Alliance plans to hold another meeting in South America in a year's time.
Survival International information 1 March
Tropical Forests
Malaysian campaign leader arrested
A leading Malaysian environmentalist, Anderson Mutang Urud, has been arrested after accompanying a Canadian MP on a visit to an anti-logging protest in the state of Sarawak.
Mutang, a member of Sahabat Alam Malaysia (Malaysian Friends of the Earth) and the Sarawak Indigenous People's Alliance, was detained after escorting Canadian opposition MP Svend Robinson to a barricade erected by Penan tribespeople in an effort to block logging trucks.
The arrest followed reports of increased harassment of tribal leaders in Sarawak by the Malaysian government.
Foreign campaigners were detained in 1991 [ED 51].
*In a speech to the summit meeting of the Association of South-Eastern Nations (ASEAN), the Malaysian Prime Minister, Dr Mahathir Mohammed, said that environmentalists opposed to the timber trade were "advocating that forest dwellers remain in the forest, eating monkeys and suffering from all kinds of diseases" .
He urged wealthy nations to plant tropical hardwoods in desert lands, thereby tripling the area under tropical timber within a century.
Mahathir denounced industrialized nations for criticizing logging in southern states, when it was they who were mainly responsible for global warming.
*Reports from Thailand suggest that, following the government's ban on logging, Thai businessmen are taking increasing numbers of trees from Burma, Laos and Cambodia, in some cases using this legal trade to pass off illegally-felled Thai trees as legitimate imports.
Guardian 13 February Far Eastern Economic Review 20 February Economist 15 February Financial Times 12 February
Tropical Forests
Forest research group formed
A total of 11 scientific institutions in the UK have come together to form the Tropical Forest Research Group.
They aim to introduce scientists to potential customers in forest states, and to help develop ways of making sustainable economic use of forest reserves.
Guardian 31 January
UNCED
World environmental problems costed
Around US$625 billion is needed to correct the world's environmental problems, according to Maurice Strong, the secretary for the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED).
The money would finance, among other things, control of carbon dioxide emissions to limit climate change, investment in more efficient energy sources, technology transfers to developing countries and programmes to alleviate poverty.
Speaking in London, Strong said that the amount, equivalent to 3 per cent of the world's gross domestic product, would not have to found all at once.
But a commitment by the major donors of 1 per cent of the GDP would make $150 billion available immediately.
He warned that the cost of not acting promptly would eventually be far greater in economic and environmental terms.
Guardian 14 February
UNCED
Environmental destruction "killing millions" says WHO
An independent report prepared for the UN's World Health Organization (WHO) claims that environmental destruction resulting from over-population is killing millions of people every year, largely as a result of the contamination of water, soil and air.
The report, Our Health, Our Planet, says that unless population growth can be drastically reduced, the resources needed to support the human race will be overwhelmed.
The birth rate will only be cut, however, if the health prospects of poor families are improved.
At present, 3.2 million children die every year from diarrhoeal diseases, a further two million from malaria, while hundreds of millions are infested with intestinal parasites.
Respiratory and other complaints triggered by air pollution affect hundreds of millions in both rich and poor countries, the report adds.
It argues that major efforts to improve the health and education of poor people, coupled with family planning programmes, are necessary to reduce fertility rates and thus population size.
The report represents WHO's submission to the UNCED conference.
Guardian 5 March
UNCED
US and UK scientists issue joint appeal
The two leading scientific bodies in the US and UK, the National Academy of Sciences and the Royal Society, have issued a joint statement in advance of the UNCED summit declaring that "the future of our planet is in the balance" .
The declaration draws attention to faster than expected world population growth and the accelerating pace of environmental decay, and concludes: "Sustainable development can be achieved, but only if irreversible degradation of the environment can be halted in time.
The next 30 years may be crucial."
If present patterns continue, it warns, science and technology may not be able to prevent the slide.
The speed of demographic change is one of the central features of the report.
World population is growing at the rate of 100 million per year, and will rise from 5.4 billion in 1991 to 10 billion in 2050.
Currently, 95 per cent of this growth is in the developing world, and by 2020, 84 per cent of the global population will live in the poorer nations.
Developed countries account for 85 per cent of the world's gross national product, and the majority of its mineral and fossil fuel consumption.
 "The prosperity and technology of the developed countries give them the greater possibilities and the greater responsibility" .
Population control is essential, they claim: "Family planning programmes have major possibilities to reduce rates of population growth and hence to arrest environmental degradation." 
Guardian 27 February Independent 28 February
UNCED
ASEAN ministers call for northern aid
The Environment Ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), meeting in Singapore, have agreed a joint position for the UNCED conference calling for increased financial and technical assistance from developed countries in order to protect their environment, and in particular to conserve forest resources.
They approved a US proposal on the transfer of environmentally-sound technology.
The Ministers resolved to oppose any unilateral bans on the import of tropical timber, and declared the sovereign right of states to develop their own natural resources.
Far Eastern Economic Digest 27 February
Waste and Recycling
Opposition to German scheme grows
Two German consumer groups have called for a boycott of the controversial "Duales System Deutschland" recycling scheme [see EDs passim].
The Bonn-based German Consumer Initiative claims that the scheme's criteria are based too much on financial grounds, and are misleading to the consumer, while the KIMM group in Cologne, which campaigns against waste incineration, argues that the system fails to reduce the total amount of rubbish generated, and ignores the potential of re-usable packaging.
It has asked the city authorities to withdraw from the programme.
Environment Business 11 March
Waste and Recycling
Cleanliness survey of European cities
The Tidy Britain Group has published the results of a survey on the cleanliness of the city centres of six European capitals.
The cleanest city was Berne, with London second, Paris third, Brussels fourth, Rome fifth and Madrid last.
The survey was based on an assessment of litter and dog fouling in a 500 metres circle round the parliament building.
The survey was based on the cleanliness grades laid down in the 1990 Environmental Protection Act.
Observers commented that the limited extent of the survey favoured London, which has few shopping or residential areas close to parliament, at the expense of cities such as Rome, which has a dense central street pattern.
Independent 20 February Tidy Britain Group information 19 February
Waste and Recycling
Netherlands launches car recycling levy
The purchase price of new cars in the Netherlands will include a levy of up to 250 guilders (£80) to help fund compulsory collection and recycling of old cars.
A new company, Autorecycling BV, is to be set up to handle the work.
It will be funded principally by the levy.
Car owners who take their old vehicles to designated scrapyards will be entitled to rebates on the levy.
New Scientist 29 February
Waste and Recycling
Polystyrene recycling plant opens
Europe's first dedicated polystyrene plant has opened in Macclesfield, in the UK.
With an initial capacity of 2,500 tonnes, the plant will use polystyrene packaging waste, such as disposable drinks cups from vending machines.
This will be converted into multi-layer polystyrene foam egg cartons.
The plant is operated by the food packaging company, Linpac Plastics International.
Financial Times 19 February