

Agriculture & Food
Patenting of transgenic animals resumes in US
Opponents of genetic engineering have resumed campaigning against the practice in the US, following the granting by the US patent office of three patents for transgenic mice"the first patents granted on genetically altered animals since 1988.
The Foundation on Economic Trends has filed a petition with the US Department of Commerce demanding that the impact of transgenic animals on health and the environment be studied before any further patents are granted, arguing that such studies are required under the National Environmental Policy Act.
The activists also plan to lobby Congress.
Attempts to introduce legislation on animal patenting have been unsuccessful so far, but the campaigners hope that the new Clinton administration will be more sympathetic to their cause than its predecessor.
New Scientist 13 February
Agriculture & Food
Grass as solution to soil erosion
A little-known species of grass, vetiver, could solve the problems of soil erosion, according to the National Research Council of the US.
Planted in horizontal rows across hillsides, the grass sinks deep roots and grows into a living retaining wall that traps soil washing down the slope.
In time, vetiver converts an eroding slope into a permanently terraced landscape.
Vetiver does not send out runners or rhizomes, so it remains where it is planted, growing into a dense palisade of stems and leaves.
Washington Post 28 January
Agriculture & Food
London kudus catch BSE
Five kudus in the London Zoo have caught BSE or "mad cow disease" .
The first case, a female, which died in 1989, is thought to have contracted the disease from feed made from crushed animal remains.
This kudu also infected her daughter, probably during birth.
Three male kudus are thought to have caught BSE through some form of transmission between animals, a phenomenon not yet seen in cattle.
Agriculture & Food
Czechs and Slovaks turn to organic farming
The Foundation for Organic Agriculture (FOA) has been set up to promote organic farming in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
The foundation, which has adopted the principles and guidelines of the German-based International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements, aims to provide assistance and education to private farmers, whose numbers are growing rapidly as a result of land reform and the breaking up of collective farms.
The foundation will also research and develop organic farming techniques.
East-West Environment, February 1993
Agriculture & Food
Polish farmers provide "green lungs" 
Ten model farms have been set up in Poland as a showcase for alternative production methods.
They form part of the Green Lungs of Poland programme, supported by the World Wide Fund for Nature, and are producing vegetables, together with cattle and goats milk.
They will be open to the public from the end of 1993, and it is hoped the local farming community will benefit from demonstrations at the farms.
The project has already shown the need for small-scale processing units for products such as goats' cheese and vegetables.
Marketing and distribution assistance is also needed, as are changes in existing regulations that hinder small-scale food processing.
The Green Lungs programme aims to integrate conservation with development in north-east Poland.
A land use plan is to be produced providing guidelines for protecting water resources, developing tourism and promoting ecological agriculture.
The region is relatively untouched by urban and industrial development, and contains a wealth of animal and plant species not seen elsewhere in Poland, including bison, wolf, otter and some 200 species of birds.
East-West Environment February 1993
Agriculture & Food
Article fans Mexican tuna row
The Mexican environmentalist organisation, Group of 100, has attacked an article in the newspaper, Excelsior, which claimed that the group had changed its position on the international embargo on Mexican tuna.
Group of 100 president Homero Aridjis accused the Mexican fishing industry of inspiring the article, which claimed that the group, together with other Mexican environmentalist organisations, were to urge an end to the embargo.
Mexico is one of the few countries that still allow fishermen to encircle and snare dolphins to catch the tuna that swim with them.
It is estimated that this has caused the death of more than 70,000 dolphins off Mexico's Pacific coast since 1990.
The country's failure to ban such fishing methods led to the US adopting an embargo on Mexican tuna in 1991, followed by other European and Asian nations [see EDs passim].
Fishing industry organisations have mounted a campaign against the bans, claiming that up to 30,000 jobs are at risk.
About 13 per cent of the US$520 million earned by Mexico from fishing each year comes from tuna sales.
The cost of refitting the Mexican tuna fleet to use dolphin-safe nets and techniques is put at $25 million.
Washington Post 8 January
Conservation: Habitat
Panel to decide on Lake St Lucia mining plans
The South African government has appointed a panel to review plans by Richards Bay Minerals (RBM), part of Rio-Tinto Zinc, to mine titanium from sand dunes at Lake St Lucia in Zululand.
The lake, the largest estuarine lake in Africa, is recognised as a wetland of the greatest international importance under the World Conservation Union's Ramsar Convention.
The lake is home to southern Africa's largest populations of crocodile and hippo, the grasslands and dune forest are inhabited by buffalo and black rhino, and the estuary is an important site for migratory birds and nesting turtles.
RBM has held a prospecting licence in the area since the 1960s, and in 1989 applied to start mining the St Lucia dunes, inspired by a booming market for titanium.
Environmentalists have mounted a vigorous campaign to resist RBM's plans, forcing the company to commission a full environmental impact assessment, which is to be made public in March.
The company has promised to restore the site to its original condition, and to mine only small areas at a time, but there are fears that many species may disappear from the area and that the dunes will never fully recover.
New Scientist 23 January
Conservation: Habitat
US law applies to Antarctica
The US National Science Foundation (NSF) has been ordered to stop incinerating waste at its Mcmurdo station in Antarctica until it proves that the practice is environmentally safe.
The ruling was made by a panel of US federal judges which found that US environmental laws apply to the country's bases in Antarctica, following a suit filed by the Environmental Defense Fund.
The fund claimed that the NSF was breaking the law by burning food waste in an incinerator, as it has done since October 1991, without first preparing an environmental impact statement.
The NSF argued that the law requiring such a statement did not apply to Antarctica, but the judges disagreed.
New Scientist 6 February
Conservation: Habitat
Sea shore loss forecast
At least 10,000 hectares of the English shoreline will disappear in the next 20 years, according to a report published by English Nature, the government's official conservation adviser.
Erosion, due to rising sea levels, is the biggest problem, concentrated in the south and east of England.
Many inter-tidal mud and sand flats, important feeding grounds for many birds, are being lost due to both to erosion and building development.
The report, Targets for Coastal Habitat Re-creation, analyses the rate of future loss by type of habitat and by county, and sets out targets for the creation of new habitats to meet English Nature's objective of maintaining coastal habitats and features, at least at the 1992 level.
It expresses particular concern about the fact that 10 per cent of England's salty lagoons are projected to be lost over the next 20 years: "Their rarity, both in England and on a European scale, is such that their conservation is of the highest importance." 
Some 38 endemic lagoon species will be at risk if the lagoons are destroyed.
English Nature 1 February
Conservation: Habitat
Darenth river to flow again
The flow of the Darenth river in Kent is to be restored at a cost of £12 million.
The 20-mile chalk stream has dwindled to a trickle, and it dried up altogether for long periods in the past three drought years, after the drilling of six drinking water boreholes by the Thames Water Authority (now the Thames Water company) lowered the water table.
The scheme, whose cost is to be shared by Thames Water and the National Rivers Authority, involves building a 10-mile underground pipe to pump water from chalk pits at Northfleet to the river's middle reaches when necessary.
Thames Water has agreed to reduce the amount of water it pumps from its boreholes during winter by 60 per cent.
The restoration scheme, to be completed by 1998, should ensure a minimum flow of 34 million litres a day.
It is hoped brown trout will be restored to the Darenth before 2000.
Independent 21 January
Conservation: Habitat
English Nature publishes first-year report
In its first annual report, for the year April 1991-March 1992, English Nature highlights the creation of nine new National Nature Reserves covering some 1,300 hectares, the launch of the Wildlife Enhancement Scheme to promote positive management of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSIs) and the spending of £90,000 on research into animals and plants included in its Species Recovery Programme.
The report shows that, of over 3,600 SSIs, six suffered long-term damage during the year, 52 suffered short-term damage and one was denotified due to agricultural damage.
English Nature spent over £6 million on habitat management agreements during the year and gave more than £250,000 in land purchase grants to the voluntary sector.
English Nature 27 January
Conservation: Habitat
Peat bogs at critical level
The UK has only 6,200 hectares of undamaged peat bogs, 38 per cent less than official guidelines suggest is the minimum needed for effective conservation.
Conservation group Plantlife has called on the government to use powers of compulsory purchase to protect the remaining bogs.
Green Magazine February 1993
Conservation: Species
Dolphin deaths increase
The number of dead dolphins washed ashore in Britain and France has increased sharply in the past five years, according to a study commissioned by Greenpeace.
Strandings in the Bay of Biscay have averaged 452 a year, five times the number in the last decade, while those in Devon and Cornwall numbered 141 last year, a seven-fold increase since the mid-1980s.
The increase is unexplained, although theories include a rise in the local dolphin population and entanglement with fishing nets.
Common dolphins have virtually disappeared from the western Mediterranean in recent years and hundreds of striped dolphins have died in the Mediterranean since 1990 [see ED nos. 55, 58, 59].
Greenpeace is seeking a joint inquiry by the governments concerned into the fate of the dolphins.
New Scientist 13 February
Conservation: Species
California grey whale off danger list
The California grey whale is to be removed from the US government's list of endangered species.
The species has recovered dramatically since hunting was banned in 1946 and its habitats protected under the 1970 Endangered Species Act.
It has also benefited from protection by the Mexican government of its calving and winter grounds in Baja California.
Only one other US species, the American alligator, has previously been deemed to have fully recovered under the terms of the act.
Killing of the California grey will continued to be banned, but there is concern among conservationists that the delisting will make it more difficult to measure the impact of offshore oil drilling on its habitat.
Washington Post 1 January
Conservation: Species
Norway to resume minke whaling
Norway has announced that it is to kill between 300 and 800 minke whales this year.
The announcement comes in the run-up to this year's meeting of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in May.
Norway has threatened to leave the IWC, as Iceland has already done, if the commission opposes its plans to resume whaling.
Last year's IWC meeting agreed in principle a new scientific procedure for sustainable catches of whales, although it was not clear if Norway used the procedure to calculate its catch.
Several members of the IWC opposed Norway's plans to resume whaling at last year's meeting.
Japan, which would be the only remaining IWC member in favour of whaling if Norway left, says that it plans to use this year's meeting, to be held in Kyoto, to "press for the resumption of commercial whaling around Japan and in the northern Atlantic" .
Japan has been hunting minke whales in the Antarctic for "research" purposes.
Japan's fisheries agency claims it can kill 2,000 minke whales a year without harming the survival of the species, and it recently launched an advertising campaign on the benefits of whale meat.
Meanwhile, the US Congress is expected to pass a resolution which could stop the US importing fish from whaling nations.
New Scientist 13 February
Conservation: Species
US prepares to boycott rhino horn traders
Conservationist groups in the US are attempting to persuade the Department of the Interior to recognise officially that China, South Korea, Taiwan and Yemen are still trading in rhino horn, even though the trade is banned by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
Attention recently has been focused on Taiwan.
The UK-based Environmental Investigation Agency has asked the European Commission and European Parliament to impose sanctions against Taiwanese goods.
Seven US environmental groups have accused Taiwan of running an illicit and barbaric trade in endangered wildlife.
The Taiwanese government has denied all the allegations.
Taiwan banned rhino horn imports in 1985 but has given traditional medicine shops until 1994 to sell existing stocks [see ED 65].
Officials say about 1.4 tonnes of rhino horn stockpiled, but conservationists claim the real figure is up to 10 tonnes.
Official recognition that the trade exists (known as "certification" ) would give the US president authority to ban all imports of wildlife products from all four countries.
According to the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), the trade in rhino horn products in these countries has been responsible for deaths of some 60,000 rhinos, or 85 per cent of the total population, since 1970.
Despite the fact that representatives of both Korea and Taiwan appeared at the public hearing on the issue to argue their case, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt is expected to grant the request for certification.
Exports of wildlife products to the US are worth US$10 million a year to Korea, which has promised to become a party to CITES, although its promises are viewed with some scepticism by conservationists.
Taiwan has prohibited the trade in rhino horn, but critics say the regulations are not being enforced.
The technique adopted by US conservationists has been effective in the past.
In 1990 the WWF and National Wildlife Federation applied for Japan and Mexico to be certified for their involvement in the trade in sea turtles.
Within 18 months, certification had persuaded Japan to end its trade in turtles, and Mexico had stopped the trade before being certified.
New Scientist 6 February Green Magazine February 1993 Guardian 29 January
Conservation: Species
Zimbabwe gets ivory offers
The Zimbabwean government has reported that several countries have offered to buy 25 tonnes of its ivory stocks, worth £9 million, in order to destroy them, in an effort to enforce the international ban on the trade in ivory.
Deputy Environment Minister Opah Rushesha did not name the countries, nor did he say if the government had accepted the offers.
* Zimbabwe has denied rumours that it is negotiating with Japan to reopen legal ivory trade through a loophole in the Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) 1989 ban.
Zimbabwe supports controlled culling of its large elephant population and has been looking for legal ways to cover the costs.
Japan is a major market for ivory.
Independent 20 January *Africa Confidential 8 January
Conservation: Species
Penguins win pipeline battle
Plans to build an oil pipeline in the Cape Virgin area of Patagonia have been shelved.
providing a reprieve for 200,000 penguins and other wildlife.
An Argentine judge ordered work in the area, the second most important penguin sanctuary in South America, to be suspended following a petition from a Buenos Aires animal rights activist, supported by the World Wide Fund for Nature.
The Argentine and Chilean companies building the pipeline, together with the Argentine government, which ratified the project, must now prove that there is no danger to the penguins.
The court ordered them to carry out surveys of how the birds would be affected and to prepare alternative routes for the pipeline.
An estimated 10,000 penguins were killed in Patagonia last year as a result of oil spills and other pollution.
Guardian 14 January
Conservation: Species
New wolf population found in Israel
A new population of grey wolves has been discovered in northern Israel, larger and darker than the country's other wolves.
The existence of the wolves, rumoured for years, was confirmed when two were shot by farmers while attacking calves.
There are thought to be at least 12 wolves in the area, including juveniles.
The Israel Nature Reserves Authority is attempting to protect the population, providing guard dogs to local farmers to prevent wolf attacks and collecting data for the wolves' long-term conservation.
Two other species of wolf, the South Asian and desert wolf, live in central and southern Israel respectively.
BBC Wildlife February 1993
Conservation: Species
UN conference opens on biodiversity convention
A UN conference was opened by the new UNEP executive director Elizabeth Dowdeswell in Nairobi on Jan. 26, following up on the Framework Convention on the Conservation of Biological Diversity.
Opened for signature at UNCED in Rio in June 1992 [see ED 59-60], the biodiversity convention had 160 signatories to date, and had been ratified by six countries; it thus needed 24 more ratifications in order to come into effect.
3 = UN Information Centre news summary 29 January.
Conservation: Species
Tajik civil war threatens Pamir wildlife
Fuel and food shortages resulting from the civil war in Tajikistan are threatening the unique wildlife of the Pamir mountains.
With supplies disrupted, local residents are being forced to forage for for food and fuel; trees and shrubs are being cut down and endangered species hunted with automatic weapons.
Radio Moscow 8 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
Changing farming practices hit bird numbers
Farmland birds are declining in numbers and contracting their range because of modern farming techniques, according to the British Trust for Ornithology.
The worst effects are on seed-eating birds, which rely heavily on fields and crops for their food.
The trust highlights changes in farming practice that have led to the decline, including a switch from spring to autumn cultivation, depriving the birds of stubble for winter feeding, the growth in the use of inorganic fertilisers and insecticides, and the greater effectiveness of herbicides in controlling weeds.
The scale of changes in farmland bird populations is only beginning to be appreciated, the Trust says.
British Trust for Ornithology 20 January
Economics & Industry
Businesses alarmed by pollution liability costs
Fears of future environmental costs could threaten flows of capital to industry, according to a report by a UK government advisory committee.
Changes in the laws on environmental liability "could have profound and adverse consequences for business across all sectors," said the report by a working group chaired by Derek Wanless of National Westminster Bank.
Banks are said to be concerned that they could be liable for pollution from land or property they take as security, and insurers say they may not be able to offer environmental cover in future, restricting coverage to sudden or accidental pollution.
UK court cases have recently raised the question of whether the principle of "retrospective liability" for past pollution that met the standards of the day will be widely applied.
Financial Times 10 February
Economics & Industry
Ecolabelling fails Body Shop test
The Body Shop has announced that it will be boycotting a European "ecolabelling" plan because the standards are not stringent enough.
It says it will not apply for the label for its hairspray because the standards would allow virtually any manufacturer to claim environmental virtue.
Body Shop managing director Anita Roddick said: "We are astounded that anyone could propose an ecolabel for cosmetic products which have been tested on animals or which might use ingredients with unacceptable impacts on third world cultures or environments." 
The scheme is expected to be launched in June.
The UK government opposes minimum standards for products and the labelling scheme is voluntary.
Other environmental organisations are unhappy about the standards being set.
Friends of the Earth and the Women's Environmental Network are expected to lodge formal complaints in Brussels that the UK Ecolabelling Board breached its obligation to consult relevant organisations before setting standards.
Guardian 26 January
Economics & Industry
Ciba-Geigy reports on emissions
Reporting for the first time on its environmental emissions, the UK subsidiary of Swiss chemicals and drugs giant Ciba-Geigy says it increased the amount of waste it incinerated in 1991 while reducing the amount sent for landfill.
The company believes incineration is more environmentally friendly.
Ciba-Geigy is giving priority to reducing emissions of halogenated organic compounds, which fell to 160 tonnes from 200 tonnes the previous year.
Emissions of sulphur dioxide fell by 28 per cent, and nitrogen oxides by 40 per cent .
The company produced 211,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide in 1991, although it was unable to compare its emissions with the previous year.
The company refused to say how much it had spent on environmental protection.
Financial Times 13 January
Economics & Industry
Shell to clean up Rotterdam refinery
Shell has submitted for environmental approval a £1.5 billion plan to clean up its oil refinery at Pernis, near Rotterdam.
The plan is required under Dutch law as a prerequisite for the renewal of the plant's operating licence.
The plant has operated under a temporary licence since 1991.
The five-year plan would make the plant the first of its size to meet the target of the Netherlands' 20-year national environment plan.
It involves construction of a hydrocracker, a gasification plant, reflecting the shift from coal to gas as a cleaner fuel, and several smaller facilities.
The proposal last year by the Dutch government to introduce a carbon tax prompted several Dutch-based multinationals, including Shell, to threaten to transfer new investments abroad.
Guardian 16 January
Energy
Montenegro dam saved
An international rescue effort has prevented the collapse of the Mojkovac dam in the Yugoslav republic of Montenegro.
Flash floods in October 1992 had torn away supporting concrete panels from the base of the dam, bringing it close to collapse and threatening the release of 3.5 million tonnes of water containing harmful levels of heavy metals from nearby mines [see ED 65/66].
When the threat of the ecological disaster became clear, the United Nations announced a partial lifting of sanctions on Yugoslavia, so that building materials could be imported.
This allowed disaster relief experts to construct a new stone wall to reinforce the dam.
European 21-24 January
Energy
Gabcikovo differences remain
A meeting between Hungarian, Slovak and European Community officials "the first since Slovakia became an independent country" aimed at finding a compromise in the dispute over the Gabcikovo hydroelectric project [see ED 59/60, 64]has failed to narrow differences between the two countries.
The Slovak government has also announced that it plans to privatize the power station when the project is completed.
European 14-17 January RFE/RL Reasearch Report 11-15 January
Energy
UK licences to drill for oil
Despite the advice of its own advisory bodies, the British government has decided to allow more than 50 sensitive areas of inshore coastal waters to be explored for oil and gas.
The Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC), the body representing English Nature, Scottish Nature and the Countryside Commission for Wales, is reported to have expressed its concern that many of its environmental recommendations on granting exploration licences have been ignored.
Sites being explored include parts of the Moray Firth in Scotland, Cardigan Bay in Wales, and Lyme Bay and waters off the north Norfolk coast, the Isle of Wight and Lundy Island in England.
Guardian 15 January
Energy
Leicester saves most energy
The city of Leicester in central England has won a national energy-saving competition.
The council has managed to reduce its overall energy consumption by 16 per cent since 1979.
It hopes to reduce consumption by half by the year 2025.
Green Magazine 2/93
Environmental Politics
French Greens seal electoral pact
France's two environmental parties, Les Verts and Génération Ecologie, ratified their agreement to co-operate in the forthcoming elections in mid-January [see ED65/66].
Lists of candidates for 547 of the 551 constituencies have been drawn up, of which 278 will be fought by Les Verts and 269 by GE.
Opinion polls predict that the Green alliance could win at least 15-17 per cent of the vote in the elections; an 18 per cent share would give it a chance of holding the balance of power between left and right in the national assembly.
Le Monde 8, 12 January European 21-24 January
Environmental Politics
Keating angers Australian Greens
Australian environmentalist groups have been strongly critical of Prime Minister Paul Keating's first major statement on environmental policy since he took office in mid-1992.
Despite promises to allocate A$156 million to projects to reverse land degradation and water pollution problems, the December statement angered environmentalists by failing to face up to issues such as the halting of logging on old-growth forests or the preparation of ecologically sustainable development policies.
Keating's predecessor as Prime Minister and Labor Party leader, Bob Hawke, promised to end woodchipping of old growth forests by 2000, a promise that Keating failed to endorse.
Licences for woodchip exports from Tasmania, New South Wales and Western Australia were renewed on Dec. 31…
More than 70 per cent of Australia's rain forests and half of its other forests have been destroyed.
Because of Australia's preferential voting system, Green support was crucial to Labor's victory in the 1990 elections and will be again in the federal elections Keating has to call by June this year.
However, the Prime Minister's statement reinforced growing disillusionment with his environmental record: in June 1992 the government rejected demands for a ban on imports of tropical timber and in October failed to push through a law on protection for endangered species.
Opinion polls show that, despite record unemployment, Australian voters remain concerned about the environment.
Far Eastern Economic Review 14 January
Environmental Politics
Clinton toughens environment policy
The new US administration has announced its first moves to strengthen environmental policy.
Carol Browner, the new director of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), has been given cabinet rank and the agency itself is to be turned into a full cabinet-level department, a move that requires legislation.
Meanwhile, President Clinton has abolished the Competitiveness Council, a White House agency which, under the chairmanship of former vice-president Dan Quayle, had often blocked the EPA's efforts to implement environmental protection regulations.
The Council on Environmental Quality, another White House agency set up in 1989 to review environmental policies, is also to be abolished.
 "The days of photo-op environmentalism are over," the President said.
3 = Financial Times 4 February
Environmental Politics
Greens enter Liechtenstein parliament
In Liechtenstein's general election on Feb. 7 the left-wing environmentalist Free List (Freie Liste"FL) entered the 25-seat Landtag (parliament) for the first time, winning two seats and 10.38 per cent of the vote.
(In the 1989 election the FL, with 7.56 per cent of the vote, had been just below the minimum 8 per cent necessary to win representation).
The result represented a radical change in Liechtenstein politics since it was the first time in the principality's history that a third party had been elected to parliament.
The other two parties, the Patriotic Union and the Progressive Citizens' Party, won 11 and 12 seats respectively.
They had ruled in coalition since 1938.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 7 and 11 February.
Le Monde, 9 February.
Financial Times, 8 February.
European, 11 February.
Environmental Politics
Slovene Greens join new government
The Greens of Slovenia (Zeleni Slovenije"ZS), which had won five out of 90 seats in parliamentary elections in December [see ED 65/66], were one of the five parties in the new coalition sworn in on Jan. 25.
Dusan Plut, chair of the party, had said earlier that he wished the Greens to "act as a constructive opposition" but later agreed to join the coalition which was led by the outgoing Prime Minister, Janez Drnovsek of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDS).
The Greens held one portfolio, that of Health; this was held by Bozidar Voljc who had been in the Cabinet since January 1992.
Miha Jazbinsek of the LDS remained Minister for Conservation and Environmental Planning.
Radio Slovenia reports, late January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts).
Embassy of Slovenia, London, 25 January.
Environmental Politics
New UNEP executive director
Mostafa Tolba bowed out as executive director of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), and was replaced, effective Jan. 1, 1993, by Elizabeth Dowdeswell (Canada).
Dowdeswell was elected as Tolba's successor by the UN General Assembly in December.
She was the third head of UNEP, after Maurice Strong (1972-75) and Tolba, who had served four consecutive terms in the post since 1976.
UN Information Centre news summary 11 December.
Environmental Politics
Tanzania gets new environment body
The Environmental Association of Tanzania (ENATA) has been set up by a group of professionals with skills in tackling environmental problems.
ENATA, whose members include engineers, scientists, economists and lawyers, will supplement the efforts of the National Environment Management Council and other bodies, according to interim president G J Njau.
It will assess the environmental impact of new and existing development projects and carry out research and consultancy.
Caribbean Times 12 January
Environmental Politics
Libel case puts Lynx out of action
British anti-fur trade group Lynx has been forced to close following the successful libel action brought by Swalesmoor Mink Farm.
The action left Lynx with a bill for damages and costs totalling £140,000, rendering the group insolvent.
Founder Mark Glover promised to continue the group's work: "Our efforts to continue the campaign may well be better concentrated elsewhere, on the continent or in the US." 
BBC Wildlife February 1993 Guardian 19 January
Forests
Europe's trees losing their leaves
One in five trees in 24 European countries is severely damaged by pollution, according to a report prepared jointly by the European Commission and UN Economic Commission for Europe.
The worst affected trees were in the UK, where 57 per cent of trees had lost 25 per cent or more of their leaves, partly as a result of a series of dry summers; the healthiest were in France and Spain, where only 10 per cent of trees suffered substantial leaf loss.
Outside the EC, tree damage was greatest in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Lithuania.
A total of 700,000 trees were examined in the survey.
European 14-17 January
Forests
Court questions Siberian logging deal
The Russian supreme court has ordered a re-examination by regional courts of the award of a logging concession in the Bikin valley of Siberia to a joint venture of South Korea's Hyundai and the State Forest Industry (SFI"see ED 65/66).
The move follows protest action by Greenpeace, which had prevented Hyundai's logging barge leaving the port of Svetlaya to take timber to Japan.
The Bikin valley area is one of the last strongholds of the Siberian tiger, of which 350 are said to survive in the wild.
The supreme court ruled that the concession was illegal, because of the failure by the regional government to consult the Udege, the indigenous people of the area, who have the right to control the land under Russian law.
Hyundai and the SFI reacted to the decision by threatening to shut down all their Siberian logging operations and sue Greenpeace for loss of earnings.
Four million hectares of Siberian forest are being logged every year.
BBC Wildlife February 1993
Forests
Oxleas Wood court battle
Plans to recreate an ancient woodland to replace the 800-year-old Oxleas Wood in south-east London, due to be cut in two by a six-lane motorway, were described as "absurd" during a court action brought by protesters attempting to stop the road plan.
[The case was subsequently lost: details in next issue, ED 68.]
Nigel Pleming QC, representing the objectors, said that ancient woodland was a national treasure that could not be recreated.
The result would be "some kind of pale pastiche" a Disneyland woodland."
Nine local residents, backed by conservation groups and environmentalists, are appealing against compulsory purchase procedures in an attempt to save the wood, a Site of Special Scientific Interest and the last ancient woodland in London, which is in the path of the access road for the East London River Crossing.
The case is thought to be the first test of the obligation under the Acquisition of Land Act 1981 to provide new land of "equal advantage" where public open space is lost through a compulsory purchase.
Pleming said the government's case rested on the plan to take topsoil from Oxleas Wood to nearby Woodlands Farm and plant trees there.
The public would be excluded from most of the new site during the 10-14 years that the trees were growing.
Experts were virtually unanimous that ancient woodland "a remnant of the forests that covered the British Isles after the last ice age and undisturbed for 8,000 years" could not be recreated, he said.
Oxleas Wood was saved from development by public subscription in the 1920s.
According to Friends of the Earth, the outcome of the case could have implications for at least five of the 161 SSSIs threatened by road schemes.
The European Commission has yet to decide whether the government has breached environmental assessment procedures in giving permission for the scheme.
Independent 19 January Guardian 18, 19 January
Forests, Tropical
Burma's oil search hits virgin forests
Environmental and human rights groups are opposing the involvement of international companies in oil exploration in Burma, which they say is destroying a relatively untouched forest environment and helping to fund a military government with a poor human rights record.
Canadian group Friends of the Rain Forest is organising a boycott of Petro-Canada, which has an oil exploration concession in Burma, saying that"oil investment dollars are helping turn mainland Asia's last significant forested region into a wasteland.
Petro-Canada must share responsibility, along with the principal shareholder, the government of Canada."
The Canadian government has repeatedly criticised the Burmese junta's human rights record, but says it is unable to control the actions of the oil company, even though Petro-Canada is 80 per cent state owned.
Other oil companies with exploration concessions in Burma include Royal Dutch/Shell, Amoco and Australia's BHP.
Exploration is taking place in formerly inaccessible areas, resulting in the clearance of forest for air strips, base camps and test sites.
Roads are also being built into the concession areas, leading to significant deforestation.
The military government is reported to have begun granting timber concessions to logging companies in areas opened up by oil company roads.
Erosion, pollution and disruption of wildlife are other side effects.
The Nation, Bangkok, 2 February (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Forests, Tropical
Thai forest devastation
Satellite photographs show that forest cover in north-eastern Thailand has been reduced from 50 per cent to 15 per cent in the past 15 years.
The survey, by Khon Kaen University, shows severe soil degradation, soil fertility loss, salinity and deforestation in the region.
Remaining forest cover is now largely secondary growth.
The Nation, Bangkok, 5 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Forests, Tropical
India's forests shrink
Estimates of forest cover in India's seven north-eastern states have been reduced by the Forest Survey of India.
Assam and Arunachal Pradesh have suffered particularly from loss of forest cover for these reasons, but Meghalaya and Mizoram have gained forest due to regeneration on previously cultivated areas.
In total, the seven states lost 1,003 square kilometres of forest area and gained 492 square kilometres.
The reduction is largely due to the exclusion of tea gardens from the forest category, but is also the result of degradation and shifting cultivation.
A separate study by the North-Eastern Council showed that demand from wood-based industries in the region was exceeding natural supply.
Plywood mills in Assam, for example, required 328,000 cubic metres of wood but the state's forests can supply only 56,000 cubic metres without jeopardising their existence.
Press Trust of India 15 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Forests, Tropical
Congo's forests hit by massive fraud
Timber companies carrying out massive logging operations in the remote tropical forests of northern Congo are operating outside the law and defrauding the government of millions of dollars, according to a report prepared for the World Bank and the Congolese government.
The report states that "almost all the companies in the forestry sector are" outside the law "" .
Losses from unpaid taxes, stamp duty, stumpage and transport fees are estimated at US$12 million on declared production alone, and huge quantities of timber are being smuggled undeclared into neighbouring Cameroon and Central African Republic.
Although the legal framework exists, there is not supervision of actual operations, the report says.
 "The forest is left to the mercy of the loggers, who do what they like without being accountable to anyone." 
French company Forestière Nord Congo, for example, which has a 10-year concession on 187,000 hectares, secured reduced import duties and a five-year tax holiday in exchange for agreeing to process 60 per cent of logs on site and establish a new sawmill.
Instead the company has processed no timber on site and has exported logs for six years without paying tax.
The company's operations are estimated to have cost Congo US$2.9 million in lost revenue.
Another company, Société  re de Missa, is using its Congo concession to keep its sawmill in Central African Republic running.
Biggest of all is Société Congolais Bois de Ouesso, 51 per cent owned by the Congo government, whose sophisticated sawmill and veneer works, built at a cost of US$63 million, mostly supplied by foreign aid donors, has never operated.
The report says that the company's failure is "due quite simply to the overvaluation of the project, which has allowed some vultures to enrich themselves immeasurably at Congo's expense." 
3 = BBC Wildlife February 1993
Forests, Tropical
Brazil's satellite to monitor rain forests
Brazil's first satellite has been successfully launched from Cape Canaveral in Florida.
The satellite, SCD-1, entirely developed in Brazil, will be used to collect meteorological and environmental data from the Amazon rain forests, including information on concentrations of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
A second Brazilian-made satellite is planned to be launched at the end of this year.
Financial Times 10 February
Forests, Tropical
New forest town threatens Indian reserve
A new town has been set up in the heart of the Arara Indian reserve in Brazil's Para state.
The town, Porto Bannach, named after an illegal mahogany sawmill on the Iriri river, has been incorporated by the authorities in Altamira, the regional capital, in defiance of Brazilian law.
About 5,000 colonists have already moved into the 300,000-hectare Arara reserve, and thousands more are being attracted to the new town and sawmill.
The mill was declared illegal in October 1990 by a judge, who gave a two-year deadline for its removal, but it continues to operate.
The Arara territory was cut in two by the Trans-Amazon highway in the early 1970s and the northern part sold to colonists; the road to the sawmill has further divided the area.
Only 130 of the original population of 1,000 Arara Indians survive, according to Fiona Watson of Survival International, and 40 of these, contacted for the first time in 1988, are cut off from the main community by the Bannach road.
3 = BBC Wildlife February 1993
Forests, Tropical
UK firms said to buy illegally felled mahogany
British companies are allegedly buying mahogany from Brazilian firms known to be felling illegally in Indian reserves.
A Brazilian court recently granted an injunction against three companies accused of taking large quantities of mahogany from Indian reserves in Para state.
The companies, which were ordered to close down their operations in the reserves, have been found by Friends of the Earth to trade with several British importers including James Latham and Richard Burbridge.
The UK is the largest importer of Brazilian mahogany, buying 45,762 cubic metres worth £22 million in 1991, 52 per cent of the country's total exports, but the Timber Trade Federation (TTF) has no idea what proportion of the timber comes from illegal sources.
British importers rely mainly on assurances from their suppliers that the timber has not been illegally felled.
* British retailer B&Q is to withdraw all Brazilian mahogany from its shops in April.
The decision follows a meeting with Sydney Possuelo, president of FUNAI, the Brazilian agency responsible for the welfare of indigenous people.
Richard Burbridge also announced that it would be replacing Brazilian mahogany with cedar.
However, Terence Mallinson of the TTF, who was also at the meeting with Possuelo, said any disruption of the mahogany trade would be "deeply damaging and counterproductive" .
Independent 2 February Friends of the Earth 19 January * BBC Wildlife February 1993
General reports
Aid policies fail to help the poor
A report by the UN International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) demonstrates the failures of international aid programmes to help the poor to help themselves.
Surveying rural poverty in 114 nations with sizeable rural landholding populations, the report shows that the number of people living below the poverty line has increased by 40 per cent in the past 20 years.
Most development programmes are too heavy on capital investment and judge results only by the effect on a country's gross national product, obscuring the real reasons for lack of growth.
Wealth is failing to "trickle down" from the rich to the poor.
"Development is not something that happens to the poor.
It is something that happens because of them,"the report says.
The rural poor are poor because they have been prevented from using resources available to others, such as credit, land, technology and social services.
Green Magazine February 1993
General reports
Environmental awareness rising again in UK
The British public is increasingly distrustful of industry on environmental issues and there is rising support for the idea that "the polluter pays" , according to Bob Worcester, chairman of market research firm MORI, which has been tracking attitudes to the environment since 1969.
The impression that the environment is yesterday's news is wrong, Worcester says.
Eighteen million people have bought products for environmental reasons and green activists (people who have engaged in five or more environmental activities) form about 23 per cent of the population, or 10 million people.
In 1992 31 per cent listed the environment as the foremost social responsibility of business, up from 24 per cent in 1991.
Independent 19 January
Global Warming
Pinatubo effect dissipates
The year 1992 was the tenth warmest year on record, according to the meteorological office of the University of East Anglia's Climatic Research Unit, confirming the overall trend of global warming.
The 1992 global average temperature was two-tenths of a degree cooler than in 1991, the third warmest year, largely due to the effects of atmospheric ash from the Mount Pinatubo eruption of June 1991, which blocked out the sun's rays.
1990 was the warmest year on record.
An additional cooling factor may have been the El Niño phenomenon, a change in the ocean currents in the Pacific which occurs every three to seven years, causing droughts, torrential rainfall and an overall rise in temperatures that last about 18 months.
1992 was at the tail end of an El Niño cycle, resulting in a fall in temperatures.
Nevertheless, 1992 was warmer than four years in the 1980s, confirming the warming trend.
Similar research by the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York reached similar conclusions.
The institute found that the global average temperature, although cooler than the previous year, was still well above the average from 1951 to 1980 and in line with values for the 1980s.
It said that temperatures could be expected to rise now that ash from the Pinatubo eruption was dissipating.
Independent 22 January Washington Post 3 January
Global Warming
Mayors to control emissions
A declaration aimed at cutting carbon dioxide emissions.
was issued at the close of a meeting of mayors from 50 cities in 20 countries.
The Municipal Leaders' Summit on Climate Change and the Urban Environment, heard the results of a two-year study into energy use and CO2 emissions in 14 cities.
The study found that the average urban North American generates 30 per cent more CO2 than a European.
The summit was co-ordinated by the initiative of the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives, a UN affiliate.
The mayors committed themselves to local action plans to reduce CO2 emissions: methods discussed included recycling of waste heat from heating and cooling systems, and controls on traffic.
New Scientist 6 February
Global Warming
Nitrates slow global warming?
Nitrate fertilisers may make grassland more efficient at soaking up carbon dioxide, helping to offset some of the risks of global warming, according to research by the Institute of Terrestial Ecology.
The institute stresses, however, that this should not be used to justify widespread use of such fertilisers, a major contributor to acid deposition.
SCENES (Scottish Environment News) in January 1993
Global Warming
Spain plans dams to cure drought
Spain is suffering from its second worst drought this century, with water rationed across half the country.
Farmers are warning that millions of hectares of crops could be lost unless the weather changes, and the government has admitted that drinking water in many towns is of poor quality.
Some experts argue that the solution lies in exploiting the country's aquifers, which they claim are as yet largely untapped, and which contain sufficient water to supply the major cities.
The government rejects this approach, however, both on the grounds of cost, and of the danger of exhausting the aquifers faster than they would be replenished.
Rapid economic development has vastly increased demand for water in recent years, and the expansion is expected to continue: the water needs of the urban population are expected to increase by 45 per cent in the next 20 years, with industry requiring 30 per cent more water and agriculture 14 per cent more.
The government is focusing on a US$26,000 million scheme to bring water from well-supplied northern rivers and reservoirs to the drought-prone south through a system of canals.
Between 150 and 175 new dams will be needed.
The ecological implications of the scheme, which will not be completed until 2000, have not yet been analysed by the embryonic Spanish environmental movement.
In the meantime, an US$87 million emergency scheme has been announced to bring water south to keep the cities supplied until the spring rains.
New Scientist 6 February Washington Post 9 February
Nuclear Power
FoE: Misplaced aid to Eastern Europe
Western governments and companies are spending twice as much money on expanding nuclear power in the former Soviet bloc as they are on improving the safety of existing reactors, according to a study by Friends of the Earth.
The report also says that the total sum spent on improvements is far less than required.
Despite deep concern over the possibility of a major nuclear accident in the former Soviet republics or Eastern Europe, Western governments have been unable to agree on a comprehensive aid package to improve safety standards [see also ED65/66].
3 = Guardian 15 January
Nuclear Power
Russian expansion plan
The Russian government has approved a plan to build 30 new nuclear power stations by the year 2010, thereby doubling the country's nuclear-energy capacity.
According to press reports the plan was approved at a cabinet meeting on 24 December, against the objections of Aleksei Yablokov, the government's senior adviser on environmental issues.
He has described it as "unacceptable from the legal, ecological, economic and political point of view" .
At least one of the new plants would be of a design similar to the Chernobyl type.
Government officials said that the design had been improved to prevent the kind of accident that occurred at Chernobyl in 1986.
But both Russian and western environmentalists and experts dispute this.
According to the Greenpeace representative in Moscow, Dmitry Litvinov, the new design "is structurally just as dangerous as before" .
Opponents of the building programme "which in any case may not go ahead as planned because of a lack of funds" claim that political instability in Russia, antiquated technologies and economic pressures (to cut corners on safety in order to produce much-needed electricity) could lead to another major nuclear accident.
Environmentalists also point out that there is no need to expand Russia's overall energy-generating capacity because there is great scope for conservation measures.
Energy use in industry is thought to be around 50 per cent less efficient than in the West.
International Herald Tribune 14 January European 14-17 January Independent 25 January
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl fires
Two fires in mid January have raised renewed fears about safety at the Chernobyl plant in Ukraine, site of the world's worst nuclear accident in 1986.
Officials said both fires measured zero on the seven-point international scale of nuclear accidents.
They did not cause any radiation leaks and posed no danger to the environment.
The first fire occurred in an electrical cabinet which was not connected to the plant's basic circuit.
The second fire occurred inside the concrete casing covering the damaged reactor and was caused by the ignition of a wooden structure in the ventilation circuit.
ITAR-TASS news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 13, 15 January International Herald Tribune 15 January
Nuclear Power
Rise in number of "incidents" at Russian plants
According to official statistics there were 205 "incidents" at nuclear power stations in Russia in 1992, compared to 172 in 1991.
Of the total, 174 incidents were on the zero point of the international seven-point scale, 28 incidents were one-point and three were two-point.
Construction faults, equipment failure and inadequate training of staff were given as the major causes of incidents.
ITAR-TASS news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 6 January
Nuclear Power
Russia approves help for radiation victims
The Russian government has approved a programme of measures to help people in the Urals region suffering from the effects of radiation.
Around 450,000 people are estimated to have been exposed to radioactive emissions from the Mayak plant near Chelyabinsk (which still produces plutonium and reprocesses waste) in the 1940s and 50s.
The money, some 11.7 billion roubles, will be spend on compensation payments, social and economic rehabilitation of the region, and health services.
RFE/RL Research Report January
Nuclear Power
Barents Sea dumping estimate
Frederic Hauge, of the Norwegian environmental foundation Bellona, has made an initial assesment of the extent of nuclear waste dumping in the Barents and Kara seas off the coast of Russia and Norway.
Relying on Soviet and Russian records and interviews with Russian officials, Hauge has identified 21 nuclear reactors, mostly from submarines, which have been dumped in the area.
Nine of these still contain their fuel rods.
He was also told that 11,090 containers with low-level radioactive waste were dumped in the Kara Sea, and that at least five barges holding large quantities of nuclear waste are floating or have sunk off the island of Novaya Zemlya (a former Soviet nuclear testing site).
In addition, the Soviet submarine Komsomolets, which caught fire and sank in the Barents Sea in 1989, is known to contain two smashed nuclear warheads.
Hauge says his assessment is still incomplete, since he has not yet had access to Soviet military records.
At a meeting of Russian and Norwegian experts to discuss ways of dealing with nuclear pollution in the Arctic, Russian experts confirmed that at least seven reactors dumped in the Kara Sea still contain nuclear fuel.
In his assessment of the problem Hauge also points to the fate of some 118 nuclear vessels currently stationed at the Russian port of Murmansk.
At least 14 submarines are expected to be scrapped over the next five years.
There are as yet no plants to deal with the radioactive waste.
3 = New Scientist 13 February
Nuclear Power
Kozloduy fire was "serious" 
The fire at Bulgaria's Kozloduy plant in September [see ED 63]was the "most serious" in the history of the plant, according to Georgi Stoilov, the deputy leader of the Union of Power Engineers.
He claimed at a press conference that the plant's management and government officials had deliberately played down the scale of the fire.
In another disruption to the troubled plant's operation, Kozloduy's second reactor was shut down for six days in early January after an escape of radioactive material from the central circulation pump.
Officials said the incident had not presented any danger to the environment.
RFE/RL Research Report January Le Monde 13 January
Nuclear Power
Armenia start-up fear
The Armenian Energy Ministry is intending to restart the ageing reactor at Medzamor, which was shut down for safety reasons after the earthquake in 1988.
The decision will need parliament's approval.
Defending the move, the Energy Minister, Steve Tashjian, said that it was the only way open to Armenia to regain the generating power it had lost as a result of the energy blockade by neighbouring Azerbaijan and the disruption of gas supplies from Georgia because of fighting.
On the other hand, the Environment Minister, Korine Danielyan, has described a restart of Medzamor as potentially "catastrophic" .
She and critics outside the government say the reactor is fundamentally unsafe because it is built in an earthquake zone and lacks modern safety systems.
Guardian 1 February 2 = European alert Nuclear power stations across Western Europe are being checked for radioactive leaks following the discovery of a design fault in the giant domes of pressurized water reactors (PWRs), the most common type of design.
The alarm was sounded when a routine check on a reactor near Lyon in France revealed that the dome had developed cracks where the control rods penetrate the casing, causing internal leakage of a litre of highly radioactive water every hour.
Subsequent checks on 10 of 16 PWRs in France revealed similar problems, as did checks on five of 14 in Germany, and on all three in Switzerland.
Checks are also underway in Belgium, the Netherlands, Spain and Sweden.
The domes are made of a steel-nickel alloy which can withstand high pressure and even explosions.
But the cracks show that it is far less resistant to corrosion than previously thought.
Repairs are expected to costs hundreds of millions of dollars, and French scientists have admitted that damage to some reactors may be so serious that they will have to be closed on safety grounds.
3 = European 7-10 January
Nuclear Power
German claims of cover-up
Two magazines have claimed that during the 1980s safety tests at three nuclear plants in West Germany had been manipulated.
One reported that safety inspectors had been told "not to find too many faults" .
The environment minister, Klaus Töpfer, ordered an investigation into the cover-up allegations.
3 = Independent 8 February
Nuclear Power
Swedish restart angers Danes
The decision by the Swedish authorities to restart operations at the plant, which had been closed down in September because of a flaw in the emergency cooling system [see ED 63], has been strongly criticized in Denmark.
Barsebäck is located 20 km east of Copenhagen, the Danish capital.
Danish politicians and environmental groups had called for the permanent shutdown of the plant, not least because Sweden is already committed to phasing out nuclear power by 2010.
European 7-10 January
Nuclear Power
Aldermaston's "appalling" safety record
The Aldermaston nuclear weapons plant in southern England has an "appalling" record of unreported deaths and fires, radioactive leaks and worker contamination, according to a report by Greenpeace.
By piecing together information from a range of sources, including fire reports, response to MPs' questions and media reports, Greenpeace has been able to document 252 fires plus explosions and radioactive leaks.
The report gives details of 58 of the most serious accidents.
It claims that more than 100 workers have been contaminated, injured or killed.
The report says that many safety improvements were made after an investigation into plutonium contamination in 1978, but that many of the study's recommendations have still not been implemented.
The report also notes that owing to serious technical difficulties a new assembly building has only just been commissioned, which means that nuclear-warhead production has had to continue in old buildings which should have been closed down.
Greenpeace is calling for an independent investigation into safety at Aldermaston, for health records to be made public, and for a halt to weapons production at the site.
Guardian 25 January
Nuclear Power
Plutonium shipments abandoned
In the wake of the international outcry over the shipment of 1.7 tons of highly toxic plutonium from France to Japan [see ED 62 and 65/66], the Japanese authorities have decided to abandon plans to import plutonium in this way.
According to the original plan, around 30 tons of plutonium "needed to supply the domestic nuclear-energy programme" would be shipped from reprocessing plants in France and Britain over a 20-year period.
The first shipment had sparked demonstrations in Japan and France, worldwide protests from environmental groups, and many governments banned the ship from their territorial waters on safety grounds.
Guardian 8 February
Nuclear Power
Nuclear power round-up
Radioactive material discharged from the Sellafield processing plant into the Irish Sea over the past 40 years may eventually accumulate in sandy sediments on the seabed, according to the government's Directorate of Fisheries Research.
It also warns that radioactive sediments will be disrupted and redistributed particularly during heavy storms in the Irish Sea, and says that the longer-term consequences of such redistribution are difficult to predict.
Further doubts have been raised about the future of the THORP reprocessing plant at Sellafield by the Japanese authorities' decision to abandon plutonium transports by sea [see above]and to scale down their nuclear-energy programme.
The controversial new plant, which has not yet been given an operating licence [see ED 64], was to have supplied reprocessed plutonium to Japan for a 20-year period.
A nuclear power plant in Oregon, USA, has been shut down permanently years before its planned decommissioning date because the operators considered the costs of safety measures and repair work too high.
The Trojan plant was the third to be closed on economic grounds in the United States in 1992.
New Scientist 30 January Guardian 8 February Le Monde 8 January
Nuclear Power
UK waste likely to pile up
Radioactive waste will pile up at nuclear power stations, defence establishments and the Sellafield reprocessing plant for another twenty years because of delays in building an underground repository, according to the Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee, which advises the Department of the Environment.
The committee says that UK Nirex, the nuclear waste disposal company, has consistently underestimated the time it will take to prepare and build a repository.
The committee in principle approves Nirex's plans for the repository at Sellafield [see ED 62, 63 and 64], but warns that the company's timetable for testing a site and construction is too tight.
The committee also believes that time should be set aside for the trial disposal and subsequent recovery of radioactive waste (which is the practice in the United States and Canada).
If the committee's recommendations were carried out, the repository would not become operational untilat least 2015.
Independent 9 February
Ozone layer
Plankton hit by ozone hole
Phytoplankton in Antarctic waters are being damaged by ultra-violet radiation because of the opening of the ozone hole over the South Pole, according to NASA scientists.
Plankton are absorbers of carbon dioxide and their disappearance could contribute to global warming as well as leaving a gap in the marine food chain.
BBC Wildlife February 1993
Ozone layer
Russia asks for more time to phase out ozone depleters
Russia has asked fellow participants in the Montreal protocol for more time to phase out use of ozone-depleting substances.
Russian Environment & Natural Resources Minister Viktor Danilov-Danilyan told a news conference in Moscow that: "Russia is now producing 10 per cent of all ozone-depleting substances.
However, due to insufficient financing, we not only had to ask for benefits, but also cannot take on ourselves new obligations, as was done by the rest of the participants in the protocol."
The minister estimated that over 50,000 million roubles will be required to undertake research, set up experimental sites to produce substitutes for ozone-depleting chemicals and convert existing production sites.
ITAR-TASS, Moscow 15 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
Ozone depletion to worsen as sun quietens
Ozone depletion is likely to become more rapid over the next few years, according to researchers from the University of Arizona's lunar and planetary laboratory, because of links between ozone concentrations and the sun's activity.
They calculate that ozone is depleted fastest when the sun is least active.
The sun's cycles of activity last about 11 years from peak to peak; sunspot numbers are now decreasing and will continue to do so until about 1997.
The rate of ozone depletion in the Antarctic has slowed in the past few years, but the researchers say that their model predicts "a return to more rapid depletion during the next four years as the solar minimum is approached." 
New Scientist 13 February
Ozone layer
Taiwan yields to CFC pressure
Taiwan, threatened with an international boycott because of its failure to sign the Montreal protocol, has begun taking steps to phase out use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The government-financed Industrial Technology Research Institute will begin helping local electronics companies to use CFC-free cleaning methods.
Electronics companies are major users of industrial CFCs and Taiwan-made electronics products will be barred from countries that have signed the protocol.
Central News Agency, Taipei, 11 January (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution
UNEP plans global city clean-up
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) is planning to stage a "Clean Up the World" event in September to publicise the problem of urban litter.
Funding of US$3 million is being sought for the campaign, to take place in 170 cities worldwide on the weekend of 17-19 September, when hundreds of thousands of people will be urged to comb public places for litter.
 "We want to bring it to the attention of communities that they can do something about the rubbish in their streets," said UNEP's Richard Lumbe, launching the campaign in Nairobi.
So far only US$300,000 has been raised for the campaign.
A booklet is being distributed to advise city authorities on how to organise a mass clean-up.
European 4-7 February
Pollution: Air
European cities' action on traffic pollution
Cities in Greece, Italy and Spain, including the country's capitals, Athens, Rome and Madrid, imposed traffic bans and other temporary measures in mid and late January to counter high levels of smog.
In each country calm weather was preventing car exhaust fumes and smoke from blowing away, leading to a sharp rise in carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere.
In Rome, Milan, Naples and eight other Italian cities all traffic was banned for up to seven hours over several days.
In Athens all cars were banned from the city centre and all even-numbered cars from the city's metropolitan area on January 19.
In Madrid the authorities banned parking in six main roads and announced several other measures to reduce smog, including restricting the number of hours central heating could be switched on.
International Herald Tribune 12, 19 January Independent 12, 26 January European 21-24 January
Pollution: Air
Report questions official acid rain figures
Some 47 per cent of Britain is at risk from further damage by acid rain by the year 2005, according to a report commissioned by Friends of the Earth and prepared by the Earth Resources Research consultancy.
This compares with a government figure of 8 per cent.
The report says that the methods used by scientists at the Department of the Environment to calculate future acid rain damage are "flawed" .
It arrives at the figure of 47 per cent on the basis of methods used by the European Commission and other European countries.
To prevent further damage, emissions of sulphur dioxide, the main source of acid rain, will have to the cut by 90 per cent by 2005, according to the report.
The government is committed to a 60 per cent reduction over the same period.
Commenting on the report's findings, Karen McVeigh of Friends of the Earth said that the government has "grossly underestimated" the extent of the problem and "has no policies to protect the countryside from further damage" .
She said that the power-generating companies would have to be forced to reduce emissions from power stations.
Guardian 12 January
Pollution: Water
Tanker disaster in the Shetlands
The Liberian-registered tanker Braer ran aground off the southern tip of the Shetland Islands on January 5 after its engines failed in very heavy weather.
(The 34-man crew was rescued by coastguards.)
When its hull shattered, the tanker began to spill its cargo of 84,500 tons of light crude oil.
Heavy seas prevented salvage teams from landing on the wreck and hampered the clean-up operation.
The tanker broke up on January 12, spilling the remainder of its cargo.
The accident threatened an ecological disaster for the remote Shetland Islands and its fishing, tourism and farming industries.
The amount of oil spilt was twice as much as the Exxon Valdez which ran aground off Alaska in 1989, and slightly more than Aegean Sea which ran aground off the Spanish coast in December [see ED 65/66].
The oil slick was initially reported to be drifting towards important seabird colonies at Sumburgh Head and other wildlife and nature reserves, which are among the most important in Western Europe.
Birds, seals and other wildlife were found dead in the first days of the disaster, and fishing and salmon farming were banned in a large area.
A particular threat was posed by wind-borne oil and fumes from evaporated oil.
Around 15 square miles of land was contaminated in this way.
Locally grown vegetables were condemned and people complained of nausea and dizziness.
Officials declared that this form of atmospheric pollution was not harmful, but people living within a two-mile radius of the wreck were given liver and respiratory checks.
Local people also expressed concern over the health risks posed by the oil-dispersing sprays, which were being carried inland by the wind.
Council officials refused to allow the chemicals to be used unless it could be shown they were not harmful to humans.
In this context, Greenpeace said it believed that some of the sprays were dangerous, and pointed out that they were banned in several countries.
Within days of the accident local officials and government ministers sought to play down the extent of the damage.
It was argued that the fierce weather which had prevented a salvage operation also helped break up the oil.
It also emerged that the oil was a light crude, which meant it dispersed more easily and did not soak into sandy beaches or adhere to birds' feathers in the way that the heavy crude of the Exxon Valdez had done.
Nine days after the first spillage the government's Marine Pollution Control Unit declared: "The stormy weather has broken down the oil and driven it out to sea.
There is practically no oil there."
While it was widely accepted that by the end of the month few visible signs of the disaster remained, environmentalists warned against deceptive appearances and claimed that marine life could be affected for years to come.
Because most of the oil was dispersed to below the surface, it would enter the marine food chain; and because the oil was easily ingested, it could have damaging effects on birds and animals in the long term.
 "Just because it is not on the surface in a visible slick doesn't mean there isn't any oil out there" , commented Alison Ross of Greenpeace.
She said the oil had been broken down into small particles and was being absorbed by organisms at the bottom of the food chain.
 "We are going to see a lot more casualties in the actual water and on the seabed" .
By early February there were reports of large numbers of dead shellfish on beaches, an increasing number of seals were being treated for internal problems caused by oil poisoning, and a quarter of the economically important salmon-farming industry appeared to be affected by the spill.
The government has ordered an investigation into the circumstances of the accident as well as a public inquiry into tanker movements around the coasts of Britain.
It has also called for stricter international standards to be introduced on maritime safety.
British-based oil companies and ship owners have also agreed on a government proposal to keep tankers away from certain environmentally sensitive coastal areas.
Greenpeace welcomed the voluntary agreement "provided that it is the first step towards an enforceable tanker exclusion zone" .
Guardian 6 January — 10 February Financial Times 6 January — 6 February Independent 6 January — 22 January
Pollution: Water
Emergency EC meeting on maritime safety
Meeting in the wake of the Braer and Aegean Sea disasters, European Community transport and environment ministers agreed in principle on a range of measures, including:(i) establishing exclusion zones for tankers and ships carrying hazardous cargoes;(ii) strengthening port controls and surveillance of shipping lanes;(iii) introducing liability rules on tanker owners and charterers; and (iv) tightening standards on the construction and maintenance of ships.
Despite calls by some countries, the proposals would not be introduced immediately, however, but would be considered over the next six months.
No consensus was reached on stricter measures proposed by France, Germany and Ireland, such as a blanket ban on single-hulled tankers and those more than 15 years old (adopted by the US government in the wake of the Exxon Valdez disaster in 1989).
The British government stressed the need to work through the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the UN agency.
The European Commission was asked to present a maritime safety plan for consideration by ministers in February.
Financial Times 26, 27 January Guardian 26 January
Pollution: Water
Disaster in Malacca Strait averted
A collision between the Danish-owned supertanker Maersk Navigator and an empty tanker near the entrance to the Malacca Strait, the waterway between peninsular Malaysia and Sumatra which is one of the busiest in the world, sparked off a pollution alert in a region home to endangered species such as rare turtles and dugong.
The tanker, which was carrying nearly 2 million barrels of light crude from Oman to Japan, caught fire and began gushing oil from its damaged hull.
It formed a slick some 50 km long and 1 km wide which began to drift westwards towards the Nicobar Islands (a territory of India).
The extensive rescue operation involved the tanker being towed further out to sea, the use of powerful water cannons to cool the hull and the application of anti-flame foam.
Divers subsequently succeeded in plugging the leak from the tanker, stopping the flow of oil and preventing a more serious accident.
A spokesman for the owners said that the total amount of the oil spilled into the ocean was around 25,000 tonnes.
The Indian and Indonesian governments announced they would demand compensation from the ship's owners for pollution caused to their territories.
And the Indonesian, Malaysian and Singapore governments took steps to implement the planned levy on ships passing through the Strait to help them meet the costs of accidents and pollution [see ED 56].
International Herald Tribune 22, 26, 27, 28 January Financial Times 22, 26 January
Pollution: Water
Conflicting evidence on Gulf pollution
Environmental pollution in the Gulf has not been as extensive as feared, according to a survey by a team from the Monaco-based Marine Environment Laboratory, an arm of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)[see also ED 62].
The survey showed that the main impact of the four to six million barrels of oil which were poured into the Gulf during the 1990-91 Gulf War was limited to the northern shores.
Much of the oil either dissolved, sank to the bottom or evaporated.
The survey also found that concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, the result of the burning of the Kuwaiti oil wells towards the end of the war, were much lower than expected.
The team has completed a second survey recently.
Its initial impression, according to one of its members, Scott Fowler, was that there has been a further improvement.
 "The coast is slowly cleaning itself" , he commented.
Greenpeace, which has conducted its own surveys of the Gulf environment, disputes the IAEA team's findings.
Its main criticism is that they do not take into account the effects of the war on the region's ecosystem.
Scientists have pointed to the collapse of the shrimp catch and a sharp decline in the number of mangrove trees along the Saudi shoreline as evidence of a significant change in the ecosystem.
Middle East International 8 January Green Magazine 2/93
Pollution: Water
NRA technology catches polluter
Evidence collected by a new computer-controlled water monitoring and sampling device developed by the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has been used for the first time to prosecute a company for polluting a waterway.
Contained in a weatherproof box and installed at a convention location underwater, the instrument, known as "Cyclops" , is programmed to monitor key parameters such as turbidity, temperature and acidity.
When it detects a significant change in one of the parameters, it faxes a message to the nearest NRA regional control room.
A water quality officer interprets the information and can instruct Cyclops to collect a sample of the discharge in a sealed container.
The container is then collected and sent for analysis.
In the past samples could only be taken by NRA officials in person.
The delays incurred could sometimes render samples inadmissible as evidence in court.
The NRA described the successful prosecution, brought against a Rhone-Poulenc Chemicals plant near Bristol, as an "historic case" .
There are plans to introduce Cyclops instruments throughout the country.
National Rivers Authority (NRA) information 2 February
Pollution: Water
Unexpected effects of Exxon Valdez spill on fauna
Scientists who have monitored the local environment since the oil spill caused by the Exxon Valdez in Prince William Sound in Alaska in 1989 have reported a range of unsuspected effects on wildlife.
The following were among the findings reported at a conference in Anchorage, Alaska:— brain damage in seals similar to that found in people who die from solvent abuse; this would have disoriented the animals and affected basic physiological functions like breathing; it is suspected that many seals drowned, but because dead seals sink an accurate assessment of deaths has not been possible;— the disappearance of a group of killer whales that had lived in the sound, possibly also due to the "solvent abuse effect" ;— deaths among sea otters not only from hypothermia (because oil stuck to their fur destroyed its insulating properties) but from emphysema caused by breathing in toxic fumes and from liver and kidney damage caused by ingesting oil;— failure to breed among many species of birds since the accident, either because of the death rate within colonies at the time (in the case of guillemots) or because continued exposure to oil-polluted food sources is preventing reproduction;— death tolls of up to 40 per cent for eggs laid by salmon, herring and other fish, and deformities and withered muscles among fish that did hatch.
New Scientist 13 February
Pollution: Water
Franco-Italian marine park
The French and Italian authorities have begun work on turning the Strait of Bonifacio, the channel between Corsica and Sardinia, into a marine park.
All oil and chemical tankers calling at French and Italian ports have been banned from using the strait, and the International Maritime Organization has been asked to impose a ban on all tankers using the waterway.
Currently an estimated 1,600 vessels carrying fuels and other hazardous materials pass through the strait annually.
New Scientist 6 February
Transport
Biodiesel fuel "not green" 
Biodiesel, made from rapeseed, has few advantages over conventional diesel, according to a report by Germany's Federal Environment Office, which states that there are cheaper and more effective ways of reducing greenhouse gas emissions than by subsidising biodiesel production.
Using biodiesel, or rapeseed methyl ester, in place of 400,000 tonnes of fossil fuel a year would reduce Germany's total emissions of greenhouse gases by between 0.5 and 0.7 per cent.
The cost to the taxpayer would be as much as DM1,000 million, which the Environment Office believes could be better spent on improving car engine designs.
Use of biodiesel is favoured by European farmers, who would be allowed to grow rapeseed on land set aside under the EC's Common Agricultural Policy.
The European Commission has recommended that taxes on biodiesel be limited to 10 per cent of the level on fossil fuels, making it competitive in some European countries.
New Scientist 6 February
Transport
Hungary's traffic pollution
Rising car ownership in Hungary is threatening unprecedented pollution and congestion, according to a recent report by the Talento Foundation of Budapest.
Private car ownership has almost doubled in the past 10 years, to 1.9 million in 1992, and is predicted to rise to 2.5 million by 1995.
Meanwhile, the development of city centres for business and commercial use is encouraging increased traffic.
One new shopping centre planned for Budapest would increase traffic in and out the city by an estimated 20,000 cars a day.
Transport accounts for the majority of air pollution in Budapest: 98 per cent of carbon monoxide, 97 per cent of hydrocarbons and lead, 93 per cent of nitrogen oxides, 60 per cent of sulphur dioxide and 40 per cent of dust and soot.
Pollution resulting from the growing number of cars will be partly offset by the replacement of highly polluting leaded petrol and two-stroke engines and improvements in engine maintenance.
Budapest is to ban all cars with two-stoke engines from the city centre unless they are fitted with a catalytic converter.
The ban will affect about 48,000 vehicles, mainly East German Trabants and Warburgs.
Budapest Municipality will pay half the cost of fitting a converter, but many may prefer to upgrade to new cars.
East-West Environment, February 1993
Transport
Dutch support electric cars
The Dutch government is introducing tax incentives for companies which buy electric vehicles: they will be allowed to depreciate them faster than conventional vehicles, setting the entire cost against tax in the first year rather than spreading it over five years.
Electric cars are now on the government's list of 400 environmentally friendly products, meaning tax breaks for companies that use them.
* A report by members of the European Parliament calls on EC governments to use subsidies and tax incentives to stimulate sales of electric cars.
It suggests that electric cars could account for 7 per cent by volume of total urban vehicle traffic by the year 2002.
Financial Times 16 January *Financial Times 22 January
Transport
Toyota and Nissan co-operate
Two leading Japanese motor manufacturers, Toyota Motor Corporation and Nissan Motor Company, are joining forces to produce an electric car.
The move follows the decision by three US vehicle giants to co-operate in electric car development [see ED 65/66].
The two Japanese firms are exchanging information on batteries and control systems and will soon begin working together on other aspects of electric car development.
The Japanese government aims to have 200,000 electric vehicles in operation by 2000.
Financial Times 16 January
Waste and Recycling
Belgium to introduce eco-taxes
Green parties in Belgium have obtained government promises to introduce environmental taxes in return for their support for measures to introduce a new federal constitution.
The environmental taxes include a higher rate of tax for packaging which does not contain a minimum level of recycled materials [along the lines announced late last year — see ED 65/66].
Pesticides will be taxed on a scale according to their toxicity.
The proceeds from the taxes will be used for environmental projects.
The taxes will come into effect on 1 January 1994, although the packaging levy on plastic bottles will not apply until six months later, following protests from chemical industry workers.
Le Monde 19 January European 21-24 January
Waste and Recycling
Great Yarmouth heads for confrontation on recycling
Labour-controlled Great Yarmouth is being threatened with government action to force it to draw up a plan to recycle its rubbish.
The local authority, the only one of England's 366 councils still without a plan, says it cannot afford the £10,000 cost and that the government's recycling policy is "grandiose" but ineffective.
Independent 14 January
Waste and Recycling
Zurich waste laws introduced
Draconian new laws on rubbish disposal have been introduced in Zurich.
From Jan. 1, all rubbish must be placed in officially-approved bags, tied and left in special containers.
There are stiff fines for non-compliance, and refuse collectors may rifle through rubbish left in unauthorised receptacles for clues to its origin.
European 21-24 January