

Agriculture & Food
Enter Goldfinger, the eco-friendly banana
A new variety of banana has been developed in Honduras which is more resistant to fungal diseases, reducing the need for spraying with fungicides.
The new banana, short, fat and apple-flavoured, is known as Goldfinger.
It was developed at the Honduran Foundation for Agricultural Research by crossing a wild Asian banana with a Brazilian variety.
It is resistant to black sigatoka and Panama disease and is less palatable to insects and to the root-eating nematodes that afflict plantations.
Spraying conventional crops with fungicides costs US$750 a hectare a year and is a hazard to the health of plantation workers and the environment; there is also evidence that black sigatoka had been becoming resistant to the chemicals.
New Scientists 17 April
Agriculture & Food
Banned pesticide in chocolate
Well-known brands of chocolate have been found to contain detectable levels of Lindane, a banned pesticide, according to research by the Women's Environmental Network (WEN).
Lindane, an organochloride compound used in sheep dips, has been linked to illnesses including aplastic anaemia.
Its use has been banned in six countries and restricted in 19.
The contamination originates in African and Pacific cocoa-growing countries, where WEN's research found that workers frequently spray Lindane and 29 other toxic pesticides on crops without adequate protection.
The manufacturers' organisation, the Biscuit, Chocolate and Confectionery Alliance, denied that the levels of pesticides found in the chocolate posed any health risk.
 "We estimate that a typical child would have to eat a tonne of chocolate a week for life to exceed the safe dose," said the alliance's spokesman.
WEN argues that because pesticides are not directly tested on humans no one can be certain of the safe dose and that the only safe answer is to remove all toxic contaminants.
Living Earth/Food Magazine, May 1993 Guardian 19 April
Agriculture & Food
Food industry's influence on Codex Alimentarius criticised
A report by the National Food Alliance (NFA) expresses concern about the disproportionate influence of the food industry on the Codex Alimentarius commission, the UN body that makes recommendations to governments on issues such as food safety, quality and labelling.
The report, Cracking the Codex, found that about a quarter of the members of the committees that agree codex standards come from the industry, with only a handful of consumer groups represented.
There is no evidence, according to Ian Lang of the NFA, that companies have exerted pressure to lower standards, but "their disproportionate presence on committees represents a conflict of interest that needs to be addressed." 
The codex has also been criticised for setting standards lower than those of national governments.
Codex officials say that governments are responsible for deciding who is represented on the committees.
The codex secretariat has pressed governments to encourage more consumer groups to attend.
Codex at present only makes recommendations but its rules will become international standards with the settlement of the Uruguay round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
Countries that set higher standards could then be asked to justify them if they block trade.
New Scientist 24 April
Agriculture & Food
Mad cow disease threatens Switzerland
News that Switzerland is facing an epidemic of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) or "mad cow disease" have revived fears of a spread of the disease throughout Europe.
The Swiss outbreak is puzzling scientists, who can find no evidence that any of the 28 cows that have died so far of BSE have eaten any food originating in another European country, the usual route of infection.
Concern about the disease has also been strengthened by reports of the death of a British dairy farmer from Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, a rare dementia in humans that causes the same kind of brain damage as BSE.
One of the farmer's cows had died of BSE, raising fears of cross-infection.
New cases of BSE in the UK "where 88,000 animals have died of the disease so far" rose from 675 to 885 a week over the past year, although the government's chief scientist insists the figure will start to decline by the end of this year.
A ban on British beef exports remains in force.
Ireland had a record number of cases last year, and Denmark had its first case of BSE last August: a cow imported from Scotland.
* Evidence is growing that BSE may be transmitted through the generations, after a third cow which has not received contaminated feed has been placed under a restriction order on the grounds of suspected infection.
All three were born after the July 1988 ban on using ruminant protein in feed for other ruminants.
European 8 April * Independent 23 April
Agriculture & Food
French drought fears grow
France has had another year of less than normal rainfall, raising fears of drought.
During the crucial five months (November-March) when groundwater resources are normally replenished, only November saw rainfall at normal or above-normal levels.
For the rest of the period, rainfall across the country was well below normal levels, with large areas of central and southern France receiving less than 60 per cent of normal rainfall, when compared to figures for the past 30 years.
France has been suffering from a series of dry winters, since that of 1988-89.
Le Monde 4-5 April
Agriculture & Food
Government pesticide tests "unreliable" 
Government tests for pesticide contamination in food have been condemned as unreliable, following the release of details of tests carried out by its Food Science Laboratory.
The tests involved sending food samples which had been deliberately spiked with pesticide to more than 50 commercial laboratories which are regularly used by the government for pesticide residue analysis.
In one test, bread was spiked with three pesticides.
Only 44 of the 58 labs identified each correctly, and seven claimed to identify pesticides that were not present.
In a second test, only 18 of the labs correctly identified four pesticides present in samples of beef fat, while 10 falsely identified other pesticides.
Many labs also gave inaccurate, and widely varying, estimates of the amount of pesticides present.
Most underestimated the total.
Food Commission information, 26 April Financial Times 26 April
Agriculture & Food
Set-aside condemned
Friends of the Earth has added its name to the list of environmental groups which have condemned the government's "set-aside" programme for redundant farmland, initially given a broad welcome by green campaigners.
For the most part, land that has been set aside is of poor conservation value, and has not been managed in a way which would bring out environmental benefits.
The scheme merely encourages farmers to intensify production on their remaining land, it is argued.
In effect, says FoE's agricultural campaigner Robin Maynard, set-aside is merely causing "rural dereliction" , and is "about as attractive to wildlife as a car park" .
The group is calling instead for an extension of the environmentally-sensitive areas (ESA) scheme, which compensates farmers for conserving selected sites of environmental importance, and for a move towards lower-input farming throughout the countryside, with the associated benefits of reduced fertilizer and pesticide use.
Living Earth/The Food Magazine, May/June 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Hedgerow decline slowing?
The decline in British hedgerows may be slowing for the first time this century, thanks to schemes to subsidise hedge planting.
Between 1984 and 1990, England and Wales lost 53,000 miles of hedgerow, nearly 20 per cent of the total, from a combination of neglect and being grubbed up by farmers for mechanised farming.
Farmers are now able to reclaim from the Ministry of Agriculture 50 per cent of the cost of providing hedges, gates and stiles.
The ministry says it has paid for 6,000 miles since the scheme started in 1986.
Last year it paid out £1.9 million.
A scheme run by the Countryside Commission gives farmers an annual payment for neglected hedgerow.
This has a budget of £4.3 million over three years, enough for 1,000 miles of hedge.
The Council for Protection of Rural England says, however, that although the schemes are welcome, the national trend may still be a net loss.
Guardian 17 April
Conservation: Habitat
Saddam drains Iraq's marshes
Attempts by the Iraqi government of President Saddam Hussein to destroy the way of life of the Ma'dan or Marsh Arabs will also obliterate the largest wetland ecosystem in the Middle East, according to western observers.
The marshes on the lower reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates cover an area of up to 17,000 square kilometres and provide a refuge for Shia opponents of Saddam's regime.
The government has responded with engineering works to prevent the rivers' winter and spring floods reaching the marshes; according to the UN, water has been prevented from reaching up to two-thirds of the marshes this spring.
Washington-based human rights organisation Middle East Watch says that "by the summer the damage is likely to be irreversible" with disastrous ecological, social and human consequences for the region".
Evidence from satellite photos, refugees and dissident groups reveals that almost the entire flow of the Euphrates has been diverted into a 560-kilometre drainage canal, known as the Third River, recently connected to the sea.
The flow of the Tigris has been regulated with locks and sluices and the river banks raised to prevent water reaching the marshes.
Iraqi engineers claim that the Third River is designed to reclaim 1.5 million square kilometres of salt-encrusted fields, which could increase Iraq's crop production by 50 per cent.
The more immediate purpose, according to Middle East Watch, is to drain the marshes.
Witnesses describe how the army initially bombards an area of marshes to drive away the population.
Engineers then move in to build dykes to help in draining the area.
Mines are then laid to prevent the embankments from attack.
Hundreds of thousands of people are reported to have fled the area.
Wildlife is also threatened in an area described by the International Wildfowl and Wetlands Research Bureau as the most important wintering site for birds in the whole of western Eurasia.
Iraq has not designated the wetlands for protection under the international Ramsar convention.
New Scientist 17 April BBC Wildlife, May 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Israel to restore wetlands
Israel is attempting to recreate part of the Hula wetlands, drained in the 1950s to create arable land for farming.
Lake Hula and the surrounding wetlands once covered some 400 square kilometres south of the sources of the River Jordan, supporting a unique ecosystem in which tropical and temperate species lived together.
Yields from the peat lands that had been part of the swamp were disappointing, however, and the land became subject to subsidence and oxidation.
 "The land turned into a desert for all practical purposes," says Giora Shaham, director of the restoration project.
Now the Jordan is to be diverted to reflood the swamplands, creating potential for tourism to generate income for local farming communities.
It is hoped that many of the species that once inhabited the wetlands will return, although some are believed to have become extinct.
Government agencies, local communities and conservation groups have agreed that 24 square kilometres of the former swamp should be given over to conservation and tourism.
There are disputes, however, between local communities, which wish to maximise earnings from tourism, and conservationists, who hope to minimise human intrusions.
New Scientist 17 April
Conservation: Habitat
Opposition mounts to South African mining project
Controversy over proposed open-cast mining in the Lake St Lucia wetlands, Natal [see ED 67], has been heightened by publication of a South African government environmental impact assessment which concludes that mining would not damage the area's delicate dune ecosystem.
The area is designated under the Ramsar convention as a wetland of international importance.
It is home to wildlife including hippos, crocodiles, monkeys, bucks, cheetahs, and several dozen species of birds, as well as a complex dune forest.
Conservationists, supported by the African National Congress (ANC), have rejected the assessment's conclusion.
They cite instead a report by representatives of Ramsar, the international wetlands convention, which warns that extensive mining would be sure to cause irreparable damage to the area.
The ANC has tabled a bill before parliament which would outlaw mineral exploitation on all 12 of the country's Ramsar sites.
In response, the government has set up a judicial inquiry, which is to consider submissions over two months, before a final decision by Minerals and Energy Minister George Bartlett.
BBC Wildlife, May 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Draining peatbogs accelerates greenhouse effect
Draining peatbogs to plant trees releases more carbon dioxide than can ever be taken up and stored by the planted trees, according to a report by Friends of the Earth.
Do not Disturb!
Peatbogs and the Greenhouse Effect, shows that the world's peatlands are a major carbon store: covering 3 per cent of the land area they contain three times as much carbon as tropical rainforests, which cover nearly 6 per cent of the land area.
The drainage of peatbogs for forestry and agriculture is making a significant net contribution to greenhouse gas emissions, the report concludes.
Bogs accumulate carbon for thousands of years; trees may accumulate carbon more rapidly for perhaps 100 years, but the carbon will be released when the timber is harvested.
Tree News Spring 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Tree planting better without peat
The Countryside Commission is encouraging tree planting without the use of peat after research has shown that there is no evidence that peat is helpful to tree growth and in some cases might actually be harmful.
Plantings in the National Forest, the 12 community forests and with the aid of landscape conservation grants should not use peat, the Commission says.
Some 2.5 million cubic metres of peat are used annually in UK horticulture.
Tree News Spring 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Incentives to conserve Flow Country
Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH) has announced a scheme to protect the peatlands of the Flow Country in Caithness and Sutherland.
Owners, tenants and crofters of peatland sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) will be offered annual payments in return for five-year management agreements to maintain and enhance peatland vegetation and wildlife.
Payments will range from £200-4,000 a year, depending on the size of the area concerned.
The Flow Country, one of the largest areas of blanket bog in the world, covers some 400,000 hectares, of which one-sixth has been severely damaged by conifer afforestation.
SSSIs now cover 106,000 hectares and SNH believes a further 69,000 hectares should be considered for SSSI status.
Tree News Spring 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Coastal protection sites kept under wraps
A map showing areas of British coastal waters being considered for protection under the European Community's habitats directive is apparently being withheld from public distribution at the request of the Department of the Environment.
The directive requires greater protection for sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs); however, the SSSI system ends at the low-tide mark, so the government will have to identify a new set of important marine sites.
The map, drawn up by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, highlights waters off up to 10 per cent of the British coast that could be designated as special areas for conservation under the directive, but so far discussion of the sites has been confined to marine scientists within the British statutory nature conservation bodies.
Officials now say the map was designed purely for internal discussion.
The government originally promised to publish a consultation document on how it proposed to implement the directive by autumn 1992.
The DoE now says this is likely to be published "in the summer" .
It must provide a list of designated sites by mid-1995.
New Scientist 1 May
Conservation: Habitat
Campaigners oppose development of Tokyo wetland
The Uchikawa wetland, a seven-hectare tidal flat in Tokyo Bay, is becoming a test case of Japan's willingness to protect its remaining natural habitats.
Plans for the wetland, which represents a quarter of Tokyo's remaining natural shoreline, to be filled in to provide a refuge for local people in the event of an earthquake are being opposed by local campaigners.
Protesters point out that an open sports ground on the waterfront could act as a refuge, and believe that the real impetus for the wetland's destruction comes from an alliance of local politicians and construction companies.
Japan has been slow to protect its marshes and tidal flats, despite joining the Ramsar Convention in 1980; since then it has listed only four wetlands for protection.
Later this year Japan will host the conference on signatories to the convention.
The Japanese archipelago is an important migration route for birds but nearly half its tidal flats have been reclaimed since the second world war.
New Scientist 1 May
Conservation: Habitat
Southern US forests protected
The US government has agreed measures to protect the habitat of the red-cockaded woodpecker, an endangered species, on land owned by logging company Georgia-Pacific Corporation.
The company will set aside at least four hectares of forest around each of the 100-odd woodpecker colonies in its lands in Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi and South Carolina.
In return, the company will be able to go ahead with logging on the rest of its 1.6 million hectares of forest.
Similar agreements are being worked on in California to protect the habitat of the California gnatcatcher.
New Scientist 24 April
Conservation: Species
International campaign for migratory birds
A campaign to protect the habitat of migratory birds has been launched by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB), as part of an international initiative by Birdlife International, which seeks official protection for 2,680 sites within Europe classified as crucial for the survival of many birds.
The RSPB Save our Shorebirds campaign draws attention to the absence of a national strategy for the coast in the UK and the lack of adequate powers to implement a coastal management scheme.
It calls for financial support for agriculture to be targeted at coastal habitat creation and management, and asks the Government to produce a clear national strategy on rising sea levels.
A new RSPB report, A Shore Future, describes the main threats facing migratory birds as port and industrial development, pollution, barrages, dredging, land claim, intensive agriculture, bait digging, cockling, mineral extraction, recreational use, marinas and rising sea levels.
The RSPB estimates that, on average, up to 1.5 million waders and up to a million wildfowl spend the winters on the UK coasts, about 80 per cent of them on estuaries.
Of the 238 important bird areas in the UK, 130 are coastal.
More than 80 of these include mudflats, sand dunes, salt marshes and shingle banks.
RSPB information 21 April
Conservation: Species
Giant clam rescue operation in Australia
Thousands of giant clams specially bred for a project on reproduction are being moved to secret sites on the Great Barrier Reef due to overcrowding.
The exact location is being kept secret to avoid poaching, which almost drove the giant clam to extinction 20 years ago.
Around 50,000 giant clams were bred on Orpheus Island in Queensland by scientists from James Cook University, and approximately 4,000 have been transported by the Royal Australian Navy as they were not getting enough sunlight and water circulation.
The undertaking will enable scientists to test theories about how marine life moves about the reef.
New Scientist 24 April
Conservation: Species
Proposal for elephant shooting rights
The Economic Commission for Africa has proposed an international exchange in elephant shares.
Under the scheme, individual shareholders would pay an annual fee which would go towards elephant conservation, in return for being able to kill "their" elephant after 10 years.
Guardian 9 April
Conservation: Species
US acts to protect porpoise
Responding to high death-rates in gill nets, the US National Marine Fisheries Service (NFMS) has proposed listing the Gulf of Maine harbour porpoise population under the Endangered Species Act.
The population ranges from Nova Scotia and the Bay of Fundy south to Florida.
Gill net fishing is blamed for the unintentional deaths of between 1,200 and 2,800 harbour porpoises every year in the Gulf of Maine alone.
A recent Canadian study suggests that 2,000 are killed annually in the Gulf of St Lawrence, and unconfirmed reports suggest larger numbers are dying in the Bay of Fundy and along the coasts of Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador.
The NFMS recommends a goal of reducing annual harbour porpoise deaths to no more than 2 per cent of the estimated total population of 45,000.
The harbour porpoise is already designated as endangered under Canadian law, but such designation does not incur the same level of protection as in the US, despite repeated warnings about the level of porpoise deaths.
The Canadian government has now decided to place observers on New Brunswick fishing boats to assess how and where the porpoises are captured.
BBC Wildlife, May 1993
Conservation: Species
 "Fake" rhino horn increases as real thing disappears
With rhino numbers in Zimbabwe at an all-time low due to poaching, rhino horn smugglers have taken to constructing fake horns in an effort to sustain their trade.
The forgeries, made out of materials such as cow horn and giraffe hair, or sheep bones and bitumen, can sell for up to US$30,000 each.
The poachers are continuing to kill rhino despite the de-horning operation embarked on by wildlife authorities [see EDs 69, 68, 59-60].
Green Magazine, May 1993
Conservation: Species
Russian tigers face shortage of prey
Tiger populations in the Russian Far East are facing a shortage of prey species, ironically at a time when their own numbers have recovered substantially.
There are now around 430 Amur tigers in the Ussuri nature reserve, up from just 30 before the war.
But, largely thanks to uncontrolled hunting, there are now only around 60,000 other animals, including deer, on which the tigers prey — about one-fifth of the number required.
Hunting has now been banned, but experts fear it will take many years for their populations to recover.
Guardian 23 April
Conservation: Species
Norway threatens to leave whaling body
Norway has threatened to leave the International Whaling Commission (IWC) unless it is allowed to hunt minke whales in the north-east Atlantic and the six-year ban on commercial whaling is lifted.
The Norwegian fisheries minister, Jan Henry Olsen, says that minke whale stocks are not endangered and points out that IWC rules should manage stocks, not just preserve them.
Minke whales are estimated to take as many cod as fishermen are allowed to catch.
The minister wants an annual sustainable harvest for minke whales to be set at May's IWC meeting in Japan.
The Norwegian whaling fleet has already set sail to study stock sizes and to establish how many fish minke whales eat, and in May will begin commercial catches for the first time since 1987.
The whale hunters from the Lofoten Islands, the heart of Norway's whaling industry, are eager to put their point of view, saying that whales have been hunted for ten thousand years and are an integral part of the local diet.
Guardian 9 April Independent? 17 April
Conservation: Species
Wolves reappear in western Germany
The wolf has begun to return to western Germany after an absence of more than 140 years.
It is described by wildlife experts as the first animal to benefit from the collapse of communism.
The last wolf was shot in west Germany as far back as 1846 and since then it has been registered as extinct.
In eastern Germany a female wolf has given birth to a cub for the first time in decades.
The wolves have been coming in from eastern Europe where they fled to escape hunters and human population expansion.
The former communist leaders in eastern Germany were enthusiastic deerhunters and allowed wolves to be hunted and shot in order to protect game reserves.
By the time communism collapsed in East Germany in 1989, wolves were virtually extinct, but since unification hunting restrictions have been introduced.
Wolves prey on small deer and would therefore keep down Germany's huge game stocks, which currently have to be culled by hunters.
European 8 April
Economics & Industry
Ethical investment on the increase
Investment in green and ethical investment funds across Europe has increased by 500 per cent over the last five years, according to a survey by the Merlin Environmental Research Unit.
This reveals that more than 70 investment schemes vet companies on ethical and/or environmental grounds.
They account for £734 million, of which more than £400 million is in UK-based funds.
Nearly half the funds were, however, unable to offer independent substantiation of their ethical claims, and the report showed that some made surprising investment choices, with Nestlé and RTZ, among others, attracting "ethical" investment.
Green Magazine, May 1993
Economics & Industry
Queen's Awards for Environmental Achievement
The UK Queen's Awards for Industry system has been extended this year to include an environmental category, with twelve companies being judged worthy of recognition for a "significant advance" offering "major benefits in environmental terms compared to existing products, technology or processes" .
Environmentalists have welcomed the new scheme, but expressed concern that receipt of an award may be misinterpreted as an overall endorsement of a company.
Among the 12 recipients are: Johnson Matthey, whose autocatalysts, are world leaders in a global market worth hundreds of millions of pounds a year; Pilkington, whose energy saving glass is projected to be worth more than £100 million a year by the late 1990s; Agricultural Genetics Company and Horticultural Research International, which have developed biological alternatives to chemical pesticides; Sericol, for the development of water-based screen printing inks; Ricoh UK Products, for chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) elimination in selenium drum production; and Kerry Ultrasonics, whose water-based cleaning system replaces the need for CFCs.
This year's list has a southern orientation, with no winners at all in north-east England, Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland.
Nor are there any awards to industries seen as critical in environmental terms, such as bulk chemicals, oil and gas, paper and pulp, mining and quarrying, batteries and energy storage and packaging.
Financial Times 21 April
Economics & Industry
Companies face pressure on environmental reporting
A new study on corporate environmental reporting has concluded that "major companies that do not produce environmental reports will begin to be judged as poor performers in other areas, such as quality" .
Coming Clean, which analyses the views of over 70 companies that have produced free-standing environmental reports in Japan, Europe and North America, has been jointly prepared by Touche Ross, environmental consultancy SustainAbility and the International Institute for Sustainable Development.
The current emphasis on providing more qualitative environmental information is noted, though the study predicts that the next generation of reports will contain more quantitative data in order to benchmark company and industry performance.
The key target audience for the reports was overwhelmingly stated as being the company's own employees.
Other targets differed by region: in Japan, 89 per cent of respondents named consumers as a key audience, compared to just 43 per cent in Europe and 26 per cent in North America.
Though most report makers were not initially committed to reporting on an annual basis, nearly two thirds now feel that an annual report is appropriate.
Environmental reporting is increasingly seen by companies as a competitive rather than a public relations issue, the study concludes.
Though public relations features highly among the reasons for issuing a report, especially in Japan, duty to the environment is more often quoted as a motive in Europe and North America.
Guardian 7 April
Energy
Gabcikovo dam conflict to world court
Hungary and Slovakia have agreed to refer their dispute over the Gabcikovo dam [see ED 69]to the International Court of Justice.
This follows Hungarian and international concern at the environmental impact of the construction of the dam and the threat to water supplies from the Danube.
Under pressure from the European Community, the two countries have agreed to operate a temporary water management scheme, which aims to reconcile the Slovakian need for increased energy with Hungary's fears about environmental impact.
They have also agreed to discuss other issues at prime ministerial level, such as the treatment of the Hungarian minority in Slovakia.
Guardian 8 April
Energy
Bulgarian concern over Greek dam plan
The Bulgarian authorities have expressed concern over the Greek Electrical Company's programme to dam the River Mesta.
The river rises in Bulgaria, but flows for more than half its 150 mile length through Greece en route to the Aegean.
The programme, which involves four hydro-electric power plants, has already drawn opposition from Greenpeace, the World Wide Fund for Nature, and Greek environmental groups, who fear that it will damage the ecosystem of Thrace, which straddles the border between the two countries.
East-West Environment, April 1993
Energy
OECD countries energy use set to rise by 30 per cent Energy consumption in the member states of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD — which groups most of the industrialized countries) is set to rise by 30 per cent over the period 1990-2010, according to a report by the International Energy Agency.
Oil consumption will increase by 20 per cent, requiring an increase of 9 million barrels-per-day in imports.
Energy requirements of developing countries are expected to double over the same period, due to population and economic growth, the Agency estimates.
Le Monde 29 April
Energy
Emergency measures over energy in Philippines
The national energy crisis in the Philippines has taken a new turn with President Fidel Ramos being granted emergency powers to charge higher rates for electricity, after the World Bank suspended a $250 million loan to the state-owned National Power Corporation.
The Supreme Court in the Philippines had previously blocked an 11 per cent increase in electricity charges, which was needed to service the loan from the World Bank.
Legislators hope that the Electric Power Crisis Act will persuade the World Bank to reconsider its decision.
The Act also allows President Ramos to negotiate contracts to build new power plants, bypassing the public bidding process, and requires state-owned casinos to give up 10 per cent of their profits over the next five years to the National Power Corporation.
Large-scale energy shortages during 1991 and 1992 cost the Philippines between $1.2 and $1.6 billion.
Power cuts of up to 10 hours a day were caused in Manila when three power stations were simultaneously closed for repairs in March.
The government's priority is to construct more coal and geothermal plants as soon as possible, rather than looking at energy efficiency and alternative strategies.
New Scientist 17 April
Energy
Report on tidal energy
One fifth of Britain's energy could be provided by tidal power using underwater windmills, according to a report commissioned by the Energy Technology Support Unit of the Department of Trade and Industry.
The power would come from sea currents which flow at up to 12 miles per hour around parts of the coast, with the greatest potential in the Pentland Firth off Scotland and around the Channel Islands.
The report, produced by a subsidiary of civil engineers Balfour Beatty, anticipated technical problems with the machinery, such as corrosion damage and encrustation by marine organisms.
The exact cost, and hence the viability, of the energy source remains to be determined, though it is projected to be about 10 pence a unit, five times the existing price of coal but only twice the cost of nuclear power.
An experimental tidal power station with a 10 kilowatt two-blade turbine is being developed in Loch Linnhe with the backing of Scottish Nuclear.
Guardian 15 April Financial Times 15 April New Scientist 24 April
Energy
Ukraine opts for wind farms
Ukraine's electricity utility has ordered wind turbines capable of delivering 1,000 MW.
Under deals agreed with two US companies, the machines will be constructed in former Soviet military factories.
The power will be supplied at an estimated cost of around US$0.05 per kilowatt hour — competitive with fossil fuel power and considerably cheaper than nuclear power, which continues to provide much of the country's electricity from a number of ageing reactors, including those at Chernobyl.
The wind power is expected to come onstream in the late 1990s.
Greenpeace have recommended that funding agencies should act to set up heating control and energy-efficient light bulb factories in the Ukraine, in an effort to cut electricity consumption and thereby further reduce dependency on nuclear power.
Green Magazine, May 1993
Energy
Europe's biggest wind farm planned
An application to build Europe's biggest wind farm has been lodged with the Department of Trade and Industry by TriGen Windpower, a joint venture by UK, US and Japanese companies.
The proposed £80m farm would comprise more than 250 wind turbines on the western edge of the Kielder Forest in Northumberland, with the capacity to feed more than 80 megawatts into the national grid.
The three-square mile site is 1,500 feet above sea level, and is owned by Forest Enterprise, the Forestry Commission's estate management arm.
The project will apply for a subsidy under the UK government's non-fossil fuel obligation scheme, which requires electricity companies to buy some energy from renewable resources.
TriGen hopes to have the farm operational by the end of 1995.
Financial Times 8 April
Environmental Politics
US to sign Rio biodiversity convention
President Bill Clinton has announced that he will be signing the UNCED biodiversity treaty.
This represents a reversal of the previous US policy, as former President Bush refused to sign the treaty when it was first proposed at last year's Earth summit in Rio [see ED 59/60].
The US administration wants to add a clause however, clarifying what it views as ambiguities on intellectual property and financing mechanisms.
This aims to protect the biotechnology companies which may otherwise be forced to share the benefits of research and patents with countries in which genetic material is found.
The US also objects to what it sees as an open-ended commitment to fund biodiversity protection in developing countries.
The President also promised legislation and controls by August to stabilise US carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000. * In a statement marking Earth Day, Clinton also announced a package of minor environmental measures, including a requirement for federal departments to start buying alternative fuelled cars, and for the White House to start using recycled paper.
Financial Times 16 April Guardian 22 April Independent 22 April
Environmental Politics
US presidential environment office set up
Following the abolition of the Council for Environmental Quality [see ED 67], which was widely criticized as ineffective, President Clinton has announced the establishment of a new Office on Environmental Policy, based in the White House.
Its aim, according to Vice-President Al Gore, is to "ensure that environmental considerations are brought to bear at the earliest stages in the development of economic policy" .
Due to spending cuts, however, the new Office is likely to have fewer staff and less budget than its predecessor.
Green Magazine, May 1993
Environmental Politics
Euro-MPs criticize environmental policy
Euro-MPs of all parties have criticized the European Commission for its alleged weakness on implementing an integrated environmental policy.
In a debate on green issues, the MPs singled out the Commission's failure to ensure that projects receiving support from regional and structure funds were subject to environmental assessments.
The chairman of the environmental committee, Ken Collins, described the Commission as "uninspiring, uninteresting and unconvincing" , and warned that "the cost of not integrating environmental policy" into Community activities could result in pollution on the scale suffered by Eastern Europe.
 "If you don't deal responsibly with the environment" , Collins said, "you can cripple whole economies and devastate whole areas" .
Environmental commissioner Ioannis Paleokrassas announced that a special committee had been set up to carry out impact assessments on the application of regional and structural funds, and that a timetable would be drawn up for the implementation of the "Fifth Action programme for the environment" — a legislative framework for the future.
Independent 22 April
Environmental Politics
Lynx reforms
The anti-fur trade campaign, Lynx, has effectively been reformed after it went into liquidation following the loss of a libel case brought by a fur farm [see ED 67].
The new organization, to be known as "Respect for Animals" , will campaign both on the fur trade and other animal rights issues.
Green Magazine, May 1993
Environmental Politics
Greenpeace activist assassinated in Brazil
Paulo Cesar Vinha, a regional director of Greenpeace in Espirito-Santo state, north of Rio de Janeiro, has been murdered.
Cesar Vinha, 37, had led a campaign to halt the illegal extraction of sand from a beach at Ponta-da-Fruta in the state.
Le Monde 2 May
Forests
Call for boycott of Canadian timber
Canadian activists are touring Europe to encourage consumers to boycott the country's timber and forest products.
Valerie Langer and Garth Lenz of Vancouver Island's Friends of Clayoquot South are drawing attention to Canada's plans to clear-fell 88 per cent of its ancient boreal and temperate forest.
Michael Clark, first secretary at the Canadian High Commission in London, admits to being "horrified" by some of the logging practices he has seen and says that the dispute between his government and the campaigners is not about the importance of conserving ancient forest but about how much of it should be conserved.
The UK imports Canadian timber and forest products worth over £50 million a year.
The Guardian 9 April
Forests
Forestry review to consider privatisation
The British government has set up an inter-departmental committee to review the future of forestry in the country.
Chaired by the Scottish Office and including civil servants from other ministries, including the Treasury, the committee will look at both the future ownership of the Forestry Commission's woodlands and the effectiveness of government tree-planting incentives.
Conservation groups and the Labour Party fear that privatisation of the Commission's 900,000 hectares of woodland would provide less public access and weaken the drive for "sensitive forestry" .
Robert Rickman, director of consultancy Forest Investment Management, believes the Forestry Commission's estate should be broken up into geographically defined chunks for sale, with woods of special amenity value handed over to conservation bodies or local authorities.
The Forestry Commission was itself split into two in 1992: the Forestry Authority, which regulates planting and gives out grants, and the Forestry Enterprise, which runs the forests.
The Ramblers Association opposes privatisation on the grounds that it would threaten people's "freedom to roam" .
Tree-planting has fallen from a peak of 29,000 hectares in the year to March 1988 to 17,300 hectares in 1992, following the replacement of tax incentives for planting by a grant system in the 1988 budget.
The old system had fallen into disrepute because of its widespread use as a tax dodge, and because it encouraged conifer planting, but it is recognised that grants are not as effective.
Some in the forestry industry would like to see tax regulations used to encourage individuals to invest in tree planting, through vehicles such as unit trusts.
Financial Times 7 April
Forests: Tropical
Forests shrink as debt rises
The annual national rate of destruction of tropical rainforest has increased by 147 per cent since the Third World debt crisis began in 1982, according to an analysis by Friends of the Earth (FoE) of figures published by the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
FoE makes a direct link between the destruction of the rainforests and the adoption by Third World countries, at the prompting of international financial institutions, of policies designed to generate export earnings with which to repay their debts.
 "Forests," it says, "have been swept aside to grow crops for western consumers, flooded by huge hydroelectric dams to power mineral smelters and cut down to provide timber for export markets." 
FoE calls for large-scale debt cancellation to help achieve sustainable development in the Third World and draws attention to the role of UK commercial banks in the debt crisis.
Friends of the Earth information 7 April
Forests: Tropical
Logging to start on Guyana concession
Logging consortium Barama is soon to start work in a four million hectare concession in Guyana.
The Guyanese government secretly leased the rainforest area to the consortium members, South Korea's Sunkyong and Malaysia's Samling Timbers, in 1991.
Neither the government nor the consortium has consulted the area's Indian peoples about the concession; at least seven Indian communities of Caribs, Arawak, Warau and Akawaio lie within the concession and the Amerindian Peoples' Association of Guyana has appealed for the concession to be suspended.
Survival International is lobbying the newly-elected Guyanese government to recognise Indian land rights.
Barama, which initially denied that any Indians inhabited the area, has begun road construction and plans also to build a sawmill and plywood factories.
Its secret contract also permits mining.
Survival International information, April 1993
Forests: Tropical
Illegally-imported timber on sale in UK
Timber from one of the rarest trees on earth is on sale at British timber yards, although trade in it is banned under UK, European and international law.
Friends of the Earth have found Brazilian rosewood, from the country's fast-disappearing Atlantic coast rainforests, openly on sale at a suppliers in Derbyshire.
Rosewood is listed under Appendix 1 of CITES (the Convention on Trade in Endangered Species), to which Britain is a signatory.
Appendix 1 species are banned from all international trade, except where special licensing arrangements apply.
None do so in this case.
Friends of the Earth have highlighted the case to counter the government's claim that it is able to monitor adequately all imports of timber, in compliance with CITES regulations.
Rosewood, used mainly for fine furniture and musical instruments, is one of only six commercially traded timber species covered by CITES.
Friends of the Earth information, 3 May
Forests: Tropical
Micronesian forests face narcotic threat
The forests of Micronesia are under threat from cultivation of a plant used to make a popular local narcotic.
Sakau, a narcotic slime served at most community gatherings and sold in local bars, is made from the roots of Piper methysticum, a relative of pepper.
The plant grows much faster in highland areas, however, maturing in two years rather than five.
Clearance for cultivation threatens the islands' tropical forests and brings with it road construction, settlement and damage to water supplies.
Forest cover has been substantially reduced over the past two decades, although the local people are also reported to be becoming more aware of the need for conservation measures.
International Herald Tribune 20 April
Global Warming
 "Coral bleaching" reported from Australia
Corals in the seas off northern Queensland are losing their colour and will die if the condition persists, according to local reports.
The colour is produced by colourful algae which are expelled when heat stressed.
Record high temperatures were recorded in northern Australia in March.
Such "coral bleaching" has been reported from a range of tropical locations in the past two years [see EDs passim].
Australian Broadcasting Commission 19 March
Global Warming
Siberian warming predicted
Temperatures in Western Siberia can be expected to increase by between one and two degrees centigrade in the near future, according to the Russian Academy of Sciences.
Its estimates are based on studies of climate conditions 65,000 years ago, when the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere was similar to that predicted for the year 2000.
Guardian 23 April
Global Warming
UK alone in opposition to carbon tax
All European Community members except the UK are now backing the proposed carbon tax [see ED 69].
Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland were won over at a meeting of Environment Ministers by promises that the tax will be levied only on energy use or carbon dioxide emissions above a threshold value linked to the community average.
Poorer members with below-average emissions, such as these four, will pay little or no tax.
The UK claims it is making its contribution to reducing emissions by imposing value added tax (VAT) on domestic fuel; the government says the VAT measures make it less likely that a carbon tax will be needed to meet the target of stabilising CO2 emissions at 1990 levels by 2000.
Greenpeace, however, estimates that VAT could cut Community emissions by only 1.5 million tonnes a year by 2000.
Cuts of 10 million tonnes a year are needed to freeze emissions at 1990 levels.
* Norway has cut emissions of CO2 by 5 per cent snce 1990, the Norwegian government has announced.
Independent 15 April New Scientist 1 May * European 29 April
Nuclear Power
Government "not notified" of plutonium airlift
The British government has denied that it was notified by the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) of shipments of plutonium by air from Germany to Scotland.
The plutonium "80 fuel rods" was shipped in containers that are designed to withstand an impact of 30mph.
The containers meet current international standards, considered inadequate by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
UKAEA claimed, despite government denials, that it had informed the Department of Transport of the shipments from Germany to its plant at Dounreay via Wick airport.
Air shipments of plutonium had been "routine" for 20 years, the authority said.
The fuel rods were originally destined for the now-defunct nuclear reactor at Kalka; they are being sent to the UK for storage because it is cheaper.
A further 120 rods are expected in the next few months and air transport is a possibility, the UKAEA says.
* The UKAEA was fined £8,000 with £10,500 costs after the exposure of workers at the Harwell nuclear laboratory to radiation.
Two employees were exposed to doses of up to 12 per cent of the annual limit during the decommissioning of a reactor.
The authority admitted the charges.
Independent 9 April * Guardian 17 April
Nuclear Power
Link between childhood cancer and radiation "in doubt" 
Doubt has been cast on a study which suggested that children of fathers who had been exposed to low levels of radiation in the course of their jobs were more likely to develop leukaemia.
The original study, carried out by the late Professor Martin Gardner of Southampton University, found that there was between a fivefold and eightfold risk of cancer in children if their fathers had been exposed to significant levels of radiation.
The new study, carried out by the Cancer Research Campaign's Epidemiology Unit at Oxford University, found no difference in cancer rates between children whose fathers had been exposed to radiation and those whose fathers had not.
The study took samples from workers at the Dounreay, Hunterston, Chapelcross and Torness nuclear plants, and Ministry of Defence staff from Rosyth, Faslane, Coleport and Vulcan bases.
Writing in the British Medical Journal, the researchers concluded that there was "no significant association [between childhood cancer]and paternal preconceptual exposure to radiation" .
It suggested that the Gardner study's findings could be due either to chance, or that any link between radiation exposure and childhood cancer could be more indirect than through sperm mutation…
Guardian 30 April
Nuclear Power
 "Safe" levels of radiation cut
The National Radiological Protection Board has proposed significant cuts in "safe" levels of radiation exposure.
It recommends that workers in the nuclear and radiological industries should in future be limited to exposure of 20 millisieverts a year, as opposed to 50 at present.
Members of the public should be restricted to 1 millisievert; their current limit is five.
The recommendations will become a legal requirement once approved by parliament.
The new restrictions have been triggered by further studies of survivors of the Hiroshima explosion, which have revealed that long-term radiation hazards may be more serious than previously thought.
The effect of the new limits will be felt most in the X-ray departments of hospitals.
Surveys had shown that X-ray doses vary by a factor of 20 or 30 between different hospitals, and that about a quarter of all hospitals had been giving patients unnecessarily high doses.
Guardian 27 April
Nuclear Power
Greenpeace warns of reactor corrosion danger
Greenpeace has issued a report drawing attention to a growing risk of accidents at nuclear power stations due to problems of corrosion under tension.
More than half the reactors in the Western world are at risk from this kind of problem, Greenpeace says.
According to the report, the metal alloy used in the construction of many of the parts of pressurised water reactors has proved less resistant to corrosion than expected, resulting in cracks appearing.
The phenomenon was first detected at the Bugey-3 reactor in France in September 1991, but Greenpeace criticises the state electricity company, Electricité de France (EDF), for devoting more attention to rectifying problems as they occur than to examining the causes.
The problem has been found in 12 of the 17 reactors so far checked.
Greenpeace says the problems bring the margin of safety below an acceptable level and calls for the immediate closure of the affected reactors.
EDF has called Greenpeace's reaction "excessive" .
The nuclear authorities in Belgium, Sweden and Switzerland have also announced checks on their own similarly constructed reactors.
Le Monde 1 April
Nuclear Power
Risk of US nuclear disaster is "high" 
There is a high likelihood of a disaster at a US nuclear weapons factory because of deteriorating equipment, worker sabotage or inept management, according to an internal report by the Energy Department's Office of Nuclear Safety.
The department's contractors are "failing to adequately protect workers, the public and the environment," the report says.
The report was issued by Office for Nuclear Safety director Steven Blush in an effort to persuade new Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary to change her plans to merge his office with the Office for Environmental Safety and Health.
The report lists dozens of safety violations and incidents of sabotage discovered by Blush's staff to support his argument for the office's continuing existence.
Blush was due to resign on 1 June, but was removed from his post by O'Leary when the report became public.
Observers noted that, four years after then Energy Secretary James Watkins pledged to change the "culture" of nuclear weapons plants to tackle admitted safety problems, the system remains flawed.
The Energy Department described Blush's report as "self-serving" and contradictory.
International Herald Tribune 19 April
Nuclear Power
Marshall Islanders receive compensation
The Marshall Islands nuclear claims tribunal has awarded over US$20 million to 436 islanders suffering ill effects from the US nuclear weapons testing programme in 1946-54.
However, only $6 million has actually been paid out, because of an expected shortfall in compensation funds.
The tribunal says it has received over 3,000 personal injury claims.
Radio Australia 29 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Safety fears surround Brazilian nuclear plant
Speculation is surrounding the future of Brazil's Angra-1 nuclear plant, following an unexplained accident in March that has led to the reactor's indefinite closure.
Reports of a rise in radiation levels within the plant have led environmentalists to suggest that there may be cracks in the reactor's primary container system and that the plant should be shut down for good.
The 626-MW Angra-1, the country's only completed reactor, and its sister plant, Angra-2, which is still under construction, are sited in a cove on Brazil's "Green Coast" , a popular tourist area.
Surrounding mountains make the site difficult to evacuate in an emergency and the area lies in an earthquake fault zone, adding to safety concerns.
Earth tremors caused structural damage in Angra village in 1988 but the nuclear plant's operators, state-owned Furnas Centrais Electricas, denied that the reactor had been damaged, although it has since been closed several times for "repairs" .
Furnas insisted that the most recent stoppage was for routine maintenance until Greenpeace made public information about the incident that it had received from a worker at the plant, later confirmed by the Brazilian nuclear energy commission.
Independent 13 April
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl effects "worse than estimated" 
New research into the effects of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in 1986 reveal that more radioactivity may have been released than originally thought.
Ukrainian and Western researchers now believe that the fire at the plant was not extinguished by material dropped from helicopters within the first 10 days after the accident, as originally claimed, but simply burned itself out.
This would have resulted in more radioactive material being released.
Alexander Burovoi, head of the permanent team researching the accident, and Alexander Sich of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, estimate that at least 35 per cent of the radiocaesium and 50 per cent of the iodine in the reactor core was released: twice or three times the estimates released by the Soviet authorities in 1986.
Their discoveries have worrying implications for the 600,000 people thought to have been affected by the release of radiation.
Concerns are also being expressed about the impact of measures taken to contain the accident, including the security of the concrete sarcophagus built around the core.
The three remaining reactors at Chernobyl are still in operation, and produced 5.2 per cent of Ukraine's electricity in 1991.
The government is committed to closing the plant by the end of this year, but the local nuclear lobby is pressing for the deadline to be extended, arguing that it is dangerous to close a reactor down quickly.
Financial Times 21 April
Nuclear Power
Russia plays down scale of Tomsk-7 blast
The Russian authorities have been playing down the severity of an explosion at the secret Tomsk-7 reprocessing plant in Siberia.
The explosion, on 6 April, contaminated 120 square kilometres of forest near the city of Tomsk, but the Russian Atomic Energy Ministry said that the amount of plutonium released was "negligible" .
An explosion in a tank containing uranium and plutonium was reported to have started a fire, leading to the release of a radioactive cloud.
There were no casualties.
Officials said that there were no plans to evacuate people from the formerly secret Tomsk-7 military settlement or the nearby city of Tomsk, which has a population of 500,000.
Children were evacuated from the village of Georgievka, within the contaminated area, in what was described as a "precautionary measure" .
Officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), visiting the plant in the week after the explosion, confirmed that, although the incident "which it said was the result of" human error "" had caused severe damage, very little radiation had been released.
The IAEA described the explosion as a "level three incident" (in which no radiation was released outside the plant) on its scale of severity, compared to level seven for the Chernobyl disaster in 1986.
However, the IAEA's report also revealed that 228 grams of plutonium were not accounted for.
Despite the damage, the Tomsk-7 plant is continuing to operate on a reduced scale.
France has been paying US$20 million a year to have nuclear waste reprocessed in Russia, reportedly at the Tomsk plant.
The incident has revived concerns about safety at nuclear establishments in the former Soviet Union.
ITAR-TASS 6 April Interfax 7 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) International Herald Tribune 8, 9, 20 April Le Monde 8 April Independent 8, 20 April New Scientist 24 April
Nuclear Power
Russia reveals details of waste dumping
A report by a commission set up by President Boris Yeltsin reveals the extent of dumping of nuclear materials at sea by Russia and the former Soviet Union [see ED 69].
The report warns that stopping the dumping will cost billions of dollars.
The report states that Russia and the former Soviet Union have dumped 92 petabecquerels (PBq) into the Arctic and Pacific Oceans, twice as much as the 46 PBq of admitted marine dumping by other countries, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The country's military and ice-breaking fleet has a total of 407 nuclear reactors, producing 20,000 cubic metres of liquid and 6,000 cubic metres of solid radioactive waste each year.
Plans in the 1970s and 1980s to build facilities to dispose of the waste were abandoned because the Soviet authorities "saw no actual danger from dumping radioactive waste at sea," the report says.
The issue has been brought to a head by disarmament treaties, ageing vessels and a shortage of money, according to Alexei Yablokov, Yeltsin's environmental adviser, who chaired the commission.
Some 35,000 spent fuel assemblies are stored on land and at sea, in dumps that are overfilled and do not meet international standards.
Some 27 PBq of radioactive material is stored in a "floating technical base" in the Arctic.
Yablokov estimated that it would cost "several tens of millions of dollars" simply to assess how much radiation was being released from submerged waste.
* South Korea and Russia are to carry out a joint survey to assess the damage caused by Soviet dumping of radioactive waste in the Sea of Japan.
Russia has welcomed the Korean contribution of experts, equipment and funds to finance the survey, expected to cost US$400,000, but has said it will have to continue dumping because it lacks the facilities or funds to process the waste on shore.
New Scientist 17 April * Independent 12 April
Nuclear Power
Russian research reactors "unsafe" 
All ten research reactors at Moscow's Kurchatov Institute of Atomic Energy are unsafe, according to the former head of the city's research reactor inspectorate, Vladimir Kuznetsov.
They have now been scheduled for closure.
Until recently, even the total number of research reactors in the country was unknown.
There are now estimated to be around 50 in the Moscow area, and 100 in the Russian federation as a whole.
Guardian 23 April
Nuclear Power
Armenia to reopen earthquake nuclear plant
The Armenian government has announced plans to reopen its sole nuclear power plant in an effort to overcome a mounting energy crisis, despite safety fears expressed by scientists and environmentalists.
The plant, situated on the outskirts of the capital, Yerevan, was closed after the devastating earthquake in 1988.
The government insists that it will only be restarted if it passes stringent safety tests, and that a technical council composed of Russian, American, French and German experts will oversee its operation.
Energy Minister of State Sepuh Tashdzhyan said he hoped the station could be reopened within 18 months.
 "Without that station, Armenia will collapse" , he said.
ITAR-TASS Agency, 14 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) Interfax News Agency, Moscow, 1 April European 15 April
Ozone layer
Ozone threat "over by 2000" 
The threat of ozone destruction should peak in about seven years' time, according to some scientists studying the problem.
After 2000, thanks to the impact of the Montreal Protocol, obliging countries to phase out use of ozone-depleting chemicals, the ozone layer should slowly start to thicken and become better able to block harmful ultraviolet rays.
 "The current and projected levels of ozone depletion do not appear to represent a catastrophe," says Michael Oppenheimer of the Environmental Defence Fund.
The view is likely to be controversial, as other research indicates that ozone loss could be worse than previously thought and that the problem could last for many generations.
Ozone depletion over the UK was 21 per cent greater than normal over the UK this spring, 10 per cent higher than last year.
Guardian 16 April
Ozone layer
Ozone levels at record lows
Global ozone levels have fallen to a record low, according to measurements by NASA's Nimbus-7 weather satellite.
Levels in the northern hemisphere were 9 per cent below normal in December 1992 and 11-12 per cent below normal in April.
NASA warns that the depletion was "much larger and of considerably longer duration" than previously observed.
However, levels in the northern hemisphere are still not as low as over the Antarctic.
The largest drops in ozone in the northern hemisphere were in the region stretching from latitude 10° North, the area that covers most of Europe, Asia and the US.
South of the Equator, the sharpest drops were between 10° South.
The extent of the depletion took scientists by surprise.
NASA researcher Jim Gleason said: "We predicted lower ozone in 1992, but nothing like the values we have observed." 
The satellite observations were mirrored by ground-based instruments in Britain, which recorded February levels of 20 per cent below average.
The most likely explanation for the decline is said to be the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in June 1991.
This effect will probably be temporary, says scientists, but this is no reason for complacency about ozone-depleting chemicals.
Other recently published satellite data reveals that such chemicals remained in the atmosphere much longer this winter than last.
Levels of chlorine monoxide, a particularly destructive compound of ozone-degrading chlorine, together with colder atmospheric temperatures that persisted a month longer than last year, pushed ozone levels down by as much as 20 per cent in some Arctic areas.
Ozone levels continued to decrease, by 0.7 per cent a day, in late February and early March this year, at a time when levels are normally rising.
*US space shuttle Discovery began a mission to study the ozone layer in early April.
**UK Environment Secretary Michael Howard has declared himself in favour of further curbs on ozone-depleting chemicals, notably methyl bromide.
New Scientist 1 May International Herald Tribune 16 April Independent 23, 28 April * Independent 9 April ** Independent 27 April
Ozone layer
UN assistance for China
The UN Development Programme has agreed a US$2.1 billion to assist China in phasing out ozone-depleting substances by the year 2010.
China is currently the largest producer and consumer of ozone-depleting products.
Xinhua News Agency, 24 April (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
Effects of UV radiation on plants studied
The effects of ultraviolet light on vegetables are being investigated as part of a £1 million project in the UK to study the consequences of the thinning of the ozone layer.
The UV radiation reaching the ground is expected to be 33 per cent higher than in 1980 by the end of the century, which "could have a profound effect on agriculture and forestry," according to Dr Brian Jordan of Horticulture Research International.
Pea plants and legumes are particularly susceptible to UV radiation; cereals less so.
Responses include loss of flesh and dry weight, a change in growth of shoots rather than roots, which could affect yields, and changes in flowering times.
Jordan says it is possible that genetic engineering could be used to enhance plants' resistance to UV radiation.
The three-year research project is being co-ordinated by the Agriculture and Food Research Council and the Natural Environment Research Council.
Independent 16 April
Pollution: Air
PVC is main dioxin source
Manufacture of polyvinylchloride (PVC) is the main source of dioxins in the environment, according to Greenpeace.
The emissions are tiny, but Greenpeace argues that if all were ingested by humans, 30 million people would receive their entire "tolerable intake" , according to international guidelines.
Greenpeace is campaigning for the closure of all industries producing wastes containing organochlorides, including dioxins.
New Scientist 1 May
Pollution: Air
Hoechst suffers further leak
Accident-prone German chemicals giant Hoechst suffered its ninth toxic discharge in five weeks when a cloud of acid fumes escaped from its main plant in Frankfurt [see ED 69].
A Hoechst spokesman said the fumes were of a concentrated form of sulphuric acid which is irritating to the eyes and throat; he said it was unclear how much material had leaked or how it had happened.
Residents of the surrounding district were warned to stay indoors.
The series of accidents at Hoechst has spurred calls in Germany for closer monitoring of environmental safeguards in private industry.
Financial Times 3 April
Pollution: Air
Generators get licences to pollute
UK electricity generating companies PowerGen and National Power have received the licences to pollute required by the 1990 Environmental Protection Act.
The generators will face heavy fines if they breach the terms of the licences, which allow them to produce a maximum of nearly 800,000 tons of oxides and nitrogen and 1.9 million tons of sulphur dioxide in the next year.
Individual limits on emissions of pollutants are set for the 29 coal and oil-fired power stations, and operating conditions and standards are laid out.
The two companies say they are confident they can comply with the licences, which they first applied for in March 1991.
The delay in issuing was caused by demands from the generators to keep part of their applications confidential, so as not to benefit commercial rivals.
Friends of the Earth welcomed the licences in principle but said the limits had been set far too high, condemning "vast tracts of countryside to damage by acid rain for decades to come" .
Independent 9 April
Pollution: Air
Incinerator "responsible for PCB emissions" 
A government study has concluded that a hazardous waste incinerator is responsible for raised levels of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and dioxins in its immediate vicinity.
But the government insists that levels "are not considered to pose any significant risk either to the food chain or to public health" , and claims that "overall, the conclusions of the report are reassuring" .
The incinerator, at Pontypool, Gwent, is owned by Rechem, which had been the target of a prolonged campaign by local people to have it closed down.
Prior to publication of the study, Rechem's position had been that there was no proof that it was to blame for any toxic contamination outside the plant.
The area identified in the study as contaminated extends over 450 square metres, and includes houses, old people's home, fields and a river.
Rechem welcomed the report, saying that "we hope it will reassure local people" .
But protestors vowed to continue their fight to close the plant.
Independent 23 April
Pollution: Air
Acidification hitting SSSIs
Freshwater acidification potentially affects 24 per cent of the total area of sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) in England, Scotland and Wales, according to research by English Nature.
North Wales is the worst affected area, with 55 per cent of the total SSSI area potentially damaged.
Sites in mid-Wales, south-west and north-east Scotland, Cumbria and the Pennines are also badly affected.
The study says that catchment afforestation undoubtedly contributes to acidification and any increase should be resisted.
English Nature says that the European Community's directive on reducing sulphur emissions from power stations is clearly not sufficient to protect wildlife.
Tree News, Spring 1993
Pollution: Water
Athens water supplies "at all-time low" 
The Greek capital is facing severe water shortages as a result of prolonged drought, wasteful consumption, and losses from an ageing distribution network.
Much of the city's supply comes from the Moreno reservoir, some 120 miles north of Athens, but this is now severely depleted.
In an effort to boost supplies, the authorities are drilling boreholes into local aquifers and planning to import water in tankers from the south of the country.
In the longer term, further supplies are expected from a dam project to divert water into the Moreno reservoir from the Evinos river.
Meanwhile, a price increase of 30 per cent has had little effect on consumption.
Athens' supply crisis comes against a background of growing concern over diminishing water supplies for the intensely-cultivated Thessaly Plain, where farmers growing EC-supported water-hungry crops are rapidly depleting available resources.
A planned river diversion project has drawn fierce criticism from environmentalists [see ED 69].
Financial Times 5 May
Pollution: Water
Braer oil "on seabed" 
Substantial quantities of oil spilled from the wrecked Braer tanker in January [see ED 67]appears to have sunk to the seabed, according to surveys by Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Office.
The oil spilt from the Braer was unusually light and toxic, and this, combined with fierce storms which mixed it into the seawater and caused it combine to form clumps with fine particles churned up by the waves, meant that rather than floating to the surface, as is normal with spilt crude oil, it was carried by ocean currents far from the spill site and later redeposited in deep "sumps" on the seabed.
There is evidence that it has killed large quantities of worms, crabs, molluscs and starfish.
Some 12,500 tonnes appears to have settled on the seabed 30 miles south-east of Fair Isle, an important spawning ground for herring, with a further 10,500 tonnes in sediments to the west of Shetland, the spawning ground for the sandeels on which many of the islands' seabirds depend.
BBC Wildlife, May 1993
Pollution: Water
Water companies among UK's top polluters
Three of the UK's privatised water companies are on the National Rivers Authority's "top 10" prosecution list, making them among the country's most polluting companies in terms of court fines.
Dwr Cymru Cwf (Welsh Water), Mid Sussex Water Company and Anglian Water Service have been fined £20,000, £20,000 and £18,000 respectively, putting them in seventh, eighth and ninth place in the list.
Top of the list is Shell (UK) with its £1 million fine for an oil spill in the River Mersey in August 1989.
Guardian 9 April
Pollution: Water
ICS publishes environmental code
The International Chamber of Shipping (ICS) has published Shipping and the environment: A code of practice, a series of recommendations for shipping companies to improve their environmental standards.
The aim of the code, the ICS says, is to"provide a framework for the development and continuing review of environmental management standards and practices, to be incorporated into the corporate culture and management procedures of shipping companies; and identify specific subjects of environmental concern upon which companies should focus.
The code lists 10 principles of environmental management, covering such areas as training, design and construction of vessels, emergency procedures and environmental assessment.
It also lists more detailed environmental standards that it recommends shipping companies should incorporate into their environmental plans, covering the various possible sources of pollution.
The code argues that sea transport is one of the least environmentally damaging forms of transport and draws attention to a reduction in marine pollution despite increasing world trade.
The ICS is a voluntary organisation of national shipowners' associations representing more than half of world merchant tonnage.
International Chamber of Shipping, April 1993
Pollution: Water
SeaWatch checks health of North Sea
A Norwegian company has developed a comprehensive surveillance system to monitor the health of the North Sea.
SeaWatch Europe, developed by oceanographic company Oceanor with funding from Norwegian businesses, uses radar buoys and satellites.
Since its launch last year, Germany, the Netherlands, the UK, Sweden and France have joined the scheme and Denmark and Belgium are negotiating to join.
Ten buoys are in place in and around the North Sea, each monitoring 20 different types of information, including water temperature, wave height, salinity, radioactivity and wind speed.
The information is relayed to a computer system which can be tapped by SeaWatch's clients, which include governments, the fishing, oil and tourism industries and environmental agencies.
Five more buoys are due to be placed by the end of the year and it is planned to expand the system to the Baltic and Barents seas, which now have one buoy each.
Priorities for further development include more sensitive hydrocarbon sensors, so that oil pollution can be spotted more quickly and eco-sounders able to monitor fish stocks directly.
SeaWatch director Sven Hansen says that recent international agreements to reduce pollution mean that it is particularly important to set up a system capable of ensuring standards are being met.
Oceanor is developing a similar project in Thailand and is negotiating with countries in Asia and South America.
SeaWatch is also the model for the UN Global Ocean Observation System, due to come into operation in 2015 at a cost of US$2,000 million.
European 22 April
Transport
Brazil may abandon alcohol
Brazil may soon end its unique experiment with alcohol-fuelled cars.
The scheme was launched in 1975, at a time of high oil prices; today, more than 4 million of Brazil's 12 million car owners use vehicles powered by sugar-cane alcohol (or ethanol).
Because of heavy government subsidies, the vehicles are cheaper to buy and run and produce fewer pollutants.
But with oil prices now much lower than in the mid-1970s, the cost to the government is much higher than that of petrol.
The government is also said to be under pressure to end the experiment from the motor industry and state oil company Petrobras, both of which find conventional petrol-powered cars more lucrative.
Environmentalists estimate that abandoning alcohol and switching to gasohol (a mixture of 80 per cent petrol and 20 per cent alcohol) would boost carbon monoxide emissions by more than one-third.
Converting to pure petrol would more than double emissions.
All alcohol-powered vehicles would require conversion if the change went ahead.
Independent 17 April
Transport
EC threatens court case over Oxleas
The EC Environment Commissioner, Ioannis Paleokrassas, has threatened to take the UK government to court over its alleged failure to conduct a proper environmental impact assessment over the planned motorway through Oxleas Wood in south-east London.
The wood, one of the last fragments of ancient forest in the capital, is the subject of a prolonged campaign by environmentalists [see EDs 69, 61, 55].
Paleokrassas has given the Department of Transport two months to disprove the allegation, after signing a "reasoned opinion" which would provide the basis for EC lawyers to start legal action against Britain.
Campaigners have expressed fears that the government will attempt to push the road through before the proceedings come to court.
Guardian 26, 28 April Independent 26 April
Transport
Planning policies to shun the car
The UK government has issued new planning guidelines to local councils that should discourage the development of out-of-town shopping centres which reinforce dependence on the car.
The guidelines require that new homes, shops and workplaces be planned and sited in ways that encourage people to reach them by public transport, bicycle or on foot.
Council must take the guidelines into account when deciding whether to grant planning permission for new developments.
The government also released a study which showed that planning policies which reduced the need for people to travel could cut pollution and fuel consumption by up to 15 per cent over the next 20 years.
 "We should always do all we can to improve local facilities and the ease of getting to them on foot or by bicycle," said Sir George Young, Minister of Housing and Planning.
Independent 21 April
Transport
Photos "misled" Twyford enquiry
Pressure group Friends of Twyford Down has accused the UK Department of Transport of deliberately misleading the public inquiry into the extension of the M3 motorway through the down [see ED 61].
Photomontages produced at the inquiry were up to 56 per cent inaccurate, the group says, suggesting a cutting 150 feet narrower than the one now being built.
Calculations based on the photomontage will be used in a submission to the European Commission that the government "substantially misled" the public on the road's full environmental impact.
The group is asking the commission to reopen its inquiry into the environmental consequences of the road and believes the case could still be referred to the European Court of Justice if the government is found to have infringed EC directives.
Guardian 17 April
Transport
Unleaded fuel consumption rises in EC — thanks to Germany
Unleaded fuel now accounts for 46.7 per cent of all the petrol consumed in the EC, according to figures released by Eurostat, the Community's statistics office.
Consumption rose by 17 per cent in 1992.
Drivers in the Community's northern states use unleaded more than their southern counterparts, while Germany alone uses as much as all 11 other member states put together.
International Herald Tribune, 15 April
Waste and Recycling
German recycling scheme to be extended to industry
The German government is set to extend to industry the compulsory recovery/recycling regulations which apply to consumer packaging [see EDs 63, 56].
Under a proposed law to be presented to parliament later this year, industrial producers will be obliged to ensure the collection and recycling of waste consumer products.
The law will limit their opportunity to incinerate or dump waste, thereby, it is hoped, encouraging manufacturers to build recyclability into product design.
In effect, the scheme will transfer the costs of waste recovery from the state to the private sector.
Industrialists have opposed the plan, arguing that it will lead to substantial cost increases which will have to be passed on to the consumer.
Observers predict that industry may set up an equivalent to Duales System Deutschland (DSD — the national waste collecting company established in the wake of the consumer packaging law).
Financial Times 1 April
Waste and Recycling
German regulations "damaging EC partners" recycling industry"
Germany's EC partners are expressing concern over the impact of its strict recycling laws [see above]on their own nascent recycling industries.
Since Germany lacks the capacity to recycle all waste covered by the laws, much is exported at subsidised rates to recycling plants in other European countries.
The UK, backed by Spain and France, has lodged a formal complaint to the European Commission.
Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands and Luxembourg have also voiced disquiet.
The UK's complaint argues that Germany's unilateral action has created distortions in the single market, and slowed efforts to develop green standards across the Community.
It claims that the small British plastics recycling sector is receiving German waste either free of charge or with incentive payments of up to £220 per tonne, against which the plastic industry's own organization set up to collect waste, Recoup, is unable to compete.
Imports of plastic waste rose by 450 per cent during 1992, while Recoup is forced to stockpile its own waste.
Similarly, UK recyclers cannot compete against subsidized imports of waste German paper and board, the government alleges.
Industry Minister Tim Sainsbury said: "In effect, German action to avoid stockpiling waste in Germany is resulting in equivalent stockpiling in the UK, with no net environmental benefit." 
Financial Times 5 May Guardian 6 May
Waste and Recycling
Toxic waste disposal in hot water
A new water-based technique for destroying hazardous waste, explosives and chemical weapons is being developed by researchers in the UK and US.
The technique makes use of the properties that water develops when heated to high temperatures at high atmospheric pressures.
At temperatures above 374° C and pressures above 218 atmospheres, water becomes what is known as a supercritical fluid, with some of the characteristics of both a liquid and gas, and is able to dissolve almost anything.
This makes it a unique medium for chemical reactions, bringing together substances that do not normally dissolve in the same liquid.
Research at the University of Leeds, in collaboration with Imperial College, London, and the National Engineering Laboratory at East Kilbride, is at an early stage, and it may be 10 years before practical applications for supercritical water are developed.
Nevertheless, the medium shows promise for disposal of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), whose use has been restricted since the late 1970s because of their high toxicity.
Huge amounts of PCBs await disposal, with high-temperature incineration being the only effective solution at present.
Tests have shown that an aqueous solution of PCBs and oxygen in the supercritical state destroys the lethal chloride material in minutes, leaving a solution that can be safely disposed of in rivers or the sea.
Unlike incineration, there are no emissions into the atmosphere.
The US military is also examining the potential of supercritical water for disposing of chemical weapons and other military chemicals such as propellants and explosives.
Congress's armed services committee recently allocated US$180 million to support research work.
Independent 12 April