

Agriculture & Food
Alliance against biotechnology
An alliance has been formed linking activists in industrialised and developing countries to oppose the use of biotechnology in agriculture.
Heading the alliance are the Third World Network, a network of non-governmental organisations, and the Washington-based Foundation on Economic Trends.
Activists in rich countries will organise consumer boycotts of genetically engineered foods, while farmers in the south take action to oppose the patenting of genes.
A massive demonstration by Indian farmers is set for Oct. 1—Gandhi's birthday.
New Scientist 17 July
Agriculture & Food
Brain disease "not linked to BSE" 
There is no evidence that a rise in cases of the fatal brain illness Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) over the past two years is linked to eating meat infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), according to the UK Department of Health.
Cases of CJD rose from 32 in 1990/91 to 48 in 1992/93 but the rise "is not statistically significant" and reflects "inevitable fluctuations from year to year" , say researchers at the national CJD surveillance unit in Edinburgh.
The researchers say they can find no evidence of occupational exposure among medical staff or farmers, with the one known case of a farmer whose cattle had BSE developing CJD being regarded as chance, rather than direct transmission.
No evidence of dietary links was found.
Guardian 27 July
Agriculture & Food
EC to crack down on growth promoters
Farmers who use illegal growth hormones on their cattle could be banned for life from receiving EC subsidies, according to proposals from the European Commission.
The Commission is also to push for sanctions against the manufacture, sale and use of illegal growth promoters.
Artificial growth promoters, such as steroids, have been banned in the EC since 1986 because of fears for human health, but there is a widespread black market.
The Commission also recently banned bovine somatotropin (BST), which increases the yield of dairy cattle.
Although BST is said to be safe and effective, the Commission says its use to produce "turbocharged" cows, capable of producing 20 per cent more milk, cannot be justified on animal welfare or economic grounds at a time of overproduction by the EC's dairy farmers.
The veterinary industry has opposed the ban on BST.
The European 22-25 July
Agriculture & Food
Bacteria can dismantle DNA
Marine bacteria take up DNA floating freely in seawater and dismantle it, experiments off the coast of Florida have shown.
The discovery suggests that nature can absorb fresh genetic material — such as the products of biotechnology experiments — without harmful consequences, but may at the same time reinforce fears that "foreign" DNA can find its way into native species, a process known as transformation.
Governments are attempting to devise safeguards to minimise the risks of genetic pollution when "genetically modified organisms" (GMOs) are released into the environment.
The researchers from the University of Florida who have been studying marine bacteria say their discovery shows how an ecosystem can change and be flexible.
Knowledge of how bacteria move DNA around could be extremely useful for developing strains that destroy pollutants, for example.
New Scientist 7 August
Agriculture & Food
World's farmland "losing agricultural value" 
A report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) warns that 245 million acres — 10 per cent of the earth's farmland — will lose much of its agricultural value over the next 20 years as a result of over-grazing, deforestation and poor land management.
Commenting on the report, FAO director-general Edouard Saouma said: "Are we going to have enough good land to feed the extra 2.6 billion people who will be on this planet by the year 2025?" 
Guardian 16 July
Agriculture & Food
Fishery crisis talks end without action
Representatives of fishing nations have ended three weeks of talks in New York with agreement to hold more talks on ways of preventing the collapse of marine fish stocks because of overfishing.
The talks were held under the auspices of the UN Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO), which says that most of the well-known marine fish stocks are being exploited at or far beyond the limits of sustainability, largely because of the development of deep-sea fleets working far from home.
The global fishing industry of more than 1 million medium or large boats has become unprofitable, the FAO says, with costs of US$124,000 million and revenue of only US$70,000 million in 1990, with much of the shortfall covered by state subsidies.
The conference focused on the problem of migratory fish stocks, preyed on by deep sea fleets outside individual countries' 200-mile exclusive economic zones.
Regional fishing organisations to police catches are seen as one possible answer, although the existing North Atlantic Fisheries Organisation has failed to protect stocks from over-exploitation.
Deep sea fishing countries such as Japan, Korea and Russia can be expected to oppose such organisations being given legally enforceable powers to control fishing.
Further talks are to be held in March and August 1994.
Independent 31 July
Agriculture & Food
Indian farmers attack "gene thieves" 
A seed processing plant being built in India has been attacked by local farmers, protesting that foreign seed companies are "gene thieves" capitalising on local crops at the expense of those who grow them.
The plant, in Karnataka, is owned by a subsidiary of US giant Cargill and the attack was the second on one of the company's plants.
The demonstrators were members of the Karnataka Rajya Raitha Sanha (KRRS), a local farmers association, which is campaigning against proposals in the General Agreement on Tariffs & Trade (GATT) to allow patenting of plants, seeds and genes.
The Indian Patents Act of 1970 prohibits patenting of life forms and, the farmers argue, protects their traditional rights to produce, modify and sell their own seeds.
KRRS alleges that foreign seed companies buy seed from farmers, treat it and sell it back to them at a hefty profit.
Cargill says it has not patented any genes from indigenous Indian plants and has not exported any seeds from India.
New Scientist 31 July
Agriculture & Food
Farmers and environmentalists co-operate
An alliance between farming and environmental groups has put forward an action plan to help farmers combine food production with conservation of the countryside.
The plan calls for government action in six areas: payments for farmers who take measures to manage their land for the benefit of wildlife, landscape and conservation; an increase in resources for environmentally sensitive farming; better integration of existing environmental schemes; the opportunity to enter a voluntary scheme covering the whole of a farm for a five-year or longer period of conservation work; government pressure on the European Commission to give greater recognition to the potential for production controls and other mechanisms to benefit the environment; and the introduction of environmental training programmes for farmers.
The groups involved in the initiatives are the National Farmers' Union, Council for the Protection of Rural England, Farming and Wildlife Advisory Group, Royal Society for Nature Conservation-The Wildlife Trusts Partnership and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
National Farmers Union information 6 July
Agriculture & Food
Pesticide use falls in Colombia and Venezuela
Elimination of government subsidies for agrochemicals has contributed to a sharp fall in the use of pesticides by rice growers in Colombia and Venezuela.
The two countries' governments have also promoted integrated pest management policies, helping farmers to apply pesticides only when necessary and reducing waste.
Pesticides News June 1993
Agriculture & Food
Queensland acts on species ownership
The Queensland parliament is to debate a bill to give the State rights over the genetic and chemical composition of its native species.
If the bill became law, manufacturers using chemicals obtained from local species would have to pay a royalty to the state.
The bill is the first of its kind introduced by any government, and reflects the recommendations of the convention on biodiversity signed at last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro [see ED 65/66].
The Australian federal government is to consider similar legislation for the whole country.
One of the architects of the bill, Dr Gordon Guymer, head of the Queensland Herbarium, said it would ensure that "when multinational companies come here to screen the biota for new drugs, the state will have some ownership over that resource" .
An example is the Moreton Bay chestnut, native to the state, which was found by researchers from Kew and Harvard to produce an alkaloid important in AIDS research.
A Japanese company has since taken out a 17-year patent on the chemical.
BBC Wildlife July 1993
Agriculture & Food
Russian fish stocks "soon exhausted" 
Intensive and uncontrolled fishing in Russia's Far Eastern seas may soon lead to the total exhausation of fish stocks, according to the Russian procurator-general's office.
Russian and foreign fleets are continuing to fish in the Sea of Okhotsk and Bering Sea, despite bans, while joint venture firms without fishing fleets are selling their fishing rights and quotas to foreign firms.
Illegal exports of fish are also on the increase, while fishing for research purposes has been abused.
Interfax News Agency, Moscow 15 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Agriculture & Food
US buys up Greenland salmon fisheries
The US is buying up the salmon fishing rights of Greenland's fishing industry in an attempt to restore the salmon population of its own rivers.
The Greenland Hunters and Fishermen's Organisation will be paid US$400,000 for each of the 1993 and 1994 fishing seasons to surrender its right to net 213 tons of salmon a year.
Most of the money will come from the non-profit Atlantic Salmon Federation, with additional donations from public sources.
The Greenland fishermen will be allowed to go on catching 12 tons of salmon a year for subsistence purposes.
Great efforts have been made to restore the salmon runs on rivers in the American north-east, only for 70-90 per cent of the fish to be caught when they reach the rich feeding grounds off the west coast of Greenland.
The agreement will provide protection for the salmon while they are out at sea before they return to the rivers to breed.
International Herald Tribune 3 August
Agriculture & Food
Bacteria survive in sewage sludge
The British government's rules on the use of sewage sludge as fertiliser for grazing land have been called into question by the discovery that bacteria survive in soil much longer than previously thought.
At present farmers have to wait three weeks between spreading the sludge on their fields and allowing cattle to graze.
Researchers at the University of Warwick have found that Salmonella typhimurium, a bacterium that causes diarrhoea, survives for much longer than three weeks, but in a dormant state that makes it much more difficult to detect.
It is not yet known whether the dormant bacteria can return to the infectious state.
Half of all sewage sludge produced in Britain is spread on farmland.
New Scientist 31 July
Agriculture & Food
More effective spraying system developed
The University of Leeds has developed a crop spraying system that produces virtually no pesticide or herbicide drift.
The system uses a gas burner to heat the spraying sheet, thereby changing the way in which the drops are formed and producing a narrow drop-size spectrum, with few small particles.
Environment Business 30 June
Agriculture & Food
UK pesticide coverage rises
The area of farmland in England and Wales treated with pesticides has continued to rise, although the volume used has declined, according to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF).
The figures showed that in 1981-91 the area of vegetables grown in England and Wales fell by 10 per cent but the area treated with pesticides increased by 40 per cent; the volume used fell by 10 per cent , as pesticides became less bulky.
The suggestion of a decline in amount used may be misleading, however, without further information on the toxicity or biological activity of the pesticides used.
In 1989/90, 99.9 per cent of the 4 million hectares of arable crops in England and Wales were treated with pesticides; crops were treated two to seven times a season.
Pesticides News June 1993
Agriculture & Food
US to curb agro-chemicals
The US administration has announced plans to reduce the use of pesticides in the cultivation of food crops, placing the emphasis on protecting the health of children and the environment.
The announcement, by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Agriculture, will "create incentives for the development of safe pesticides" and "remove those pesticides that pose the greatest risk to health," according to food and drugs commissioner David Kessler.
Kessler added that his administration was committed to "integrated pest management" : farming methods that substitute the use of beneficial insects and crop rotation for some pesticides.
EPA director Carol Browner said the three agencies were now working together in an unprecedented way to co-ordinate policy on food safety and pesticide use.
Meanwhile, a report by the National Academy of Sciences called for changes in chemical regulations to protect children because of the possibility that they may be uniquely sensitive to pesticide residues.
The report, while acknowledging a need for pesticides, recommends that health considerations be put before those of agricultural production.
* Exports by the US of banned and hazardous pesticides rose by 12 per cent in 1991, compared to 1990, according to government figures analysed by the Foundation for Advancements in Science and Education.
During the year, pesticides whose use is banned in the US were being exported at the rate of 15 tons a day.
The exports included 96 tons of DDT, which has been banned in the US for 20 years.
The Foundation noted that most of the exports went to developing countries, where unsafe storage and application practices were common.
It also complained of gaps in the information provided by the US Customs shipping records used for the study, the only public source of data on pesticide exports: the names of more than 74% of the 477 million pounds of pesticides exported in 1991 were not recorded.
International Herald Tribune 28 June *Pesticides News June 1993
Agriculture & Food
Uzbekistan cuts back on pesticides but maintains yields
Use of pesticides on the cotton crops of the former Soviet republic of Uzbekistan has been reduced sharply since the mid-1970s, as evidence of disastrous environmental damage has mounted.
Centrally planned production targets required that 2 million hectares be set aside for cotton production each year, with no provision for crop rotation to allow natural pest control; the resulting heavy use of pesticides led to severe problems with soil-borne disease.
The collapse of the Soviet system has resulted in the replacement of pesticides with biological control, with no significant decline in yields, according to Dr Graham Matthews, director of the International Pesticides Application Research Centre at Imperial College in London, who recently visited the area.
Some 64,186 tonnes of insecticides were used on the republic's cotton crops in 1975; this fell to 30,083 tonnes in 1985, as the environmental implications of their use became evident, and to 2,586 tonnes in 1991, following the end of the centrally planned system.
The use of Trichogramma, a parasitic wasp, against cotton insect pests has been stepped up, although Matthews says it is still too early to tell how effective biological control has been.
Yields have remained at an average of more than 2.6 tonnes a hectare.
Pesticides News June 1993
Conservation: Habitat
Everglades clean-up agreed
A plan to clean up Florida's endangered Everglades has been agreed between sugar growers and government officials, following a five-year legal battle.
The Everglades, home to a huge variety of plant and animal species, have been damaged by oxygenation caused by fertiliser run-off from sugar plantations, and by a reduction in water flow from the Kissimmee river.
The sugar growers have agreed to spend US$322 million over 20 years to reduce pollution from fertilisers and increase the flow of water to the Everglades.
The federal government will contribute about US$161 million through flood control projects and the services of the US Army Corps of Engineers.
A further $21.8 million a year may be raised through a special local tax, although this has to be approved by voters.
Artificial filtration marshes will be built to absorb the fertiliser run-off and canals rebuilt to increase the water flow to the Everglades by 25 per cent.
The plan clears up the legal wrangles set off by the federal government's decision in 1988 to sue the state government over water quality in the Everglades, but leaves unclear many of the details of the clean-up.
The 26 environmental groups that make up the Everglades Coalition say the agreement does not go far enough, failing to tackle the problem of how to restore the natural rise and fall of water in the swamps, which has been disrupted by dikes, canals and other human intervention.
Financial Times 14 July International Herald Tribune 17 July New Scientist 24 July
Conservation: Habitat
EC calls for further study on Acheloos diversion project
The European Commission has ordered an emergency reassessment of Greece's ambitious Acheloos diversion project [see ED 69].
The scheme, for which Greece has applied for Ecu80 million in funding from the EC, aims to divert water from the Acheloos river to irrigate agricultural land on the Plain of Thessaly.
But there are growing doubts about whether the plan will deliver as much irrigation water as promised and about its effect on the Missolonghi wetland at the river mouth, designated as of international importance under the Ramsar Convention.
The decision to order a reassesment comes after claims that the Greek government has vastly overestimated the amount of water that can be safely diverted.
The commission has contacted the Ramsar Bureau asking it to nominate hydrologists to carry out an independent survey of the scheme.
British hydrologist Ted Hollis, of University College London —one of the experts proposed by the Ramsar Bureau for the new study — says the amount of water flowing in the river is 40 per cent less than the Greek government claims and that the volume reaching the irrigated areas will be consequently reduced.
He adds that the Greek government's assessment makes no allowance for evaporation and calculates the reduction in the amount of water reaching the wetlands on the basis of the present total flow rather than on the present volume reaching Missolonghi.
The actual reduction could be as much as 33 per cent, he estimates, causing large areas to dry up.
The Public Power Corporation of Greece is already demanding compensation of £15.8 million for loss of generating capacity from recently completed hydroelectric power stations downstream on the Acheloos as a result of reduced water flow.
Opponents of the scheme point out that a proper environmental impact assessment has not been carried out and that the irrigation water provided will be used to produce crops such as cotton and tobacco, already in surplus in the EC.
New Scientist 10 July, 7 August Guardian 26 June
Conservation: Habitat
Set-aside helps rare plants
Some of Britain's rarest wild flowers, swept to near-extinction by the intensification of farming since the second world war, are likely to stage a comeback thanks to the EC's set-aside policy.
Plants such as shepherd's needles, pheasant's eye, corn gromwell, corn cockle and mousetail flourish in farmland that is lightly tilled and cut once a year.
Research by the Game Conservancy Council found that 19 endangered plant species were reappearing on six fields in Wiltshire, Hampshire and East Anglia.
Their seeds had remained dormant underground for years or come from a few surviving specimens.
Independent 19 July
Conservation: Habitat
Urban sprawl swallows farms
One fifth of England will have been lost to urban sprawl by 2050 if development continues at the present rate, according to the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
Calling for stricter local planning laws to protect the countryside as an aesthetic and economic resources, the council's senior planner Tony Burton said that 15 per cent of England is already covered in towns and cities.
England has lost 70,000 hectares of farmland in the past 50 years — an area equivalent in size to the whole of Berkshire, Hertfordshire, Oxfordshire and Greater London combined — with the south-east losing as much land to development as if Greater London had been built all over again.
Launching a report on the changing face of England over the past 50 years, Burton called on the government to target the 150,000 hectares of derelict land in cities before it allows more building in the countryside.
He said the government's road building policy was the single most important aspect of policy responsible for loss of rural land.
Financial Times 28, 29 July Guardian 29 July
Conservation: Habitat
Parks mutilated by quarrying
The 10 national parks in England and Wales have been severely scarred by quarrying and the rate of damage is likely to increase as the economy recovers, according to a report by the Council for the National Parks.
The report calls for government action to restrain demand for minerals by curbing their use and encouraging recycling.
More than half of the quarrying is of aggregates for construction purposes.
The council is particularly worried by the existence of planning permission for quarrying so far unused.
It recommends that all planning permissions for quarrying in national parks should expire in 10 years and that permission for dormant sites be removed, or at least reviewed — even though this would require compensation for the owners.
Guardian 17 June
Conservation: Habitat
SSIs still at risk next century
About 600 of England's 2,619 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSIs) will still be receiving damaging levels of sulphur from acid rain in 2005, according to English Nature.
This will still be the case even if the government achieves its target under the EC Large Combustion Plant Directive of reducing sulphur emissions from power stations to 40 per cent of 1980 levels by 2003.
Areas at most risk are high ground in the north-west, south-west, south and east, with woodlands, lowland peatland and lowland heaths being the wildlife habitats most vulnerable.
The UK is at present negotiating a new protocol on sulphur emissions with the UN Economic Commission for Europe.
English Nature 30 June Independent 2, 5 July
Conservation: Habitat
Trees suffer from the weather
A survey by the Forestry Commission has found that Britain's oaks and Scots pines are in poor condition, largely due to climatic conditions and insect attacks, but that the condition of beeches and Sitka spruces are improving.
The survey of about 9,000 trees showed that the crowns of oak and Scots pine trees had deteriorated as a result of wind, snow and a climate which allows damaging insects to thrive.
Air pollution was not thought to be responsible.
The beech, which suffered from the effects of the 1976 and 1984 droughts, is now starting to recover.
Most of the damage to trees was not thought to be permanent.
Forestry Commission 27 July
Conservation: Habitat
Oil drilling steered clear of sensitive areas
The UK government has for the first time ruled out the award of oil and gas exploration licences in certain areas on environmental grounds.
Announcing the successful bids for the latest round of exploration licences, Energy Minister Tim Eggar said 35 sites nominated by the oil and gas industry had not been put up to be licensed.
These included sites in the Moray Firth, Cardigan Bay and off the coast of Pembrokeshire, north Norfolk, eastern Scotland, Lundy Island and the English Channel.
However, eight blocks have been licensed in Cardigan Bay, against the advice of the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, near one of the country's two marine nature reserves and home to a population of bottle-nosed dolphins.
Eggar said environmentalists should be reassured by the new rules governing the licences, including the requirement for a full environmental impact assessment before an oil or gas find is developed.
Guardian 15 June
Conservation: Species
Mystery disease threatens alders
Britain's alders, which make up as much as one-third of river bank, lakeside and wetland tree cover, may be threatened with extinction by a mystery disease.
Many affected trees have been dying within a year of the condition being detected.
The alder is one of the few tree species to fix nitrogen on a significant scale; one theory is that atmospheric and water enrichment with nitrogen is upsetting the delicate relationship between the trees and soil micro-organisms.
National Grid information 22 June
Conservation: Species
Amphibian decline "not due to acid rain" 
Speculation that the rapid decline of many of the world's amphibians may be due to acid rain has been dampened by a study carried in the Rocky Mountains by the US Fish and Wildlife Service.
The study showed no correlation between "surges" of acidity in local pools and rivers, and the widespread decline in numbers of many of the region's toads and frogs.
There is some evidence from other recent studies, however, that acidity may be a factor in the decline of amphibian species in eastern North America.
New Scientist 7 August
Conservation: Species
US steps up pressure on rhino and tiger trade
The US has signalled that it may apply trade sanctions against Taiwan and China, because of the trade in rhino horns and tiger bones for medicinal purposes [see ED 67].
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has issued a certification stating that the two countries' trade in such items diminishes the effectiveness of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
Under the Pelly Amendment, President Clinton has broad powers to impose penalties, including a total ban on imports.
Warned that the certification was about to be issued, China has already responded by banning trade in rhino horns and tiger bones [see ED 71].
The US is calling for stockpiles of these items to be destroyed as well.
The US approach was criticised by Southern African countries at a meeting of the UN Environment Programme, where a split emerged between those countries wishing to stop the trade altogether and those seeking more radical measures to help conserve the rhino.
Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe, the countries where most African rhinos live, are pushing for the trade to be legalised to undercut the black market and reduce poaching.
Despite a 15-year ban on trading in rhino horn, numbers of black rhinos has fallen from around 65,000 in 1977 to 2,500; numbers are falling at the rate of 28 per cent a year.
Wildlife trade monitoring organisation TRAFFIC, conceding that the ban has not worked, is proposing a range of radical alternatives, including the establishment of rhino sanctuaries, controlled sales of rhino horn from stockpiles and trophy hunting safaris.
Zimbabwe's existing stockpiles of horn could supply the traditional medicine trade for 10 years.
International Herald Tribune 11 June New Scientist 10 July
Conservation: Species
Chough numbers recover
The chough, the rarest member of the crow family in Britain and Ireland, is recovering from a severe decline in numbers.
A survey in 1992 showed that chough numbers had increased by a third since the previous survey 10 years earlier; 1,247 pairs were counted, compared with 950 pairs in 1982.
Some 1,070 non-breeding birds were also counted.
Most of the choughs were found in the Republic of Ireland, with 904 pairs.
Only 88 pairs were found in Scotland, 74 on the island of Islay, with 177 pairs in Wales.
Formerly found around the coasts of England, the chough is now confined to Ireland, Wales, the Isle of Man and western Scotland.
Threats to its survival include habitat change, disturbance, egg collecting and severe winters.
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds 6 July
Conservation: Species
Unique Hong Kong dolphin species faces extinction
A variety of the Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, Sousa chinensis, is being threatened with extinction by the construction of Hong Kong's new airport, just as it is being recognized as a distinct species.
The remaining population of the "white ghost" dolphin, as it is known locally, now stands at between 150 and 350, and is believed to be falling fast under pressure from pollution resulting largely from intensive construction work on the massive new offshore Chek Lap Kok island airport.
One of the dolphin's main nursery areas is being devastated by construction of new sewage outfalls.
Many of the remaining dolphins have injuries from propellers or trawling gear.
The dolphin is one of the most visible victims of the major disturbance of marine life caused by the controversial airport's construction, which is expected to involve some 60 per cent of the world's dredging fleet.
The World Wide Fund for Nature-Hong Kong is carrying out DNA analysis to discover whether the local dolphin is indeed a separate species.
BBC Wildlife, July 1993
Conservation: Species
Italians "use illegal drift nets" 
Italian fishing boats in the Ionian Sea are using illegal drift nets up to 22 km long, according to Greek environmentalists, who have appealed to the Italian government to halt the practise.
The nets are apparently being used to catch swordfish, but are also sweeping up many other marine creatures, including turtles and dolphins as well as fish which the Greek Ionian fleets had been accustomed to catch.
The drift net effect has been blamed for unemployment among fishing communities in the Greek Ionian islands, notably Corfu and Cephalonia.
Under EC law, all nets longer than 2.5 km are illegal.
European 15/18 July
Conservation: Species
Spider's fen becomes nature reserve
Redgrave and Lopham Fen in Norfolk, one of the two remaining haunts of the great raft spider, has been declared England's 143rd National Nature Reserve.
Funds are being provided by the Suffolk Water Company and the National Rivers Authority to help prevent the fen drying out because of local water extraction and the European Community is expected soon to approve a £1.9 million grant for the scheme [see ED 71].
New Scientist 3 July
Conservation: Species
Red kite breeding success
The red kite, one of the UK's rarest breeding birds, is breeding successfully after its experimental reintroduction into southern England and northern Scotland in recent years.
Twenty-one red kite chicks have been raised this year, compared to just 10 last year.
The kite was driven to extinction in England and Scotland last century, although a small breeding population survives in Wales.
New Scientist 31 July
Conservation: Species
South Korea to join CITES
South Korea has applied to join the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
Membership of CITES will prohibit use of rhino horns, turtle shells and other ingredients of Korean traditional medicine.
A recent poll showed that 78.7 per cent of South Korean herbal pharmacists thought rhino horns were "necessary ingredients" for their trade.
The application follows years of pressure from environmentalists, concerned at Korea's prominent role in the illegal trade in endangered wildlife products.
Yonhap news agency, 3 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Species
Set-aside rules trap skylarks
Rotational set-aside policies have proved a mixed blessing for birds such as skylarks, lapwings and partridges that nest in uncut fields.
Rules allowing farmers to cut set-aside fields to control weeds have resulted in many nests being ploughed up or crushed by machinery.
Much of the cutting has been taking place in May, during the nesting season, to prepare fields for planting in the autumn.
The set-aside rules are expected to be changed next year to take account of the problem, encouraging farmers to carry out weed control either earlier or later in the year, allowing field-nesting birds to complete their breeding cycle.
British Trust for Ornithology information 17 June
Conservation: Species
Eco-tourism "scares rhinos" 
Rhinos in Nepal's Chitwan National Park are in danger of being scared off their foraging grounds by parties of tourists mounted on elephants.
The elephant drivers are often encouraged by tourists or tour operators to move in very close to browsing rhinos, on occasion surrounding them.
Researchers from the University of California who have studied the area warn that the shyer rhinos are retreating into denser vegetation, away from their natural foraging grounds with the high protein grass on which they depend.
The researchers conclude that this may in time result in a depleted population of effectively "domesticated" rhinos, and warn that losing the genetic input of the wilder rhinos would have a dangerous impact on the gene pool.
 "Any loss of genetic material in an endangered species with such a limited range and such a small population is a significant loss" .
New Scientist 7 August
Conservation: Species
Turtle beaches get protection
Turtle breeding beaches in western Cyprus have been given a breathing space by the decision of the government to freeze development in the area for one year.
Guardian 8 July
Conservation: Species
New Vietnamese animal named
The small, ox-like forest animal discovered in south-western Vietnam last year [see ED 61]has now been given the name Pseudoryx nghetinhensis.
The name reflects the fact that the animal's horns and head resemble the Arabian oryx, but DNA analysis has shown that it is most closely related to the oxen family.
The animal was first identified from a skull found last year by a joint expedition of the Vietnamese government and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) in the Vu Quang reserve on the border with Laos.
Since then some 20 other specimens have been found, including three complete skins, but as yet no living Vu Quang ox has been sighted by scientists.
BBC Wildlife, July 1993
Conservation: Species
Alaskan wolf cull to go ahead
Alaska is to go ahead with a controversial plan to reduce wolf numbers in a bid to restock caribou herds.
State employees will trap and shoot up to 75 per cent of the wolves in a region southwest of Fairbanks and keep numbers to that level for the next few years.
Animal rights groups have called for a tourism boycott in protest against the plan.
A "wolf summit" was held in January to debate the plan, but failed to reach any agreement [see ED 68].
Some 150 wolves are likely to be killed this year in the region, which is home to the Delta herd of caribou, whose numbers have fallen from 10,700 to 4,500.
The plan is designed to provide more caribou for hunters; hunting of the Delta herd has been banned since 1991.
Hunting organisations claim however that the planned cull will not allow caribou numbers to increase quickly enough and does not cover enough areas.
New Scientist 26 June, 10 July
Conservation: Species
Wolves to be reintroduced to Yellowstone
The Clinton Administration is supporting a scheme to reintroduce wolves to Yellowstone National Park.
The wolves were hunted to extinction in the 1920s, at the request of ranchers who regarded them as a threat to cattle.
Under the new plan, 15 wolves are to be released annually at three sites for up to five years, in the hope that they will breed to form a sustainable population.
New Scientist 17 July
Economics & Industry
EC eco-label scheme launched
The EC's long-awaited eco-labelling scheme has come into operation, with dishwashers and washing machines the first products to be included.
The scheme is intended to help buyers identify products which are least harmful to the environment and relies on manufacturers voluntarily putting their products forward for assessment.
Products which satisfy the EC's criteria will be awarded a special eco label.
Financial Times 2 July
Economics & Industry
More Polish "debt to clean-up" deals
Poland has agreed with France and Switzerland to convert 10 per cent of its debt to each country into investment in environmental projects.
The deal, which in the Swiss case, involves some US$50,000,000, follows a similar agreement between Poland and the USA.
Negotiations with Holland and Sweden are expected to be opened soon.
Projects covered by the deal include effluent treatment works and gas supplies to eliminate the use of brown coal.
TV Polonia 11 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) PAP 17 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Economics & Industry
 "Sustainable Netherlands" plan published
Friends of the Earth-Netherlands has published a report on the impact that the introduction of a sustainable economy would have on Dutch living standards.
Sustainable Netherlands: A perspective for changing Northern lifestyles, suggests that the use of fossil fuels would have to be cut by 60 per cent over the next 20 years, followed by a further 60 per cent cut in the following two decades.
A sustainable water supply would require a 32 per cent cut in consumption.
In order to reduce agricultural land use by 50 per cent to a sustainable level of half an acre per person, meat consumption would have to be cut by 60-80 per cent, to the equivalent of an ounce per person per day.
The report acknowledges that such a transformation would be seen as unacceptable by a majority of the population, but adds that more efficient use of energy and the introduction of new technology could minimize the impact.
It calls for an alliance between environmentalists, consumer organizations, churches and trade unions, but concludes that the real impetus for change will come when Southern countries challenge the North's addiction to consumer lifestyles.
The Food Magazine, Aug/Oct, 1993.
Economics & Industry
US government's clean-up cost warning
The US government has been told by congressional investigators that it is responsible for cleaning up possibly hundreds of thousands of publicly-owned environmentally hazardous sites, at a cost of billions of dollars.
In its report, the House of Representatives natural resources committee identified former military ranges, hazardous chemical dumps and mines for which the government is potentially liable.
The land belongs to the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), which could have hundreds of thousands of sites, the National Park Service, which identified 2,400 hazardous mines, and the Forest Service, which estimated it has 25,000 mine sites.
The major burden would be the cost of dealing with unexploded shells and bombs on former military ranges, many of which had passed from Pentagon control to that of the BLM.
Financial Times 10-11 July
Economics & Industry
Chemical firms claim improvement
The UK chemical industry has claimed to have improved performance on emissions and environmental spending.
The Chemical Industries Association said the industry spent £1bn on the environment in 1992, some three per cent of turnover, and an increase on the 1991 figure of £830m.
Capital spending on the environment rose from £184m to £305m, from eight to 14 per cent of total capital expenditure.
Levels of "red list" wastes — 23 chemicals considered by the government to be unwelcome in liquid waste — fell by 40 per cent from 1990 to 1992.
But while levels of so-called special wastes outside chemical sites for 1992 was down on the 1990 total, the 231,800 tonnes figure for 1992 was higher than the 213,700 tonnes figure in 1991, because company closures had led to high waste disposals.
Some 114 sites surveyed had improved their environmental performance while that of 30 had deteriorated.
Some 256 locations — 75 per cent of the association's members — were surveyed in total.
The organization's Director General, John Cox, said the figures were a model for other industries to follow.
Friends of the Earth responded by calling on the industry to publicize levels of all toxic emissions.
* BP Chemicals said its total emissions from major sites fell by 4,000 tonnes to 154,000 tonnes in 1992 when it published its second annual emissions report.
Financial Times 1 July *BP Chemicals information 6 July
Energy
Controversial battery charger launched
A controversial new device which is claimed to recharge ordinary batteries has been launched in the UK.
Major battery manufacturers immediately expressed concern, arguing that only specially-designed nickel-cadmium batteries were suitable for recharging, and that ordinary alkaline or zinc chloride batteries might explode if subjected to it.
The new device's distributors, the Innovations mail order company, insisted however that it had been proved safe in laboratory tests.
A computer chip checks voltage levels within the battery, and slows down the recharging process if this increases too rapidly, thereby, according to Innovations, avoiding the danger of explosive gases building up.
It can recharge conventional batteries up to 20 times, thereby extending their useful life 10 times (the recharge is not equivalent to the initial charge).
If it proves successful, the device will dramatically cut the cost of battery power.
Independent 4 August
Energy
Secrecy over oil drilling lifted
The UK government is for the first time to publish environmental conditions attached to the granting of oil drilling licenses.
The announcement was greeted with some scepticism by environmental groups, with Greenpeace describing it as "purely and simply a public relations exercise" .
Among recent conditions imposed were restrictions on drilling activity at a time when seabirds were moulting or mating.
Financial Times 17 July
Energy
Indian solar power drive
The use of solar heating is to become mandatory for Indian government departments as part of a drive towards the use of renewable energy resources.
Energy Minister S. Krishnakumar said that governments, the public sector, the defence services and the railways, must use solar heating systems.
Soft loans to support the programme would be provided by the Indian Renewable Energy Development Energy Agency, which had received US$200 million in aid.
Incentives would also be given to new electricity suppliers.
Press Trust of India 27 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Energy
Orimulsion to be burnt in Britain
PowerGen, one of the UK's two main power generators, has been granted licenses to burn the bitumen-based orimulsion fuel at two of its power stations.
Described by opponents of its use as "the world's dirtiest fuel" , orimulsion, imported from Venezuela, is cheaper than oil or gas, emits less carbon dioxide or nitrous oxides, but more sulphur.
The two power stations awarded licenses by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP), are Richborough in Kent and Ince in Merseyside, which have both been burning the fuel on an experimental basis for the last three years.
The licenses have been issued on condition that PowerGen installs equipment to remove most of the harmful emissions by 1998.
Financial Times 3 August Guardian 4 August Independent 4 August
Energy
Russian energy conservation plan announced
Russia has announced a plan to cut energy consumption significantly by the year 2000.
Fuel and Energy Miniser Yury Shafranik said that the waste of energy resources had increased over the past two years and that energy use had remained stable, despite falling production.
Initially, fines would be imposed against enterprises using excessive amounts of energy.
The government plans to reduce consumption to 35-40 million tons below 1990 levels by 1995, and to 200 million tons below 1990 levels by 2000.
ITAR-TASS 18 June
Energy
Solar energy expert meeting
Some 150 experts in solar energy from across the world met at UNESCO headquarters in Paris in early July to prepare the ground for the second "global solar summit" , scheduled for 1995-97.
The first summit was held at UNESCO in 1973, against a background of the oil crisis.
The meeting agreed that solar energy held great potential for third world countries, particularly as a substitute for fast-depleting fuelwood stocks.
It called for the development of solar rural electrification programmes in the South, particularly Africa, and for the expansion of solar power in the Middle East, as a means of preventing possible conflict over water resources for hydro-electric power between Israel and her Arab neighbours or Turkey and Iraq.
Le Monde 13 July
Energy
Chinese hydro-project threatens Tibet environment
Construction of a massive hydro-electric project on one of Tibet's largest freshwater lakes is proceeding at speed despite fears that it could lead to ecological disaster.
The Chinese authorities are building a 90 megawatt plant on the Yarlung River, 2,600 foot below the Yamdrok Tso lake, with water falling through four tunnels drilled through the Gambala mountains to power the turbines.
The water will be recycled back into the lake through the reversible turbines in a system known as "pump-storage" .
Construction of the dam began in 1985, but was suspended in 1986, apparently after protests about its ecological impact, which were supported by Tibetan spiritual leaders.
Work resumed in 1989 after the death of one of its leading critics, the Panchen Lama.
The environmental effects of the project are uncertain, but likely to be serious.
At the least, the delicate ecosystem of the river and lake will be devastated; at worst, the entire watershed will be drained within 50 years.
Local wildlife and agriculture are likely to be badly affected, environmentalists claim.
The Washington-based International Campaign for Tibet has joined Greenpeace in calling for the project to be halted.
Independent 20 July
Energy
Renewable potential for south-west England
Between 6 and 12 per cent of South-West England's electricity could come from renewable sources, according to a study jointly funded by the Department of Trade and Industry and South Western Electricity, which opened the UK's first wind farm last year.
In the terms of the study, "renewable" sources include wind and tidal power as well as waste incineration.
Financial Times 8 July
Energy
UK increases support for renewables, efficiency
The UK government has announced a number of measures to boost energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources.
It has extended for a further 20 years the terms of the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation (NFFO) for renewable energy, originally scheduled to end in 1998.
This ensures that production costs of electricity generated by these methods are no greater than for fossil fuels.
It operates via the regional electricity companies, which must pay a premium price for renewable energy.
The subsidy is estimated to cost consumers an extra £3 per year.
Announcing the extension of the scheme, Energy Minister Tim Eggar said that further subsidies might be introduced in 1997-98, with possible separate bands for wind power, hydroelectricity, landfill gas, waste incineration, agricultural and forestry waste and coppice fuel.
The government's target is to have 1,500 megawatts worth of electricity, equivalent to 3 per cent of the country's requirements, generated by renewables by the turn of the century.
Friends of the Earth responded by asserting that there was sufficient interest among energy suppliers to provide three times that amount.
The Scottish Office has also announced its own NFFO subsidy, to encourage generation of 30-40 megawatts by renewables, and the Northern Island Office is expected to follow suit shortly.
Other programmes announced by Eggar included a commitment by the government to cut its own energy consumption to 80 per cent of 1990 levels by the year 2000, and to reduce transport emissions even further.
The target for electricity generated by combined heat and power (CHP) schemes has been raised from 4,000 to 5,000 megawatts.
Financial Times 22 July Independent 22 July Guardian 22 July
Environmental Politics
UK Environment Secretary calls for change
The UK Environment Secretary, John Gummer, has launched a consultation paper on how the country might move towards sustainability as envisaged at the Rio summit.
The paper identified seven key areas in which present trends are "unsustainable" .
These include: * emissions of carbon dioxide from burning coal, oil and gas; * local air pollution caused by vehicle emissions; * rising levels of water abstraction, threatening to dry out streams; * water pollution resulting from agricultural chemicals and wastes, industrial emissions and acid rain; * loss of countryside and open spaces to roads, housing and other development; * damage to habitats and associated loss of wildlife, with one per cent of sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) suffering potentially irreversible damage every year; * damage to wildlife, landscapes and communities by sand and gravel extraction, notably for the expanding roads programme.
Gummer admitted that previous governments had largely failed to address the environmental agenda, and called for a "great debate" to help inform the government's strategy on achieving sustainability.
Friends of the Earth criticized the lack of concrete suggestions, claiming that "the government has come along with a blank sheet of paper and asked the public to fill it in" .
FoE's director, Charles Secrett, commented that "the biggest stumbling blocks are the three Ts — the Treasury, Trade and Industry, and Transport" .
Gummer's comments were seen as highlighting the rift between the Environment and Transport Departments.
Gummer admitted that current estimates of traffic growth, and hence traffic-related pollution, were incompatible with sustainability.
On the same day, the Transport Department announced plans to widen the M25 around London, believed to have been opposed by Gummer in Cabinet.
Guardian 22 July Independent 22 July
Environmental Politics
Slovakia sets up environmental agency
Slovakia established a state environmental protection agency on July 1.
The Slovak Agency for the Environment, based in Banska Bystrica, in Central Slovakia, incorporates several existing environmental protection organizations.
Slovak Radio 1 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
Hungarian green party formed
Fifty Hungarian environmental groups have formed a green political party to contest elections in 1994.
The Green Alternative Alliance will be co-chaired by Erzsebet Schmuck, president of the National Conservationist Federation and Gyorgy Droppa, of the Danube Circle.
Schmuck said existing political parties were failing to make the environment a priority and that economic and environmental restructuring can be combined.
East-West Environment, June 1993
Environmental Politics
Hungarian Greens verge on anti-semitism
The Secretary of the Hungarian Green Party, Tibor Elekes, has issued a statement describing "Neo-Zionism" as the world's greatest environmental threat.
Elekes claimed that the party was not against Jews as such, but "the neo-Zionists, the international criminals, who commit their crimes taking cover behind the Jews" .
In common with much of eastern Europe, Hungary has witnessed a growing number of anti-Semitic attacks in recent years.
Hungarian Radio, 13 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
US judge questions legality of free trade agreement
The US Justice Department has lodged an appeal against a ruling by a federal judge that the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) violates federal environmental law.
NAFTA has been strongly criticized by environmentalists on the grounds that it will lead to "dirty" US industries moving into Mexico to take advantage of that country's more relaxed environmental standards, and that other environmental considerations for all three countries will be sacrificed for the principle of free trade at any cost.
Le Monde 3 July
Environmental Politics
Israel's green year
Israel has declared next year (from Sept. 1993 to Aug. 1994) "environment year" .
The government wants to increase public environmental awareness, focus the efforts of ministries on green issues, promote a range of environmental action, including green consumerism, eco-labelling, recycling, facelift cities and towns, and promote Israel's green image abroad.
The government said it will be putting "renewed emphasis" on the enforcement of environmental laws, and is making the cleaning-up of polluted rivers — including the Yarkon, Kishon, Alexander, Taninim and Lavish rivers — a priority.
A series of key projects designed to encourage public participation, include a battery collection programme, the launch of a nationwide eco-labelling scheme, the closure of unregulated waste dumps, and a plastics, glass and metals recycling campaign ahead of an expected recycling law.
An intensive environmental education campaign, including TV and radio coverage, posters, stickers, jingles and a range of publications, is being planned.
The Education TV Network is to produce 25 programmes on the environment and there will be an educational fair to exhibit teaching materials on the subject.
A special environmental session of the Knesset and a meeting of local authority leaders are planned.
Middle East Times 15-21 June.
Forests
Clinton backs sharp logging cuts in Pacific NW
US President Clinton has unveiled a controversial plan to end the confrontation between environmentalists and loggers in the Pacific Northwest.
The plan calls for massive reductions in logging coupled with an aid package to offset job losses.
Logging in the region has been halted since 1990 by court actions to protect the habitat of the northern spotted owl, leading to thousands of job losses [see EDs 70; passim].
The plan recommended by Clinton, one of nine options prepared by a committee of scientists in the wake of a conference on the issue in April, is an attempt to break the deadlock.
It calls for logging on federal lands to be reduced to 25 per cent of late 1980s levels, with buffer zones to be established along salmon spawning streams.
Ancient forest reserves are to be set up and less damaging forestry techniques tested.
Over five years, US$1,500 million will be spent on retraining laid-off workers.
The scientific committee had itself recommended an option calling for as much logging as could be carried out in compliance with US environmental laws, far more than in the option chosen by the President.
Environmentalist groups have criticised the plan, because it still allows some logging in ancient forests, but say they are prepared to work with the Administration to improve it.
Timber industry groups maintain that the plan could lead to the loss of 85,000 jobs — compared to the administration's estimate of 6,000 — and that the aid package is inadequate.
The plan now faces a court hearing in Seattle before becoming law.
New Scientist 10 July International Herald Tribune 19 June, 2 July
Forests
British Columbia designates wilderness park
The government of British Columbia is to set aside 1 million hectares of the watershed of the Tatshenshini and Alsek rivers as a provincial park.
The area, in the north of the province, is one of the last strongholds of the grizzly bear and is also home to wolves, bald eagles and wild salmon.
It adjoins existing parks in Alaska and Canada's Yukon Territory, creating the world's largest protected area that crosses national boundaries.
The decision effectively kills off plans for an open-pit copper and gold mine, the US$430 million Windy Craggy project.
Environmentalists had claimed acid run-off from the mine would damage the area's fragile ecosystem and harm salmon fisheries on the Pacific coast.
British Columbia Premier Michael Harcourt said his government had concluded that "the preservation of wilderness and the proposed mining activities could not co-exist" .
UN designation of the region as a World Heritage Site is being sought.
Mining companies involved in the Windy Craggy project meanwhile promised to seek hundreds of millions of dollars in compensation for the loss in value of their mining leases.
International Herald Tribune 25 June Independent 23 June
Forests
Tropical timber agreement "near collapse" 
The refusal of timber-growing countries in temperate regions to be bound by the same rules that apply to tropical timber producers has led to the collapse of attempts at meetings in Geneva to renegotiate the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA).
Tropical timber producers have been pressing for the ITTA, which expires next year, to be replaced by a comprehensive agreement that also covers wood from temperate forests.
They are threatening to abandon their commitment under the ITTA to manage their forests sustainably by 2000 unless temperate countries make a similar pledge.
Temperate producers, led by Canada, the EC and Sweden, claim their timber is already sustainably managed and does not need to be controlled by international agreement, although the US recently made a surprise announcement that it would introduce sustainable forest management by 2000 and criticised European countries for not doing the same.
Prior to the collapse of the Geneva talks, forestry ministers from 37 European countries signed four "general guidelines" — on sustainable management of forests in Europe; conservation of biodiversity; help for central and eastern Europe, and strategies for adapting to climatic change — but rejected a target of using only sustainable timber by 2000.
Greenpeace has described the guidelines' description of sustainable management as too vague.
New Scientist 26 June, 3 July
Forests: Tropical
Report warns of dangers in exploiting forest products
Prospecting in the world's rainforests for new medicines and crops needs to be carefully regulated if developing countries are to reap full benefits, according to a report from the Washington-based World Resources Institute.
The report advises developing countries on drawing up contracts and establishing regulations so that they can profit from their biodiversity.
 "Historically, the exploitation of a new resource has led to its exhaustion and to the destruction of local communities and cultures," the report says.
It argues that it is impractical for countries to protect their interests by patenting plant species.
Instead they should restrict access to plants, control contracts and set up local industries to capitalise on biodiversity.
Both scientific and commercial biodiversity prospectors should pay fees, as mineral prospectors do.
Developing the ability to identify and process plant samples will add value to a country's resources, the report says.
It recommends that developing countries seek "advance payments and relatively small royalties rather than holding out for higher royalties that may never materialise" .
New Scientist 19 June
Forests: Tropical
Trade in herbal remedies threatens plants with extinction
The survival of many wild medicinal plants is threatened by the booming trade in herbal remedies and herbal teas, according to a study by TRAFFIC International.
India, formerly the largest supplier of medicinal plants to the European market, has now banned the export of wild plants.
Other countries, such as Pakistan, allow uncontrolled exploitation which may lead to the extinction of many wild plants.
Other major suppliers named in the report include Argentina, China, Egypt, Sudan and several East European countries.
Germany is the major European buyer, with 70% of the market.
Two-thirds of its imports of medicinal plants are taken from the wild.
Among the species threatened include Taxus baccata, a Himalayan yew which may yield a chemical that arrests ovarian cancer.
New Scientist 19 June
Forests: Tropical
Forest loss hits biodiversity hard
Satellite studies of the Amazon rainforest by the US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) show that the area being felled each year is far less than previously estimated.
The research shows that an average of 15,000 square kilometres of trees was cleared annually from 1978-88, half to a third of other estimates.
However, scientists at NASA's Goddard Center estimate that the loss of plant and animal species as a result of the destruction of the forest may be three times higher than earlier estimates.
 "If you are talking about biodiversity, then I don't see any reason for optimism," said the Goddard Center's Compton Tucker.
* An important forest reserve in southeast Brazil, 400 kilometres north of Rio de Janeiro, is being destroyed by fire, according to reports in early July.
International Herald Tribune 26 June *Guardian 9 July
Forests: Tropical
Bangladesh mounts tree-planting campaign
Faced with rapidly-depleting timber resources, the Bangladesh government has announced plans to plant 85 million trees this year.
Its forests are shrinking due to demand for homes and firewood.
International Herald Tribune 5 July
Global Warming
EC softens emissions directive
The European Community has abandoned directives necessary to meet its target to reduce carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by 2000.
A series of 13 directives planned in 1991 to cut 2,500 million tonnes of EC emissions, a quarter of the total, was replaced last year by a single directive calling for member states to set energy efficiency standards.
This has now been dropped by a directive concentrating on public education and voluntary agreements with industry.
The European Association for the Conservation of Energy says member states will not now be able to meet the targets set at the UNCED Rio summit [see ED 59/60].
The other strand of the community's policy, a carbon tax, now looks unlikely to be approved by ministers.
The EC has meanwhile approved a five-year plan to boost use of renewable energy.
Under the plan, share of total demand met by renewables would rise from 4 per cent in 1991 to 8 per cent in 2005, cutting carbon dioxide emissions by 180 million tonnes.
New Scientist 3 July The European 26 June
Global Warming
Ice-cap surveys reveal climatic fluctuation
Analysis of ice extracted from the Greenland ice cap has revealed that climate over the last 250,000 years has fluctuated rapidly — with the exception of the last 8,000-10,000 years.
The findings suggest that the period during which developed human society has flourished may be a time of unusual stability.
At other times in the past, temperatures appear to have fluctuated by as much as 10 degrees centigrade over a couple of decades.
Were such a fluctuation to take place now, it could have disastrous consequences for agriculture and economies across the world.
Writing in the scientific journal Nature, researchers from the University of Victoria, British Columbia, insisted that it was "difficult to express the importance" of their findings, and added that there were no obvious explanations as to why the climate had remained "strangely stable" recently.
The studies are based on ice samples extracted by a drilling operation mounted by a consortium of scientists from eight European countries.
Records of past climates were inferred from analyzing oxygen types in the ice, with changes in relative oxygen densities being assumed to reflect temperature changes.
New York Times 16 July
Global Warming
Pinatubo effect shows climate sensitivity
The cooling of the earth caused by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 may have been "the largest global climate pertubation of the century," according to American climatologist James Hansen.
One of the first to bring global warming to international attention, Hansen says the effects of the Philippines eruption underline how sensitive the atmosphere is to small changes in heat balance and how vulnerable it is to the greenhouse effect.
The 20 million tonnes of sulphur dioxide injected into the atmosphere by Pinatubo created a thin shroud that has reduced the amount of solar heating reaching the surface of the earth by about 4 watts per square metre, Hansen says.
This temporarily exceeds the warming impact of the greenhouse effect.
The response of the world's climate to the eruption confirmed predictions of high sensitivity to such events.
Hansen predicts that, following the cooling of between 0.3-0.4° C after the eruption, world temperatures will bounce back sharply once the shroud disappears to bring new record high levels.
New Scientist 19 June
Global Warming
Satellite data "doesn't support warming claim" 
A network of satellites operated by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) have not recorded the levels of temperature rises reported from ground-based thermometers, raising questions over the true extent of global warming.
US scientists who have analysed the data claim that there is no evidence that temperatures in the lower atmosphere have increased significantly, as could have been expected if global warming were underway.
They suggest that peculiar factors may account for the high levels recorded on a limited number of ground-based instruments.
These include the fact that many are in urban "heat islands" , although allowance is supposedly made for this.
By contrast, the satellites scan the whole Earth surface several times a day, measuring the intensity of microwave radiation emanating naturally from oxygen molecules in the lower four miles of the atmosphere.
The extent of the coverage is seen as more reliable than the scattered ground-based measurements, although other scientists have pointed out that atmospheric temperatures are not so relevant for surface life, and that the microwave readings can also be thrown out by water droplets and other atmospheric particles.
It is seen as significant, however, that there is not a greater correlation between the two measurements.
International Herald Tribune 29 July
Global Warming
Global warming may increase insect-borne disease
Australian scientists have warned that the prevalence of insect-borne diseases could increase as a result of global warming.
Most parts of Australia are expected to become hotter and wetter in the next 40 years; more open water lying on the surface is likely to increase the risk of insect-borne diseases such as Ross River fever, Dengue and Bluetongue now confined to Northern Australia spreading throughout the country.
Chain Reaction (Friends of the Earth, Australia), no 68
Nuclear Power
UK pays for Australia clean-up
Australia has accepted the UK's offer of £20 million as compensation for cleaning up former nuclear test sites.
The money will pay for decontaminating test sites used by the British at Maralinga and Emu in South Australia in the 1950s.
Guardian 30 June
Nuclear Power
Nuclear decommissioning costs "financial time bomb" 
Scrapping the UK's civil nuclear facilities could cost a total of £17,900 million, according to a report by the National Audit Office (NAO).
The head of the NAO, Sir John Bourn, described the costs as "a financial time bomb ticking away" .
Another recent report, by Friends of the Earth (FoE), claims this is an underestimate, however, and puts the full cost at £30,000 million.
The estimates do not include the cost of dismantling nuclear weapons and military nuclear facilities.
The NAO says its estimates could be reduced by improvements in technology, but adds that higher costs may result from stricter health and safety regulations.
Of the total, decommissioning the eight Magnox and five advanced gas-cooled power stations run by Nuclear Electric would cost £7,000 million, Scottish Nuclear's one Magnox and two AGR stations £1,500 million, British Nuclear Fuels' fuel treatment and reprocessing facilities £6,000 million, and the Atomic Energy Authority's research and reprocessing facilities about £3,500 million.
The report assumes that decommissioning costs would be spread over 100 years, although the industry has been pushing for a "deferred safe storage strategy" , spreading the costs over 135-150 years.
The NAO's costings were criticised by the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee, which accused the government of complacency in estimating the cost of scrapping nuclear facilities.
Committee chairman Robert Sheldon said: "I see a lot of assumptions made, not taking into account the very serious consequences if you get it wrong." 
Financial Times 2 June, 1 July Guardian 1 July
Nuclear Power
UK to retain nuclear option
The British government is committed to retaining the option for nuclear power, providing the industry can operate economically and meet rigorous safety and environmental standards, Energy Minister Tim Eggar told a London conference organised by the nuclear industry.
Eggar said a key question for the review of the industry that the government plans to launch later this year would be whether new nuclear power stations could be commercially viable.
The review would also look at arrangements, such as the nuclear levy, which cover th gap between electricity prices and the industry's exceptional costs.
He added that the terms of reference for the review had not yet been decided.
Financial Times 30 June
Nuclear Power
EC sends experts to advise Russia and Ukraine on nuclear safety
The EC is sending nuclear experts to help in improving the safety of reactors in Russia and Ukraine.
Six teams of experts are going to Russia and two to Ukraine for placements of six months to a year; each team consists of between four and six engineers, who will install computerised protection systems and leak detection devices.
The scheme forms part of the Ecu62 million second phase of the EC's programme of assistance to the nuclear industry in the former Soviet Union.
About half the money will be spent on studying the problems at nuclear facilities and recommending solutions, the remainder on training of local staff, equipment and technical assistance.
Le Monde 1 July European 1-4 July
Nuclear Power
Marine dumping "not a global threat" 
Dumping of nuclear waste in the oceans poses local rather than global dangers, according to an international group of scientists.
A conference in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, reacting to reports of large-scale dumping of highly radioactive waste by the Soviet Union over the past 40 years [see ED70], concluded that "any potential problem would be a local one and would pose no threat on a global scale." 
No signs of dangerously high radiation levels had been deteced in water samples from the Kara and Barents Seas, where Soviet dumping, totalling 2.5 million curies, took place, the conference participants said, adding that there was strong consensus among them that "there is no evidence of any regional-scale radioactive contamination in the Arctic and North Atlantic oceans that currently poses a threat to human health or causes environmental concern." 
International Herald Tribune 14 June
Nuclear Power
UK government supports THORP opening
The British government has given the clearest signals yet that it intends to authorise the start-up of British Nuclear Fuels' (BNFL) thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP) at Sellafield.
As a second round of public consultations on the plant opened, the government issued a statement saying that: "A positive case for the operation of THORP has been well made" .
Officials added that the government was now "minded" to give the plant the go ahead.
The consultations will focus on the economic and diplomatic issues surrounding the plant, although officials also made clear that these issues are "not relevant" to the government's final decision, saying that the consultations were being held as a matter of "good governance" because of the great public interest in the plant's future.
The government has been criticised for failing to seek an independent audit of BNFL's economic justification for THORP.
Documents published by BNFL state that the plant will earn £950 million for the UK and £1,800 million for BNFL in its first 10 years, but contain no comparison of the cost of reprocessing with that of storage of nuclear waste, or any assessment of the revenue BNFL could earn from storage of its customers' waste.
The consultations will end on 4 October, with the government unlikely to make a final decision before the end of the year, depending on the volume of comments received.
Labour environment spokesman Chris Smith condemned the consultations as a "facade" designed to avoid legal difficulties.
Greenpeace has threatened to seek a judicial review if a full public inquiry into the need for the plant is not held.
The government has appeared deeply split on the issue, with Environment Secretary John Gummer earlier saying that economic and nuclear proliferation issues had to be considered.
In July, Environment Minister Tim Yeo said a public inquiry had not been ruled out, but would have to await the results of the latest round of consultations.
Radioactive testing at THORP was due to begin in mid-August, subject to approval by local councils.
The first round of public consultations considered only environmental and health issues.
In its report, the pollution inspectorate said it had received 80,000 responses — 77 per cent of which opposed approval of the plant — but found "no points of substance" to cause it to reconsider the terms of its draft licence for the plant.
The licence would "effectively protect human health, the food chain and the environment generally" .
Meanwhile, the government published a report from its radioactive waste management advisory committee saying that BNFL had failed to supply it with sufficient information on its proposals to deal with waste arising from work carried out at THORP for foreign customers.
The committee on medical aspects of radiation in the environment warned that the proposed increase in radioactivity from THORP "should be viewed with some concern" .
Independent 19, 23 July, 5 August Financial Times 5 August Guardian 26, 29 June, 17 23, July, 3 August
Nuclear Power
Trawsfynydd closed for good The UK's Nuclear Electric company has abandoned attempts to reopen the Trawsfynydd nuclear power station in North Wales, two and a half years after its operations were suspended because of safety fears.
The company has failed to convince the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII) that the embrittlement of the steel reactor vessel was not serious enough to prevent the station reopening.
Decommissioning the station will cost £220 million and will result in the loss of 490 jobs over the next two years.
Nuclear Electric says the station's closure since February 1991 has already lost it £125 million.
The company says its four other Magnox stations, which have similar steel pressure vessels, are not threatened by the same defect and the NII has allowed them to continue operations.
Greenpeace is pushing for the four — Hinkley Point A, Sizewell A, Dungeness A and Bradwell — to be shut immediately.
Guardian 21 July
Nuclear Power
Design flaws in US plants
Design faults at the Susquehanna nuclear power station in Pennsylvania would make it impossible for operators to control a nuclear accident, according to engineers who worked on the plant's construction.
In a report to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the engineers, Donald Prevatte and David Lochbaum, say the problem, concerning the inadequacy of back-up cooling for spent fuel pools, could affect one-third of the US's 109 nuclear plants.
They say it could lead to a melt-down more serious than that at Three Mile Island in 1979.
The plant's owners, Pennsylvania Power & Light, have denied the existence of the problem, even though three internal engineering studies supported the conclusions of Prevatte and Lochbaum.
The company's delays in reporting it to the NRC led the engineers to do so themselves.
Other US nuclear plants are now said to be studying their fuel pool cooling.
Guardian 23 June
Ozone layer
Czechs ban ozone-depleters
The Czech Parliament has passed a law banning a number of ozone-depleting substances.
As from 1 April 1994, the production, use and import of Halons-1211, 1301 and 2402 will be prohibited, and the ban will extend to a further 17 substances as from 1 January 1996.
In the interim, producers and imported will have to pay a levy of 100 crowns (U$3.30) for every kilogram to the State Fund for the Environment.
Companies which flout the ban will be liable for fines of between $9,000 and $90,000, with half going to the Fund.
CTK Radio 8 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Ozone layer
Poles reduce use of ozone depleters
Poland has cut its use of ozone depleting substances to below the levels demanded by the international community in the Montreal Protocol [see EDs 35/36; 59/60].
A Polish bureau for the protection of the ozone layer was set up in May [see ED 71].
Imports of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in 1991 fell to 2,600 tonnes from 6,700 tonnes in 1986.
Halon imports fell from 1,250 tonnes in 1986 to 280 tonnes.
The reductions were caused partly by Poland's recession and its resulting inability to import and partly because of growing public environmental pressure, according to a spokesman for the Ministry of Environmental Protection.
However, the dissolution of Poland's parliament in May, on the eve of a bill regulating imports of ozone depleting freons being put before the Senate, the upper house, could hamper progress, according to the spokesman.
East West Environment June 1993
Ozone layer
New EC limit on ozone depleter
The European Commission has announced plans to end the use of ozone-depleting hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) by 2014.
But while it proposed interim restrictions on the consumption of HCFCs — used for making foam insulation — it stepped back from proposing to outlaw their production in the EC, from where they could still be exported to developing countries as a substitute to the much more harmful CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons) in refrigerators and air conditioners.
Commissioners proposed a reduction in their use to 7,300 tonnes from January 1995 with an end to their use by 2014, or earlier if the production of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)— the least harmful direct CFC substitute — is considered sufficiently reliable.
The Commission also announced plans to outlaw the use and production of hydrobromochlorofluorocarbons (HBFCs), used in firefighting equipment, and to curb production of the pesticide methyl bromide, by Jan. 1, 1995.
Financial Times 10 June
Ozone layer
Alternative to methyl bromide proposed
Australian scientists have suggested that carbonyl sulphide should be used as a benign alternative to methyl bromide, a pesticide employed for fumigating soil, timbers, and grains and fruit after harvest.
Methyl bromide is a major ozone-depleter, some 40 times more powerful than chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
It currently accounts for some 10 per cent of ozone loss, but this proportion is likely to rise to 16 per cent if present trends continue, despite the fact that at a meeting of Montreal Protocol signatories last November, it was agreed to freeze use at present levels [see ED 68].
Carbonyl sulphide, a compound of carbon, sulphur and oxygen, is a naturally-occurring gas, given off by compost heaps, marshes and fires.
It has no effect on stratospheric ozone, and no measurable impact on climate.
Tests carried out by Australia's CSIRO research body has shown it to be effective against over 30 pests ranging from beetles to nematodes.
The CSIRO has just applied for a worldwide patent for its use as a fumigant.
The head of the team which carried out the research commented that "we're amazed that no-one has thought to use carbonyl sulphide in this way before" .
New Scientist 31 July
Ozone layer
EC fails to phase out methyl bromide
The European Commission has recommended to member states that they cut usage of methyl bromide [see story above]by 25 per cent over the next seen years.
Use of the pesticide in the EC amounts to 14,000 tonnes annually, out of a world total of 66,000 tonnes.
Environmentalists have criticized the Commission's failure to follow the lead of the US, which has proposed a complete phase-out, and is about to insist also on warnings about ozone-depletion to be included with the product.
The French government is strongly opposed to any phase out.
It is part owner of Atochem, one of Europe's main manufacturers of methyl bromide.
Within individual European countries, however, some progress is being made.
Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands are encouraging a switch to crop rotation, integrated pest management, or steam-based soil sterilization.
In the UK, major supermarket chains including Sainsbury and Tesco have produced codes of practice encouraging suppliers to adopt integrated pest management.
Sainsbury claim that most of its suppliers have now stopped using methyl bromide.
* Greenpeace has criticized the Israeli government for failing to take steps to cut production of methyl bromide.
Its executive director, Paul Gilding, has written to the Environment Minister asking him to take action.
Israel is currently a major producer and exporter of methyl bromide.
The Food Magazine, Aug/Oct 1993 *Independent 22 July
Ozone layer
Skin cancer link questioned
The link between ozone-depletion and skin cancer has been questioned by the UK's National Radiological Protection Board.
It has carried out a five-year study which it says shows no significant increase in radiation is reaching the earth's surface.
The Board claims that environmentalists have underestimated the degree of protection afforded by clouds and industrial emissions.
Sunday Times 20 June
Ozone layer
New planes could pose ozone threat
Exhaust fumes from a new generation of "super Concordes" planned for the 21st century may threaten the ozone layer, according to researchers from Cambridge University.
Emissions from the aeroplanes, dubbed high-speed transport aircraft (HSTs), will react with chlorines from chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which are already in the atmosphere and damaging the ozone layer.
Slimane Bekki and John Pyle said they could not calculate the effect on ozone depletion, but believed the northern hemisphere would be worst affected, because it has most of the main air routes.
New Scientist 19 June
Ozone layer
Ultraviolet rays hit Argentina city
The world's southernmost city, Ushuaia, in Argentina, has been hit by sizeable increases in ultraviolet radiation, caused by the hole in the Antarctic ozone layer.
Twice in the last five years — in December 1990 and December 1992 — scientists from the University of Chicago registered abnormally high levels of uv-B radiation (the most harmful) in the city.
In each case ozone-poor air had been blown over the city after the annual break-up of the Antarctic ozone hold at the end of the southern spring.
In other years, none of the ozone-depleted air had been blown over Ushuaia.
In 1990 the level was the equivalent of moving 20 degrees closer to the equator — 45 per cent higher than normal.
John Frederick, leader of the Chicago team, said it was not clear how the increased ultraviolet radiation had affected the population.
New Scientist 15 June
Pollution: Air
New ozone measurer developed
A new instrument for measuring ozone levels in the air has been developed by Austrian scientists.
The instrument not only measures the amount of ozone in the air but also the amounts of substances which lead to the formation of ozone.
This enables predictions of ozone formation at a particular location to be made and allows local authorities to take remedial action.
News from Austria 16 July
Pollution: Air
Czechs act on air pollution
The government of the Czech Republic has introduced measures to take the thermal power stations of Northern Bohemia out of action when there is a danger of smog.
An early warning system, based on weather forecasts, will enable the stations to be closed before smogs develop, although the reliability of the system is uncertain.
Funds have also been allocated to help schools and residential areas convert to gas-fired heating and to send children from heavily polluted areas on "holidays with lessons" away from home.
CTK 21 July, Czech Radio 29 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
Estonia "to halve sulphur emissions" 
Estonia and Finland have signed an agreement under which Estonia undertakes to halve sulphur emissions within the next five years, compared to 1980 levels, in return for Finnish financial assistance.
The two countries also agreed to joint projects aimed at cleaning up the Baltic waters.
Estonian Radio, 2 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
Japan helps China clean up
Japan is to provide China with 6,000 million yen in aid during the current fiscal year for an environmental protection programme.
An increase on the 1,000 million yen in environmental aid provided last year, the programme is linked to acid rain in Japan caused by pollution in China.
Kyodo News Service, Tokyo, 2 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Air
Lithuania's smoke-free Cabinet
The Lithuanian Prime Minister, Jurgis Bredekis, has persuaded three of his fellow Cabinet ministers to give up smoking as part of his drive to head the world's first "tobacco-free government" .
Bredekis, a former heart surgeon, said that 15 out of 17 of the Cabinet had previously smoked.
Lithuanians have a high rate of tobacco consumption.
International Herald Tribune 22 July
Pollution: Air
Soot particles kill thousands in US
Some 50,000-60,000 people in the US are dying every year as a result of particle pollution, the inhalation of tiny particles of soot.
The number of deaths is far higher than for any other form of pollution and rivals the death toll from some cancers.
The figures, emerging from studies by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Harvard School of Public Health, may require the authorities to revise pollution standards, as in most cases the amount of particle pollution emitted — by industrial plants and the exhausts of diesel vehicles — is within legal limits.
Environmental regulation has focused on other forms of pollution; only a third of air pollution expenditure goes on removing particles and most of this is spent on catching larger particles, those that are more than 10 microns in diameter.
The American Lung Association has said it will sue the EPA to get it to revise the standards on particle pollution but many scientists argue that more data is needed before the effects of the pollution is properly understood.
International Herald Tribune 20 July
Pollution: Air
US rain less acid
Government researchers have found that rain in the US became less acid during the 1980s.
There was a progressive decline in concentrations of sulphate, produced by power station emissions, between 1980 and 1991, and a less marked decline in nitrates, from vehicle exhausts.
The researchers, from the US Geological Survey, were unable to explain their findings, based on rain collected from 33 weather stations.
New Scientist 19 July
Pollution: Air
Rome and Athens suffer pollution crises
A pollution alert was issued in Rome in early June because of rising ozone levels, with the elderly and children advised to stay indoors.
The alert, the first of its kind in the city, was cancelled the following day, when ozone fell to tolerable levels.
Later in June, more than 1,000 people in Athens sought hospital treatment for heart and respiratory problems in a single day because of air pollution and high temperatures.
International Herald Tribune 11 June Independent 25 June
Pollution: Air
US lawmakers oppose space advertising
A bill has been presented to the US Congress to ban advertising in space.
Georgia-based advertising agency Space Marketing had earlier announced plans for inflatable space billboards, 2 kilometres long and 1 kilometre wide, which would appear as large as the full moon.
A cross-party coalition of legislators was formed to oppose the idea, proposing a law that would deny the licence needed for the launch of any billboard from an American rocket.
 "Space belongs to all the people of the world and should be used for the benefit of all humankind," said Senator Jim Jeffords of Vermont as he introduced the bill.
New Scientist 10 July
Pollution: Water
Blackpool condemned for dirty beaches
The British seaside resort of Blackpool has been condemned by the European Court of Justice for the quality of water off its bathing beaches.
Blackpool, with neighbouring Southport, fails to meet European standards on sewage pollution.
Ruling that the UK had breached international agreements, the judges dismissed the British government's contention that it had not had enough time to meet standards set in 1975.
The judgement, which provoked an angry reaction from the local tourist industry, was described by the government as a "technicality" , saying it was confident all but nine British beaches would be up to EC standards by 1996.
By then North West Water will have completed a pipe to carry Blackpool's sewage three miles out to sea.
Independent 15 July Financial Times 17 July
Pollution: Water
Black sea states agree to address pollution crisis
Six countries bordering the Black Sea — Bulgaria, Georgia, Romania, Russia, Turkey and the Ukraine — have agreed on a three year programme to tackle pollution of its waters, after an international scientific group warned that it faced ecological death unless urgent measures were taken.
Meeting in the Bulgarian port of Verna, officials from the six states agreed to establish marine protection centres in each country, and to set up a $32 million fund to support work on reducing oil, chemical and biological pollution and to improve fishing conditions.
Middle East Times, 13-19 July
Pollution: Water
Braer disaster "did little harm" 
The environmental impact of the Braer oil tanker disaster in January appear to have been relatively mild, according to an interim report from the Scottish Office.
Damage to wildlife was far less than at first feared thanks to the rare combination of fierce wind and waves, the fact that the light crude was released slowly and heavy rain.
Most of the oil was dispersed quickly, leaving "little evidence of pollution" .
Four of the Shetlands' 100 otters — one of the densest populations in Europe — were found dead, but two had been killed by road vehicles and the deaths of the others were not attributed to pollution.
The number of sea birds killed, more than 1,500, was regarded as low compared with similar disasters elsewhere.
Most damage was suffered by salmon farms, which had to destroy all fish born in 1991.
Environmental groups commented that the report was premature, with the long-term effects on health and the environment yet to be assessed.
A report from the Marine Pollution Control Unit however, says that the disaster exposed flaws in the UK's emergency plans for tanker accidents.
The report says the national contingency plan could not have coped if large quantities of the Braer's cargo had come ashore.
The plan contained no provisions for the long-term clean-up that would have been necessary if the tanker had been carrying heavier crude.
In the event, spraying of chemicals to disperse the oil was probably unnecessary, the report says, adding that computer models used to predict the fate of the oil proved inadequate, as did aerial surveillance equipment.
Guardian 18 June, 2 July New Scientist 26 June
Pollution: Water
Croatian war leaves its mark on Danube
Water quality in the Danube has been one of the casualties of the war between Croatia and Serbia, according to the UN Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO).
The Sava and Drava rivers, which feed the Danube, are heavily contaminated because of the destruction of factories and sewage works and river water poses major health risks.
Numerous instances of the dumping or abandonment of toxic chemicals and other materials have been discovered.
Repair work has yet to be done because of lack of funding.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has published a strategy for repairing war damage in Croatia but only one project is nearing approval and there are no environmental projects as yet.
The Danube Environmental Programme, which aims to clean up the Danube basin, may be frustrated by the enormous amount of pollution coming from Croatia.
The ecology of the Danube delta is also under threat.
New Scientist 19 June
Pollution: Water
FoE attacks British water standards
At least 14.5 million consumers in England and Wales are supplied with sub-standard drinking water, according to Friends of the Earth (FoE).
FoE said the European Commission was threatening the UK government with court action because of its failure to apply the EC's drinking water directive fully.
The FoE survey, based on water companies' unpublished returns to the Drinking Water Inspectorate, showed that 14.5 million people received drinking water breaching the standard for pesticides and 3.5 million had supplies containing nitrate above the legal limit.
The Department of the Environment (DoE) challenged FoE's interpretation, claiming that the inspectorate's figures showed 98.7 per cent compliance with EC and UK water standards.
The DoE said it would be making a "robust reply" to the European Commission's request for evidence that the directive was being applied.
Guardian 13 July
Pollution: Water
More pesticides and chemicals
Levels of pesticide and chemical residues in drinking water in England and Wales rose in 1992 for the second year in succession, according to the Drinking Water Inspectorate, although overall water quality remained the same, with 98.7 per cent of the 3.75 million tests complying with national and EC standards.
Three per cent of water supply zones failed to meet pesticide standards, compared with 2.8 per cent in 1991 and 2.1 per cent in 1990.
Thames Water had the worst record for pesticides, as well as the biggest problem with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are potentially carcinogenic.
Getting rid of PAHs requires the replacement of old cast iron mains lined with coal tar paper.
The number of supply zones not complying with EC standards on PAH concentrations has doubled since 1990, to 224 out of the total 2,598, but chief inspector Mike Healey said there was no risk to health, as the EC standards were very cautious.
The European Commission has, however, threatened to take the UK to court over its failure to observe community rules on drinking water quality.
Friends of the Earth said water reaching 14.5 million people in England and Wales regularly failed to meet the EC pesticide standard, while 3.5 million received water with nitrates above the EC limit.
Financial Times 29 July Independent 29 July
Pollution: Water
Po's pollution causes concern
Pollution of the Po, Italy's largest river, is a source of mounting concern, with fears that it may be contributing to pollution of the Adriatic, into which it flows.
About 16 million people — more than a quarter of the Italian population — live in the Po basin, which is also home to 37 per cent of Italy's industry.
But the major source of pollution of the river is agriculture, thanks to increasing use of chemicals by the traditional rice growing industry and the growth of pig farming.
Chemical seepage is starting to affect drinking water, 70 per cent of which comes from underground sources.
The recently created Po Basin Authority, the main watchdog over water quality and the environment, has a list of proposals for ways to change farmers attitudes: price controls over pesticides and weedkillers should be increased to deter excessive use; farmers should get better weather information, to minimise repetitive use of chemicals; water charges should be enforced, to limit use of chemicals, and farmers should move away from single-crop farming, which exhausts the soil and requires more fertilisers.
Financial Times 21 July
Transport
EC vans to get cats
European Community environment ministers have decided that new passenger vans and light goods vehicles will have to be fitted with catalytic converters from next year, bringing them into line with cars and lorries.
A call by the Netherlands, Germany and Denmark for more generous fiscal incentives for cleaner cars to cut emissions faster was resisted by other EC countries, including the UK, on grounds that it could distort competition.
Financial Times 29 June
Transport
Car's environmental costs
A report from the Environment and Forecasting Institute in Heidelberg, Germany, details the environmental and health costs of the motor car through its life-cycle.
The report assumes a medium-sized car, driven for 13,000 km a year for 10 years.
It concludes that during its lifetime such a car will produce: * 44.3 tonnes of carbon dioxide; * 4.8 kg of sulphur dioxide; * 46.8 kg of nitrogen oxide; * 325 kg of carbon monoxide; * 36 kg of hydrocarbons; * 26.5 tonnes of waste.
The report also details the car's contribution to pollution of soil, air and water by oil, cadmium, lead, copper, chrome, zinc and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
Acidic emissions from each car's exhaust account for three dead and 30 "sick" trees over the 10-year period.
In health terms, the car is responsible for 820 hours of life lost through a road traffic accident fatality, and 2,800 hours of life damaged by a road accident.
One individual out of every 100 will be killed in a road accident, the report claims, and two out of every three injured.
The car's external costs in terms of pollution, accidents and noise, after income from all sources of vehicle and fuel taxation are taken into account, amounts to DM6,000 per year (about £2,400).
Guardian 30 July
Transport
Oxleas Wood saved
After a lengthy and intense public campaign of opposition, the UK government has abandoned plans to build a six-lane motorway through the ancient Oxleas Wood in south-east London [see EDs 55, 61, 69, 70, 71].
The victory by the environmental campaigners, taken together with the intensity of the campaign over Twyford Down [ibid.]may prove a turning point in Britain's roads programme.
Announcing the decision in parliament, Transport Secretary John MacGregor said the £300 million East London River Crossing scheme "fails to meet the high environmental standards we now apply to new road schemes" .
He said the decision was "quite independent" of the European Commission's threat to take the government to court for its failure to carry out a full environmental impact assessment of the scheme, but warned that a new river crossing was still necessary and the government would bring forward new proposals.
Anti-road campaigners called for the government to guarantee long-term protection for Oxleas Wood and pointed out that the change of mind did not necessarily signal a change of policy, with the government's £23,000 million roads programme continuing to threaten 160 sites of special scientific interest, many of them more valuable than Oxleas Wood.
The scheme was launched 14 years ago and had been subject to two public enquiries, both of which recommended the building of a tunnel under Oxleas Wood, at an extra cost of £10 million.
Public support for the scheme evaporated as a result of the campaign to save the wood, with even its most vociferous supporter, the British Road Federation, withdrawing its backing for the government's plans.
Some £31 million has already been spent on preparation for the scheme.
Independent 8 July Guardian 8 July Financial Times 8 July
Transport
Backing for Twyford protest
Former EC environment commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana has expressed his support for opponents of the extension of the M3 through Twyford Down in Hampshire, saying the road project was a "brutal and unneeded monster" .
He was speaking after visiting the six protesters imprisoned under 28-day sentences for defying a court injunction not to take part in a mass protest at the site.
The six, among 55 individuals banned by a High Court judge from trespassing on or causing a nuisance at the site, joined 500 others in a peaceful invasion of the construction site; 27 were arrested.
Legal proceedings begun by Ripa di Meana to block the Twyford Down scheme were dropped a month after he left office as commissioner.
He said the battle over the motorway extension was important for the whole of Europe, and he did not rule out a further legal challenge.
Guardian 3 July, 3 August Independent 3 July
Transport
Biofuel experiment abandoned
The UK's first experiment with biofuelled buses has ended because of the high cost of the fuel [see ED 63].
Reading Bus tested Italian-made rape methyl ester (RME) on three buses on different services for nine months.
It experienced no problems but found the fuel too expensive, at about 24 pence a litre compared to 10 pence a litre for diesel.
The company was unable to interest any British firm in making the fuel and was also deterred by the government's failure to exempt RME from fuel duty.
RME, which produces no sulphur dioxide and less carbon dioxide than diesel, is used in France, Germany, Italy, Spain and Austria [see ED 67].
New Scientist 10 July
Transport
Indian emission controls
India is to introduce tighter controls on vehicle emissions.
New vehicles will be required to comply with set standards from 1995, while unleaded fuel will become available in 2000.
The government says it is putting emphasis on acquiring environmentally friendly technologies.
Press Trust of India 25 June (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Transport
Budapest to end two-strokes
Budapest city council is to spend 80 million forints this year phasing out the city's 120,000 two-stroke cars and vans.
Owners get grants and loans for four-stroke vehicles—or public transport passes.
MTI, Budapest, 13 July (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Waste and Recycling
Germany to allow incineration?
Germany is set to introduce legislation to allow it to incinerate domestic and industrial waste as complaints grow among its EC partners that German waste exports were stifling their own recycling capacity.
Duales System Deutschland (DSD), the organization set up by industry to comply with a law requiring manufacturers to recycle packaging, has succeeded in dealing with paper, aliminium and glass, but it collected four times more plastic rubbish than it could cope with.
Meanwhile France, the UK, Spain, Ireland and Luxembourg all claimed their new recycling industries could not cope with exports caused by German legislation.
France threatened to curb imports of waste that Germany could not recycle.
German businesses had claimed that German disposal laws — among the strictest in Europe — placed an unfair burden on firms struggling with recession and foreign competiton.
They called for alternatives to the "recycle at all costs" policy.
* Responding to criticism from neighbouring countries, Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer announced plans for legislation under which exporters who dumped waste illegally abroad would be liable to prison terms of up to 10 years.
Financial Times 18, 30 June Guardian 19 July
Waste and Recycling
Toxic legacy
A quarter of waste dumps in England have been closed by companies in attempt to sidestep new pollution control rules, leaving a toxic legacy which could cost councils millions of pounds to clean up.
Daily Telegraph 8 June
Waste and Recycling
Landfill levy plan dumped
Italy has abandoned a landfill levy a week after its introduction, against a background of widespread opposition from across the board.
The plan, which involved charging a flat-rate tax per kilo, represented an attempt to reduce the amount of waste dumped in landfill sites.
But it was opposed by the Senate's Environment Committee, industry, local authority refuse collection agencies and environmentalists.
Opponents said the plan would have had a variable impact, because of differences in the charges of landfill operators across the country.
A new plan is being considered.
Environment Business 30 June
Waste and Recycling
UK packaging deadline
Britain's packaging industry has been given until the end of the year to draw up plans for recycling 50-75 per cent of all packaging waste by the year 2000.
Announcing the initiative, Environment Secretary John Gummer warned that if the industry cannot satisfy the government that they are moving towards that objective, then "we will need to move towards a legislative approach" .
He added that he wanted to avoid "the alarming imbalance in some schemes [a reference to the German method — see above]between what is collected and the ability to reprocess it" .
The packaging industry reacted cautiously.
Cameron Mclatchie, chairman of the British Polythene Industries, said that the emphasis on recycling household waste was unrealistic.
 "It does not make environmental or economic sense" , he argued,"although it is politically easy to tell people they should recycle.
It's what they want to hear."
Industry would be unwilling to invest further in recycling until it became profitable, he said.
For its part, Friends of the Earth criticized the lack of statutory recycling targets.
It pointed out that a recent packaging industry report on the packaging of liquids for human consumption had revealed a marked increase in the amount of energy and waste involved in the period 1986-90.
Financial Times 28 July Friends of the Earth information, 21 July