

Agriculture & Food
Canada cuts back cod fishing
Canada has shut down virtually all cod fishing on its east coast and made deep cuts in quotas for other species.
According to federal Fisheries Minister Ross Reid: "We are facing an unprecedented ecological crisis in Atlantic groundfish stocks.
Immediate action is needed to permit this fragile resource to rebuild."
The ban will cover cod on the eastern Scotian shelf off Nova Scotia, the southern Gulf of St Lawrence, the Sydney Bight area off Cape Breton and the south coast of Newfoundland.
The measures could mean the loss of 12,000 jobs.
Financial Times 1 September
Agriculture & Food
Gulf of Gabes ecosystem under threat
Sardines are threatened with extinction in the Gulf of Gabes, one of the southern Mediterranean's richest fishing grounds, because of overfishing and chemical pollution.
Trawlers from the Tunisian port of Sfax have been banned from fishing since August, although the ban will end in mid-September, because of a sharp drop in sardine numbers.
Catches have fallen from 36,000 tonnes in 1988 to 28,000 tonnes in 1992 and the number of fish is down by two-thirds.
Greenpeace says urgent action is needed to prevent irreversible damage to the Gulf's ecosystem, in particular to save the Posidonia sea grass, basis of the local food chain, which has almost been wiped out.
The grass has been destroyed by the effects of trawling in shallow water and the dumping of waste by the chemical plants at Gabes and Skhira.
The Tunisian government is attempting to persuade fishermen to fish further north and not to trawl in shallow waters; it has also pledged to stop dumping by the state-owned chemical plants by 1996.
Middle East Times 7-13 September
Agriculture & Food
Pressure for UK sheep dip ban
Volunteers wearing full protective clothing suffered "significant" falls in their white blood cell counts after exposure to the toxic chemicals contained in sheep dip (used to protect sheep from disease).
This is the key preliminary finding of a study conducted by scientists from the University of Newcastle.
The finding is expected to increase pressure on the British government to ban sheep dips, which contain organophosphates, compounds closely related to nerve gas.
Hundreds of farmers are believed to have suffered dizziness, skin irritation and even chronic weakness after exposure to the chemicals.
The government banned compulsory dipping in June 1992, but most farmers still dip their sheep because they risk prosecution if disease breaks out among their herds.
The government maintains that dipping is safe if carried out with the recommended protective clothing and other precautions.
But surveys by the Health and Safety Executive have shown that farmers and workers often dispense with proper protection because it is impractical.
Guardian 26 August
Conservation: Habitat
Campaign over Siberian mine
Indigenous peoples from northern Russia are demanding a halt to work on exploiting the Udokan copper deposit until the Russian parliament has passed legislation on the economic status of the region and the rights of indigenous people.
The mining programme, they say, ignores the rights of the Evenki and Yakut peoples and interferes with their traditional way of life and their hunting grounds.
The region's indigenous peoples demand that they be included in discussion about environmental issues and development.
Interfax, Moscow, 23 August (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Conservation: Habitat
Scientists call for moratorium on Siberian oil plans
An international scientific expedition has called for a 10-year moratorium on the extension of oil and gas production to a huge area of north-west Siberia to allow time for urgent research into its forests, peat bogs and tundra.
The expedition, which included 30 foresters and ecologists from Russia and the West, as well as oil industry specialists sent by the European Commission, visited with a brief to advise on ways of reducing environmental damage from oil and gas exploration.
It found evidence of extensive oil pollution of lakes, rivers and groundwater and of the destruction of virgin swamp and forest.
The expedition was invited because Siberian oil companies plan to extend their operations north from the existing centre at Noyabrsk into the Krasnoselkup region, which covers an area of 106,000 square kilometres, almost the size of England.
The expedition called for the region to be protected at least until its ecology had been investigated.
One oil rig is already operating in the region, near Devil's Lake, an important wildlife habitat and the headwater for the region's river.
It noted that introduction of modern oil industry technology could reduce damage to the environment and condemned the unplanned quarrying of local sands for construction, the disruption to drainage caused by poorly designed roads, and the failure to build roads, pipelines, pylons and seismic survey lines along the same routes.
New Scientist 11 September
Conservation: Habitat
US wetlands proposals
The Clinton administration has endorsed a practice known as "mitigation banking" , under which property owners are allowed to develop protected wetlands in exchange for a payment into a fund to restore other wetland areas.
Government officials committed themselves to ensuring that there would be no net loss of US wetlands and expressed the hope that the proposals would end the stalemate between environmentalist and business groups on the wetlands issue.
Measures which in effect balance environmental damage in one area with rehabilitation in others are highly controversial in the United States, but are gaining in popularity.
Financial Times 25 August
Conservation: Habitat
Call for improved English coastline protection
English Nature, the statutory body advising the government on environmental issues, has called for improved protection of marine wildlife in 27 environmentally sensitive areas of coastline.
The areas, all below the low water mark, contain unusual plants and animals, including seaweeds, sponges, bryozoans, invertebrate animals and bird breeding colonies.
There are currently no statutory means to enforce their protection.
European Community legislation to protect the marine environment will not come into effect until 2000.
In the meantime English Nature calls for the creation of marine nature reserves, research on the effect of water quality on marine life, and controls on water quality, shipping, fishing and leisure activities.
The recommendations are contained in two reports, Managing England's Marine Wildlife and Conserving England's Marine Heritage.
Independent 23 August New Scientist 28 August
Conservation: Habitat
Councils phasing out peat
Local councils throughout the United Kingdom have stopped using peat in favour of environmentally friendly alternatives, a new survey carried out by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) has found.
The survey showed that all the 46 county councils England and Wales, and seven out of the nine regional councils in Scotland, have switched to peat alternatives.
More than half buy no peat at all and six county councils have set up schemes to produce peat-free compost.
Commercial peat extraction is destroying lowland peatbogs, one of Europe's most threatened habitats.
The use of peat-free products such as those based on coconut fibre and composted garden and timber waste — all readily available — helps to reduce demand for peat.
RSPB News, 10 August
Conservation: Species
Whaling: US threatens Norway with sanctions
The US Secretary of Commerce, Ron Brown, has made an official recommendation to President Clinton that Norway's decision to resume commercial whaling this year undermines the efforts of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) to conserve stocks.
Under a provision of US fishing law known as the Pelly Amendment, the President can now impose trade sanctions against Norway for its defiance of the IWC moratorium on whaling.
US administrations did not follow through previous threats to invoke the amendment over Norwegian whaling for research purposes in the 1980s and 1992, but this time it is being considered as a sanction against commercial whaling.
This year the Norwegian government has allowed a catch of 160 minke whales for commercial purposes.
New Scientist 28 August
Conservation: Species
Japanese switch to whale-watching?
One of the most outspoken proponents of commercial whaling in Japan, the Fisheries Agency, has requested funds to conduct a survey to assess the potential for developing a "whale-watching industry" as a tourist attraction.
Observers have described the move as a significant change of direction for the agency, a government body, which has hitherto emphasized the economics of catching whales and played down the benefits of active conservation.
Kyodo news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 21 August
Conservation: Species
CITES calls for action against China and Taiwan
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) has recommended action, possibly including trade sanctions, against China and Taiwan for illegal dealings in rhino horn and tiger products.
The recommendation, made at a CITES meeting in Brussels, follows the announcement by the US that it is considering similar action [see ED 72/73].
The sanctions could take the form of a ban on virtually all trade in wild animal products with the two countries.
China and Taiwan claimed to have ended the trade in rhino and tiger products earlier this year, but stockpiles have since been found in both countries.
CITES will review the situation again in November.
On the day following the CITES announcement, Taiwan ordered tougher action against traders in rhino horn and tiger bones, and police raided several traditional pharmacies.
International Herald Tribune 8, 9 September Financial Times 7, 8 September Independent 8 September
Conservation: Species
Javanese rhinos' diminishing numbers captured on film
A team of wildlife biologists from the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) has been to able study the Javanese rhinoceros, considered the world's rarest large mammal, by recording them with hidden cameras.
Until recently, attempts to study Rhinoceros sondaicus were foiled by their small numbers and the impenetrable habitat in Java's Ujong Kulon national park.
On the basis of earlier work relying on measuring footprints, it had been estimated that their must be at least 60 rhinos in the park.
But this technique was not considered very reliable, nor could it provide other important data on the population, such as its sex distribution.
The WWF team set up 34 cameras in the undergrowth, linked to pressure pads hidden on animal trails.
When an animal over a certain weight walked over he pressure pad, it triggered the camera.
The cameras snapped an average of one rhino every five days.
The team then identified individual rhinos from their skin markings, sex, size and age.
The results confirm that the Javanese rhino population is dangerously small, around 50 animals.
The suspicion is that the fall in numbers, by perhaps ten in as many years, is due to poaching.
New Scientist 21 August
Conservation: Species
Zimbabwean white rhinos "wiped out" 
A survey has found just two white rhinoceroses in Hwange National Park, Zimbabwe, raising fears that poachers have virtually wiped out the animal in the country's main game reserve.
Up to 70 white rhinos had been recorded in 1992.
Independent 21 August
Conservation: Species
Swazis put a price on rhino
Swaziland has put a price of US$60,000 per head on its endangered black rhinoceros.
All endangered big game has been given a value so that poachers can be forced to pay compensation as well as serving up to six years in prison for killing the animals.
Independent 1 September
Conservation: Species
Greek hunting season postponed
The start of the hunting season in Greece has been delayed by a court because of a lawsuit brought by an environmental group.
The season was to have started on 20 August, but it was postponed at least until 8 December.
The hunting has been blamed for rapid falls in the population of birds.
International Herald Tribune 21 August
Conservation: Species
Bad UK weather hits rare birds
Hopes of record breeding for many rare birds in the UK this year were ruined by poor weather, according to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
Golden eagles in the northern Scottish highlands were hit by late snow and the only breeding pair in England, in the Lake District, also failed to breed this year.
Merlins, red kites and cirl buntings were all affected by heavy rain.
The news was better from southern England, where stone curlews and marsh harriers raised large numbers of young.
In the Western Isles, the white-tailed sea eagle increased its numbers by five.
The shag population of the Shetlands was hit hard by the Braer oil disaster in January [see EDs 67 et seq]; numbers around Sumburgh Head fell by half, but the shags still raised a large number of chicks.
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds information, 6 September
Conservation: Species
Virus factor in frog deaths
Researchers seeking to explain the rapid rise in deaths among Britain's common frog have found pox virus like particles in the skins of many of the dead amphibians.
This is the first time in which such a virus has been found in amphibians.
The researchers are working for the Frog Mortality Project, set up last year amidst reports of rapid and inexplicable declines in amphibian numbers worldwide [see EDs 72/73; 51; 49; 47; 44].
New Scientist 14 August
Energy
Energy supplies threatened by waste and exploding demand
The security of future energy supplies is under threat because of waste in industrial countries and growing demand in the developing world, according to the World Energy Council.
Present trends could lead to consumption more than doubling by 2020, the council says, and although energy is abundant at present, governments should take early action to secure supplies.
The introduction of strong energy efficiency measures could constrain consumption growth to about 28 per cent by 2020, despite a 50 per cent increase in world population.
Environmental pressures will also require a drive towards greater efficiency in energy use.
Known oil reserves are enough to last for 40 years, natural gas for over 65 years and coal for 250 years.
But the council expects coal use to increase sharply as oil and gas reserves run out, leading to the exhaustion of fossil fuel reserves by the end of the next century.
Financial Times 9 September
Energy
Narmada project under review
Under growing local and worldwide pressure, the Indian government has announced it will review the controversial Narmada dam project.
The government had originally planned to launch the review in June, but it backed down after a request from the Gujarat state government, which supports the huge Sardar Sarovar irrigation project of which the Narmada dam forms a part.
It changed policy again after leading members of the Save the Narmada Movement had threatened to drown themselves in the rising waters of the Narmada river.
(The dam is already 60 metres high.)
In April the World Bank cancelled a loan of US$170 million to the Indian government for the dam after an independent report condemned the lack of measures to resettle displaced people and protect the environment [see ED 69].
New Scientist 14 August
Energy
Indian investment in solar energy
The Indian Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources has announced plans for the installation of the country's first solar power plant.
The new plant is to be built in a small village near Jodhpur (Rajasthan).
It will have a capacity of 30 megawatts and will serve as a research and development centre.
Foreign financial institutions are expected to contribute to the project and an Israeli company will provide technical assistance.
Press Trust of India (PTI)(BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 7 August
Energy
Body Shop launches wind farm in Wales
Cosmetics group Body Shop International has awarded contracts for the construction of a 10-MW wind farm in mid-Wales, as part of its drive for energy self-sufficiency.
The farm is to be built by National Wind Power, jointly owned by electricity generator National Power and construction group Taylor Woodrow, at a cost of £11 million.
It will have 22 37-metre diameter wind turbines on 30-metre towers and generate enough electricity to supply 7,000 homes.
Planning permission has been granted by Radnorshire District Council, in spite of objections by groups including the Countryside Council for Wales.
There are now 14 wind farms in operation in the UK, with six more under construction.
Financial Times 1 September
Environmental Politics
ICJ sets up environmental chamber
The International Court of Justice in The Hague, the judicial organ of the UN, has set up a specialised chamber to deal with environmental matters that fall within its jurisdiction.
The chamber will deal with environmental disputes between states referred to it by UN members.
The chamber will not, however, deal with two cases "out of a total of 11 pending" which are the subject of appeals made prior to its constitution: the question of compensation for Nauru for the effects of phosphate exploitation before its independence from Australia [see separate item in this issue], and the dispute between Hungary and Slovakia over the Gabcikovo dam [see EDs passim].
Le Monde 11 August
Environmental Politics
New Amazon ministry
The Brazilian government has set up a special ministry for the Amazon region.
The work of the Extraordinary Ministry for the Articulation of Actions in Amazonia will concentrate on protecting the region's tropical rainforests and its Amerindian inhabitants.
Critics, however, have said the move will simply create more bureaucracy and fails to address the problem of formulating a long-term policy for the sustainable development of Amazonia.
"The government has taken many of these initiatives already and so far we have not seen any result.
There is no planning.
Decisions are taken according to which way the wind blows", according to Rubem Almeida, president of Greenpeace Brazil.
Bodies which already have responsibilities in Amazonia include the Amazonia State Environment Agency (IBAMA), the National Indian Affairs Institute (FUNAI) and the Superintendency for Amazonian Development (SDA).
New Scientist 4 September
Environmental Politics
Chinese to bear down on environmental lawbreakers
The Environmental Protection Agency of the Chinese government has set up an inspection team which will tour the country over a three-year period to ensure that environmental laws are being properly enforced, and to heighten awareness of environmental issues.
Since the early 1980s, the Chinese parliament has enacted four major laws on the protection of the environment, and eight laws on the protection of natural resources, and the government has issued a series of administrative regulations and environmental standards.
A government official noted that despite this framework, "not abiding by the laws, not strictly enforcing the laws and not punishing the lawbreakers" is still common.
Xinhua news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 26 August
Environmental Politics
Australia settles Nauru phosphate dispute
Australia has agreed to pay the government of the Pacific island of Nauru a total of A$120 million (£50 million) as recompense for the environmental damage wreaked by 90 years of phosphate mining, most of it carried out while Nauru was administered by Australia as a UN Trusteeship.
A total of $57 million is payable in the first year, with the remainder due over 20 years.
In return, Nauru has agreed to drop its case before the International Court of Justice lodged in 1989.
It may still, however, proceed with claims against the UK and New Zealand, Australia's partners in the British Phosphate Commission under whose auspices the mining was carried out.
They have failed to endorse the Australian move and are refusing to contribute to the compensation fund.
They have hitherto rejected Nauru's claim, not least because an independent inquiry in 1986 set the appropriate compensation level at A$72 million.
The phosphate reserves on Nauru, the island's only natural resource and source of income, are expected to run out in five or ten years.
Most of the island was cleared for phosphates, leaving it devoid of vegetation.
The islanders inhabit the coastal strip only, and subsist almost entirely on royalties from the mining.
The Advertiser (Adelaide) 10 August New Scientist 14 August
Environmental Politics
Russian "ecological troops" 
The Russian Ministry of Defence is to set up special "ecological units" which will be given "unlimited powers to curb all environmentally destructive activities" .
According to the Archangelsk-based newspaper, Volna, Moscow radio reported that the units would be financially independent, funding themselves in part by collecting titanium scrap "which is littering the entire tundra landscape from Mezen to the Yamal and beyond, in the form of wreckage from the first stages of rockets launched from the Plesetsk cosmodrome" .
The first trial units will be set up in 1994, attached to the Moscow Military District and the Northern Fleet.
Moscow radio, 3 August (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Environmental Politics
French Greens near split
French environmental party Les Verts is on the verge of a schism between members prepared to contemplate an alliance with the Socialists and a rebel group backed by party spokesman and former presidential candidate Antoine Waechter.
Following a national council meeting in late August, the rebels, who call themselves Co-ordination for the Independence of Ecology, said they were ready to field independent green candidates in next year's European elections.
Waechter, the party's moving force since its foundation in 1984, was the only member of the leadership not to condemn the initiative, which was supported by 18 per cent of delegates at the meeting.
Waechter has consistently refused political alliances with either left or right.
The alliance between Les Verts and France's other green party, Génération Ecologie, failed to live up to opinion poll predictions in April's parliamentary elections, winning only 9 per cent of the vote between them [see ED 69].
Le Monde 31 August, 2 September
Environmental Politics
Czechs want more action
Two out of three Czechs think their government is not doing enough to improve their country's devastated environment, according to a recent opinion poll.
Guardian 8 September
Environmental Politics
Labour launches "Green Right to Know" campaign
The British Labour Party has launched its "Green Right to Know" campaign, attacking what it describes as the government's contemptuous attitude to the provision of environmental information to the public.
Shadow Environment Secretary Chris Smith said the government's implementation of the EC Directive on Access to Environmental Information could only be described as "minimalist" , allowing companies maximum scope to claim commercial confidentiality.
"Information about the state of the environment is every citizen's fundamental right.
The system should always err on the side of openness.
Instead the Tories hide at every opportunity behind the spurious cloak of commercial confidentiality,"Smith said.
Labour highlights areas in which the government has failed to meet its promises on freedom of environmental information, including drinking water quality, the release of genetically modified organisms, contaminated land, the thermal oxide reprocessing plant (THORP) at Sellafield, air pollution, forestry and ozone depletion.
Labour Party information 6 September
Forests
Europe's forest health worsens
The health of most of Europe's forests is continuing to decline, according to the latest survey by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and the European Community (EC).
The survey, covering 1992, was compiled from data supplied by 34 countries and used defoliation as the measure of forest damage.
Of the total sample of around 95,000 trees, 23.5 per cent were more than a quarter defoliated in 1992, and were thus classified as damaged, compared with 22.2 per cent in 1991.
Broadleaf and conifer trees showed roughly equal amounts of damage; the most affected broadleaf species were cork oaks and other oaks, and the most affected conifers were fir and spruce species.
The countries with the most damaged trees were the United Kingdom (with 58.3 per cent more than a quarter defoliated), and the Czech Republic, Poland, Latvia, Slovakia, Estonia, Norway, Germany, Denmark, Netherlands, Bulgaria, Portugal, Hungary and Luxembourg.
The countries with the least damaged trees were Austria and France.
The UNECE report warns that direct comparisons between countries should be treated with caution, and that a number of other factors (such as wind strengths) may account in part for defoliation.
Tree News, September 1993
Forests
Britain's tree health declines
The health of Britain's trees is continuing to worsen, according to a new survey by the Forestry Authority (part of the Forestry Commission).
The decline is most marked among oaks and Scots pines, with insects and wind damage assumed to be the main causes.
Over 80 per cent of oaks have lost more than a quarter of normal crown density, with attacks from winter moths identified as the main cause.
The proportion of sick Scots pines has risen from 49 to 64 per cent, largely due to high winds, the Authority claims.
It dismisses suggestions that acid rain is a key factor in declining tree health.
New Scientist 14 August
Forests: Tropical
 "Eco-bananas" scheme
Banana growers in Costa Rica and Hawaii have been awarded "ECO-OK" certificates by Rainforest Alliance, a lobby group based in the United States, for abiding by a strict code of environmental standards.
Under these standards, virgin forest cannot be cleared for plantations, unproductive land must be reforested, and use of pesticides is strictly controlled.
The certificates are reviewed annually.
Bananas from the "green" plantations will initially be available in Germany and Hawaii.
New Scientist 21 September
Forests: Tropical
Project collapse raises GEF questions
The failure of a forestry management project in northern Ecuador is raising questions over the World Bank's role as administrator of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), the main international vehicle for financing environmental projects in developing countries.
The project, Ecoforest 2000, was abandoned because of controversy over its social and environmental implications.
Designed to minimise deforestation of primary rainforest by planting tree farms for use by commercial timber companies, the project was the first approved by the World Bank's private-sector arm, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) using GEF funds.
The project soon came under criticism for the role granted to a wealthy family-owned lumber group, the Durini Foundation, and for underestimating the effect of resettling 40-50 families to establish tree farms.
Plans to lease timber rights from indigenous peoples for extremely low prices were also criticised.
Critics say the project was largely based on commercial considerations, with conservation a secondary issue, and lacked sensitivity to the needs of the local community.
A review of the project confirmed many of the criticisms and the IFC announced its withdrawal, despite attempts to bring all parties involved together for round-table talks.
The IFC's rapid withdrawal, which led to the project's collapse, was itself criticised as indicating a lack of interest in local input.
Financial Times 1 September
Forests: Tropical
Illegal logging: first conviction in Brazil
A Brazilian court, creating national legal history, has convicted a logger of operating illegally on Indian land.
Marco Antonio Bogaski was convicted of extracting mahogany from the Guaporé Valley reserve.
He will be required to compensate the local people for the stolen logs and to pay for an environmental recovery plan for the damaged area.
The suit had been brought by the Nucleus of Indigenous People (NDI) on behalf of the Hahainetsu Indians.
The organization has lodged a number of similar suits.
New Scientist 21 August
Forests: Tropical
Mahogany imports plummet
Imports of Brazilian mahogany into the UK have been cut to less than half of 1988 levels, as consumer demand shifts away from tropical hardwoods towards temperate timbers such as oak.
The Timber Trade Federation, however, rejects claims by Friends of the Earth that this proves the effect of environmental campaigns.
A spokesman instead blamed "changing fashions and tough market conditions" .
BBC Wildlife, August 1993
Forests: Tropical
Malaysia introduces logging curbs
The Malaysian government has introduced sweeping measures to counter illegal logging of the country's tropical rainforests.
The measures include mandatory jail sentences of between one and twenty years and fines of up to 500,000 ringgit (US$185,000).
The authorities may call in the army to apprehend alleged offenders.
However, Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth, two long-standing critics of the Malaysian timber industry, have commented that the measures will have no effect unless they are adequately implemented by the state governments.
The national government should attempt to stamp out widespread corruption at the state level and do more to protect the land rights of indigenous people, they say.
Over the past five years, 2,346 cases of illegal logging have been brought before the courts.
But the government believes that the penalties have not been high enough and that hitherto it has been the workers and not company owners, the real culprits, who have been punished.
New Scientist 14 August
Forests: Tropical
Development bank to change forest lending policy
The African Development Bank is to draw up new guidelines for funding projects in the forestry sector.
The bank will no longer fund projects in primary forests or engage in developments affecting forest dwellers without their consent, and will carry out environmental impact assessments for projects in forest areas.
One direct result of the change in policy is the abandonment of a coffee-growing project in the south of the Central African Republic, which would have opened a rainforest area to unplanned colonization and illegal logging.
The change follows lobbying by Friends of the Earth.
Earth Matters, September
Forests: Tropical
Malaysian timber advertisement censured
The Advertising Standards Authority has upheld a complaint against an advertisement by Malaysia's Timber Industry Board.
The advert, which appeared in the October 1992 edition of Architectural Review, claimed that the Board supplied timber from "one of the worlds best conserved forests [using]best possible conservation techniques" in a way which led to "national progress and the betterment of the people" .
The complaint submitted to the ASA cited widespread evidence of unsustainable logging and failure to respect indigenous peoples' rights in the forests of Sarawak.
BBC Wildlife, August 1993
Forests: Tropical
Massacre of Yanomami
Up to 73 Yanomami Indians have been killed by a group of garimpeiros, illegal miners who have moved into the Indians' reserve in the Amazonian forests on the borders of Brazil and Venezuela.
According to officials of the Brazilian National Indian Affairs Institute (FUNAI), the massacre occurred in Roraima state, near the Venezuelan border.
Subsequent reports suggested that the atrocity had taken place just inside Venezuela.
Independent 23 August
General Reports
Change of eating habits key to survival
The effects of environmental degradation are seriously undermining economic performance, according to the Washington-based Worldwatch Institute.
In its recently published report, Vital Signs 1993, the institute differs from conventional economic wisdom that attributes the recession of the early 1990s to mismanagement in industrial countries.
Instead, it says nature's constraints are now "directly affecting economic trends" .
Nowhere is this more true than in food production.
The world is entering a period of protein scarcity, the report says.
The area of cropland has peaked and is now static.
The global fish catch is also static.
Population is increasing at the rate of 91 million people each year.
With grain production per person falling since 1984 and little potential to increase planted areas or yields further, plus the impact of global warming, the world is approaching what Worldwatch president Lester Brown sees as a nightmare scenario.
He describes the 6 per cent decline in grain output between 1984 and 1992 as the "most disturbing economic trend in the world today" and argues that people either need to eat less or differently: to "move down the food chain" by eating less meat.
In land-use terms, a non-meat diet is between two and three times more efficient.
Vital Signs monitors 30 indicators "ranging from energy efficiency and atmospheric temperature to wind-power capacity and bicycle sales" to give the same kind of picture of the global environment that indices such as trade, production and GDP do for its economy.
Independent 30 August
Global Warming
Global warming treaty makes progress
The international global warming treaty, signed at last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, has so far been ratified by 31 nations, out of the 50 required for entry into force.
A further 34 governments have said they will ratify by the end of this year, permitting the treaty to take effect earlier than expected, in early 1994.
More than 160 nations signed the framework treaty, which commits governments to curbing emissions of greenhouse gases.
However, negotiations in Geneva in August failed to reach agreement on the key issues of finance and "joint implementation" .
Developing countries are unhappy about the dominant role envisaged for the Global Environment Facility, run by the World Bank and the UN, which they see as an extension of Western interests.
 "Joint implementation" , which allows industrialised countries to gain credit for financing projects to reduce emissions in developing countries, is disliked by environmentalists who fear it will weaken the resolve of industrialised countries, the biggest producers of greenhouse gases, to reduce their own emissions.
Negotiations are due to resume in Geneva next February.
Financial Times 27 August
Global Warming
Boreal forests lock up carbon dioxide
The world's northern, or boreal, forests have played a key role in mitigating the greenhouse effect by soaking up huge quantities of excess carbon dioxide.
An analysis of data collected over the past 50 years by national forestry ministries shows, however, that there has been a sharp decline in the volume of boreal wood "and hence the capacity to absorb carbon dioxide" since the 1960s, as a result of more intensive logging and increased dieback because of the effects of acid rain, pests and fires.
Between 1920 and 1976 forests and other plants soaked up 35,000 million tonnes of carbon dioxide.
Since 1976, however, land plants have started giving off as much carbon dioxide as they absorb.
1976 was also the year when the size of the boreal forest slipped from net growth to net depletion.
Changes in the size of boreal forests and carbon dioxide concentrations have moved in step for most of this century.
Allan Auclair of Washington-based environmental consultancy Science and Policy Associates, which carried out the research, suggest that boreal reforestation might help stabilise climate.
New Scientist 11 September
Global Warming
Less rain in the greenhouse world
Plants may respond to increased concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by conserving water, creating a drier world in the future, according to research by the National Environment Research Council.
With atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide expected to double in the next century, plants would open the stomata through which they breathe for shorter periods reducing the transpiration of water and providing less water for cloud formation.
The research contradicts computer models predicting a warmer, wetter world as the greenhouse effect develops.
The drying effect in the Brazilian rainforest could be felt in the southern states of the US and could turn stretches of Amazonia into savannah.
Independent 1 September Guardian 1 September Financial Times 1 September
Global Warming
Germany unveils plan to cut emissions
The German government has published detailed plans to cut emissions of greenhouse gases to half their 1987 levels by the year 2005, including a cut in carbon dioxide emissions of between 25 and 30 per cent.
The targets are the most ambitious announced by any industrialized country to date.
They are contained in a report prepared under the Climate Convention signed at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro last year.
The German government is the first to produce such a report.
The "climate-relevant emissions" covered in the plan include, apart from carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, nitrogen oxides, volatile hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide.
The report lists 28 items of legislation to achieve the reductions, some of which have already been passed, while others are about to be passed or are under discussion.
They include a new law requiring better insulation (which is expected to reduce heating fuel consumption by 30 per cent by the year 2000), restrictions on the use of fertiliser, and financial incentives for small businesses to adopt energy-efficient technologies.
Critics of the government, in particular the Greens, believe that the emission targets are not attainable within the existing and planned array of measures.
New Scientist 21 August
Global Warming
US delays greenhouse announcement
The Clinton administration has missed its self-imposed deadline of mid-August for presenting detailed proposals on how to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases by the turn of the century.
In April President Clinton pledged his administration to a target of reducing emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
But according to a White House spokeswoman, the commission set up to work out the details has not yet completed its economic and environmental analyses.
International Herald Tribune 17 August
Nuclear Power
Western aid to Bulgarian plant
Western countries have allocated 24 million ecus (US$27 million) to help the Bulgarian authorities to improve safety at the Kozloduy nuclear plant, described in 1991 as the most dangerous in Europe.
The grant is the first to be paid out of the Nuclear Safety Account, set up by the Group of Seven industrialized countries at the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) for the purpose of providing emergency aid to secure the Soviet-designed nuclear reactors in Eastern Europe.
The funds will be used to import safety equipment, including process computers to make the system easier to operate, additional cooling devices, isolation valves, spare parts and ultrasonic inspection equipment for the pressure vessels.
In return for the aid, the Bulgarian authorities have agreed to close down the plant's four 440-megawatt pressurized water reactors, which lack containment facilities to enclose them in case of an accident, as soon as financially possible, perhaps by 1998.
The Kozloduy complex also includes two more modern 1,000-megawatt units.
Financial Times 25 August
Nuclear Power
Chernobyl plant "safest in world" 
The Chernobyl nuclear plant is now among the safest in the world and the decision to close it should be reversed, according to Ukraine's Energy Minister Vilen Semenyuk.
The Ukrainian parliament has decided to close the plant, plagued by fires and other problems since the 1986 accident, at the end of this year.
The country's nuclear lobby has argued that alternative energy sources are either not available or too expensive and Semenyuk told a parliamentary debate on the government's economic reform programme that: "Experts say that after the introduction of safety measures the plant is among the safest, and not only in Ukraine." 
* Studies at a Kiev hospital of 200 people who participated in the Chernobyl clean-up reveal structural changes in the brain as a result of stress and radiation.
The changes were found to cause dementia, as well as psychoneurological and neurotic diseases.
Guardian 1 September * UNIAN news agency, 16 August (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Nuclear Power
Village "sentenced to death" 
Nine out of 10 people in the Russian village of Muslyumovo are suffering from radiation-linked diseases.
The village is near the formerly secret city of Chelyabinsk-65 in the Urals, centre for the manufacture of weapons-grade plutonium since the 1940s; dumping of radioactive waste in the River Tyecha, which flows through Muslyumovo, led to the contamination.
The village has a population of 6,000; 95 per cent of recent deaths have been due to cancers of various kinds.
Children have been born deformed and there are fears of genetic defects; many adults are suffering from wasting diseases.
Two major accidents at Chelyabinsk-65 and decades of dumping of radioactive waste have released 140 curies of radiation, compared to the 50 million-80 million released by the Chernobyl disaster in 1986.
The extent of the contamination has been denied by the authorities for decades, with results of health tests withheld or falsified.
European 2-5 September
Nuclear Power
Czechs to bury waste
The Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade has recommended that spent nuclear fuel from the country's nuclear power plants be made safe through deep burial at a site yet to be determined.
A temporary storage depot would have to be established by 1995 and a second would have to be available around 2005.
A permanent site would have to be ready by 2030.
Members of the Rainbow (Duha) environmental movement have ended their blockade of two of the seven gates of the Temelin nuclear power plant.
The protest was part of a campaign to stop construction of the plant.
CTK news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 17, 26 July
Nuclear Power
Japanese policy confirmed by new government
Japan's new coalition government has indicated it will not abandon the previous government's commitment to nuclear power.
The coalition includes members of the Social Democratic Party, which has traditionally been opposed to the nuclear option.
But the new minister of international trade and industry, who is also responsible for nuclear energy, comes, like most of his colleagues, from the mainstream of Japanese politics.
New Scientist 4 September
Nuclear Power
Warning on nuclear sub accidents
An accident in a nuclear submarine could cause radioactive contamination over a much wider area than government and Royal Navy officials have admitted in public, putting millions of people in Britain at risk.
Confidential documents for a training course on nuclear accidents, leaked to The Scotsman newspaper, suggest a "worst case" scenario in which harmful radiation could spread beyond 100 kilometres (60 miles) of an accident "in a very short time (minutes)" .
This contrasts with recent statements by Royal Navy officials that contamination would not spread more than two kilometres and that an accident would take "quite some time" to develop.
The Ministry of Defence has declared in the past that people up to 10 kilometres from an accident could be affected.
A ministry statement said that the scenario described in the training document was "a theoretical accident which is virtually inconceivable" .
Guardian 20 August
Nuclear Power
Greenpeace legal challenge as Thorp tests go ahead
Greenpeace has won permission to mount a High Court challenge to the opening of British Nuclear Fuels' (BNFL's) thermal oxide reprocessing plant at Sellafield.
Mr Justice Brooke granted Greenpeace leave to seek a judicial review of BNFL's permit to test the plant's systems using uranium prior to the government taking a final decision on whether the plant should be allowed to operate [see ED 72/73].
However, he refused to grant an order preventing BNFL starting the 10-week testing period before the outcome of the legal action is known, saying he had been "very considerably influenced" by evidence from BNFL that a delay in the start of testing would cost the company up to £2 million a week and put 700 jobs at risk.
The Court of Appeal later confirmed by a 2:1 majority Mr Justice Brooke's refusal to delay the start of testing.
Testing at Thorp was interrupted a week later by the evacuation of 280 workers following a leak of non-radioactive chemicals.
One person received medical treatment after being overcome by fumes and 15 others received medical checks after the leak of nitrogen oxide, which BNFL emphasised was not connected with the uranium testing.
Greenpeace said that the evacuation added strength to its case: "If they cannot deal with the non-radioactive materials safely then we have no confidence that they can deal with the highly radioactive spent fuel," a spokesman said.
Testing resumed the following day.
Financier Sir James Goldsmith is meanwhile funding a campaign against the Thorp plant, featuring an £18,000 balloon in the shape of a white elephant.
The campaign is run by environmental communications group WBMG, which says it wants to spread debate about whether Thorp should be allowed to operate outside the environmental movement.
The balloon will tour the country until the end of the current public consultation period on 4 October.
Guardian 2, 8, 9 September Independent 2 September Financial Times 1, 2, 3, 4-5 September
Ozone layer
T-shirts "to protect against ultraviolet rays" 
Two Australian scientists have developed a chemical process which significantly increases the ability of clothing to act as a barrier against ultraviolet radiation.
Michael Pailthorpe and Bernard Thompson claim that the process, known as "Sunsafe" , increases the sun protection factor (SPF) of light-coloured T-shirts, for instance, from about SPF 10 to SPF 50.
(Contrary to popular belief, summer clothing currently offers poor protection against ultraviolet radiation.)
The process can be carried out during the normal dyeing and finishing of fabrics.
The fibres are bathed for about two hours in a solution of water and Rayosan, a chemical consisting of an ultraviolet absorber such as benzotriazole and a reactive agent such as chlorotriazine.
Rayosan, patented by Pailthorpe, is made from commercially available chemicals approved by international regulatory bodies.
The two scientists have also developed similar treatments for synthetic fibres made from polyester and polyamide.
New Scientist 28 August
Ozone layer
Growth in ozone-destroying chemicals slowing down
The build-up of ozone-destroying chemicals has slowed substantially and may halt by the end of the century, according to scientists at the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The worst ozone destruction should take place around the turn of the century, as the chemicals rise into the stratosphere, followed by a gradual recovery in the ozone layer over the next 50-100 years.
The build-up of ozone-destroying chemicals has slowed more rapidly than expected, even before international agreements to phase them out took full effect.
The scientists measured concentrations of CFC-11 and CFC-12, the two most important ozone destroyers, at locations in both the northern and southern hemispheres and found that the growth rate for CFC-11 concentrations dropped from an annual average of 11 parts per trillion from 1985-88 to 3 parts per trillion in 1993.
For CFC-12 the growth rate dropped from 20 parts per trillion to 11.
Independent 26 August International Herald Tribune 27 August
Ozone layer
Doubts over uv radiation as cause of Chilean illnesses
Claims that unusually large numbers of cataracts, cancers and other eye diseases in sheep, cattle and rabbits in southern Chile are due to overexposure to ultraviolet radiation (as a result of ozone depletion over Antarctica) have been put into question by a study conducted by researchers from John Hopkins University and Chilean health and veterinary authorities.
The researchers found that levels of ultraviolet radiation doubled on certain days in September and October 1992, but by only 9 per cent in the whole of September, the worst month, and by less than 1 per cent for the year as a whole.
They found no acute or immediate impacts on human health.
They did find high incidence of eye diseases among local animals, but in each case they concluded that the most likely cause was infection from a common pathogen.
In their conclusions the researchers did warn, however, that the samples they studied were small and that they could not say anything about the long-term effects of increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation.
New Scientist 21 August
Pollution
Bureaucracy delays East Europe clean up
Four years after the collapse of the communist bloc, funds promised to help cleanse the environment of Eastern Europe are still tied up in banks and many aid pledges have evaporated, The European reported.
Despite the persistence of huge environmental problems, Western donors and lending institutions are financing only projects that give a good return on investment and are expecting Eastern European countries to pay for much of the clean-up themselves.
Poland, for example, has so far received just US$2,100 million of the US$8,600 million promised by foreign creditors.
The multinational Phare economic reconstruction programme spent 20 per cent of its budget on environmental projects in 1990; this figure fell to 6 per cent in 1992.
Western governments and lending institutions launched a new environmental action programme for Eastern Europe in April, but so far only US$30 million has been pledged.
European 2-5 September
Pollution
Plants suck up toxic metals
Contaminated soils can be cleaned by plants that take up metals as nutrients, a process known as green remediation, according to scientists from the Institute of Arable Crops Research.
The most efficient plant tested on soils polluted by heavy metals from London sewage, alpine pennycress, reduced zine to acceptable levels after nine croppings.
This could be achieved in three years, using intensive cultivation.
A hectare of contaminated soil can be cleaned for £5,000, leaving it fertile; conventional treatment by vitrification costs £18,000 a hectare.
Conventional physical and chemical methods can leave the soil structure unsuitable for cultivation.
Financial Times 31 August
Pollution
Kuwait makes oil fire claim
Kuwait is preparing to make a US$1,000 million claim for compensation from Iraq to cover the costs of cleaning up after the oil well fires left burning at the end of the Gulf War in 1991.
The claim is to be presented to the UN Compensation Commission, but the commission "set up after the war to co-ordinate claims against Iraq" has few funds at its disposal.
Iraq has yet to make the US$1,600 million oil sale authorised by the UN to compensate victims of its 1990 seizure of Iraq.
Kuwait is urging the commission to encourage all countries holding frozen Iraqi assets to transfer them to the commission to meet claims.
The Kuwaiti claim is designed to cover the cost of putting out the oil fires and cleaning up the mess, as well as of removing mines laid by Iraqi forces.
Middle East Times 10-16 August
Pollution: Air
Summer smog hits Athens
Soaring smog levels during a heat wave in Athens in late August resulted in hundreds of people being rushed to hospital.
Temperatures rose to 43° C, the highest since 1958, compared to an August average of 33° C. Cars were banned from the eight-square-kilometre city centre as windless weather trapped pollutants in the lower atmosphere.
European 2-5 September Financial Times 28 August
Pollution: Air
British crematoria breach dioxin limits
Two British crematoria have been found to be emitting levels of dioxins between 25 and 70 times current precautionary limits for new incinerators.
Studies by the government's Warren Spring Laboratory showed that even though one of the crematoria had been updated to bring it into line with the 1990 Environmental Protection Act, its flue gases still contained between 25 and 46 billionths of a gram of dioxins per cubic metre.
The new limit is one billionth of a gram per cubic metre.
The locations of the crematoria have not been disclosed, at the request of the local authorities concerned.
The laboratory believes further research on more of the UK's 240 crematoria is needed.
The Department of the Environment has yet to respond to its findings.
Independent 8 September
Pollution: Air
Kiev health problems
High levels of industrial and traffic pollutants are to blame for widespread health problems in Kiev, Ukraine, according to research by the Ukrainian Ministry of Health.
Cases of lung disease, allergies and cancer are all on the increase, while deaths among children have risen between 1.3 and 2.2-fold in the past decade.
Rada (Kiev), 29 July
Pollution: Air
Power stations "main air polluters in Poland" 
The Polish Institute for Ecological Development has published a report detailing the extent of air pollution in Poland.
It shows that Poland is one of Europe's largest producers of sulphurous and nitric gases, the main causes of acid rain.
Power plants are responsible for most of the pollution: they account for about 90 per cent of all the emissions of sulphur dioxide, 40 per cent of nitrogen dioxide and around 60-70 per cent of dust.
Another major cause of air pollution are "imports" from Germany, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
The report also mentions poorly designed and inefficiently used dust yards as a major source of secondary emissions into the atmosphere.
PAP news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 10 August
Pollution: Air
Labour challenges government acid rain claims
The British Labour Party has challenged the government's claims to have met its target for reducing emissions of sulphur dioxide, one of the main contributors to acid rain.
In a letter to Environment Minister Lord Strathclyde, Shadow Environment Secretary Chris Smith accepted that sulphur dioxide emissions have been reduced by 45 per cent since 1970, but pointed out that progress has been haphazard, with reductions in emissions coinciding with economic recession.
The bulk of the reductions have been due to the recession, he argues, while emissions from power stations have fallen by only one-sixth.
Emissions of nitrogen oxide, not mentioned in the government press release despite the fact this is another important contributor to acid rain, have continued to rise every year since 1984, with emissions from road transport up by 73 per cent between 1981 and 1991.
Labour Party 31 August
Pollution: Air
Court closes Indian factories
The Indian Supreme Court has ordered 212 factories to close because the pollutants they produce has been affecting the Taj Mahal.
The factories had previously been ordered to install pollution control equipment but had failed to respond.
Independent 28 August
Pollution: Air
French clean-up funds
The French environment ministry has allocated 200 million French francs (US$36 million) to reduce emissions of air pollutants from 28 major industrial plants.
The largest sum, FF70 million francs, will go to the Cordemais power plant, described as France's largest source of sulphur-dioxide emissions.
Le Monde 6 August
Pollution: Air
US sulphur decline
Pollution linked to acid rain in the US may be declining according to research by the US Geological Survey.
There was a significant decline in concentrations of sulphates in rainwater at 26 of 33 sites monitored from 1980 to 1991.
Data was collected in 18 states, but mostly in the east of the country.
Evidence of a decline in nitrates is less clear, with a significant decrease at only three of the sites, although data from 24 suggest a downward trend.
A decrease in acidity of rainwater was recorded at nine sites, with only one recording a statistically significant increase.
International Herald Tribune 8 September
Pollution: Air
PCB detoxification method
British scientists have devised a method of recycling oil which has become contaminated with highly toxic polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) while being used to cool cores in electrical transformers.
The new process is expected to reduce pollution and save millions of pounds each year.
The oil is normally cleaned by switching off the transformer for a week and draining the oil and transporting it to a special depot for decontamination.
Another option is to incinerate the oil, but this is very wasteful.
Researchers at the National Grid Company's technology and science division have developed a way of destroying the PCBs while the transformer remains in operation.
It involves sucking the contaminated oil into a cleaning system housed in a mobile trailer, cleaning it and returning it to the transformer.
The process also uses milder chemical reagents to detoxify the oil.
New Scientist 14 August
Pollution: Air
Air pollution talks reach stalemate
International negotiations on reducing sulphur dioxide emissions have ended without agreement.
The 30-nation talks in Geneva failed to bridge the gap between countries such as Germany and the Nordic states, which are seeking a 79 per cent cut in emissions by the end of the decade, and those like the UK and France which want a lower level of cuts over a longer period.
The UK is offering to cut emissions by 71 per cent from the base year of 1980 by 2005 and is committed to reaching 60 per cent by 2000.
Senior officials will meet again in October in an attempt to break the deadlock.
Independent 4 September Financial Times 31 August, 3 September
Pollution: Air
UK rejects sulphur-dioxide commitment
The British government has rejected the terms of a new European-wide agreement sponsored by the United Nations [see ED 71]which would require cuts of sulphur-dioxide emissions by 80 per cent from 1980 levels.
Instead, it is arguing for cuts of 70 per cent.
Under a European Community directive, the government is committed to reducing emissions of sulphur dioxide — the main cause of acid rain — by 60 per cent from 1980 levels by 2003.
New Scientist 21 August
Pollution: Water
Turkey warns of Bosphorus oil traffic dangers
Turkish maritime experts are warning of the dangers of an increase in oil and gas traffic through the crowded Bosphorus and are calling for a revision of the 1963 Montreux Convention, which guarantees freedom of navigation through the waterway.
The Bosphorus, a winding 30-kilometre waterway which passes through Istanbul, a city of 10 million people, carries an average of 140 ships a day.
Some 22,500 foreign merchant ships passed through in 1992, a 10 per cent increase on the previous year.
Sixty per cent of the ships carry oil or oil derivatives, natural gas, chemicals or nuclear waste and it is estimated that an additional 75 million tonnes of oil would pass through the Bosphorus each year "the equivalent of four supertankers a day" if oil from Azerbaijan's oil fields was pumped to a Black Sea port for onward shipment.
Turkey is proposing the construction of a pipeline across its territory to carry Azeri oil direct to the Mediterranean port of Yumurtalik.
Experts point out that the largest vessels are now 15-20 times the size of those at the time the Montreux Convention was signed.
Russia has already made clear that it would oppose any renegotiation of the convention.
Middle East Times 31 August-6 September
Pollution: Water
Beijing takes steps to tackle water shortages
The municipal authorities in Beijing, the Chinese capital, have adopted new water management measures in an attempt to conserve resources, reduce pollution and improve quality.
New irrigation systems have been installed on around half the irrigated farmland around the city, the channels of three rivers are being dredged, and separate drainage systems are being built for waste water.
The city's water consumption is expected to be around 3.88 billion cubic metres in 1993, while only around 3.76 billion cubic metres are available.
The shortage is being met by pumping up groundwater and by making more efficient use of water.
Xinhua news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 31 July
Pollution: Water
Exxon and insurers feud over oil spill costs
A group of insurers led by Lloyd's of London is fighting a lawsuit filed by oil group Exxon claiming US$1,000 million to cover part of the US$3,500 million clean up costs of the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska in 1989.
Exxon filed suit in Houston, Texas, after the failure of four years of negotiations with the insurers, who claim that they are not liable under the policy, underwritten by more than 100 insurers led by Lloyd's, because the spill was not a "fortuitous" event but arose from "reckless disregard" .
The insurers have asked a federal court in New York to declare that they are not liable for the costs of the spill.
Financial Times 1 September Guardian 2 September
Pollution: Water
Radiation in Kazakh water
A series of underground nuclear tests has left groundwater in several regions of Kazakhstan contaminated by strontium-90 and caesium-137, according to the Ministry for Ecology and Biological Resources.
The tests were carried out some years previously under Soviet rule.
Moscow world service, 6 August (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Water
Russia ratifies Black Sea convention
The Russian parliament has ratified the convention on protecting the Black Sea from pollution.
The convention, signed by the six states bordering on the Black Sea in April, aims to prevent further pollution and reduce current pollution levels.
ITAR-TASS news agency (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts) 12 August
Pollution: Water
Uzbek water "below standard" 
Thirty per cent of the drinking water in Uzbekistan fails to meet minimum health standards, largely as a result of contamination by industrial waste.
The situation is worst around the Aral Sea, where only 10 per cent of the local water supply is fit to drink.
APN Uzbekistan news agency 6 August (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts)
Pollution: Water
France focuses on nitrates
France has introduced regulations on the protection of water supplied from pollution by nitrates from agricultural use.
A survey is to be carried out to identify vulnerable areas; these will be divided into two categories, those affected by pollution and those threatened by it, according to the concentrations of nitrates in water supplies.
The results of the survey will be made public.
Le Monde 4 September
Pollution: Water
Dead fish in Allier
Thousands of dead fish have been appearing in the river Allier in the French department of Puy-de-Dôme.
At one spot, two tonnes of fish were recovered from the bed of the river within the space of 48 hours.
No explanation has been offered for the deaths, although the local police have set up an enquiry.
Le Monde 17 August
Pollution: Water
Norwegian protests against oil drilling
Members of two Norwegian environmental groups have staged spectacular protests against oil exploration in the Barents Sea, which they claim is too risky because the inhospitable climate and months of winter darkness would make a clean-up operation impossible in case of a pollution accident.
Four activists chained themselves to an oil drilling rig being towed to the Barents Sea in early August, and several days later others steered a boat into the 500-metre safety zone around the rig.
Geologists believe that the eastern Barents Sea, an important spawning areas for fish and home to millions of seabirds, may hold vast oil reserves.
European 5-8, 12-15 August
Pollution: Water
Beach owner sues water company
The owner of a private beach in southwestern England is suing the local water company for causing the contamination of his land.
If successful, the action could pave the way for local authorities to make similar claims for beach-cleaning services in holiday resorts.
Michael Saltmarsh, owner of one of the four private beaches left in the country, at Croyde Bay, Devon, argues that his business has suffered because of contamination of the beach and the coastal waters.
He operates 800 holiday lets on a camping, caravan and apartment site.
 "We have invested heavily in beach-cleaning equipment, but we get slicks of rubbish: bits of condoms and sanitary towels mixed with green algae" , he declared.
South West Water is expected to resist the claim, which is for £1 million in lost profits.
Guardian 26 August
Pollution: Water
FoE threatens action against industrialists
Friends of the Earth (FoE) has launched a new campaign against pollution by warning the directors of 14 industrial companies in Yorkshire that it will seek to prosecute them personally unless they take action to prevent their companies breaching water pollution laws.
The campaign relies on a provision in the Water Resources Act 1991, under which company directors are deemed guilty of an offence if their company causes pollution with their "consent or connivance" or if it is "attributable to any neglect" on their part.
The maximum penalty for water pollution offences is an unlimited fine and/or two years' imprisonment.
The campaign will be extended to other parts of the country in due course.
Earth Matters, September
Transport
Europeans urged to use buses
Twenty cities within the European Community (EC) have joined forces in three EC-sponsored projects aimed at improving public transport and the urban environment, in particular at persuading people to abandon their cars and use buses instead.
The projects will include experiments with:(i) buses powered by alternative fuels such as natural gas and rape methyl ester (RME, derived from rapeseed oil);(ii) electronic systems for tracking buses to inform people when a bus is expected to arrive at their stop; and (iii) control systems for traffic lights to ease congestion by allowing buses priority.
A key objective of the projects is to show how carbon dioxide emissions would be reduced by an increased use of bus transport.
Cities participating in the projects include Barcelona, Cologne, Florence, Liverpool and Rotterdam.
New Scientist 4 September
Transport
44-tonne lorries cleared for British roads
The UK government's plans to allow limited use of 44-tonne lorries on British roads have been attacked by environmental groups as being open to widespread abuse.
The six-axle lorries "six tonnes heavier than the current limit" will only be allowed to transfer freight to and from rail terminals.
But pressure group Transport 2000 expressed concern about the lack of controls on maximum distance; it is calling for the lorries to be restricted to designated routes.
Announcing the move, Transport Secretary John MacGregor said it would be a boost for the railfreight industry, encouraging companies to switch freight from road to rail.
Road transport bodies expressed disappointment, saying the government's action was a "halfway house" .
The Freight Transport Association claimed that raising the weight limit to 44 tonnes for all vehicles would have taken more heavy lorries off the road, reduced carbon dioxide emissions and saved the road haulage industry millions of pounds.
Guardian 3, 4 August Independent 4 August
Transport
Government backs cycle use
The UK government has announced plans to encourage cycling, in what is seen as something of a shift of policy away from its market-oriented attitude to transport.
Speaking at the Velo-City conference in Nottingham, Roads and Transport Minister Robert Key said local councils would be expected to include plans to improve facilities for cyclists when bidding for government funding for transport schemes.
He did not, however, reduce the minimum level of grant for schemes receiving government support from £2 million, making many cycle schemes ineligible.
Key said there was untapped potential for cycle use to grow if the road environment is to be made more friendly.
Cycle paths and traffic-calming measures will be key parts of any improvements.
In a departure from his prepared speech, Key responded to criticism from transport campaigners by saying he was prepared to consider targets for cycle use; campaigners argue that targets are essential to stimulate growth.
At present bicycles are used for only 2 per cent of journeys in the UK, compared to 30 per cent in the Netherlands and 20 per cent in Denmark.
Independent 7, 8 September
Transport
UK government to fund alternative-fuel trials
The Department of Transport has allocated £100,000 to allow local authorities to run trials of various alternative fuels for buses.
Preference will be given to trials involving liquid petroleum gas (LPG), compressed natural gas and electricity, rather than "biofuels" such as rape methyl ester (RME), derived from rapeseed oil.
(The latter has been tested in Britain by the Reading Bus Company, see ED 72/73).
Local authorities will have until the end of September to put in bids for funding.
The winners are expected to be announced in October and the trials are likely to start in the new year.
New Scientist 14 August
Transport
UK roads threat challenged
Transport groups and environmentalists in Britain have stepped up campaigns against the government's road-building programme.
They attacked the announcement of plans to widen the M6 motorway between Birmingham and Manchester from six to eight lanes as further proof of the government's "bias towards roads" , in the words of Tony Burton of the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
They argue that the new road will not, as the government maintains, relieve congestion but instead increase car use and thus exacerbate congestion and pollution; they argue instead for major investment in public transport and higher taxes on fuel.
The M6 proposal will have to be submitted to a public inquiry.
English Nature, the statutory body advising the government on environmental issues, has identified at least 160 sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs) which will be affected by major road schemes currently under consideration.
Independent 18 August BBC Wildlife August
Waste and Recycling
Waste glass price set to fall
An expected fall in the price of waste glass.
or cullet, may force local authorities in the UK to rethink their recycling plans.
British Glass Recycling (BGR), which has a 75 per cent share of the reclaimed glass market, is threatening to cut the price it pays for cullet by up to £10 a tonne.
Local authorities are resisting the cut, saying BGR is attempting to dictate to the market and calling for the Office of Fair Trading to intervene.
Guardian 8 September
Waste and Recycling
The rich produce more waste
Richer households produce twice as much domestic waste by volume as poorer ones and also throw away more potentially useful material, according to research carried out by the UK government's Warren Springs Laboratory for the Department of the Environment.
Households in affluent suburbs threw away 70 per cent more paper and cardboard, 80 per cent more plastic, and 25 per cent more glass, whereas households on low-income council estates threw out more tin cans and significantly more "putrescibles" , i.e. food wastes that can be used to make compost"perhaps because the more affluent homes had compost heaps in their large gardens.
Independent 6 September
Waste and Recycling
Tyre-fuelled power station
A power station fuelled by burning waste tyres "Europe's first" has started operations in the UK.
The plant, at Wolverhampton in the West Midlands, will employ 60 people and expects to burn 23 per cent of the UK's waste tyres in its first year of operation.
It will supply electricity to 25,000 homes in the Midlands.
Elm Energy, which is operating the plant on a contract from the Non-Fossil Purchasing Agency, says the power station will be the cleanest in the country; £48 million has been spent on equipment to ensure that emissions are well below maximum levels set by the World Health Organisation.
The tyres contain only low levels of carbon and no dioxins; potentially harmful products of burning tyres are to be recycled.
Elm also plans a similar plant in East Kilbride in Scotland, and is seeking a site for one in the south-east.
Financial Times 6 September